THE
EUGENICS REVIEW

Editorial Offices: The Eugenics Society, of the Professional Classes War Relief Com-

69 Eccleston Square, London, S.W.l. mission. Not even the characteristically

(Telephone-Victoria 2091.)

modest record which he contributed to Who's

Editor for the Society-Maurice Newfield.

Who could quite slur over these few moments in a life exceptionally rich in influence and

"Eugenics is the study of agencies under achievement; or the fact that the University

social control that may improve or impair of Cambridge conferred upon him the well-

the racial qualities of future generations earned honorary degree of Doctor of Science.

either physically or mentally."

A man totally devoid of ambition, as all

who kmew him testify, he could not altogether

escape the fate of having greatness thrust

upon him.

LEONARD DARWIN, It was characteristic of Leonard Darwin

1850A1943

that he had to be persuaded, against strong resistance, to succeed his cousin, Sir Francis

Galton, as President of the Eugenics Society.

M/rAJOR LEONARD DARWIN, our He was too modest to acquiesce easily, but

beloved Honorary President, died at once convinced that in this position he could

v his home, Cripps's Corner, Forest
Row, on Friday, March 26th. He was the fourth and last surviving son of Charles Darwin and Emma Wedgwood; and throughout his long life he displayed the intellectual activity and versatility, the high qualities of character, and the dedication to public service which have been the common heritage

forward the cause of eugenics he plunged himself into the work, and in a critical period in the Society's fortunes, from I9II to I928, he formulated its policies and ideals, and by his writings and the influence of his per-
sonality did much to make them acceptable to an unsympathetic, misinformed and often highly suspicious public.

of his distinguished family.

From the start he was prominent among

Leonard Darwin was a soldier, scientist, those who believed that the objectives of

member of parliament and author. The the Society should be limited, at any rate in

diversity of his interests and talents are its difficult formative years, to matters on

reflected in the oddly unrelated titles of his which all eugenists could agree: to the

books, which include, besides his funda- creation of a public opinion favourable to

mental contributions to eugenics, such sub- the promotion of fertility among those who

jects as municipal trading and bimetalism; could enrich the biological endowment of

in his appointments to the staff of the posterity and to its restriction, by steriliza-

War Office Intelligence Department and as tion or other means, among those whose

instructor at various staff colleges; in his contribution to posterity could be spared.

service on scientific expeditions, including This does not mean that he was indifferent

those concerned with the transit of Venus to the influence of other than inborn

in I874 and I882; and in the distinction genetical factors upon the physical and

with which he filled the offices of president mental qualities of future generations; and

of the Royal Geographical Society, chairman indeed much of his Galton Lecture for 1929,

of Bedford College for Women, and chairman the last occasion on which he addressed the

lO9

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Society in person, was concerned with the issue of the problem, even if they lacked, as

eugenic evaluation of social changes. But indeed we still lack ourselves, all the

some differentiation of function seemed to material for its solution.

him essential, and he felt that the Eugenics Society would do better to devote itself exclusively to the study of man's heredity than to cumber itself with the problems of his personal and social environment, on which there were organizations that could speak with a more expert and certainly a more united voice.
" I suggest," he said in his Galton Lecture,* "that we should devote our energies almost
exclusively to the propaganda side of the
question; because I believe that the ways
of science will always prove to be so far more pleasant than any attempt to force un-
palatable truths on an unwilling public that, if both are admitted, the propaganda side of our work will not survive in the
struggle for existence within the Society; just as, according to Gresham's Law, light money, being generally preferred by purchasers in times gone by, always tended to
drive heavier coin out of circulation; if -I may, for this purpose only, compare science
to an inferior currency."
It is true that in recent years eugenists
have given increasing attention to matters which Leonard Darwin and his generation

Eugenics is not an immutable doctrine

and we should not esteem it a virtue if we

pursued tomorrow the same policies as serve

us today. While holding firmly to our ulti-

mate purpose, which finds expression in our

profound conviction that man by taking

thought can add a cubit to his stature, we

endeavour now, as in the past, to adapt our ideas and programme to the realities of a

changing world. Leonard Darwin would

have demanded nothing better of us. Always

tolerant of intellectual differences he fol-

lowed developments in the Society's outlook

and activities as closely after his retirement

as before; but he no longer took the initia-

tive in influencing them and neither expected

nor asked that they should accord with his

own preferences. He had laid the founda-

tions securely and was content that his suc-

cessors should build on them in their own

way. It is our duty and privilege to continue

the work he so well began, setting ourselves

the same task as that to which he devoted

his life, and which he fittingly described as

" the advancement of mankind in the

future."

**

*

preferred to leave alone; but who would say that in the conditions of their time theirs
was not the wiser course? If the infant Eugenics Society has not emphasized the role of heredity as a determinant of pheno-

Lord Horder, President of the Eugenics Society, writes:
The passing of Major Leonard Darwin in his ninety-third year impels some of us who

typical characters, the prevailing assumption that the differences between men reflected

were his associates in the work of the Eugenics Society to accord him an affectionate and

merely the differences in the circumstances
of their lives might have continued to hold
the field. Today, without risk of misunder-
standing, we can stress the biologically selective influence of factors in our social and economic life; we can contemplate the problems of nature and nurture in explicit 'terms, not as antithetical factors but as variables within conditions that can be defined with increasing precision; but that
we can do so is a debt we owe to those who,
like Leonard Darwin, first made a social

dutiful Farewell. Affectionate, because to know the man, even a little, was to love him; dutiful, because he was to most of us the master and we were his pupils. A pilgrimage to his home in Sussex, even for a
few hours, was always a stimulus and an inspiration to those who have tried to carry on his ideals: both physically and morally Leonard Darwin was the Sage: he not only looked wise, he was wise. His seventeen years' presidency of the Society set an example that is very difficult to follow and impossible to excel.

EUGENICS REVIEW, 1929, 21, ii.

LEONARD DARWIN, I850-I943

III

Sir Charles Galton Darwin, Vice-President Mr. B. S. Bramwell, Chairman of Council,

of the Eugenics Society, writes:

Eugenics Society, writes:

Though my recollections of my uncle go I first met Major Darwin shortly after the

back to my earliest days, it is rather the last war in our old quarters in Lincoln's

later times that I recall, especially many Inn Fields. I had written an article which

visits during the last twenty years to his was published in the EUGENICS REVIEW and

house on Ashdown Forest. He retained to he asked me to join the Council. On the

the very last a continuing interest in the death of Mr. Howard Hazel, he accepted my

theory of evolution, and of course in eugenics, offer to undertake the duties of Treasurer.

and it always seemed to me that he combined Our finances depended very largely on an

very successfully this enthusiasm with a annual gift of £i,ooo from a friend of his,

modesty which prevented him, as an old who was always referred to as " the anony-

man, from intruding his views in such a mous donor." This was Mr. Twitchin, and

way as to cause serious embarrassment to if it had not been for his personal confidence

the later generations. He would write out, in Major Darwin, it is at least doubtful if

in his wonderfully firm handwriting, some the Society would have been the happy

ideas he might have, perhaps on a point in recipient of the Iwitchin bequest. On his

evolutionary theory, and would say, "I retiring from the Presidency, he felt that

expect this ought to be torn up, but I would his successor must be relieved from much of

like to know what you think of it."

the donkey work, if we were to obtain a man

In many people of extreme old age there of eminence still actively engaged in his life's

is a tendency for recent times to fade from calling. He therefore- suggested making a

the memory, so that the conversation per- Chairman of Council. As the holder of this

petually harps back to earlier years. There new office, I was indebted to him for much

was nothing of this in him. He kept his profound and far-reaching advice. His

interest in current affairs to the very end, knowledge of the subject was immense; he

and in particular followed with interest the had been in at the start and had undertaken

careers of all his family and relations. It was work for Sir Francis Galton as far back as

even rather hard to get him to talk of the the time when he was a sapper subaltern.

days of his youth, and though I sometimes His knowledge of men was equally wide.

prompted him to speak of it, there were not One could hardly mention anybody without

many personal reminiscences of his father. finding that he had sized up not only his

He once described how Huxley, staying at intellectual stature but also his character

Down, would try and shock the boys with and temperament, matters often of equal

anatomical stories. He used sometimes to importance. Sanity and caution always

talk of his military career, with reminiscences marked his outlook. As against this, his

of Woolwich which included the name of family and sapper associations gave him an

Kitchener, and I remember him once saying independence of thought not always to be

that all the things he had done at the Staff found in more conventional circles. His

College had had no connection with any- larger work, The Need for Eugenic Reform,

thing like war. He would also sometimes I think bears out these statements.,, His

talk about his time in Parliament, recalling smaller book, What is Eugenics?, is an

speeches of Gladstone and others.

excellent introduction to the subject, and one

Though he used to say that he had never Edinburgh Professor of Medicine presents a

had any scientific education, I should say he copy of it each year to all the members of his

had all the outlook of a scientist, and that he class. It would be idle to deny that his views

would have accomplished even more than have not always found favour in every class

he in fact did, if he had not been obsessed by of the community, but his most severe critics

a modesty as to his own abilities which often are those whose grudge is really against

made him fear to tread where others were Providence in having made men different

quite willing to rush in.

and not equal. How much wiser was a remark

***

II2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of Miss Jennie Lee in a recent broadcast that I followed his advice at the time and have

perhaps the rewards of intellect may be too continued to follow it since. My correspond-

great. Many of us feel that he did not ence with Darwin was voluminous; and up

receive the public recognition he deserved. till the war I used to visit him regularly every

Trues he received a Doctorate of Science three months. I frequently took with me to

from Cambridge, but we should have liked see him persons who could supplement or

to see him a Fellow of the Royal Society, as correct my account of the Society's projects

were his three brothers. Also, like them, the and activities, and my talks with him in his

recipient of some State recognition. How- study at Cripps's Corner are among my hap-

ever, in spite of one puckish gleam of humour piest recollections. In the course of the last

when Mr. Oscar Browning was made an ten years, when he grew a beard, he ca-me to

O.B.E., these latter are generally highly have a striking resemblance to his father as

conventional and dull.

he was depicted in his last portrait; and I

It was delightful to travel down to Cripps's seemed to detect an equally striking resem-

Cower and to seek advice from the fresh blance in character. It is difficult to describe

mind of the nonagenarian. Alas, no more. this without fulsomeness. Leonard Darwin

A life well spent.

had a perfect courtesy for everyone, irre-

***

spective of age, station or attainments. This

Dr. C. P. Blacker, General Secretary, was revealed in personal contacts no less

Eugenics Society, writes:

than in his allusions to people in conversa-

When I became (.eneral Secretary of the tion. He was completely devoid of the

Society twelve years ago, Major Leonard egotism and vanity which are sometimes

Darwin had ceased to take an active part in disappointingly disclosed in eminent men.

its affairs. That is to say that he never He retained till the very end an alertness of

attended Council Meetings, or came to our mind which continued to belie his self-

Galton dinners. Nor did he wish to influence disparaging belief that age and infirmity

the policies of the Society despite the favour- were impairing his judgment. But his most

able change in its fortunes brought about by notable characteristic was his remarkable

Mr. Twitchin's legacy which suddenly made fairness and openness of mind, and it was in

us rich. Mr. Twitchin had been his friend and this that his resemblance to his father seemed

admirer, and it was entirely due to Leonard to me most striking. My views on the

Darwin's influence that the Society came into genetic and social basis of eugenics, while in

the whole of his considerable estate.

general conformity with his, differed in

Yet it is true to say that eugenics, together emphasis. I believed less than he did that

with the activities of the Society, remained eugenically desirable qualities were segre-

Darwin's chief interest. Sir Bernard Mallet gated in social classes, and this difference

who, on his nomination, had succeeded him had implications affecting policy. We dis-

as President, was keenly aware that we owed cussed these matters at length in letters and

everything to him. Darwin had gathered in conversation. His attentiveness and

round himself, among the Honorary Officers receptivity to arguments which were some-

and Council, a band of distinguished and times at variance with his outlook were an

loyal helpers; he had steered the Society unfailing source of delight. It is not often

through many difficult controversies; his that one meets people who genuinely regard

leadership had been gentle, wise and firm. controversy as a means of reaching truth.

The world-wide respect which his name com- Leonard Darwin conveyed to one this

pelled was more than matched by the approach more directly and convincingly

affectionate regard of those who sat at the than anyone I have ever met; and it was

meetings over which he presided. No one perhaps in this respect more than any other

knew this better than Mallet, who bade me that he made one feel that, in his presence,

keep in close touch with him and to consult one might be listening to his father. His

him over all problems and difficulties.

views have been vigorously and sometimes

LEONARD DARWIN, I850-I943 ,

113

bitterly attacked. I have often wished that reasoning and well-weighed earnestness of

his detractors had a fraction of his genuinely this really great book.

scientific spirit, and of his integrity.

***

I think that I was the last person con- Mrs. S. Neville-Rolfe, Honorary Secretary

nected with the Society to see him. During to the British Social Hygiene Council, writes:

my three years in the army, we maintained In the death of Major Darwin the country

our correspondence. We exchanged several loses one of its wise men and a great gentle-

letters about Mr. Frederick Osborn's book, man.

Preface to Eugenics, by which I had been As one who worked with him very closely

much impressed. We exchanged views about over a long span of years (from I909 to I9I8)

the war, in whose favourable outcome he and since then has been privileged to main-

always believed, and about the policy of the tain the ties of friendship, the loss is also

Society. He firmly supported the decision of personal. Major Darwin was a second father

the executive committee to slow down in his understanding, guidance and training

activities and to refrain from dissipating our of a willing amateur to public service.

financial resources. One of the first things. I Looking back over the early years when, as

did on leaving the army at the beginning of President and Honorary Secretary of the

October 1942 was to pay him a visit at then Eugenics Education Society respectively,

Cripps's Corner. The joumey on October i2th we drew together a band of volunteers to

presented war-time difficulties, and I had a bring the principles of eugenics into public

ten-mile bicycle ride to and from Three consciousness, one realizes the care and

Bridges. But we had an hour's talk in his patience, the strength and gentleness with

study as of. old. His kindness, his warmth, which he drove his team of willing workers

his courtesy, and the feeling of welcome he towards the objective.

gave me were unchanged; and it was I well remember in I912, on the occasion

astonishing that, at the age of 93, his faculties of the First International Eugenics Congress,

were so alive. But the death of his wife had held at the London University, South Ken-

saddened him, and he now looked his years. sington, with Mr. Arthur Balfour making the

As I said good-bye at the door of his house, I speech of welcome at the opening dinner and

had a presentiment that this might be my The Times giving full reports of the sessions,

last visit.

with what satisfaction he was able to say,

I have known very few men who inspired " we have now put eugenics in the public
in equal measure such respect and affection eye and made it respectable! "

as he; and I count my friendship with him It is a good example of his moral courage

as both a privilege and an education.

and intellectual integrity that when some of

***

us wanted the Eugenics Education Society to

Dr. R. A. Fisher, Galton Professor of raise the problems of venereal diseases-at

Eugenics, University College, London, that time an entirely taboo subject, and its

writes:

damage to posterity unknown to the general

No more fitting memorial to Major Dar- public-Major Darwin, while seeing the

win's lifelong concern for eugenics could be danger to the infant Eugenics Society, recog-

found than in his masterly book, The Need nized the importance of checking the pre-

for Eugenic Reform. To it speakers and ventable damage-although he did not

writers on the subject will for long turn for consider the prevention of venereal diseases

wise counsel, and for a penetrating analysis to be technically a matter of eugenics. Under

of all aspects of eugenics, especially in its his Presidency the first steps were taken

practical application.

from the Eugenics Education Society to

It is one of the difficulties of the subject secure the appointment of the Royal Com-

that eugenics exercises a potent attraction mission; the majority of the commissioners

for cranks of various kinds. All the more were members of the then Eugenics Educa-

valuable is the sober judgment, detached tion Society's Council, and though he

II4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

personally had a great distaste for the friendship and wise captaincy from Europe,

subject, Major Darwin presided over the and not least from our enemies' country.

first meeting at which the provisional Here at home it is not generally realized

executive of the National Council for Com- how widespread and penetrating was his

bating Venereal Diseases was-appointed and influence outside this country.

remained for a number of years its Honorary Brevity forbids even a bare outline of the

Treasurer.

growth of the- International Federation of

The kindly side of his character took Eugenics (earlier the International Eugenics

greater pleasure in another endeavour in Commission) which brought Major Darwin

which he, Sir Theodore Chambers and I into relations with America and the Con-

worked together to give practical effect to tinent over a long period, of which the be-

a positive aspect of eugenics. At the out- ginnings go back to that dim age " before

break of the last war, a number of the pro- the last war." That can be learned from

fessional classes, a socially selected group of records. His influence, and the directions it

a proved standard of intelligence, were in took, are less easily recognized from that

acute economic difficulties. To bridge the history; nor can one clearly disentangle in

war period through maintaining continuity the position at any given moment how much

in education, through maternity accom- is due to his guidance, and how much to

modation and assistance and in many other other factors in development. These are the

ways-as Chairman of the Professional things one would like to see recorded.

Classes War Relief Council he guided an Throughout Western Civilization Charles

early experiment in social welfare related to Darwin was a name to conjure with, and his

social biology.

son was accepted with a great respect before

Intellectual integrity, courtesy and kindli- he was known personally. Major Darwin

ness are to my mind the characteristics that treasured affectionately what was a tribute

stand out in memories of Major Darwin. to his father, but most cleverly evaded any

***

reflected glory falling on himself. The result

Mrs. C. B. S. Hodson, Honorary Secretary gave him contacts entirely personal; he

to the International Human Heredity Com- became known and respected for himself;

mittee, 1930-9, writes:

respect grew into affection on the part of

On learning the news of Major Darwin's those who had frequent opportunities of

passing, I thought back to. the period when seeing him, and thus his views prevailed-

I was working under him, and the time often against considerable potential resist-

before. There may never be another oppor- ance.

tunity given me to express gratitude for that Major Darwin had no illusions about the

time, and this can best be done in the simple many differences distinguishing countries

statement of intimate facts. Being one of and peoples; and he realized how much

those happy people whose occupation is minute points of custom and outlook

concerned with their chief aspirations, I dominate the emotional attitudes of their

know that I owe this mainly to two men: nationals. Thus he never fell into the mis-

first Sir Edward Poulton, who made it taken attempt to rationalize, still less to

possible for me, late in college days, to begin ignore, these potential points of division.

studies in science, and then to Major Darwin For all these national (or local) features, by

(to whom Sir Edward " handed me on " as courteous recognition, he showed a kind of

it were), who led me to concentration on "international respect," so that the sus-

human biology, and brought my mental picion of British national superiority could

devotion to evolution into proper relation not arise. It may be added that this same

to problems of society.

awareness of differences, applied to per-

There will be in the U.S.A. a keen sense of sonal idiosyncrasies as part of the human

the loss of a leader. Were it not war-time, make-up (coupled with the respect which

one would also hear many tributes to his knowledge of the hereditary inevitableness

LEONARD DARWIN, I850-1943

II5

thereof entails), made his personal relations measures of social selection might eventually

entirely devoid of snobbery. The celebrity be wisely chosen and applied. Natural

meeting him, lost his feeling of reliance on a selection seems to be a touchstone of any

great name, and became a man; the humble thinker's power of reasoning; social selec-

and unknown individual felt the compliment tion has proved to be an indicator of the

of being accepted as of interest in and for individual scientist's courage and independ-

himself and reacted with new confidence; ence of thought. It is proof (if proof were

insincerity could not long persist in this needed) of his large measure of this quality,

atmosphere, indeed that was the one quality combined with scrupulous honesty.

which evoked laughter or scorn.

Major Darwin's lectures and addresses

It was not alone these personal character- were no more " popular " abroad than at

istics which brought about a united federa- home; his conscientious care for accuracy

tion of the previously warring nations, all in detail of fact and language prevented that

still sore, or full of inimical feelings, sooner lightness which makes a speech easy for the

than one first dared to hope. There was wise hearers. Long preparation went to making

policy in each detail of the common business. the fullest use of every chance of teaching.

Those who were being gently led, rarely When, however, some extemporary unpre-

suspected the inflexible purpose patiently pared occasion arose, humour, pleasantness

at work through each detail of election to and ease were never lacking, while the

membership, each conference programme, habitual sincerity made complimentary re-

even in the selection of the social entertain- marks and " votes of thanks " from him

ments which played their part in the interna- ing true in a way that made of these trivi-

tional intercourse. Here, generosity in alities amongst his foreign friends coins of

money matters played its part, that is at an value; it was a largesse that did much to

angle where it often remained hidden, and unify a group of singular variety.

could in no way interfere with the desirable I hope he knew to the end how much of

financial independence of the Federation. his work persisted-though so much of what

One point of far-seeing policy, has in the he would have wished to see come about

event had special importance, and it was a awaits posterity, perhaps our grandchildren ?

policy that often caused criticism-namely, His modesty would prevent his desiring,

that the group should never discuss practical much less claiming, his real share in the

eugenic measures. Papers and work were advances of the knowledge of the biological

strictly limited to theory, scientific aspects side of Man's life, whereby alone human

of problems, and research. It is in the realm evolution can escape another period of

of practical measures that the national frustration; his singular wise patience knew

emotional outlook and prejudice play the no pessimism, focussing on the vision ahead;

strongest part. Insuperable divisions would when his part was played he could wait

rapidly have wrecked any true international content. I think he trusted " those that

collaboration had these ever been mooted; come after": it will take all our powers to

research, on the other hand, proved a fruitful be worthy of that trust.

soil for joint work, and it is the side of the

***

Federation's life which still bears fruit, under The Hon. Mrs. Grant Duff writes:

other dress, in more than one direction.

Major Leonard Darwin was President of

Here may be mentioned the outstanding the Eugenics Society for nearly twenty years,

aspect of eugenic science constantly reiterated and no one was ever more delightful to work

by our leader: this was selection, which with. He combined the qualities of efficiency

was in Darwinian evolution theory the with human kindness and understanding to

instrument playing on the material of a rare degree, and it was this combination

variation and heredity. A search for the which made serving under him a real

factors at work in human selection was a privilege. He was whole-heartedly devoted

goal steadily kept in view, so that practical to the cause of what in America is called

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

" human-betterment," and we call eugenics. and for seventeen years he guided us all.

He never spared himself in his efforts to Mental honesty was an outstanding feature

make the laws of human heredity understood of his life and, therefore, he always gave a

by those they so deeply concem, not only in fair hearing to all who served under him.

his own country but throughout the world, I can never remember him other than

for no one knew better than he did that these courteous, no matter whether he agreed

questions concern all humanity. His example with the views being expressed or not. His

was an inspiration and working with him an patience and clear exposition often con-

education which not only caused others to verted his opponents.

give of their best unstintingly and untiringly, When the last war broke out and Mrs.

but made their efforts a true happiness. Neville-Rolfe (then Mrs. Gotto) and Sir

When he retired to the country he was Theodore Chambers- started the Professional

deeply missed; but his help and encourage- Classes War Relief Council and were estab-

ment were still always accessible, both to lished in Princes Gate (lent to them by Mrs.

correspondents and to all who went to Forest Pierpont Morgan), Major Darwin willingly

Row to visit him. He kept his clear faculties accepted the invitation to become Chairman

to the end of his ninety-three years, and now of the Council, and for some years he gave

his loss is irreparable.

his wise and sympathetic help to the work.

***

He shared the views of the founders as to the

Lady Chambers writes:

eugenic value of the project, designed to

It is with pleasure that I shall always encourage parenthood and to give help to

remember the years I served under Major those carrying good stock through the

Darwin with the Eugenics Education Society tribulations of the war period.

and the happy days when everyone was I cannot finish my small tribute to his

filled with enthutiasm and the single-hearted memory without a mention of his quiet sense

desire to educate the general public to under- of humour, which often gave us much

stand the import of the laws of heredity. enjoyment. I shall always be thankful that

Major Darwin was our loved President I knew him and grateful for all he taught me.

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION

"For the

of knowledge of the coue of legislation in different couies, more aticuly in te several par of His Majesy Doin, and in the United Snta"

President s The Rt. Hon. S. PL BRUCE, CJL, M.C.

Chairmon of the Executive Committee: The lt Hon. Lord MACMILLAN, G.C.V.O.

Honorary Secretaries: C. E. A. BEDWELL, Esq.

ProfEor H. C. GU1IDGE, KLC.

Annal Subserpon a a

- a Qne Guinea

Adress.28 Euem Stre, Lnle W.C2

