HUMAN FERTILITY
A Demonstration of its Genetic Basis By Dr. med. WILLY WAGNER-MANSLAU
Translated by E. 0. Lorimer

M Y article, " Heredity as an Explana- potential parents of high fertility-more

tion of the Declining Birth Rate," and more frequently to seek wives from

which appeared as No. VI of the small families of lower strata. Thus the

Eugenic Research Association's Mono- highly fertile father almost invariably

graphs, sought to demonstrate that the main marries a wife from a stock of minimum

cause of the fall in the birth rate was an fertility.

actual evolutionary change of the human A large collection of statistics assembled

animal itself (Umziichtung der Menschheit) in the tables of Monograph VI showed that,

due to the conditions of civilization.

in fact, up to 40 per cent. of the daughters

My hypothesis is, therefore, the exact of large families remained spinsters. That

antithesis of the generally accepted view is, io per cent. more than in the case of

that the sole cause of the declining birth small families. It therefore seems that, in

rate resides in altered external circum- the conditions of modern civilization, the

stance. This being so, I must naturally be propagation of the human race comes to lie

prepared for considerable opposition to my with the offspring of the less fertile stocks

thesis.

to a greater degree than their numerical

In Monograph VI, I proved my case by proportion in the population would warrant

quoting a large number of observations -which must in the long run detrimentally

made on the actual population, by the affect the fertility of a people. It is only

marshalling of masses of statistics, and, fair to admit, however, the possibility of a

finally, by drawing several conclusions, all fallacy lurking in this conclusion. But the

of which seemed to me to tell the same tale, correctness of my theory cannot be im-

namely that the decline in the birth rate pugned if I can prove by statistics, drawn

must be mainly caused by alterations in the from a sufficiently large human community

hereditary constitution of the people.

whose intimate structure is adequately

But syllogisms are tricky things. Even known, that those who marry into a lower

when the inaccuracy of a deduction cannot social stratum beget, in fact, fewer children

be proved, there remains the possibility that than those who take a wife of their own

some vital factor has been overlooked which rank.

would put an entirely new complexion on The Genealogical Gotha Almanachs pro-

the data, and with one blow lay low our vide, from this point of view, an excellent

house of cards. The question is so far- field of observation, for they supply in-

reaching, and its importance so immense, formation about the families of the Princes

that in this present article I am attempting for over I50 years; of the Counts for I25

an entirely new approach to the whole years; of the Freiherren for ioo years; and

problem.

of the lesser nobility for 50 years.

In Monograph VI I came to the con- Their data are not entirely ideal, since

clusion that the decisive factor in the they completely omit dead members of the

declining birth rate was the marriage for family. But, since all the genealogies are

money, which compelled the offspring of similarly deficient, the material yields un-

families where children were numerous- exceptionable data for comparative study.

'95

i96 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Not only is the number of children in each it necessary to gather data in every case from

marriage recorded, but it is possible also to two successive issues, and if the article about

look up the number of brothers and sisters any given family occurred in both I have

of each parent.

utilized the earlier entry. I have reckoned

Certain considerations govern the inclu- dead children as well as living ones. Where

sion of a family. The following potentates marriages with more than one wife have

are omitted: The Popes, the Turkish aris- taken place I have tabulated them on the

tocracy, non-European princes, and mem- following lines: If they were childless, I

bers of the Albanian house of Zogu. have only reckoned the first marriage; if

Information as to whether a given person there were children, I have entered them in

belonged to the old or to the new nobility the column of the wife who had the largest

is somewhat unreliable in the earlier issues. number; if the numbers were equal I have

The claims of certain families to original reckoned the latest marriage.

nobility have not withstood later investiga- In order to understand the following argu-

tion, and on the other hand, many families ment it is absolutely essential to master the

first quoted as later creations are able to structure of the German nobility. Table I

prove their original nobility. Recent shows the system. " Standesherr " cannot

decades have, however, been hypercritical be translated into English and the word

in demanding documentary proof of un- " Freiherr " must not be rendered by Baron

broken genealogies, and many families because the English baron is socially of

whose original nobility cannot seriously be higher rank than the German Freiherr.

questioned have been consequently trans- The two words must be therefore retained

ferred to the list of later creations.

in the text.

For my purpose it matters little whether The guiding principle of my investigation

the family in question can produce exact has been to endeavour to establish the rela-

proof of their title to belong to the original tion between the number of children spring-

nobility so long as their right was recog- ing from a marriage and the number of

nized by their peers. For determining these brothers and sisters of each parent.

questions I have therefore been content to Linking these present researches on to

abide by the findings of the Almanachs de those of my Monograph VI, I have taken

Gotha for 19I2 and I9I3. I have only I9I2 as a starting-point, and have ascer-

utilized other editions, on occasion, to fill tained at intervals of twenty years the

up gaps in these. Marriages with women number of children of each man who, in the

whose families had not separate entries of index year in question, was 40-60 years of

their own in the A Imanach have been age; further, the number of children in the

entered (unless with princes) as marriages two marriages from which the parents

with new nobility.

sprang. I devoted my attention to the men

In studying the following tables, there- between the ages of 40-60 because highly

fore, it should be borne in mind that the fertile families require a longer time for

marriages into the new nobility may always their full development than those less

contain a certain percentage of cases where fertile, and it was therefore essential to take

the woman really belonged to the older a sufficiently long period into account.

nobility, especially in the case of foreign

brides.

Before I873 the Almanach was not regularly issued in complete revised annual editions, but was amended as required,

TRANSLATOR'S NOTS:
To avoid recurrent circumlocution I denote throughout text and tables:

some families being brought up to date

the noun Old Nobility (Uradel) and the adjective belonging to the O.N. (uradlig)

lb OONN

every year, some every second year, and no distinction being made between the two categories of nobility. I have therefore found

the noun New Nobility (Brietadel) and the adjective belonging to the N.N. (briefadlig)

JbYy NN

noun,(the (MCiodm&mdoCnkearssses }* (Burgertum) XbyMC

and the adjective belonging to the M.C. (bUrgerlich) J

HUMAN FERTILITY

I97

TABLE I.-SCHEDULE OF THE GERMAN NOBILITY.

I. THE HIGHER NOBILITY.

A. Original or Old Nobility. [All families who can prove that they were ' noble ' before I350.]
i. Ruling Princes. [a. Families who were ruling in Germany, Austria, Russia, and Bulgaria up to November I9I8. b. Non-German, European families still ruling.]
2. Standesherren.
[Princely families who were ruling
families till the Congress of Vienna and preserved the 'Equality of Birth' -i.e. were considered equal mates for ruling princes, whose children would enjoy the right of succession.] 3. Non-ruling German Princes. [Families to whom the title of ' Prince ' has been accorded but who have not ruled. They have not ' Equality of Birth ' with I and 2, and their children would not enjoy the right of succession.] 4. Non-ruling Non-German Princes. [The non-German equivalent of 3.] 5a. Original Counts.

B. Patent-or New Nobility. [Families to whom a patent of nobility has been granted since I350.]
i. Even some ruling princes belong to the newer nobility with patents; but there are too few to form a separate category. And as they persistently sought their consorts in families of the old nobility they may be considered as belonging biologically, as far as questions of fertility are concerned, to the Original Nobility.
5b. Patent-Counts.

II. THE LESSER NOBILITY.

6a. Original Freiherren. 7a. Lesser Nobles.

6b. Patent-Freiherren. 7b. Lesser Patent-Nobles.

Children of Ruling Princes or Standesherren [Grades I and 2] by a less noble wife or by a commoner are ranked in a lower class of nobility according to the decree of the relevant Sovereign.

Children of the grades 3 to 7 take the father's rank regardless of their mother's origin.

I had already recorded in my seventh compelled to supplement it by considering article (see list of my articles at end) that the marriages of the women folk with men the Court Calendar of I912 disclosed a very of other social strata to procure mathenoticeable difference in fertility between the matical corroboration of the differential offspring of less fertile and more fertile fertility amongst the offspring of the less families. The Court Calendar, however, fertile and the more fertile families. Though deals with such small numbers that I was I cannot myself detect any error in this pro-

198 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
TABLE II.-NUMBERS OF CHILDREN of all married noblemen between the ages of forty and sixty according
as the father springs from a

Almanach de Gotha

Date of Marriage

Marriage yielding I or 2 children

Marriage yielding 6 or more children

Average Actual Actual Average Actual Actual

No. of total No. No. of No. of total No. No. of

children of Marriages children- of Marriages

per father children

per father children

Court Calendar
1912 ......
Court Calendar
I930 ...
ON Counts
I9I2 ...
ON Counts
I930 ...
NN Counts
I892 ...
NN Counts
I9I2 ...
ON Freiherren I892 ...
ON Freiherren
I9I2 ...
NN Freiherren
I893 ...
NN Freiherren
I9I3 ...
Totals ...

I852-7I
I872-9I I852-7I I872-9I I832-5I
I852-7I
I832-5I
I852-7I
i832-5I I852-7I

2'48
2.84 2 II I 97 2-46 2 24 2.5 2-I9
2 33
2,02
2'22
+00487

236 230 423 307 374 342 534
65i
74I
773
4,6II

95 2.79

488

II3 2.4

432

96 2.64

484

I56 2.7

524

152 2.8I

365

I53 2.84
2I3 2-66

3I3
745

297 2-7I

74I

3I8 2 53

597

383 2'28

530

2,076 2-62 5,2I9
00o589

I75
i8o I83
I94 I30
II0
280
273
236
232
I,993

ON=Belonging to Old Nobility. NN=Belonging to New Nobility. [See Table I]

cedure I am, nevertheless, dissatisfied with determined to make a study of the entire this method of securing data. The subject data offered by the A Imanach de Gotha. is of such far-reaching importance that I Table II shows an analysis of the two was anxious to obtain as much unexception- last 20-year periods. This reveals that 2,076 able material as possible and I therefore offspring of less fertile stock had an average

HUMAN FERTILITY

I99

"22 children each, and 1,993 offspring of fertile stocks an average of 2 *62.
ing to the first and subtracting from
second the margin of error, the values out at 2 - 346I and 2 - 4433 respectively. even according to the least favourable retation of the figures, the number of
ren per head of the offspring of the fertile stocks is 0 -0972 higher than
the less fertile. is therefore mathematically established the origin of one parent from a more e or a less fertile stock determines estionable differences in fertility. A derable and definite degree of difference fertility-in phenotypical fertility at -is therefore determined by heredity. is correlation will naturally be more us when both parents spring from less e (or more fertile) stock; my material,
shows clearly that the offspring of matings themselves produce distinctly
(or more) children. The marriage oney-far more than would a marriage luenced by financial considerationsces the result that the poor person (i.e. erson from a family of numerous chillooks out for a rich mate, which is t synonymous with a mate from less e stock. The result of this is that the age of two persons who are both from fertile families is extremely rare; and therefore difficult to muster sufficient tics to show with mathematical exactithis difference in fertility. I cannot ssfully approach this part of my probuntil I have fully worked out the 'ily very considerable) material proby the Gotha Almanachs. Tables IV and V of my Monograph VI onstrated that there existed a marked nce, in the last four generations, in lative fertility of Counts and Frei-
of the old and those of the new ty. In explanation of this I referred ables X, XI, and XII, which also d definite evidence that there was a
tendency, increasing with every tion, for the nobility to marry beneath
this present article I have endeavoured

to bring proof of this assertion. If my assumption is correct that the differences in fertility between the ON and the NN are caused by this type of marriage, we shall expect to find that the individual noblemen who have married beneath them have fewer children than those who have married their social equals. In examining these relationships in greater detail I soon perceived that, while a marked difference was to be detected according as the wife came from the ON or the NN, it was still more strongly marked where the wife was a commoner. I was therefore driven not only into dividing up the husbands into ON and NN, but to subdividing the wives into ON, NN, and MC. The sub-groups of Counts thus formed are tabulated in Tables III and IV.
THE WEALTHY WIFE
Table III shows all the marriages of Counts during the 8o years from 1832-I9II which are recorded in the Almanach. It is immediately patent that very considerable differences in fertility, ranging from 3-41 to I 92, are manifested between the various sub-groups, according as the wife springs from the ON, NN, or MC. The divergence is so pronounced that, in spite of the limited material, the difference between the ON and MC wife (with the exception of the period i832-5i) and between the NN wife on one side and the ON and MC wife on the other is mathematically established.
'rhe Table shows that the fertility of the three sub-groups of marriages with wives of the ON, NN, and MC has altered little in the three-score years of our investigation. This fact stands in glaring contrast to the results of Table VII in Monograph VI, according to which the average fertility of a Count was 2-6 in I852 and 2-22 in 19I2that is to say, has shown a definite decrease during the period under examination. The explanation is not far to seek. A glance at the percentage column on the right shows that marriages with the fertile ON women had fallen off by io per cent. between I852 and I9I2, while marriages with the much less fertile MC women had increased by I0 per cent. It is obvious that this increase of

200 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

MC marriages-the ultimate cause of which It is an amazingly small proporti

was the more and more ruthless hunt for we realize that the blood-dilution is

the maximum dowry-had the inevitable still when we reflect that even befo

result of the lowering of the average fertility two-thirds of the marriages of ON

of the whole group.

had been made with the less fertile'

The percentage table is most instructive ing ' daughters of the NN or MC. Al

in showing how strong was the uprush of the Counts of I892-I9II had, accor

the socially ambitious commoners. The the German law, the right to call the

New Nobility had, of course, itself emerged ON through their fathers, a large pro

not so very long before from the ranks of of them inherited the less fertile MC

the middle classes. The grant of a patent from their maternal ancestors. The

of nobility and a coat of arms, naturally, of this are unmistakable in the dec'

could not alter a man's hereditary fertility fertility between I892 and i9ii, not

factor* (supposing such to exist). The first in the groups of the NN and MC mo

section of this article has shown that there but also in the ON.

do exist genotypical differences in the FF My contention, that the NN nob

which considerably influence phenotypical represent just as much a selection i

fertility. If so, the men of the NN will be direction of a weaker RI as do the w

just as surely carriers of a less fertile gene commoners who marry into the nobili

complex as the MC women, who in Table convincingly demonstrated by a se

III have married direct into the social scrutiny of the marriage relationships

stratum of the Counts.

ON and NN Counts. This sub-di

however, makes the sub-groups so

THE SELECTION OF INFERTILITY

that the differences are not mathemat

It is only in a negligible minority of cases
that a commoner is elevated to the peerage for sheer merit, since the overwhelming
majority owe their elevation to the great wealth that makes it possible for them suitably to support a title. And we know that

established. But since the differences, consistently parallel (apart from the e tions indicated by an asterisk) with
mathematically unexceptionable figur
Table III, they may safely be consi fairly sound. From this point of view

great wealth regularly accumulates in fami- may be checked by the figures in br

lies with the fewest children. Thus the con- which indicate the actual number of

ditions of civilized life operate automatically riages in each case. to select the wealthiest commoner families In Table IV we see that the two grou

who at the same time are those with the
weakest desire for offspring. t These families
pour upwards into the ranks of the nobility in a mighty stream, the men by acquiring a peerage and the women by marriage. And

their marriages with wives of the ON
and MC display differences in fertility show the same principle at work a entire material does. This is not surpr It is worth noting, however, that the nu

since the elevation does not alter the RI of of children per marriage of the NN C

either sex they both help to destroy the is consistently lower than the correspon

fertility of the ON. Table III shows that only a third, even
of the Counts, conclude an ON marriage.

figure for the ON Counts. It is impo to escape the conclusion that here differences in fertility exist between th

The most interesting point is that the

bination of ON Counts with ON

* The ' predisposition to fertilit ' [Fruchtbarkeitsanlage] I have rendered by "fertility factor"
-FF.-Translator.
t ' Desire for offspring,' ' reproductive impulse'

yields the highest and that of NN C with MC wives the lowest number of dren per marriage. The only pla

[Wille zum Kinde] I have frequently denoted by RI. Obviously FF and RI are frequently interchangeable terms.-Translator.

explanation of this is that the ON been selected for high fertility, and the

HUMAN FERTILITY

20I

TABLE III

Average Number of Children per head of Counts between the ages of forty and sixty [from the Almanach de
Gotha] married to wives of

Percentage of Counts who contracted marriages with wives of

Date of Marriage between

ON

32-5I ...

3-4I

321+0I7

+o0i65

NN
2 68
+0-12
263
+0II5

No. of MC Marriages

2 - 69*
+043
I*98
켹-I76

900
I,026

ON
%
4I.89
36*55

NN
%
53
5I-I7

MC
%
5.II*
I2-28

Y2-9I ... 3.I

2 66 I*98 1,294

+O.I5I + 1I04 켖.I32

32.46 500o8

I7-46

92-I9II ... 2 8

45 I 92 1,402

01I27 0-0997 +oi086

34 52 43.I5 22.33

32-I9II ...

3.II

2-6

2 02

0076 +0-055 0'0757

* These figures are of no weight. The number of marriages involved is too small, and further ey include some unusually high rates of children per family.
ON=Old Nobility. NN=New Nobility. MC=Middle Classes (Commoners).

d the wealthiest commoners for low sistently less low than that of the equivalent

lity. Count marriages; and secondly that between

Tables V and VI analyse the same rela- i872 and I89I a definite decline is notice-

s for the Freiherren as III and IV did able in the fertility of marriages with NN

the Counts.

and MC wives.

In Table V the totals for the two outside The first of these points is obviously the

umns are mathematically established, statistical expression of the fact that those

h the exception of those of I852-7I. The Counts who decided to stoop to a middle-

tility figures for the NN wives for the class marriage had the first choice of

Lole period, and the ON wives for i892- wealthier and, therefore, less fertile brides,

i are likewise established.

while the Freiherren had only the second

he tables all show the same principle in choice, and the fertility of the wives they

tion-decrease of fertility according to secured was definitely higher. The fact

ether the marriage is contracted with that the fertility of the Freiherren in the

NN, or MC wives. The combination individual sub-groups is more variable than

ON yields the highest number of chil- that of the Counts, is doubtless due to the

per marriage, and NN x MC the Freiherr feeling less class-conscious than

rest. the Graf and less averse from marrying a

n the other hand, two points should be commoner.

d, firstly that the fertility of the Frei- A glance at the percentage column shows

marriages with commoners is con- that as early as the middle of last century

202 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE IV.-THE SAME COUNTS AS IN TABLE III DIVIDED INTO ON AND NN

Average of Children per Head

ON Counts married to wives of

NN Counts married to wives of

Date of

marriage

ON

NN

MC

ON

NN

MC

between

I832-5I ... 3.6

2-74

2.66*

3.o6

2-63

3 64*

[244] [2I8]

[32] [I33] | [259]

[I4]

I852-7I ... 348

2.76

2-I8

2.74

2 5I

I75

[232] [249]

[66] [I43] [276]

[60]

I872-9I ... 3.22 2-86 2-03 2-88 2.47 I*93
[274] [312] [II3] [I46] [336] [II3]

I892-I9II 278 246 1.95 282 2.43 I*9 [3I5] [333] [I83] [I69] [272] [I30]

The figures in brackets give the actual number of marriages in question. * These figures are of no weight. The number of marriages involved is too small, and they include some unusually high rates of children per family.

the Freiherren sought more than a quarter external influences. But environmental

of their wives among commoners and less fluences play a subordinate role to those

than a quarter from the ranks of the ON. heredity, now waxing, now waning, accor

By i9i2 the marriages with commoners have ing to time and place.

increased by i2 per cent., those with the The decisive factor in the steady decli

ON wives have decreased by 2 per cent., in the birth rate of the nobility and well-

those with the NN wives by 9 per cent. do during the last fifty years, and the gr

From the outset, therefore, the blood of the increase in the birth rate of certain clas

Freiherren is much more diluted by that and sometimes of entire populations remai'

of the rising MC than is the blood of the however, the hereditary factor.

Counts.

THE EFFECT ON THE NATION

THE GENETIC FACTOR

This raises the question whether

Summarizing all these considerations, it principle we have found valid for a nobili

appears that fertility is determined by here- leading a more or less self-contained exi

dity. From Table II it is manifest that the ence, will also be found good for civil

phenotypical consequences of the varying mankind as a whole. The proof that

fertility factors are very considerable; and it reproductive impulse in the German nobili

is indubitable that the marked variations in is determined by hereditary genes m

fertility are referable to an inherited FF- obviously be equally valid for the rest

though I would expressly emphasize that I mankind, and further discussion is unnec.

by no means overlook the contributory in- sary.

fluence of environmental circumstances. In The circumstances governing the dest

several passages in Monograph VI, I ex- tive influence on fertility of the marriage

pressly pointed out that some of the results money throughout the rest of the people

in my statistics can only be explained by not so clear. If we fully understand h

HUMAN FERTILITY

203

TABLE V

Average Number of Children perhead of Freiherren between the ages of forty and sixty married to wives of
,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Percentage of Freiherren who contracted marriages with wives of

Date of

No. of
ON NN MC marnages ON NN MC

I ... I .4..
1911.
1911 ...

3.I 2.54 2-48
+0oI56 +0-092 +켹iI8

3
+0 I35
2.53
0+o I05

2.42
0-079
2 03 +o-o65

2-22
+o'o82
I*97
+o-o62

2.84

2-3I

21i6

+0-0745 켹-448 0o-o464

1,594 2,I42
2,54I

24.65 47.68 27.67

22 83

43

34.I7

22.48 38.29 39-23

TABLE VI.-THE SAmE FREIHERREN AS TABLE V DIVIDED INTO ON AND NN Average of Children per Head.
ON Freiherren married to wives of NN Freiherren married to wives of
teOf age ON NN MC ON NN MC

5I ... 3-I4 2 5I 2.53 2.99 2.55 2.44
[251] [325] [i86] [I42] [435] [255]

3'15 2 66 2-2

2-69 2-26 2.24

[327] [364] [358] [I62] [557] [374]

-I911 2-67 I *83 2-07 2.33 2-2

i-87

[345] [440] | [486] [226] [533] | 53I]

hCures in brackets give the actual number of marriages in question.

erential decline of fertility has amongst the nobility, and grant
erences in fertility-with marked
ical manifestation-are hereditary i then we see that each social
inevitably consists of a chaotic of carriers of weak, medium, and -fertility factors. To express these

ratios in figures and to work out the governing principle with the maximum simplicity, I shall first deal only with weak and strong
FF's.
Let us arbitrarily assume that, in view of the actual fluctuations of human fertility, a strong FF implies a wish for lo children, and a feeble FF a wish for only

204 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

two. The average fertility of a population gradually grow poorer in carriers of s

must naturally vary within wide limits FF's in proportion to the decrease in

acording as the carriers of these different number of more fertile marriages-for

factors mate together. Now, supposing that chief source of a strong FF will nat

there are 200 men and 200 women, one half be the more fertile marriage. It is

of each sex with a strong and the other that even in less fertile marriages the

half with a feeble reproductive impulse (RI dency to greater fertility may be formed

or FF), then either-

the coincidence of complementary ge

i.-Strong mates with strong and feeble
with feeble, or
2.-One strong and one feeble mate together.

but it is improbable that such fort coincidences would be numerous.
We have, of course, no clue as to number of carriers of the strong and fee FF's in the various social strata at

In the first case the strong groups yield beginning of last century. We are j

ioo marriages with ten children, and the fled, however, in deducing from Tables

feeble a hundred marriages with two children and VI that the diminution of the ave

-making a total of I,200 children. In fertility of Counts and Freiherren was

the second, the 200 marriages of the highly mediately promoted by the fact that

fertile yield only one or two children each, highly fertile scions of these stocks,

because, though one parent desires many their quest for fat dowries, did not light.

children, that is insufficient for their pro- often as of old on highly fertile wives.

creation-the mate with the strong RI consequence of this the number of ma

would depend wholly on the other's will, child marriages fell off, and this in its t

because a job which requires the co-opera- was the cause of an increased reduction

tion of two cannot be carried out if one the number of carriers of a strong

refuses.

throughout the population.

This imaginary example shows that very Such marriages as take place within

considerable differences of phenotypical pale of the ON itself denote no renuncia

fertility can be produced merely by variant of the marriage for money. With n

combinations of the carriers of the FF's. ligible exceptions the decisive factor in

Our knowledge of the FF in man is choice of a wife is her dowry. The yo

limited to the knowledge that such exists. Count or Freiherr is, of course, best sui

Since we are dealing with a physiological when he finds the wealth he requires

property, we may assume with a high a wife of his own rank; only if thi

degree of probability that the FF depends denied him, does he turn his thoughts

on several hereditary genes, and that its the wealthy heiress of a lower s

different degrees are the products of their stratum. In civilized conditions, theref

varying combinations.

even within the limits of the same ca

The various genes for any physiological there is a selection in favour of lower

property are known to be distributed ac- tility. If circumstance arose which c

cording to the binomial theorem; and if we pelled young men to seek brides in

reckon those combinations which lie beyond their own caste, the women with the

the centre of the variation curve as strong, fertility would, as of old, attain

we find that these strong RI's will be pre- matrimony.

sent in only about 34 per cent. of the popu- Instead of this, the young men are

lation. It would therefore be possible, if offered the chance of finding a rich wife-

all matings were of the second type (strong themselves lower in the social

and feeble RI), entirely to eliminate the and a surplus io per cent. of the daugh

more fertile marriage. If this were the of the more' fertile families of the hig

case, or even if the number of more fertile stratum (according to Tables II, VII,

marriages decreased, the population would VIII of my Monograph VI) remain s

HUMAN FERTILITY

205

rs. Inasmuch as the ' mounting' between I852 and I9I2 their fertility sank

en represent a selection in favour of low from 26 to 2 22; while the lower ranks of

lity, this substitution of wives, so to the nobility show a lesser power of resistance

k, involves an increase in the combina- proportionate to their lower rank.

ns unfavourable to fertility. Referring The net result of these varying marriage

Table V of the Monograph VI, we do not relations has been the remarkable fact

d, as we should be justified in expecting, (demonstrated in Table I of Monograph VI)

t the decline in the average fertility is that the NN has the lowest average fertility

ected in the corresponding shrinkage in of all, and that the rate increases as the

e number of children per marriage; it social scale both rises above and falls below

nifests itself, rather, in the decrease of their class. In the nobility, the highest

ge families and in a simultaneous in- rank has the highest fertility, while among

e of few-child families-which are the commoners it is found in the lowest

tributed, however, in such a way that in ranks !

h index-year the ON has more many- These remarkable differences can easily

ild and fewer childless marriages than the be reconciled if my theory proves to be

If my theory is correct, this is bound correct that the decline in the birth rate is

be the case: for the ON represent a selec- in the main a matter of heredity.

n in favour of high fertility and the NN

selection in favour of a low FF.

EFFECT ON THE MIDDLE CLASSES

Tables III to VI demonstrate conclusively The next question that presents itself is

at the increasing shrinkage in the number whether the marriage for money is destruc-

carriers of a high FF in the population tive to the fertility of the middle classes.

question, such as was theoretically bound No wideawake observer can fail to see that

follow the altered marriage conditions, the reckless dowry-hunt prevails also among

d in fact set in. This is shown by the the MC and is the determining factor in

line in the numbers of children even in most marriages. The difficulty is that the

NxON marriages in recent generations. facts are not easily reduced to statistics.

In direct relation to the pace of this Official and semi-official records never

dency to contract marriages for money systematically take note of the wife's social

a lower stratum, is the speed of the origin, and a great drawback of all official

rinkage of the numbers of carriers of a records (and still more of family records) is

gh FF in the population; and the decline the definite effort to draw a veil over a low-

the average fertility of the individual born wife's origin. Further, middle grade

ata of the nobility will consequently or petty officials are described by high-

velop at varying rates. For the various sounding titles from some accidental occupa-

ata have exploited in different degrees the tion such as ' Town Councillor '; small

sibility of finding a rich wife by marry- peasants are designated ' land-owners,'

g beneath them. The Princes clung with shop-keepers become 'directors,' honest

utmost tenacity to their " equality of craftsmen ' contractors,' ' rentiers,' etc.

h," particularly the reigning princes and But it is possible, nevertheless, to show in

Standesherren. For, in these two higher another way that in the great body of the

ata, the Princes' own caste feeling was MC whole sections, showing strongly differ-

nforced by the fact that if they married ing FF's, live side by side uninfluenced by

eath them their children forfeited the each other, according as they are or are not

right of birth." The consequence of this slaves to the marriage for money.

cording to Table VI of Monograph VI) Let us consider first the evangelical

s that for over ioo years, ending at I912, ministers who are notorious for their

Princes retained unimpaired their rela- remarkably large families. I took the

!fively high fertility.

trouble to investigate this recurrent asser-

The Counts proved less resistant, and tion which seemed to be nowhere proved,

206 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and in my second article I extracted from was made of the marriage for money w

all the family histories I could lay hands has to-day become universal.

on the number of children of ministers and other professional men. My researches THE MONIED AND LANDED CLASSES

showed not only that the popular belief was Long ago, the nobility, higher and lo

well-founded, and that for centuries the the military caste, and the merchant pri

ministers' average was one child per head of the towns married for money; and

more than that of other professional men, know for certain that all these groups

but, further, that the officer class had had involved in a progressive process of

for centuries two children less per head elimination-that is, were becoming i

than the ministers.

tile. For the military and the merch

princes this still holds, and their fertilit

SUBNORMAL FERTILITY IN A.D. 1700

therefore even lower than before. Spe changes, however, have affected the nobi

My second article also established the fact Since the emancipation of the peasan

that as early as I700 in Danzig, a city with landed property has increased enormo

a relatively self-contained and well-to-do in value. Hence the older nobility, in wh

population, exactly the same subnormal fer- hands the bulk of landed property

tility prevailed as in our large towns to-day experienced an immense increase in weal

-and this in the midst of a surrounding Numerous many-child families of the

peasant population which was undoubtedly were thus preserved from social decay, a

on the increase.

their highly fertile offspring were able

All these remarkable reductions in fer- participate in the propagation of their ca

tility set in in earlier centuries; at a time, so that the ON was enriched by individ

that is to say, when there was no talk at all with a very high FF. Thus the ON,

of a rationalization of the birth rate or any of comparison with the NN, represents a sel

those external influences which are popu- tion in favour of high fertility, and h

larly supposed nowadavs to account for the therefore proved more resistant to

fall in the birth rate. The Church was then decline of the birth rate.

still at the height of its power, and none of The same circumstances have even m

those influences which are reputed provoca- affected the Counts, who possessed e

tive of a falling birth rate were in existence. larger landed properties, and most of all t

I therefore conclude that none of these Princes. The Princes further benefited

external factors, which are quoted to-day as the institution of the " right of birth "

the cause of the declining birth rate, are of " apanage "-i.e. the absolute guaran

really vital, but that, at the most, they are of an income suitable to the individu

mildly contributory; the one vital factor is a rank and birth regardless of work don

change in the hereditary gene-complex of the number of children. This alm

[Erbmasse] consequent on the marriage for completely neutralized the social

money. For the marriage for money is no advantage of the large family which had

new phenomenon.

seriously threatened the Princes' fertii

In response to these measures we note

The difference between then and now is prompt recovery of the Princes' fertility

just that in earlier centuries the marriage its stabilization at the relatively high fig

for money was only open to a very few of 2 - 7, in spite of the accumulation'

strata, whose numbers were relatively immense wealth in the hands of the Me

negligible, but left the great bulk of the recent centuries which tempted even

people unaffected, for the simple reason that Princes to marry beneath them-though

they had no property. That is why the to the same extent as the lesser nobility'..

declining birth rate was only noticed in In the same way great changes have taken'

olden times in a few circles where a fetish place of late in the marriage conditions of

I HUMAN FERTILITY

angelical ministers, but in a reverse direc- COLONISTS' 'NEED FOR CHILDREN'

on. Theological students used to have Colonial populations and their fertility

umerable free places, free food, bursa- statistics also make an interesting study.

es, scholarships, and what-not secured to The enormous fertility of the Boers, the

em at all ancient schools and universities. French-Canadians, and the Mennonites is

ese safeguarded the sons of large families well known. It is commonly explained that

ongst the clergy from a fall in the social the colonists needed children as workers-

le, and they became ministers like their which at first sight seems illuminating. But

efathers. In the early days there were this explanation does not bear scrutiny.

university men in the countryside except The Spanish and Portuguese in South

e clergy. Their social intercourse was, on America and the Australians in Australia

e one hand, with the landed nobility, who are similar colonizing populations, though

marriage questions did not recognize the not customarily styled so, and they have

nister as an equal, and, on the other, with never displayed any remarkable fertility,

e peasant serfs, whom they, in their turn, although they would equally have benefited

not accept as equals. The consequence by their children's labour. We may leave

that they were mainly driven to inter- these groups out of our reckoning because

rriage. How straitened their circum- they did not start as small-scale cultivators,

nces were is common knowledge, but the but from the first as large landowners with

ances of marriage for the daughters of a an upper-class outlook, particularly in that

ister's large family were more favourable most important point-marriage for money.

n they are to-day. Thus the ministers of But in the United States and Canada all

ly days were protected from social decline these colonizing populations of small-scale

their daughters from spinsterhood, far cultivators continue to exist in every period,

re than were the other professional completely unchanged in externals in spite

sses. Hence, the mating of two indivi- of changing times, side by side with other

ls, each with a high FF, occurred more types of population.

n among them.

The so-called " spaciousness of colonial

life " works with extraordinary selective

force. Cheek by jowl with the highly

E CLERGY TO-DAY

fertile French-Canadians, old-American, and German-Russian Mennonites, live the

arge families nowadays are economically new American settlers of German and

hed by high educational expenses, while English stock with their low fertility.

s are driven into secular posts in banks, It is irrational to suppose that circum-

tofices, etc. From material at my dis- stances which have hypothetically provoked

1-not a very large quantity-I could an almost extravagantly high fertility

that the ministers of to-day most often amongst the former group should leave the

g from the lower MC. Their rise to latter entirely unaffected.

position of minister would only be Limitations of space compel me to leave

ible in families which had been able to these unusually interesting and instructive

the money for their education by limita- questions aside, and to refer the reader to

of the number of their children. They Monograph VI; but I should like just to say

selves represent, therefore, a selection this about the results of my investigations

avour of low fertility, and, in order to there recorded-that in genuine colonizing

off the debts of their student days, they conditions, where the cultivator must him-

compelled to seek wives with means. self perform all the labour needed for his

er average FF is therefore low. It is own support, he is compelled to marry.

cant that the few among them who This rules out the marriage for money, or

still highly fertile are invariably at any rate, it leaves none of the daughters

dants of old minister-families.

even of the largest families unmarried. The

208 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

complete elimination of one factor which is the growing need for initial capital

persistently potent in reducing fertility in rising to higher levels.

civilized countries (viz. the spinsterhood of In the early generations when the isola

daughters of large families) has the effect individuals of the higher and lower s

of multiplying so mightily the highly fertile stood nearer the average of the I807 pOp

families that the fertility actually becomes tion, highly fertile marriages must o

excessive. When, however, it is no longer have occurred even in the higher stra

a question of annexing land, but of install- though not so frequently as in the low

ing agricultural machinery which demands The rising costs of education, howev

initial capital, the offspring of large families brought about the economic collapse of

are unable to hold their own and are driven larger families and an average intelligen

into the towns.

type is clearly seen emerging, closely alli

Reports are unanimous that from the to an average fertility-type, which shows t

moment of the introduction of economic higher strata as a selection from the low

capital the average fertility of Boers, a selection for low fertility.

French-Canadians, and Mennonites immedi-

ately showed a sharp decline. This evolu- THE CAUSE OF CLASS DIFFERENCES

tion (Umziichtung) towards low fertility The consequence of such conditions

requires two generations for its accomplish- inevitably been that the various strata of

ment and thus, for a certain period, as at MC display a lower degree of fertility

the present moment in Canada, highly fer- higher they stand in the social scal

tile early colonists exist side by side with phenomenon which is confirmed by

new settlers who have already, in their almost unanimous statistics from the m

original homes, been bred to a lower level varied places. The peak of this devel

of fertility.

ment of the MC is reached in the new nobl

We can see, therefore, on all sides the way and Freiherren of the I9I3 creation.

in which the marriage for money pursues studying the nobility we had already noti'

its baleful work of annihilation. It only that the issues of the Gotha A lmanach

now remains to explain the varying fertility these two years showed the lowest fertil

statistics of the MC.

yet attained.

Conversely, of course, if we again t

THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION

as our starting-point the year I807 and c sider its average population as the standa

In the year I8oo, four-fifths of the popula- the strata below this standard have a hig

tion were peasant serfs, and only one-fifth fertility than the average. All the desc

lived in the towns. The citizens of the dants of large families who were econo

towns consisted for the most part of small ally unable to hold their own in the hig

artisans who differed little in culture and strata, were bound in the course of gen

education from the peasant serfs. The tions to sink to the lower or lowest lev

ancestors of our present MC were therefore according to their intelligence. H

preponderantly people of extremely humble the strata of the skilled and unskilled w

birth. After the emancipation of the ing classes contain a greater percentage

peasants, outstanding individuals on all individuals with a high FF than does

sides acted as pace-makers for the more mean for the year I807.

gifted individuals of the common people. The result was that in these lowest s

In this struggle for precedence all weapons a far larger number of highly fertile

which proved useful were employed, and not riages occurred than before I807. Furth

intelligence, industry, and thrift alone. A since in consequence of all these fert

most potent aid to advancement was the conditions the strata below the MC me

restriction of the family, an aid which was are numerically far in excess of those abo.

bound to become increasingly valuable with two most important and remarka

HUMAN FERTILITY

209

henomena inevitably occur-the progres- THE EFFECT OF THE WAR

ive intellectual proletarianization, and an The War brought about a violent up-

bsolutely amazing rise in the total fer- heaval; first a steep upward curve of the

ity of our people as compared with I807 numbers of children (in consequence of

-a rise which it is quite impossible to explain marriages which had not taken place during

y external influences. The former, the the War and were hastily concluded after it)

ctual proletarianization of the people is so and then a sudden drop. By the end of the

enerally recognized that no elaboration of War the evolution was complete. If the

e point is necessary, and it is possible to War had not interfered, a gradual modifica-

prove the latter in comparison with the fer- tion of public opinion in favour of the two-

tility of earlier centuries without recourse to child family would in any case have set in.

xact statistics. The population of Germany The biological conclusion of the evolu-

pproximately doubled itself in the nine- tionary process, happening to fall in the

nth century. If the natural increase had severe post-War distress, made it easy for

been at the same pace in earlier centuries extremists to convert the mass of waverers

e population of Germany, as a simple to the two-child system. In this instance

alculation will show, would have been only biological causes were reinforced by external

me 8oo,ooo in I30o-which is certainly conditions. The ultimate result has been

rong. We must therefore conclude that the almost complete levelling of the average

e fertility of the German people in the fertility rates between the various strata of

neteenth century must have been very the upper and lower MC, and since the

much higher than ever before.*

abrogation of the ' equality of birth ' tradi-

As the increase in population before i8oo tion the Princes have shown unmistakable

can only have been slight, the average fer- signs of approximating to the MC average.

tility of the population before i8oo will have Since this average is not large enough to

been only some 3 - 3. Our earlier calculations maintain the numbers of the nation, we are

Whowed that the strata above the social mean now entering on the last phase of cultural

bmust have been suffering from reduced fer- decay. Apart from the decline in intelli-

tility, their numbers will therefore be below gence, the final dissolution has begun, the

.3, and the numbers for those below that actual Passing of the Civilized Races.

mean must, correspondingly, have been This fate might yet be averted. But can

Rbove 3*3-

the various Governments be induced to

This was how the case stood in I9I2, the envisage facts so clearly as to take the neces-

wear which I made the starting-point for sary measures while there is yet time? Jf

ny research in Monograph VI. The evolu- they did, would they be able to induce their

ionary process (Umziichtung) has continued people to use their powers with firm resolve?

minterrupted ever since; and even the work- Finis Germanorum!

Png man has learnt
1 modest dowry.

to appreciate Just as in

the the

value of earlier

generations the women who were carriers of

X high FF tended to remain spinsters or to [BIBLIOGRAPHY]

sink a degree or two in the social scale, their Articles by the same author, referred to last representatives are now for the most in the text:

part employed as spinster sewing-women,
,waitresses, nurses, etc.

i. Geschichtlicher Riickblick auf das Vergehen der alten Kulturen. [Historical Survey of the

Decay rf Ancient Civilizations.] Waichter, XII,

io and ii.

2. tber die Fruchtbarkeit der h6heren Stiinde

It is possible, however, that the birth rate was
equally high -in the centuries preceding i8oo, but tat a very hig'i death rate resulted in a low rate of batural increase -ED.

in den letzten vier Jahrhunderten. [The Fertility of the Upper Classes in the last Four Centuries.] Archiv fur Sippenforschung, VIII, 4.
3. Erklarung des Geburtenriickganges durch

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

erbliche Einfluisse. FThe Decline of the Birth
Rate explained by Heredity.] Monograph VI of the Eugenics Research Association, New York,
'93'. 4. Uber die Ursachen des Geburtenruckganges
beim deutschen Adel. [The Decline in the Birth Rate of the German Nobility and its Causes.] Archiv fur Sociale Hygiene und Demographie,
VI, 5. 193I.
5. Die Fruchtbarkeit der Danziger Bevolker-
ung im i8ten Jahrhundert. [The Fertility of the Population of Danzig in the i8th Century.]

Mitteilungen des West-preussischen Gesc vereins, XXXI, I.
6. Die Wandlungen der Fruchtbarkeit deutschen Adels im Igten Jahrhundert. Fluctuations in the Fertility of the
Nobility in the igth Century.] Archiv fur R
hygiene, XXV, 2, 1932. 7. Zahlenmiissiger Nachweis des Einflusses
Erbmasse auf die Kinderzahlen des Hochb [Statistical Proof of the Influence of Heredi the Number of Children of the Higher Nob'
Eugenik, 1932.

DIFFERENTIAL CLASS FERTILITY

(See footnote on p. I88. D. Caradog Jones's article.)

To prevent any possible misunderstanding of the fertility figures in this first paper it is perhaps well to explain here that we were not seeking to find out how many children families containing an ament could produce if they tried, nor how many they would produce by the time their families were completed, but simply how many children on the average they had produced per family at the time of investigation. The result came out large in comparison with the average number of children per family in a random sample of the working-class population, where also the families were not necessarily completed. It might not have appeared so large had we adopted some other standard for comparison. We took the most general standard available, but it may be argued that it would have been more appropriate to take a random sample of families containing at least one child of school age, since (i) a family cannot have a feeble-minded child if it has no child at all, and (2) feeblemindedness may not be detected till a child reaches school-age. But our object was to compare the mean accomplished fertility of families containing an ament with the mean accomplished fertility of families in general, and the latter group contains, among others, families which, by their own wish or otherwise, produce no children and families whose children die before they reach school age. Both these classes ought to be adequately represented in their failure to contribute to the general population, but they would be ignored if we took as our norm families containing at least one school

child. Moreover, if the standard adopted w
limited at one end, it ought for consistency to
limited at the other end also. One would theref be driven to take a random sample of families taining at least one child between the ages of and 22, since all the ament families contained least one ament between these ages. To rule families with no child over 5 would tend to r the accomplished fertility in comparison with of families in general (the standard actu adopted), but to rule out families with no under 22 would tend in just the opposite directi and these two tendencies would go some way cancel each other out.
There is another important point to which atte tion should be drawn. Quite apart from any oth forces at work in that direction, there is doubtedly a higher probability of an ament bei' found in a large family than in a small family just as there is a higher probability of finding genius in a large family-simply because there more children available to be genius or amen Some readers may be interested to inquire what influence of this factor is upon the figures. I ha discussed the question with two distinguish statisticians and they estimate that it would raise the average size of family by one chi-id to a chil and-a-half. Consequently, an allownce of aba that amount might be made in reading the reIevant tables if it be desired to determine .he effect upon them of other factors independently of this one.
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 3.

