REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

73

projects. There can be little doubt that several generations of education for parenthood may be necessary before a sufficiently stronig feeling of racial responsibility will have developed to supply the necessary control. The Eugenist does not postulate the ideal man, nor does Miss Key postulate the ideal marriage form. As the Eugenist works from the general principle that, as " like tends to beget like " it is necessary to ensure that the better elements in the community propagate their kind, so Miss Key demands that " society must be so adjusted as to make the happiness of the individual subserve the betterment of the race," and asserts that the one thing necessary is "to make ever greater demands upon the men and women who take to themselves the right to give humanity new beings."

Mental Defleiency. London. Adlard and Son; 1912; price is. net;

PP- 93. THIS reprint from the " Journal of Mental Science " consists chiefly of
Dr. Hyslop's account of the provisions of the Mental Deficiency Bill, together with the discussion thereon which took place before the Medical
Psychological Association. It also contains other papers and reports on the same subject. It is of interest to note that the general trend of professional and expert opinion is in favour of the measure, and it is greatly to be regretted that it has not been proceeded with.

A. F. T.

Isaaeson, EDWARD. The Maithusian Limit. London. Methuen and Co.; I912; price 3s. 6d.; pp. xxvii. + 215.
IN the introduction to this book the author says, " I have simply taken up what seems to be an actual tendency in the normal course of evolution, and thought it out to the logical extreme. It has thrown much

light for me upon many of the puzzling questions of the day, and I hope

it may do the same for others." The italics are mine, and serve to point out the fallacy underlying the whole argument of the book, which is a study of the conditions and possibilities of a fully peopled earth. This

condition of a teeming universe will take nobody knows how long in coming, the time must be counted at least in centuries. But the author supposes its accomplishment, and proceeds to discuss certain puxzling
questions of the presentt day, among them women suffrage, the land,
socialism, etc. But will these problems remain in the fully peopled

earth ? The universe having gone through the cataclysmic changes

necessary in reaching that state will have left these problems far

behind, or find it necessary to study them from a totally different aspect.

The book is well written, and deals with a subject of living interest

to all thinkers since Malthus made it current coin; but whether it will be

helpful to the eugenist is another matter.

E. CLARKE.

Ashley, ANNIE. Birmingham Studies in Social Economics; III., The Social Policy of Bismarck. London. Longmans, Green, and Co.; I9I2; price 2S. net; pp. 95.
IN this sane and interesting study Miss Ashley traces the growth of
" State Socialism " and the Historical School in Germany, their association with Conservatism and influence on Bismarck, and his eventual concentration upon insurance legislation. The comparison of the English and German systems is probably matter less familiar to our readers, and here Mliss Ashley is all too brief: we miss especially some
account of the financial basis of the three great German Acts. Some
German errors we have been able to avoid such as separate administrations for the invalidity and sickness insurances, and the class distinctions emphasised by benefits varying with wages. Our sickness insurance is more extensive than Bismarck's, and our benefits better; we may hope that our system will be more popular, as we have left more room for individual initiative in administration than the bureaucratic Germans.

74 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Miss Ashley regrets our restriction of the invalidity pension to those earning nothing instead of, as in Germany, to those earning less than one-third of their average wages, as likely to encourage malingering; and would prefer no maternity benefit for wives of insured men unless themselves insured. It is still too early to test the effect of Bismarck's legislation upon national health; but the compulsory system provides valuable information as to the course and causes of disease. The contributory principle is much commended, but Miss Ashley thinks the pauperisation argument is sometimes overdone. " Too much danger of misfortune in life is weakening rather than strengthening "-surely a sound reflection for the sterner type of eugenic politician.
A W rCOCKBRTT1N. Engel, DR. The Elements of Child-Protection. Translated by Dr.
Eden Paul. London. Geo. Allen and Co.; 1912; price I5s.; pp. 276.
A VERY disappointing book. The first part consists of a sketchy enumeration of the various conditions that militate against the physical and moral well-being of the child. This is followed by a vague account of the various agencies which are at work for the benefit of the child. But Dr. Engel does not give us a single illuminating idea on the problems involved, and we have looked in vain for the data which, in his preface, he claims to have supplied us in order to enable us to form our own conclusions. He gives us simply page after page of statements without either the facts on which he bases them, or the reasons which have guided him in making them. These statements, he seems to think, are incontrovertible, and the great majority of them doubtless are, being mere platitudes, such as " Artificial feeding (of infants) frequently leads to illness, life-long debility, premature death, etc.," or " Alcoholism is a cause, both direct and indirect, of the maltreatment of children." But what will Eugenists say to " the parental constitution must be regarded as largely dependent upon the social environment in which the parents themselves have grown to maturity," or followers of Karl Pearson to the blind placing, as usual, of women's "work for wages" as one of the chief causes of infant mortality? Or what can anyone say to such statements, absolutely unsupported by either example or argument, as " Capitalism gives rise to numerous diseases in the
social organism, and then endeavours to cure them, for the most part, by
the methods of child-protection," and " Child-protection to-day is in
essence nothing more than a number of represszve measures, which are necessary only because capitalism will not permit the desired ends to be
obtained by the use of preventive methods, owing to the fact that prevention would involve the destruction of capitalism " (the italics are ours).
It is difficult to understand why this book was thought worthy of translation. It would be a very unsafe guide for those ignorant of the subject, and quite useless for anyone with any knowledge of it.
M. B. ANDREWS.
Saleeby, C. W., M.D., F.R.S.E. Woman and Womanhood: A Search for Principles. London. Heinemann; 1912; IOS. net; pp. 398.
WE disagree with Dr. Saleeby concerning many of the details of his book, but recognise that in it the true eugenic aspect of the woman's movement is clearly portrayed, and therefore recommend it for the consideration of all women who are taking part in the movement, and, above all, those who are responsible for its policy. There is very little to be said either for or against the woman's movement that has not been reiterated ad nauseam, but while nothing new is said, the facts are so grouped into their racial, social and economic settings as to throw fresh light on many points, and to conduce to clear thinking on some of the fundamental principles.

