i76 EUGENICS REVIEW.

arts practised by late Aurignacian and early Neolithic man encourages

Sir Art'hur in the hope that somewhere in the world we shall find the

passage of the one type of culture into the othe,r. One of the most

interesting facts which emerges from the investigation of Neolithic

rem.ains in Crete is the close connection which obviously existed between

early civilisation there and in Egypt. Sir Arthur Evans *records the

existence of a mound 45 feet thf:k consisting of depo.sits of Neolithic

remains in which, at a depth of I9 feet, fragments of pottery are found

which must have been impor;ted from Egypt at the time of. the earliest

dynasties. The greater bulk of the deposits must therefore be coev.al

with pre-dynastic times; and the civilisatio-ns of Egypt and Crete seem

therefore to have been connected since the begi.nning. Which of the

two is mno.ther and which is daughter? Prolf. Elliot Smith has given

reasons for believing that civilisation in ELypt is of indigenous origin.

The cause which converted the nomadic Neolithic tribes into stationary

settlers is cleaTly in evidence-it is the everlasting fertility of Egyptian

soil we

mruesntewleodokbyforthteheinsupnodtatwihoensreofthtehNhuNmilaen.

Here, then, if race first came

anywhere, to anchor,

where cities were first built, and the State, as distinct from the tribe,

was born, and the culture of Crete must be regarded only as one of the

earliest off-shoots from this original focus of civilisation.

E. W. MAcBRIDE.

REPORTS.

Penal Reform League Record, I9I8; pp. io4; price is.

Anyone who has any care for the h-elping of the helpless, and who

believes in prevention rather than cure, should invest a shilling in this

Record. They will find it, contrary to expectation perhaps, absorbingly

interesting and refreshing, for it touches upon so many questions from so

many aspects, and always with the human and the commonsense one well

to the fore, so that it may be truthfully recommended as a very human

document. It deals with the problem of delinquency in general, an.d in

particular, in our own Courts, and in the UT.S.A., with the effects on boy

conduct of birching, and also, indirectly, of mothers' pensions. It gives

first-hand evidence of prison conditions and necessary prison reforms,

quoting largely from Thos. Mott Osborn's rather wonderful experiences

at the Sing Sing Prison, discusses the death penalty in civil and military

life, the correlation between our bad educational system and delinquency,

the essentials of a satisfactory national education, the troubled pToblems

of adolescence, the extension of the probation system, the Women Police,

etc., and lastly reviews many books dealing with all these subjects, from

the pens, not so much of theoTists, as of practical workers, who have come

face to face with the real difficulties and have made some headway against

them.

The book is really both useful and suggestive as compendium of what

has been done in the way of penal reform, which is, alas, very little, what

still remains to be done, and along what lines further aciion should be

taken.

N.A.

