REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

363

and government by the able, but only by violent civic struggles between

the aspirants to power (as in Oriental monarchies and Latin American

presidencies), or aim at so subtle a system of checks and precautions that

no man can control everything, and government can be securely carried

on by mediocrities (as in old Japan, the Chinese mandarinate, and the

older British universities)? Lastly, might not much instruction accrue

from studying the anomalous cases of illustrious men too great for their

country, who failed because they were not properly supported, such as

Vercingetorix in Caesarian Gaul, Arminius in' Augustan Germany,

Skanderbeg of Albania, Walleusteiu the Bohemian, and, above all, the

great family of Hamilcar Barka, which so nearly changed the course

of history and gave to the supine and short-sighted traders of Carthage the

victory over imperial Rome. It seems probable that in the end all these

apparent exceptions would only deepen our appreciation of the power of

personalities in history and of the absurdity of trying to do without them,

and so lead science to correct an error into which only gross ignorance of

its own history could have betrayed it.

F. C. S. SCHILLER.

Wallin, J. E. WALLACE. Experimental Studies of Mental Defectives: A Critique of the Binet-Simon Tests and a Contribution to the Psychology of Epilepsy. (Education Psychology Monographs, No. 7). Warwick and York, Inc. Baltimore, U.S.A.; 1912.
THE ingenious scale devised by the late M. Binet for measuring the intelligence of backward school children of Paris assumed that mental efficiency could be measured in terms of age. By actual experiment he found that most normal children of four could just repeat three figures from memory, name common objects such as a knife or a penny, distinguish the longer of two unequal lines, and give their sex. At six they could just repeat sentences of sixteen syllables, define common objects in terms of their use, distinguish pictures of ugly and pretty faces, carry out three simple commissions successively from a single instruction, distinguish morning from afternoon, and give their age. At nine they could repeat the days of the week; at ten, the months of the year; at twelve, seven figures or twenty-six syllables. A list containing about five tests suitable for each age from three to thirteen was accordingly drawn up. A child of eight who can answer all the tests for the age of six, but fails for those of seven or eight, is said to have a mental age of six; and to be backward or retarded by two years. A retardation of two or more years denotes mental deficiency such as would qualify a child for admission to special schools.
The scheme has been taken up enthusiastically in America and elsewhere, and has even appeared in the regulations published in this country by the Board of Education. American investigators have applied it to groups of a thousand children; and, as an inference from their results, (somewhat hastily obtained, it must be confessed), have declared enthusiastically in favour of the value of scale.
Dr. Wallin has been more cautious. He realises that the Binet-Simon scale is not " a wonderful mental X-ray machine," and that it has suffered considerably from being " victimised by the indiscriminate exploiter " before it had been perfected by its ingenious inventor. His book contains one of the most thorough studies of the scale that has been published in the English language; and his analysis does not hesitate to criticise the imperfections involved in assigning certain tests to certain ages or in calculating the mental age according to certain arbitrary rules from the results obtained. He has further used a second series of tests of a more experimental nature (dynamometer, form-board, ataxiagraph, and others) with a view to studying the underlying problem of variation in mental and physical traits.
His conclusion is as follows: " While it does not scale different grades of intelligence with the degree of accuracy which would be desired,

364 EUGENICS REVIEW.

the Binet-Simon scale does enable us to grade and classify defective

individuals far by the ordinary

more rapidly and satisfactorily than methods of observation." But he adds

waonuoltdeofbe

possible warning.

" The function of the Binet-Simon, or any other graded scale of intelli-

gence, is to give us a preliminary and not a final survey or rating of the

individual who may be tested." Critical and extensive as Dr.

Wallin's

work

has

been,it

appears

not

to be quite critical or extensive enough. In the first place, most of

the conclusions in the present volume are drawn from the investiga-

tion of a peculiar group of individuals-namely, the patients at the New

Jersey State Village for Epileptics. In the editor's preface it is

claimed that, although many eminent individuals are said to have been

epileptics-for instance, Julius Caesar, Mohammed, and possibly St. Paul

-yet the majority of epileptics exhibit a mild degree of feeble-

mindedness which places them in the class known in America as

"morons." " These children," he adds, " resemble more the typical lag-

gard of the public schools than the typical feeble-minded child...

For this reason, the more we can discover as to the psychology of the

epileptic, the more theless, in several

successful will be ways the epileptic

our educational appears to be

measures." Never-
distinctly atypical:

he suffers from an unusual impairment of memory; he is particularly

inefficient in the more intellectual tests and in the tests calling for adjust-

ment to new situations; sensory discrimination of

he suffers from a weights, and from a

ppercounloiuarncebdlurnettnaersdsatiinon

the of

rate in the stream of thought and in motor response. His other mental

processes peculiar examined

seem, by comparison, methods of testing and
over the widest possible

nreasacnroglreyi,nogfifyaernaeorts.neqcueiIstnsea,erayic.nhtacotHf.ethemuHhseitngcheeb,re

years there will probably be one or two tests at which he fails, and one

or two at which he is successful. Consequently, the estimate of his

intelligence will be largely dependent upon the way in which credit is

given for tests for a mentality far higher than that which is characteristic of

the age at which he first begins to fail. These are difficulties of a special

kind which Binet naturally did not contemplate. Hence, the chapter on

" testing the tests," though for this very reason extremely suggestive,

remains at the same time inconclusive. Dr. Wallin, however, promises

later to publish a second research upon ordinary public school children;

and the comparison of the two sets of data will undoubtedly prove most

instructive.

The peculiar nature of his data enables him, in the earlier part

of his book, to criticise the scale from a new point of view somewhat

drastically. Yet his final estimate seems too lenient. To the unpre-

judiced observer, the true conclusion to be drawn from Dr. Wallin's data

is, I think, this: except for rough and popular purposes, any measure-

ment of mental capacity in terms of age is unsatisfactory. Who would

measure height or weight in terms of years? The unit fluctuates in its

significance all along the scale. When the child is just beginning to

walk and talk, when he is seven or eight, when he is ten or eleven,

when he is on the verge of puberty, when he is twenty-one, when he is

in the prime of life, and when he reaches the climacteric-at these

different periods a retardation of a single year means very different

things. In the case of children, age, of course, must be taken into

account; but it does follow that it must be erected in a scale of

measurement.

Such a mode of measurement is particularly untrustworthy from the

standpoint of eugenic investigations. It confuses at the very outset con-

genital with environmental influences. The plausibility of the scale rests

on two distinct and development, certain

disparate functions

facts. do not

First, in normally

theemecroguersuentoifl

natural certain

fairly definite periods have been reached. Familiar instances are the

REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

365

power to walk, and the power to procreate. Retardation or precocity in

the emergence of these functions may be of profound significance in esti-

mating a child's congenital endowment. Secondly, however, the suc-

cessive appearance of certain powers may merely indicate that society

finds it convenient to instil certain items of knowledge or certain dexteri-

ties only after other more simpler ones have been acquired. The fact that

most children can recite the days of the week at the age of nine, while

but few can recite the months of the year till the age of ten, may simply

mean that, directly or indirectly, we teach the former list first. A dis-

placement in the relative or absolute time at which these mechanical

memories appear is, more often than not, quite insignificant for the

diagnosis of intelligence. In his later revision of the scale (i9ii), Binet

proposed to omit all tests depending upon knowledge acquired in school.

Dr. Wallin, however, strongly advocates the retention of the earlier (I908)

scheme. So far as the importance of retaining tests of scholastic know-

ledge is concerned, he seems obviously right. But, if retained, they should

be sharply separated from tests measuring capacity for the most

part inborn and should constitute a distinct system of pedagogical tests,

complete in themselves.

In this country psychologists have paid attention chiefly to experi-

mental tests measuring general intelligence in units of their own. Only

recently has attention turned to use of everyday questions with everyday

units. The former method still seems to hold its own. At the recent

meeting of the British Association in Birmingham results from both

methods were reported in new subsection of psychology. The correla-

tions of Binet tests with empirical estimates of intelligence ranged from

about '4 to *6; those of the more rapid but more technical experi-

mental tests rose to between '7 and '9. In view of the pro-

visions of the recent Mental Deficiency Act, the relative value of these

methods of diagnosis is of utmost importance; and further investigations

along the lines of Dr. Wallin's-using both methods side by side-are

most urgently needed.

CYRIL BURT.

Heron,, DAVID, D. Sc. Mendelism and the Problem of Mental Defect. I.: A Criticism of Recent American Work. Questions of the Day and of the Fray. No. vii. London. Dulau and Co.; 1913; price 2s. net; pp. 62, with 4 diagrams.
A GOOD deal of attention has been attracted by the assertion, based upon results obtained bv workers associated with the American Eugenics Record Office, that some forms of mental defect behave in respect of hereditary transmission like simple Mendelian characters. The importance of the conclusion, if correct, justifies a searching examination of the methods by which it has been reached. The publication under notice provides such a criticism and certain aspects of it appear to us to call for more detailed attention than we are accustomed to devote to a pamphlet of 62 pages. We shall divide our remarks into two sections, the first dealing with the substance of Dr. Heron's criticisms; the second with their form.
At the beginning of the paper, attention is directed to a statement of Dr. Davenport's, which appears to sanction the belief that a mating of the " weak " with the " strong " is eugenically justifiable. If, as Dr. Heron supposes, this advice be tendered without qualification we agree with with him in regarding it as thoroughly unsound, but the passage cited on
page 7 of Dr. Heron's paper suggests to us that Dr. Davenport may merely have meant that such a course was the lesser of two evils. Prima facie, however, Dr. Davenport's utterance appears to have been rash.
Passing now to the papers directly criticised by Dr. Heron, we may remark that a scientifically valid comparison between theory and expectation in a case of supposed Mendelian inheritance involves (a) a uniform system of classification, (b) a correct statistical method. With regard to the former, Dr. Heron argues in detail that the categories used are vague,

