REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

25I

Galton, SIR FRANCIS. Hereditary Genius. London. Macmillan and Co.; 1914; price 5s. net; pp. 379.
THE Eugenics Education Society ought to be especially grateful to Messrs. Macmillan and Co. for reprinting and bringing out a cheap edition of this classical work, a step taken, we believe, mainly owing to a suggestion made to them from this office. The first edition appeared in I869, and we are told in the preface of the 1902 edition, from which this is a reprint, that Sir Francis Galton felt that the labour involved in a thorough reconstruction necessary to bring it up to date was more than he could undertake. In reading these pages we must therefore remember that they were written not very far short of half a century ago.
Perhaps the greatest service which Galton rendered to the cause of eugenics was the proof he gave that mental qualities are inherited in the same way as bodily characteristics; for, previously to the publication of " Hereditary Genius," even Darwin was of opinion that " men did not differ much in intellect, only in zeal and hard work." As far as the ordinary public were concerned, Galton was breaking up entirely new ground and we ought not, therefore, to be surprised when he tells us that this work was, when it was published, " subjected to much criticism, no small part of which was captious or shallow." It is not necessary here to describe in outline what is contained in this storehouse of information, for anyone working at this subject is certain to have to refer to the book itself. Like all Galton's works, it is rich in observations made bv the way, and certainly a second reading will amply repay the reader.
T. T)
Niehels, ROBERT. Sexual Ethics: A Study of Borderland Questions. Contemporary Science Series. London. Walter Scott Publishing CO.; 1914; price 6s.; pp. xv. + 296.
A PRIMARY aim of this study, as the author quaintly says, is to wage war upon fig-leaves, and many will sympathise with his desire for frank scientific discussion and for judicious sex-education. It may be doubted, however, whether details in regard to the imperiousness of sexual desire, or man's unnatural offences, or the tragedy of prostitution make for edification in a popular book of this sort. It is required of all of us that we should try to love out of a pure heart fervently; but is there any profit for us in pathological information which has not some very definite moral or piece of scientific advice attached to it? We shall briefly indicate some of the author's positions.
" The primary ethical foundation of every sexual relationship must be the deliberate consent of both participants in the sexual act "; but there are surely other ethical considerations not less primary ! The author is not pleading for " free love," which he condemns, but for tolerance of the Don Juan type of man if he exhibits "the primary attributes of sexual morality . . . . loyalty and truth." If he has these, and if the successive women give themselves to him with a free spirit and full awareness, then " the basic principles of ethics " are not infringed. We do not share this view of ethics or this tolerance of social pests of the domesticated canine type.
The prostitute is regarded as the "old maid " of the proletariat, and the author rightly says that what we need is " the collective prophylaxis of prostitution through an evolution of all our methods of production, and in addition of our ideas of education and of general social hygiene." We do not think that the details given as to the various types of prostitution were at all necessary in order to substantiate the sad truth that there is an economic factor in its maintenance.
The author discusses the dangers of playing with the fire of sexual impulses, and of ignorance on the woman's part. He points out, on the other hand, what is sometimes overlooked, that a wanton girl may tempt a man beyond endurance, and that there may be great injustice in legislation which is protective of the girl only.

