POSITIVE EUGENIC POLICY*
By CHARLES GALTON DARWIN, M.C., M.A., Sc.D., F.R.S.

r,HEN I received the invitation to misrepresenting him in the part of my

give a Galton lecture this year my discourse which concerns him.

first feeling was perhaps not untlly to refuse. After all eugenics is a Civilization and Free Choice

cal subject, and my knowledge of I had some difficulty in choosing a title,

is only amateurish; and I felt that and am afraid that the one I have chosen

y to express a deep belief in the may give a false idea of my subject. I have

tance of eugenics would hardly provide no intention of dealing with the problem of

matter for a whole discourse-at any how we are to encourage the greater fertility

to spin it out for the requisite time of those who we think ought eugenically to

call for a special skill which I do not be encouraged, but am going to try and

, that of the political speaker who answer the question which must precede

a single idea (and that usually a simple this, the question of who those people are.

and knows how to reiterate it for an As you will see my answer is almost trivially

However, when I began to think about obvious and could be stated in a few words,

roposal more closely, I reflected that but that is not the point I want to emphasize.

bly when the Council gave me the Rather I am aiming at showing that it is not

ion they supposed that I might have merely the only immediately practicable

Jess simple ideas on the subject, and so answer, but also the only absolutely admissi-

to search my mind for what these ble answer.

were, and I think I have found some- Before discussing eugenics itself I want to

which is not entirely familiar, at any set the stage by considering for what condi-

t the extent of my very limited study tions alone a eugenic policy of any kind is a

subject. It was about this time that I possibility. This is broadly speaking the

ed to meet my old friend Professor condition that we call civilization. At

Bohr the physicist, and found that he various intervals of history civilizations have

een thinking profoundly on certain emerged, characterized by a great flowering

of the subject and that his views of the human intellect in one direction or

certainly not commonplace. As far as another. I want to maintain that the

Bohr has not written on the subject, primary feature of these civilizations has oSt of our conversation was conducted been that for one cause or another it is only

course of a walk in a crowded and noisy at those times that men have been able to

so that it is possible that I shall not do anything outside the mere task of keeping

iews justice. I can only say that in so alive. I remember a conversation some time

I have got hold of his ideas they ago with a distinguished economist-it was

to have a profound bearing on only a casual conversation, so I cannot put

c policy, and they seem to me to it in as formal evidence-in which he told me

the much less definite views at which that he had once studied the value of wages

been arriving myself. But I ought to at different epochs of history. The earlier

he warning that I have no reason civilizations must be left out because they

to believe that Bohr would express were based on slavery so that the question

nent with what I am going to say, of real wages would be hard to evaluate at

is quite possible that I shall be those times. For more modern times he

Lecture delivered before the Eugenics kFebruary x6th, 1939.

eliminated the arbitrary value of money by expressing the day's wages of a labourer in

'3

I4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

terms of the price of wheat, and he found have to buy it anyhow, but when a

that it was roughly constant from the dark unessential we need some persuading

ages up to the middle of the eighteenth we prefer it to something else. Is it too

century and then rose gradually to a very to say that the advertisement is the

much greater height. This means that up to index of civilization, not because of

the eighteenth century the labourer could civilizing influence obviously, but

get just enough food to keep himself and his because it is only in the civilized con

family alive, allowing I suppose for a hideous that " it pays to advertise," for only

degree of infantile mortality and a good deal have the majority any choice in what

of adult mortality too. In fact he was lving shall buy.

in a state of natural selection, which though In the future of the world we cannot

it over-emphasized the dangers of infancy any great confidence that civilization

still did a great deal to keep him up to the survive. If it should fail then we shall r

mark in both body and mind. Then the to a barbarous condition in which we

price of wheat started to go down, or if you be living a hard life, with the minim

prefer it his wages went up, so that there subsistence for those intelligent or c

was plenty of food, with result the immediate enough to win it, and not enough for

increase of population of the end of the rest. Natural selection will again come

eighteenth and the early nineteenth cen- full play and will tend to maintain the

turies. Man became free from the daily of human intelligence. There will be nei

probability of death, and had the leisure to the necessity nor the possibility for

invent all the marvels of our modem scienti- exercise of free choice which is impli

fic development, which themselves in turn the idea of eugenics. Now in a game ofa

further lowered the price of food and so made the player who has to take a risk is ngh

possible still further increase. But these postulating that the cards are so placed

increases of population were comparatively he will win by his finesse, on the ground

free from the check of natural selection; it if they are not he will lose anyhow; in

was no longer essential to be above a certain same way in dealing with eugenic policy

level of intelligence in order to get enough may postulate civilization simply on

food to stay alive, or to have exceptionally ground that, if we do not have it,

good health in order to escape the diseases of eugenics becomes impossible. Whatever

malnutrition.

think of the probability of civiliza

My picture is of course very much over- collapsing, you can leave it absolutely out

simplified, but it does suggest what I believe account in considering eugenics.

to be the essential character of the civilized condition, and that is that in this condition

Absence of Natural Selection

natural selection ceases to operate, or any- We have arrived at the conclusion

how only operates to a greatly reduced we may assume that civilization will

degree. In speculating on this train of tinue, and we saw that this implies

thought I have been led to a curious, perhaps absence of the older checks of nat

frivolous, conclusion, which I would like to selection. What follows ? In most parts

propose, though it has little to do with my the animal kingdom the absence of

theme. If I am right that the essential of competition of natural selection seems

civilization is that there is something to spare have disastrous effects on the qualities of

in life, then the civilized man earns more animals. The fauna of oceanic islands

than he absolutely needs for survival, and not seem capable of competing with la

can choose what he will spend it on. His importations from continents. The liz

choice is capricious, and is largely deter- of the Galapagos are being killed out by

mined by the persuasion exerted on him by competition of pigs and goats, and

sellers, which is done by advertisement. No marsupials of Australia have been beat

one advertises common bread, because we by the rabbits. Even as to those rabbits

POSITIVE EUGENIC POLICY

I5

venture the guess that the absence of which does call for some comment, and on

norgmal struggle for life during a century, which I would like to express my personal

* ted by their rapid multiplication, opinion. This is the question of physical as

to degeneration, so that an Austra- opposed to mental weakness. One sometimes

'abbit, if brought back to England, meets people, often of notably high intellect,

.have little chance in the competition who feel that they are eugenically unfit for

its untransported cousins. Have we begetting a family on account of some

Wgt to think that humanity can escape physical disability, such as a bad digestion

e tendency. I believe that investiga- or weak lungs, disabilities which are often

carried out under the auspices of this hereditary. It is a reasonable argument that

show the same trend even during the such a person should not marry for fear of

short period for which data can be infficting on his mate the hardship of a life-

If then civilization is the condition time of living with an invalid, but that is

natural selection is inoperative for nothing to do with eugenics. I maintain that

* it must inevitably lead to degener- eugenically there is nothing against such a

rhich for men means decay of the person founding a family. There are two

and such decay must surely lead reasons. Firstly the advance of medical

of the civilization. The principal science certainly accompanies the state of

all of us, whether eugenists or not, is civilization, and these organic weaknesses

to maintain or improve our present may be largely nullified; consider how many

and our particular doctrine as eugen- there are now leading a normal life, who

that the way to avoid its collapse is by fifty years ago would have been permanent

up an alternative selection to that of invalids, and in the future we may expect

and that is eugenic selection. When still further progress in this direction.

invented the idea of eugenics he did Secondly if there are diseases which are not

the idea of improving humanity, and to be conquered in this way, they carry with

would welcome such improvement. them their own seeds of destruction in that

is a more important need for a they will gradually eliminate themselves by

policy even than this, for something the earlier death-rate of their victims. In

must be done even to keep up to our spite of civilization natural selection is still

condition. We shall have to run operating here, and will protect the com-

fst even to stay where we are, and munity against these defects. Not so against

ster if we want to get anywhere the mentally weak when their bodily health

on. is good, for they are protected, and I suppose

Disability and Eugenics

must continue to be protected, from the selective destruction which ought to be

are two sides to a eugenic policy, the eliminating them. If anyone then, having

and the negative-to increase the some purely physical weakness, were to

to decrease the tail. With regard consult me as to whether he would be

I suppose there is complete agree- eugenically justified in founding a family, I

No one, whether eugenist or not, would say without hesitation that the mere

tes the unlimited breeding of fact that he had sufficient intelligence to ask

mnded. The only trouble is the the question would be sufficient evidence

of mmaking politicians realize that that he was justified in doing so. So much

matter of desperate importance to for the negative side of eugenics.

ticable methods of control, and e the legal difficulties of such Probability as Guide to Action

with individual free action. If When we come to the positive side the

say more than this I should be question at once becomes much more diffi-

g to the converted. But cult. Many people who are quite ready to

er part of the negative policy subscribe to eugenics in general terms tend

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to hedge or fail to make up their minds as to in which eight out of his ten test animals

what they really do want. When such a person verify his hypothesis.

is faced with the direct question, " You have If we are to accomplish anything at all,

said which part of the population ought to we have got to take chances, and to do so is

breed much less, now tell us which ought to not the desperate measure some are apt to

breed much more," he is apt to answer that think. One of the defects of our present-

after all we know very little about the education is that people are not taught whati

genetic constitution of humanity and that extreme certainty can be achieved out o6

once we start breeding from such and such a chance, so that the majority have no habit otd

class there may emerge all sorts of wicked thought which regards operation on proba

recessive genes, and in a general way the bilities as a really satisfactory method. Bu

most awful things may happen. This is I that it is so is immediately obvious from

think partly plain timidity, arising from the existence of two very highly paid professi

feeling that to do nothing has no conse- those of the insurance company and of

quences, which as I have tried to point out is bookmaker. As the chief present applica

lamentably untrue. But it also arises from of what I mean by operating on probabili'

an exaggerated reverence for the certitude of we may cite and refute the sort of argum

science. There is a feeling that by waiting used by the opponent of eugenics. He

only a few years we shall know absolutely point to so-and-so, a brilliant man wnth

all about the human genetic constitution and intelligent wife but children hardly a

that we had better wait for this, so that at the sub-normal, and such-and-such, a

the end we may construct men with the wrangler sprung from half-witted parents

certainty and accuracy with which an engin- a slum, and will argue that therefore

eer can construct a bridge. Now this cannot do any good by eugenics. No

reverend confidence in the certitudes of suppose there are examples of the sort

science is not the outlook of the scientist cites, but I simply decline to believe

himself. I remember some years ago reading they are not highly exceptional; can anyo

a novel about a young scientist, who was doubt that if the offspring of a hun

always being lectured by his patron on the intelligent people are compared with th

rule that he must never publish anything of a hundred stupid, the averages will not

until he was absolutely certain of it. I markedly different ? Even if it were o

remember thinking that such a man would slightly more probable that children

never really publish anything at all, either intelligent parents should be intelligent, s

because he would not attain the certainty, that slight chance would be quite enough f

or else, if he did, then the matter would be so the laws of probability to work on in bett

simple and straightforward that someone ing the wits of humanity. So I conclude

else would have published it already.

firstly we cannot afford to wait for acc

The certainty of scientific truth is not like information about human genetics,

that ; it is a reasonable certainty of the kind secondly such information if obtained wo

that is accepted as evidence in a court of law. To get on with the world in any way at all we have to recognize always the possibility that we may be wrong, and to work on that basis. Even in fundamental physical science it is now known-I would like to say with

surely not be very accurate, and that th
fore our method must be to work on
principle of probability, and in doing so see that we take so many good chances it becomes a very strong probability the total result will be favourable.

absolute certainty! (with the caution I have Analogy between Man and Domestic Ani

stated)-that probability plays an essential part. How much more is that so in the

In his original conception of euge Galton laid stress on the analogy of

biological sciences where an experimenter domesticated animals, and it is the obvi

will regard as a highly satisfactory result one one to take, but it is not a perfect analo

POSITIVE EUGENIC POLICY
y the appreciation of this fact, the fashionable " Two," one thinks " Well, *completely understood, that has you don't seem to be living up to your
-progress of eugenic doctrine. principles." But if the answer is " Twelve,"
e that we can take the analogy then one's thought is, " What a good
wtwere perfect, and see where it opinion this man has of himself and his
We will suppose that we have a family." This is a crude way of putting it,
slave-owner possessed of a large and I am going to develop it in a more the South Seas. He is a firm general manner. eugenics and decides to improve on by means of it-we must of Bohr's Principle of Complementarity w him with the capacity for This is the aspect of our subject which has k patriarchal age so as to give him been specially considered by Bohr. I think it. By selective unions among his his main interest has been not so much the
iII succeed in making his navvies question of eugenics as the question of
artisans will get defter fingers, whether there are such things as racial ts will do their additions characters, but the argument is sufficiently p engineers will devise yet more cognate to be worth developing in detail. ur-saving machines, his police His starting point was certain very important er detective ability, his civil theories in pure physics that were made higher efficiency in their admini- about twelve years ago. I have no intention power, and everyone in his of explaining an exceedingly subtle piece of will be entertained by better reasoning, but shall take the liberty of paraand funnier comedians than ever phrasing it into a much simpler process; if ut in accomplishing all this there this contains fallacies I will ask you to * he will not do, and that is believe that they have arisen in the para-
!tbe race of slave-owners, because phrase and that they do not occur in the
know what improvement to original. Suppose that one wanted to measure the diameter of a cylindrical shaft,
Am this point that the analogy one would take a pair of calipers, and one man and the domestic animals would open them out until the jaws could slip
and it is the chief point that I freely across the shaft. One would then push emphzsze in our subject. Let us them a bit closer together and try again,
general terms. The greatest and go on until they would only just pass,
idea developed in the nineteenth and then record the distance between the
that man is only one of the points. At the next attempt the points are it was an idea which has had too close together and the calipers will not effect in improving our under- pass, and the diameter is somewhere between # the world. But there is an even the " go " measurement and the " stop " ental idea, which cuts right measurement, and by delicate handling which does not arise in many these two measures can be almost indefinitely of biology, but which is essential close together. But now suppose that the -and this is the idea of the shaft is made of soft wax. Then in one of the
between subject and object. It trials the calipers will pass but in doing so
tially different thing to make an will scratch the shaft. What is the diameter ? t on oneself and to make one on The answer is that whatever it was before we
object-including an animal or measured it, it is different afterwards by the ye in the term. I arh going to depth of the scratch. By how much? To point in greater detail, but you measure it we must use the calipers again, once by asking of any convinced and in doing so shall deepen the scratch
awkward question: " How further, and so shall not get an answer to have you." If the answer is the question we asked of how deep the

i8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

scratch was before the second measurement. friends who are perfect Englishmen in

The only answer we can give is that there is sense-in fact the only really human wa

no exact answer, and that any answer given living. This Englishman starts to tr

is only accurate to a length equal to the understand French culture, and will

depth of the scratch. But we might try to do succeed till he has understood the ch

better by going another way about the of the perfect Frenchman. Now of cO

business. If we are afraid of scratching the one of the doctrines of the perfect Fret

shaft, why not take calipers with very soft man is that his way of living is the

points. They will not scratch it; quite the really human one-most Frenchmen see

contrary, for now the shaft will damage the us to believe this-and so as soon as

points of the calipers, and it is these points Englishman has understood the French

that we are trusting for our measurement. ture he will have mastered this fact and

VVhichever way we go about it in the course will have ceased to be a perfect English

of comparing the two things one of them The two cultures are mutually exclusive,

must alter the other a little, and so defeat that neither can gauge the other with

the attempt to get an exact comparison. damaging it and so depriving it of

Of course with actual hard steel shafts and perfection which is one of the qualities

strong calipers the damage is slight and in it claims.

practice no one cares about it, but that

merely means that we do not happen to be Objectivity and Subjectivity

interested in so high a precision. In other As its name suggests the complement

cases this will not be so, and the effect will of Bohr is a mutual relation, in which ei

become of the greatest importance.

or any half of the world may be taken

This parable will represent Bohr's idea basis for measuring the other. But for

sufficiently for our purpose. He expresses it purpose we shall simplify by fixing speci

by the word complementarity. In studying on one aspect for basis. The shaft is

the world we always take a certain part of object that I am studying, and the cali

it for granted, and use it as a yard-stick to as being my instrument, is a part of

describe the rest. In doing so we always subject which is studying the object.

find that the yard-stick interacts with the experiment consists in setting up ce

object measured, so that the object is specified conditions for the object and

altered, and the measurement is not abso- seeing what it does. If anything precise

lutely trustworthy. Moreover it is no use to be found, that implies that the seei

interchanging the two halves of the world, what-it-does has no further effect on

since that only means putting our trust in object. In nearly all scientific work

the other half and regarding the first as the objects we study are not disturbed by

untrustworthy one. His principle goes extra- subject seeing what they do; at any

ordinarily deep into all branches of know- the disturbance, though always present

ledge, but we are here only concerned with demonstrably of negligible import

one aspect of it, that concerning man, and I These are the experiments we like, but

cannot do better than quote an example he all experiments can be brought into

gave. He put it in an intentionally exag- category, and we have to keep in mind

gerated and picturesque form.

as soon as the subject, in the course of

Bohr takes as his two complementary experiment, exerts a perceptible effect

quantities the English and the French cul- the object, then the observation beco

tures. He asks how is an Englishman to unreliable. Moreover we must remember

understand the nature of French culture. complementarity, that it is just as true,

The characteristic of the perfect type of only a change of language, to say that

Englishman is the conviction that his way of object disturbs the subject. We may put

living is not merely the best one, but really whole matter crudely by saying that

the only right one-we could all name culties may arise when subject and ob

POSITIVE EUGENIC POLICY

mixed together. In most experiments words black and white, and also so that they

of the main concerns of the experimenter believe the changelings are their own chil-

b6ep them apart, and so to achieve good dren, but otherwise each race must keep its

results, but sometimes this cannot own mentality. Under these fantastic condi-

e and then we must look out for tions the negroes, who will have inherited

* For example the psycho-analyst most of the wealth of the country from their

always be on his guard against the blackened foster-parents, will grow up con-

of himself filling his patient's mind vinced of their superiority, and when the

the ideas that he hopes to extract from little white child is submitted to an intelli-

Or we may take an even more general gence test, of course by a black professor, he

ple in the study of the ultimate nature will stumble over his answers with the

life. Perhaps the experimenter may try thought at the back of his mind: " After

tudy it by the ordinary methods of all I am only a white- I suppose with great

*stry. In doing so he will treat the luck I may some day become a Pullman car

aiimal with chemicals according to porter." There can hardly be a doubt that

t methods of the laboratory, and the social feelings of the two races would be

* will die. Result-he is studying changed round in this way in the first

matter, and the nature of life has generation, and the experiment would only

bdhim. verify the superiority of the whites-if they

tis of Subjectivity

are superior-if it were found that after a few generations the whites were rising above

in the study of human characters this the level of Pullman car porters.

ty is present inevitably. A European This is the sort of experiment that would

poloist may be able to keep his be needed to test the superiority of white

vity when he is comparing the culture over black in a fully objective manner, and

Australian aboriginal with that of a its fantastic absurdity is enough to show

on Islander, but if he tries to make the that in eugenic matters we have got to be

n with that of a European the content with knowledge of a different quality

becomes a comparison of object with from that which may be used in fully

and his conclusions must be judged objective work. Experiments in which the

erent standards. Let us take as an subject plays a part are radically different

l-I am quoting Bohr again-the from those in which the subject can survey

own case of the alleged inferiority of the object without interference from either

groes to the whites in America. on the other, and we cannot take over the

er many intelligence tests are applied full analogy from the biological theory of

anstrate it, the test is never a " clean " genetics and apply it to ourselves without

ent, because they are always a white attending to the entirely new factor that has

tests and because in the present social entered.

tion of the United States part of the make-up of the negro is invariably

Method of Unconscious Selection

, "After all I am only a nigger, and Must we then despair of finding anything

will ever give me the chance of rising." to do in positive eugenics. Quite the con-

see what would be needed to make a trary. We must recognize that on account

clean " experiment on the subject. of subjectivity, human experiments are in a

d have to go something like this. different category from others, and are to be

aU the negro children shortly after undertaken in a different way. Now Galton's

d give them to the white women, and original idea of eugenics arose from con-

these women black. Similarly paint sidering the domestic animals, and this idea

negresses white and give them the is still fruitful and does indeed suggest a way

Infants. All the women must be out of our difficulties. For one of the most

so that they interchange the remarkable facts about the domestication of

20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

animals is that all the most important of know about the genetic constitutioni

them were domesticated in prehistoric times, humanity the better can they operate so

and man has accomplished much less in the to eliminate the subnormal. But on

period when he knew what he was doing positive side they cannot act objecti

than he accomplished before it. The process because they are to operate on themsel

of " unconscious selection " as it is called in and the best they can do is to try to inc

the Origin of Species, signifies that the the numbers of their own type without

savage keeps the tamest or cleverest or ing any exact enquiry into which parti

swiftest dog and breeds from it, but in doing members of it are to be distinguished

so has no thought of changing the race of specially favourable treatment.

dogs. The immense change that he produced

in this way may be seen from the fact that We have nothing to wait for

we do not know with certainty what were The most important practical consequ

the wild ancestors of many of the domes- of this view is that there is no excuse for

ticated animals or plants. It is of course true starting immediately to put it into eff

that the recent changes, when man recog- It is worth while to consider the results

nized what he was doing, have been at a this, as not all of them may be welcome

faster rate, but in the sum they have been everybody. There is first the question of

very much smaller than those produced by we are to decide what we mean by a g

unconscious selection. Now as far as con- citizen. The phrase itself has almost beco

cerns himself we must regard man as a wild a cicheuwith a slightly contemptuous m

animal, for his civilization means control ing, and of course I want to dissociate

over other things, but not over himself. If from that contempt; in this bad sense

he is a wild animal, he is at any rate a wild good citizen is the sort of tame animal

human animal, and the best he can hope for we could breed like a domestic animal,

is to proceed as other wild human animals we would not improve the top of the h

have proceeded in the past, and consciously race in doing so. I mean the useful cit

to adopt a method like that of unconscious who is likely to beget sons who will beco

selection. He must pick out some of his leaders in the next generation. Can any

fellows without any exact analysis and say suggest a better rough and ready way

to them: " You are a useful citizen; be estimating a man's value than by the amo

fruitful and multiply," and that is not only he is paid? There are obviously a gr

the best thing he can do, but it is the only many cases which can be cited against

thing he can do, and with no more than this but is anything better possible. At any

he can accomplish the most astounding when we wish to mark our approval of'

changes in the human race.

value of the services of someone we do so

It may appear to you that I have spent a increasing, not diminishing, his salary.

very superfluous amount of_time in reaching will furnish a rough starting point, and

what is an obvious and uniinspiring result, suggests that our national organization ou

for all that I have concluded is that the to be such that the number of children wo

better and more useful members of the bear some close positive relation to

community are those to be encouraged. income. It is true of course that there

Nevertheless I think my elaboration is justi- be bad examples where none of us can f

fied, for I hope I have shown a great deal that a man merits the large income w

more than this. My point is that no condi- he knows how to gain, but we may no

tions of scientific knowledge can arise by that eugenically this will not do very mu

which we can better the process. On the side harm. Suppose we plan a scheme where

of negative eugenics that of course is not so; it would be usual that a man with L2,o

there the intelligent part of the community year would normally have five children, t

are able to act quite objectively in restricting the financier, honest or fraudulent,

the breeding of the less, and the more they made £2o,ooo would not thereby have

POSITIVE EUGENIC POLICY

2I

that any excesses in population minority, but may trust to the certain effects

commit would hardly matter. of the law of averages.

g a plan on some such lines as

apt to see these kinds of fault and Divergence of National Characters

because of them. But in blam- There is one more point of interest in this

for these faults it should be connection, but I hesitate to make it on

that we are going far outside the account of the danger of my own sub-

n cs into a general criticism of our jectivity. To a considerable extent each

itions. I have for instance heard nation has a different taste in the type of

exit that if we merely adopt the character which it reveres, and this type will

if making the well-to-do breed, we therefore be encouraged by it to multiply.

e no poets because poets are For example the German seems to prefer the

y paid for their services. I will docile type who will make a good soldier or a

t to judge whether we ought to capable and intelligent administrator in the

supply of poets-after all Plato industrial machine. We seem to prefer some-

t they should be killed; but the thing rather different. From the point of

of this view regarded it as a major view of an unfavourable critic, we like the

against a eugenic scheme of the amateur who succeeds in whatever he tries,

pose, that there would be no provided he does not have to put too much

i it for breeding poets. It is not effort into it. I do not like this view at all,

sn objection against our social but there is another aspect of it which is

bn m general. If poets ought to much more satisfactory. What we value is

ter part in the world, then the the quality of independence which goes

y to do it is to reward their services with not becoming too much of a specialist,

cli means to give them better pay, a quality found say in the general practi-

awder the eugenic scheme they will tioner or the manager of a small works. To

poetic population.

us it seems that this independence is one of

seem rather gross and materialistic the hardest things to seek and one of the

eugenic principles on a cash basis most important things to get. The dictator

y, but that is not the fault of can use something like the ordinary methods

We do reward those whose services of animal breeding to raise his soldiers and

by a rise of salary, and so pre- his operatives, and if that is his ideal he will

we estimate social values on the presumably arrange his system of rewards

If you are a communist, this is accordingly. But his difficulty will be to

ble, but that has nothing to do provide future dictators; his habit of sup-

cs, but with the social organiza- pressing opposition will be dysgenic for all

appliyng positive eugenics in a the men of independent character who might

state it would be just as neces- become his rivals. It has indeed always been

necessary in just the same way, to found that the chief trouble of dictatorships

'the rewards that follow good ser- is to provide a successor, and a eugenic

the encouragement to have chil- policy will make it even harder. The much

ver the objection is just the abused democracy of the present has many

cases. If we have financiers faults-one of the worst is that it will pro-

-managed to collect money which bably be the last system to adopt a eugenic

t deserve, there will in any other policy at all-but if or when it does so, it

people who contrive to rise to will succeed in improving the race at the top

d to win rewards which they do in the region where independence and

In either system such people are originality may be found. It is not easy for

ty (or if they are not then the us to judge these national characters, so

needs amending), but the that perhaps my speculations are not worth

not worry about such a considering seriously, but there emerges one

22

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

I

point from them. We may expect that what- important, but it is on the political side
ever positive eugenic schemes are developed, I will leave it to others to discuss. they will accentuate further any differences have attempted to show is that the need of racial character that were present before. national eugenic policy is urgent and that
That is as far as I am going in our subject, we must aim at is simple. There is no and I know I am leaving out what is the real that a better positive eugenic policy immediate problem, that of making breed be attained by waiting for fuller scien those who ought to breed. How far this can knowledge, because of the essentially be accomplished I cannot judge, but it jective character of its application. seems to me that much might be accom- already have enough to go on, if, instea plished by child-allowances in taxation on a aiming at an unattainable certainty, we
scale which would make it very expensive content to allow the law of averages
for the well-to-do to be childless. And produce its inevitable result. There perhaps a good deal would be done by a nothing to wait for in our positive eug genuine feeling for eugenic duty, which in a policy, and we shall hardly be pardoned
democracy must certainly precede any the verdict of history if we do not forth
strong eugenic legislation. All this is very set to work to carry it out.

9SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEWT

Ei JOURNAL OF THE INSTITUTE OF SOCIOLOGY

[s Editorial Board:
E[03] A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS, ALEXANDER FARQUHARSON and MORRIS GINSBERG

E3 VOL. XXXI, No. 1

JANUARY 1939

ES] CONTENTS

ei Science and the Social Relations of Industry

P. Sargant Florence

[0] A Study of Population in Ulanga, Tanganyika Territory

[0] A. T. Culwick and G. M. Culwick

The Adoption of Children
E[ Three Aspects of Regional Consciousness
E[ National Socialism and the Social Sciences

S. Clement Brown
F. W. Morgan R. J. Baker

Eq Annual Subscription £1 ls. Od., post free. 5s. 3d. per copy, post free.

EF[000]

'Cbe Le jlap tlouse jDress,
35 GORDON SQUARE, LONDON, W.C.1

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXI, No.

