THE PECKHAM EXPERIMENT*
By INNES H. PEARSE, M.D.

T HE Peckham experiment began as admixture of cultural types as it is possible

far back as I925. At that time, the to find within any small area in the metr'o-

interest of the eugenist was focused polis. It was a populace not afflicted by any

on the genetic factor in inheritance. Those continuous unemployment, and did not

responsible for the inauguration of the include any " social problem " group.

Peckham experiment, aware that it was not The Club consisted of a small house

possible to apply to human society such containing no more than a consulting room,

knowledge of inheritance as the study of changing room with hot bath, a very small

genetics had so far presented us with, and room for social purposes, and a rough garden

sensible of the potent effect of environment hut used for an afternoon nursery for

upon the new individual from the moment children of the member-families. The induce-

of conception, determined to explore the ment for any family to join was the oppor-

environmental factor in inheritance. This tunity of having a periodic health overhaul.

implied a comprehensive experiment in the We believed that there were parents with

field of social biology in which there could be the good sense to jump at such an oppor-

brought under observation the intimate and tunity, provided that the circumstances in

subtle, as well as the more remote and wide which it was offered were convenient to

effects of changes in the environment upon them, and did not cut across other responsi-

the individual. Such an experiment necessi- bilities that they had previously assumed.

tated not merely a study of the earliest (maternal) environment of the embryo, but investigation of the factors involved in

This small club was run for three years,
and yielded certain findings of importance:

natural selection as evidenced in the pro- (i) Examination of the man-in-the-street

cesses of falling in love and courtship which

by modern scientific methods disclosed

set the stage for the debut of the new

disorders of a pathological nature not

individual.

anticipated by us nor by the families

If, then, we were going to deal with the

themselves.

effect of environment upon the child, the (2) Such disorders, when discovered at

first requirement was to know the state of

this early stage, were easier to treat

the parents to whom that child was to be

and adjust than in a more advanced or

born. Nowhere had any work been done on

chronic staga

the uncomplaining or so-called " healthy" man-in-the-street or woman-in-the-home. As
scientists, how were we to come into easy and natural contact with such people ?

(3) If individuals after their " cure "
remained in the environment in which they had been living, those disorders
were prone to recur.

First Experiment, 1926-9

This last was a very serious finding. It

In I926 my colleague, Dr. Scott William- meant clearly that periodic overhaul accom-
son, and I, supported by a small group of panied by early treatment of disorder was of
interested laymen, decided to open a small little use if unaccompanied by measures to " family club " in South London. The dis- modify the environment in which the disorders trict was chosen with some care for the fact had arisen. This impelled us to shut down the that it housed a populace mainly of good first experiment while determining what

artisan type, but including as wide an could be done to change and modify the

* Being the substance of an Address to the Eugeinics
Society on October I7th, I943.

environment in which the families were living.

48

THE PECKHAM EXPERIMENT

49

Second Experiment, 1935-9

action was a natural stimulus to action-

Five years elapsed, during which time one which is perforce inoperative in the

the problems were reviewed, plans laid, and increasingly disintegrated state of contem-

funds collected for further experiment. The porary society.

second experiment took the form of a

specially designed club to cater- for the Constitution of the Club

leisure of 2,000 families living in the same A word must be said about the constitu-

district and within walking distance of the tion of this Family Club. It was planned,

building.

built and equipped throughout for self-

The Club was equipped with all those service. This gave freedom to its member-

things which experience had shown that families to act without the restraint that

keen and active individuals like to make use service inevitably imposes. Apart from the

of in their leisure-a swimming bath, a individual conditions of membership, to which

gymnasium, space for games (e.g. billiards, I will come shortly, there were no rules and

whist, badminton, table tennis), a theatre no " organizers" or leaders in the Club.

for drama, music and cinema, a library, a That the absence of rules caused difficulties

cafeteria, nurseries, workrooms, etc. Thus, in the beginning cannot be denied. And

the Club was provided with equipment for where everyone is a stranger and the

the use of every member of any family from majority are too shy, too diffident, tooinept

infancy to old age.

to begin to take hold of the opportunities

Our object in putting up this building before them, there is nothing more difficult

was to put in the path of families a diversity than to stay one's desire to " get things

of opportunity for social action and to going." In those early months the children,

observe the effect of the changed environ- largely hysterical from too little outlet in

ment upon those families. It was necessary, school or home, contributed greatly to the

therefore, that there should be free circu- chaos which continued until one activity

lation throughout the building so that the after another began to organize itself around

families should be able to see what was one or other keen individual or group of

going on. It was also necessary that the individuals exercising their skill and develop-

observers should be able to note the effect ing an interest in some form of activity.

of the new environment upon family action. So, gradually, out of chaos order grew-not

Hence the building was planned for visibility unlike the way a patterned order appears

and free circulation throughout. Its con- in the chromatic elements in the cell as,

struction was simple: three concrete plat- emerging from the skein stage, it takes on a

forms supported on pillars, thereby eliminat- new orientation. Suffice it to say, as evidence

ing the necessity for any obstructing walls. of growth of such an order in the Club, that

In the middle of the building was a full-size by the fourth year of the experiment, on

swimming bath surrounded by a band of any afternoon in the week between 4 and

plate-glass window separating the bath 6 p.m. there could be seen some 200 to 250

chamber from the cafeteria on one side and children moving at will to their chosen

the main social hall on the other. From the activities amidst the general and adult

main hall on the first floor, one could also society of the Club of which they were an

look down into the gymnasium and into the integral part, their only point of reference

theatre, both rising from the ground floor; being the biologist-observer and her student

and, as one passed the gymnasium to go to also at all times moving freely throughout

the playground, one could look into the the building. An intrinsic equilibrium had

babies' swimming bath adjacent to the established itself within this society, making

nursenes.

the enforcement of an extrinsic discipline

Everything was visible. One object of redundant.

this provision was to test the hypothesis As well as no rules, and no organizers to

we had laid down, namely that the sight of see that members " got together " or used

50 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the equipment, there were no teachers to (2) The second condition of membership

teach how to use each instrument. What was periodic overhaul for every individual

would people do, and how would they act, of each member-family. The Centre was

given such a new environment ? were the open from 2 to IO p.m. daily, and all over-

questions asked of the equipment. There hauls were done by appointment, so that all,

were people of every degree and many could choose a time that suited their con-

varieties of skill among the members. It venience. The first appointment was for

was but natural that the skilled should turn a laboratory overhaul, when specimens wer-e

to teaching those of their friends who were collected from each individual. Then fol-

less skilled-and often in doing so they lowed a personal overhaul of each individual,

discovered in themselves a quite unsuspected where the women and children were examined

gift for teaching. There were no profes- by a woman, and the men and older boys by

sionals to set a standard. This does not mean a man. The third and last appointment was

that there were none who were expert for a " Family Consultation," at which the

there were. But also there were individuals whole family assembled to meet the two

in every stage of competence with growing "doctors " who had examined the members

courage to attempt what they had never of the family.

attempted before. So, in three or four years, The family consultation presented us with

instead of a small group of experts perform- a peculiar situation. We were not " doctors"

ing to a majority of spectators among the facing " patients " suffering from symptoms

membership, we had nothing but " doers" who had come asking for advice. We had

in the Centre-some continuously appreciat- had an opportunity of examining the

ing and so learning from the expert; and ordinary man-in-the-street and woman-in-

others gaining the necessary courage to try the-home, who were not aware that they

from the person even less competent than needed advice of any sort. To give advice in

themselves.

these circumstances would have been an

unwarranted intrusion, as well as likely to

Condition of Membership

arouse resentment. Would whatever infor-

The conditions of membership were two mation we had gained prove of use to the

only: (i) payment of a weekly subscription family itself, and could it be translated into

per family, and (2) periodic health overhaul lay terms ? If so, should we see them take

for every individual of each member family. responsible action as a result of knowledge

(I) Family membership as distinct from not hitherto available to them ?

the usual individual membership of a club Thus a new technique of health consulta-

means that there are automatically gathered tion was evolved. At the family consulta-,

together people of all ages and both sexes. tion we dealt first with the baby or youngest-

There is thus assembled a society in which child. " This and this has been found, and-

every stage of maturity is represented, each as far as we know, it means so and so."

exerting its natural biological influence upon The baby is then taken out. The parents,

other members of the group.

somewhat taken aback, for they are little

Peckham was chosen because of the used to a situation where they are treated

cultural diversity of the families living by those with knowledge as sensible and

there, so that, as well as a diversity of skills responsible human beings, are nevertheless

and of ages, there was a considerable degree interested.

of cultural diversity as well. The incomes of Then comes the turn of the next child.

our members ranged from £2 Ios. a week When the last child has left, much of the

to £i,ooo a year or more, the majority strangeness has worh off, and a discussion

being between £3 I5s. and £5 I5S. a week; follows, during which all sorts of other facts

and in occupation the members ranged from concerning the children, the family circum-

the unskilled labourer to the lawyer, the stances and relationships tumble out. Then

clergyman and the doctor.

the findings of the husband's overhaul are

THE PECKHAM EXPERIMENT

51

detailed by the man " doctor " in the without giving advice had been acquired,

presence of his wife, and the findings of the there was scarcely a family among the

wife's overhaul by the woman " doctor" thousand or more examined who did not

in the presence of her husband. This, too, themselves take the hecessary steps to put

is inevitably followed by a still more lively right what was wrong. Often after talking

and intimate discussion.

it over together at home, they would come

It must be recalled that it was not a back a few days after the consultation to

medical overhaul, but a health overhaul that ask where and how they could best get the

had been undertaken. In medical overhaul necessary treatment. Thus, placing infor-

search is made for what is wrong. In health mation at the parents' disposal led to volun-

overhaul the search is for what is right. Thus tary adjustment on the part of the family

in the family consultation the emphasis itself of any disorders that had been found.

falls always on what is found that is right, This resulted in a growing sense of respon-

that which is not right arising as incidental sibility and a growing courage and capacity

to the general account of what has been for action on the part of the family and of

found. No issue, however, is shirked in the all its members.

final discussion between biologists and To come back to the family consultation.

parents.

If the families were young and likely to have

It will be convenient here to make some children or more children, a brief outline

mention of the findings of such overhauls was then given of what is known of the

as were made in the four and three-quarter significance of parenthood-not only for

years preceding the outbreak of war.

their children, but as the means by which

Of the 3,91I individuals of both sexes and parents themselves might reach full maturity.

all ages examined, it was found that 90 per Contraception, which in this setting falls

cent had pathological disorders which could into its place as a means of family welfare,

be diagnosed by any clinician working with was discussed, and it was made known that

a modem laboratory and equipment and advice was available for this purpose at the

making a comprehensive personal overhaul Centre by appointment if required. Bio-

of each individual. When further analysing logical knowledge of the processes that

the IO per cent without disorder into males underlie courtship and mating in the animal

and females, there were found to be i6 per world were translated into general terms

cent of males but only 4 per cent of females and afforded a means of illustrating the

without disorders. Moreover, of these subtlety of the biological processes of growth

females with nothing wrong, a relatively high and development of a family and all its

proportion were under fifteen years of age, integral members.

thus disclosing that there were practically Thus parents began to grasp, perhaps for

no women in the child-bearing period free the first time, that health is not merely a

from disorder.

state of physical fitness, but rather one of

This is a serious comment on the probable progressive unfolding of their potentialities

state of the populace, in view of the fact that for development-which could not take

it is derived from a specimen chosen as place at all without continuous contact with

representing that section of the populace the outside world, and with the society in

which is not embarrassed by poverty or which they as a family are embedded. All

other social problems. I do not, however, these things were of intense interest to the

propose to enlarge on these findings here* parents, both husband and wife frequently

apart from referring to the response of the making remarks and comments, showing

families to disclosure of their defects and that they had been dimly and intuitively

disorders at the family consultation.

aware of the deep significance that underlies

Once the technique of giving information their parenthood.

* See Biologists in Search of Material, Faber & Faber, 1938, Section III, pp. 52-9I.

So, the family consultation over, they would go down and have a cup of coffee or

52 THE- EUGENICS REVIEW

a glass of beer in the cafeteria by the swim- wrong with- them of which they were

ming bath, and there would meet someone aware.

they knew. Inevitably the main lines of This subject is obviously one which

what had gone on in the family consultation demands not months but years of observa-

-if not the more intimate personal details tion. I mention it here merely as an indica-

-would sooner or later be discussed. And tion of the nature and interest of the studies

perhaps the friend, an older member of the which an experiment of this order opens up

Centre, would talk about it in terms he had for future research.

already made his own.

So a growing understanding of the pro- Pregnancy in the Family

cesses of growth and development-and of With such close and intimate contact with

the nurture of children-began to be trans- each family, and deeply interested in any

lated by the members themselves into the change in their circumstances, it became

vernacular. Here was, in fact, the basis for natural as time went on for all sorts of

a tradition of knowledge in society. And, matters of any importance to the family to

later, as they came with their children to be talked over with the biologist. It was

the Centre, watched them at play, and thus natural, when quite casually we met

began, like us, to be observers of what their downstairs, to be told that they had bought

children were doing, there was daily oppor- a new house, had decided to send John to a

tunity for such knowledge to gather and to new school, or were in trouble with the land-

grow.

lord or the insurance company.

By experiment we had arrived at a method This was extremely valuable, for it meant

whereby the democratization of biological that when anything important like a

knowledge had begun to take place through probable conception occurred, it was re-

the idiom of the people, and in a situation ported to us at the earliest possible moment

which offered the opportunity for such -and that was equally the case with a

knowledge to be acted upon by each in his wanted or an unwanted conception. At

own fashion. For this to occur naturally, such a time another overhaul would immedi-

a continuity of association between staff ately be made, followed by a " parental

and members was necessary. Sixteen stairs consultation" with the man and wife and

down from the examination department, the man and woman biologists. Here was

and the biologist could meet the family on a further and appropriate opportunity to

the social floor of the Club and see them in deal with the subject of pregnancy in the

action. When the overhaul recurred a year family and to engage the interest of both

or eighteen months later, at the second parents in its significance for their own

family consultation, there was more to development. (It was also a profitable

add: observations on the patterns of action occasion to explain the disastrous effects of

of the members as they had moved about attempts at abortion in the case of an un-

the Club.

wanted pregnancy.)

So striking was the nature of these action- Within the brief space of four years we

patterns displayed by individuals and by had in the Centre an increasing number of

families that within four years the social wanted conceptions. The situation was in

biologist (who was not a doctor), working more than one way a novel one, for where a

day by day on the floor of the Centre, found family joined before conception had occurred

,that new families as they moved about the both parents had been examined, and, so

Centre fell according to their action-pattern far as possible, had had their disorders

into three categories closely coinciding with removed before the conception of the child.

what was later to be found on examination We had started from the beginning, creating,

-those with nothing wrong with them, as far as modern science allowed us, a fit

those with disorders of which they were intimate environment for the new individual

unaware, and those who had something -as well as a general enviromnent capable

THE PECKHAM EXPERIMENT

53

of enriching the home into which that growth. Life was acquiring a fuller savour

individual was to be born.

for them both:

After the first " parental consultation," This very striking change in the pair

the wife went to the laboratory fortnightly, during the ante-natal period had, as might

and to the biologist every month. Presented be expected, its effect upon their outlook

thus with pregnant women who, through upon delivery. Labour, no longer anticipated

their periodic overhaul as members of the as some drastic surgical operation, became

Centre, had rid themselves of their disorders the accepted climax to pregnancy, which

before conception occurred, we had little to the woman, feeling full of vigour, approached

set right. So each successive ante-natal with the quiet confidence of being able to

consultation became a recurring opportunity achieve naturally and unaided.

of placing at their disposal knowledge as to It was impossible to subject such women

the developmental changes that were taking to the ordinary circumstances for delivery

place during the course of pregnancy. Here could be stressed the importance of nutrition*

in which they are reduced to the status of invalids for two or three weeks. Through

not merely for the embryo but for the family the courtesy of the obstetric staff of one of

as a whole, including food for both their the teaching hospitals, who co-operated

physical and social needs during this active with us for this purpose, special arrange-

phase of family growth. Both husband and ments were made for this still relatively small

wife were participators in pregnancy, and, category of mothers. Under this scheme,

looking forward to the birth of the child they were " expectant parents."

the mother went into hospital for fortyeight hours-for labour and the sleep that

In this situation full attention could be
given to building up the woman's reserves, checking their maintenance by means of the laboratory records. The wife was on top of her form, her capacities sharpened by use and the " tuning up " of her physiological engine. She did not experience the sickness, lassitude, tiredness and depression, nor suffer from the minor disorders so commonly
regarded as " normal " at this time. So,
quite naturally, she remained an active
participant in the social life of the Centre

followed-coming back to her home immediately afterwards. In this way the initiation
of lactation was carried on in the intimate environment of their own home and under supervision of the Centre's midwife and biological staff. In circumstances like these ope watched a smooth progress: conception welcomed, pregnancy enjoyed, labour accomplished with a sense of achievement, and no doubts or difficulties with the subsequent feeding of the child. And after a
period of absence from the generatl social life of the Centre, first the young father would

with her husband. She continued to go to be seen again among his friends and asso-

her " keep fit" class, to play badminton, ciates, and later the mother would bring her

and to swim (up to fourteen days before baby to the Centre Nursery for an hour or

delivery), and was to everyone's surprise in two in the afternoon, while she joined her

no way remarkable in doing so. And, be- friends for an afternoon's sewing, or a swim

cause they as a " family " were growing, and a cup of tea.

they began to find themselves making new The result of this successful and easy

friends among other families in the same progress of a family through pregnancy,

stage of maturity that they themselves were child-birth and infant rearing, was that the

now approaching. Instead of retreating and having of children came to be seen amongst

retiring from society; they were growing farther into society through their own

the Centre community not as a danger or a burden upon the parents, but as a very desirable experience. There were, indeed,

* The Centre Home Farm at Bromley Common pro- indications that pregnancy taking place in

vided live milk and vegetables which were made available to the family at the time of pregnancy,

these circumstances was an infectious element

lactation, and the weaning of the child.

in the community-a stimulus to other

54 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

young married people to want and to have the urgency of pursuing this research into

children.

the potency of environment upon family

If on further research this proves to be action.

the case in general, it has a very direct
bearing on the population question, and
would indicate that one of the main causes
of a falling birth-rate lies in the absence of the natural biological stimulus to maturity due to the isolation of the young married couple in the disintegrated state of contemporary society.
It was quite a common thing for young families who at their first overhaul expressed the firm intention of having no children, to
come to us after their second or third family consultation saying that they had changed their minds. It is impossible to say whether
fear had been eliminated as a result of seeing easy, natural and successful pregnancies, or
how far the general environment of the
Centre, with its opportunities for information and for action, was responsible. The fact that it happened within four years is nevertheless a very significant one. It is of equal importance that it happened in the case of young couples who in the intervening period had acquired neither better housing accom-
modation, a rise in wages, nor any other change in their financial prospects.
But perhaps of even more interest from the eugenist's point of view were the young couples who, within two and a half years of

There is a further interesting indication that has arisen from close study of the expectant mother and her child. Intractable deficiencies in the mother are very apt to manifest themselves in the child three months or more after birth. But where, however, a "floating" reserve has been maintained in the mother during the pregnancy, the child born of that woman will
not only be born with a higher standard
than his mother could reach, but appears to maintain it at least during the first year of
life.* Time has not permitted us to carry out observations on this subject over a longer period upon the offspring, or to collect sufficient numbers to substantiate this point, but the indication has been explicit enough to demand the fullest investigations when the cessation of hostilities makes the resumption of this research possible. If true, it means something very important, namely that by the use of pregnancy as a particularly
fluid phase of differentiation in the life cycle
of the family, we can enable a child to reach
and maintain a higher standard than its
parents can maintain. Is there here a means
of breaking the vicious circle in family inheritance ?t

opening the Centre, began of their own Courtship

accord to seek to make use of the examination department to ensure that they would be as fit as possible before setting out on pregnancy. Such couples would come to
us to ask if their next overhaul, due perhaps in August, might be put forward to the end
of June; for they wanted to start their baby during their annual holiday in July. In these "bespoke conceptions " we find evidence of an intelligent and live parental sensibility operating from the outset towards responsible nurture of the child.
That we should have found evidence of
such a deep-seated change in outlook and
action in young families in instance after instance during the four and three-quarter

But even " bespoke conceptions " are not
the beginning of eugenic " practice." The new individual is subject from the moment
of conception to the intimate environment created by the interrelations of the parents. This has its physical aspects (about which in the human species we know but little as yet), and its social aspects, as expressed in the nature of the home (or zone of sociobiological influence), that the parents may "induce " through the nature of their mutual interaction with their environment. These influences have their beginning in falling in love, grow in courtship, and are
confirmed in the intimacies of marriage.

years during which the full-scale experimental Centre was working, seems to indicate

* See The Peckham Experiment, Pearse & Crocker, Allen & Unwin, I943, pp. I4I-4.
t Ibid., pp. 243-5.

THE PECKHAM EXPERIMENT

55

Thus the appropriate field for the beginning
of eugenic research and practice is one in which the adolescent is moving towards the
courtship phase.
To this end in the Centre there was one
exception to the rule of family membership. The adolescent sons and daughters of mem-
ber-families were allowed to introduce the
girl or boy friend of the moment as "temporary members." Such temporary members were not offered periodic overhaul
-for we were busy enough already, and boy and girl friends tend to come and go-but they had the full run of the activities of the Centre. Here, then, were young boys and girls, growing up in the midst of a general society, and passing through the phase of fleeting attractions to that of permanent attachment, in a situation where each -had not merely two or three to choose from and
to move amongst, but in active contact with
two or three hundred of roughly the same rage. There was no segregation of sexes or of ages; all therefore were subject to the
influence of those slightly more mature than themselves. Thus there was no tendency for them to be confirmed in their adolescence.
Parents would say to us that when a son was attracted to a girl they did not think suitable they would in the old days have worried and wondered whether they ought not to say something to the boy about it; but that as members of the Centre they were relieved of this worry, for the boy saw the girl doing a great number of things in contact with a great number of other people of all ages, and came to know for himself that she was not the type of girl he was looking for.
We had created circumstances in which there had gathered spontaneously a society of people of different ages and different

types, in which the young adolescents had a far wider choice than is possible in ordinary circumstances. We were coming nearer to circumstances in which natural selection could operate in the selection of a mate. We had created a field for the observation of human courtship. We now know that it is as easy to study human courtship as to study the courtship of birds-of which Julian Huxley has so fascinatingly written.
Conclusion Time does not permit a description of the
atmosphere of the Centre, except to say that it was an exceptionally free and natural one. Nor is it possible here to speak of the way other aspects of its work proved full of interest. The fact that the family rather than the individual was used as the basic unit for organization meant that no side of life was outside the Centre's range of observation. Hence, through its work wide fields of research hitherto unexplored have opened up and await investigation. Its facilities are unparalleled for research into the physical constitution and diathesis of the individual; into the origins of clinical disease, seen for the first time at the period of departure from health; for research into the biology of sex in its subtler manifestations; and into the socio-biology of the family group in its environmental associations. It opens up possibilities for research into psychology proper, that is to say of the healthy or socalled " normal," and for a scientific approach to education of the child from a biological standpoint. But, more important perhaps than all at this juncture in history, it affords a field for the exploration of eugenics and a rational means of translation of eugenic principles to the public need.

Eugenics Review, Vol. MUMVI No. 2

