212 2 UGENICS REVIEW.
Fair and dark; is there a predominant type?
13y H. ONSLOWY.
The work of F'riedrich Nietzsche has for a counitless inumber
of people, who have scarcely ever glanced at his writing, apid who but for the war could niot conceivably have taken any interest in it, niow become a subject of controversy. The discussion has been carried on by those who mistakenly consider that Nietzsche's work is a
philosophical system, and those who realise that it merely containis
the poetical exposition of an ideal; the result has been distressing, as the daily press testifies, without even being interesting. A philosopher usually tries to prove his thesis, but Nietzsche scorned to use argument. Like Bergsoni he despised reasoni, exalting in its place the Will, as Bergson does Intuition. Now a poet may indulge in
the luxury of self-conitradiction-a lphilosopher must not; hence
arises the argunment and the injustice. Not that a poet cannot have a philosophy; far fromn it. If, however, a poet is quoted to prove a certqin philosophical point of view, there is little doubt, that no matter what the poilt of view nmay be, numerous
passages in his poetry can be found to prove it. In this way the disputants in the press will always be able to
prove their respective arguments by quoting from the statements
of opinion, which Nietzsche has made about life. Thus the most rabid anti-Germans have depicted Nietzsche as the archetype of the coarse, crime-besotted Hun, and yet at the same time Stephen Graham with equal plausibility has written that he is the spirit of Holy Russia, which will work her redemption anid lead her on to triumph.
To attempt to decide which view is the right one would be im-
possible in the scope of a few pages, but fortunately there is still onie
phase of Nietzsche's work which can be dealt with without becoming involved in this controversy, for he was a philologist, like that other surprising personality, Borrow. Philology! What a strange bond between two such dissimilar figures, and what a strange study for
either. Borrow, the scholar gipsy, friend of pugilists, Armenians, and all the motley following who called him " brother" on the roadand Nietzsche, son of a Lutheran pastor, lecturer in a German university, and the passionate poet of Zarathustra. That Nietzsche was a philologist is very often overlooked, for though philology was his real business, in it he never achieved success, possibly because he never really had it at heart. And yet he was inever loth to seek philology's assisance fromi it, when he thought it might serve the purpose of strengtheninlg an argument, or of forminig the foundation
to one of his castles in the air.
For instance, he derived from the words "good" and "bad'"
an etymological basis for his doctrine of Good andcl Evil-that moral

FAIR AND DARK; IS TIHERE A PREDOMIINANT TYPE ?

213

sta(ldard which was created from the very esseince of his nature-
but there is Ino doubt that with a character like his, the same theory
would have been developed, if the scientific evidence had been wanting
or evenm contradictory. As a matter of fact his etymology was not always without fault, as we learn from the interesting correspondence between
him and the Scandinavian literary critic, Brandes, recently published.
He expresses the opinion in a letter to Brandes that "Goth" has
the same derivation as gut and "God" the god-like race, the fair race. }3randes, however, replies that ''Gothic'" has certainly nothing to do with " God, ' nor with " good ." " It is connected with giessen,
to )our, (he who emits the sperm) and signifies " stallion" or " male." On the other hanid, philologists here hold that your suggestion bonus, duonus, is extremely apt.'"
On this last derivation (bonus) was based the doctrine of Good anid Evil, the Master Mlorality and the Slave Morality. For Nietzsche cointended that the Latin word bonus originally meant a "warrior," being a later form of duonus, from duo, "'two,'" whenice the idea of opposition, duel, war. (In the same way, belluin is a later forlm of duellu,n, which also is derived from duo). The "good" mani was therefore the war-like man or warrior, who led and composed the aristocratic classes. Ini the judgment "good" throughout the world, the root idea is the same, namely, aristocratic and noble. The good were the powerful, the commanders, and often as the sigIn of their superiority, the rich; as is found for instance to be the case in the Slav languages, where arya means "rich"; or again the "real ones, " the " truthful " which was indeed the title by which the Greek nobility styled themselves in a passage from the poet Theognis.
The ruling class was always fair comnplexioned like the Aryanis w%Nlho invaded Inidia from the north. That they prided themselves on their fairniess is indicated by the Sanscrit word for "'colour'" zarna, which came to mean "race" or "caste." Their divinities mentioned in the V`edas, whose namies were often identical with those of the Roman gods, were called davata, " the shining ones. " The RigVeda, speaking of the conquest of the dark-skinned aboriginal inhabitanits, known as di'sas, which means "'enenies" or "slaves," describes how the gods "slaying the da'sas protected the Aryan colour, and subjected the black-skin to the Aryan man." Another great Sanscrit epic, the Rcimzayana, describes the race of a non-Aryan chief as ''of fearful swiftniess, unyielding in battle, in colour like a dark black cloud." When caste first arose in India the dasas of the Vedas became the lowest caste anid were called the Szidras, "theslavebands of black descent, " who could never rise from their servile conditioni. In addition to this connection between " the inoble " (bonus) and " fair, " there is a parallel connection between "'the vulgar," "'the plebeianl" (malus) and "the dark," or "dark-haired"; thus it is found that mnalus, 'bad," is derived from the Sanscrit miala, 'dirt," from which is also derived the Greek ,dXa9, "black," and hence the dark-coloured, vulgar man.
Further, the word "bad" signifies "'vulgar,'" "'plebeian," as is exemplified in the Geriman schlecht, " bad,'" which is identical with schlicht, "'simple,'" "'homely,'" "'plebeian,'" in contrast to

2I4 EUGENICS REVIEW.
"aristocratic." The dark-haired men referred to werc no dooubt the pre-Aryan iinhabitants of Italy, who contrasted with the fair, conquering race.
This correlatioii between "bad'" and "'dark,'' and " good'' and "fair" is a most striking one, and is far more wide-spread than in the derivation of a few words. It may, therefore, be worth while to follow the matter somewhat imiore closely, and see wlhether any further explanation can be given as to why the judgment "fair" should signify "good"; why, in fact, the fair were preferred to the dark.
The population of Europe meay be roughly divided inito three races, the fair race, the medium race, and the dark race. Now, of these three races, the fairest is always found to be the ruling class, and the darkest the lowest class; hence of course the fairest men are the noblest, the best; and the best are the fairest. The first race are the tall, light-haired, blue-eyed northern type, to be found on the shores of the North Sea, and south-west of the Baltic. In Britain, they settled on the east coast of Einglanid, in Norfolk, Suffolk, Linicolinshire anid Yorkshire, in the east of Scotland, ancd in the north of Ireland. The seconid or Alpine race, with intermediate stature and colouring, anid with distinctive mental and physical qualities, inhabited the Highlands of Europe, from tle Levennes to the Balkan Peninsula, and even as far as Asia Minor anid Turkestan; but in Great Britain this race has left only the slightest traces. The third and darkest type inhabit the shores of the Mediterranean. They are characterised by their short stature, long skulls, and dark hair and eyes. They are the fundamental race, remnants of which arc still to be found on the Atlantic coast of France, in the extreme south west of England and Wales, in the west of Scotland, and the southwvest of Ireland. This type is also found to be particularly attracted to urban areas.
Throughout history it has been noticed that the fair, nortlierin
type has been the conquering and ruling race, and that the small, dark
type has been the conquered and enislaved, or has succumbed to poverty
in the economic struggle for wealth. These fair men have also excelled in the study of the natural sciences, as opposed to craftsmanship, and most of the great English scientists have been of the fair type, as for instance, Newton, D'arwin, Kelvin, and J. J. Thomson. This fact, taken in connection with the observation that the tall fair race settled by preference on the east coast of England (an obser-
vation confirnled by Dr. Beddoe, who made a map shiowing that fair people were distributed most densely on the east coast of Britain, and dark people most densely oII the west coast) furnishes perhaps a reason why the University of Cambridge has given the world more famous natural scientists than anly other. For since, by geographical position, the University is situated in the heart of the country settled by the fair-haire(d race, in time past they have gone to Cambridge in greater numbers than to any other university, so that Cambridge has had a greater proportion of the men Lest adapted to acquire natural science than the other universities, and this advan-

FAIR AND DARK ; IS THERE A PREDOMINANT tYPE ?

215

tage originally gained by geographical position, may have subse-
quently become intensified by tradition.
But there are still stranger facts to be considered. This wide-
spread preference may be traced throughout art and history, even
from before the time when Pope Gregory exclaimed "Non Angli sed
angeli." Among other influences, this predilection had of course
the effect of creating a preferential selection in favour of the fair-
complexioned race. In English, the very word "fair," which
comes from the Anglo-Saxon faeger, "bright," is synonymous with both '"light-complexioned'" and "'good,'" or "'beautiful"; and the lainguage is rich in expressions such as "a dark horse" or a "blackguard.. "*
Even fronm the earliest times a similar preference for the fair is nioticeable; thus Homer describes the gods and heroes as fair, Helen of Troy was golden--haired, and Veinus was nearly always depicted as a blonde, as indeed was Milton's Eve. MIoreover, in Greek sculpture the hair of the statues was gilded, to indicate fairniess, and the Romans also by preference dyed their hair light. In Italy, the early poets like Firenzuola anid Petrarch, a(dmired fair people, as well as almost the entire Venetian school of painters, ancd a similar feeling nmay be founid at the same date in French literature. Ste. Godeline of Bruges, though otherwise beautiful, unfortunately possessed black hair and eve-brows, and was hence contemptuously called " a crow, " in the Acta Sanctorunm. In French mediaeval poetry the eyes of beautiful women were often described as vert, an epithet which probably means "of various colours, " or commonly " grey, " and not " green " as has
been falsely stated to be the case, in this passage from the Chanson dle Roland
"Noir je zeux l'oeil, et brun le teint, Bien qu? l 'oeil zrert toute la France adore.''
Cervantes loved the fairer women of Spain, and the great English beauties like Nell Gwyii and Venetia Stanley were all fair. It would be possible to swell the catalogue indefinitely with lists of the fair women like la reine Margot, who have received worldwide admiration, for even in the East, preference is always given to the fairest, the Circassians and the Kabyles.
The surest proof of the admiration granted to the fair, lies in the fact that the dark and ill-favoured (sic) people try to remedy their defect, as for instance in Venice in the 16th century, where it was the custom for women of all classes to practice "l'arte biondeggiante,' by sitting upon a wooden terrace constructed oIn the roof of the house, with their heads in crownless hats, the broad brims
of which protected their faces and necks, while their hair, previously
steeped in a mixture called la bionda, was exposed to the rays of the suni. In winter they even went so far as to replace the sun-light by
fires.
The most definite piece of scientific ev7idence on the subject, is that collected by Professor Karl Pearson. He discovered that in

* This word is said to be derived froim the retinue of cooks, scullions Rnd
hangers-on who followed a noble when he was travelling.

206 2T UGENICS REVIEW.
England husbands are very decidedly fairer than men in general, and wives somewhat fairer than women in general; that is to say, there is a preferential mating among the fairest of mankind, so that a fair man is on the average more likely to be married than a dark man, and a fair woman is more likely to marry a fair man than
a dark one. For the popular idea that dissimilar people tend to
marry each other is entirely wrong. As a matter of fact, it has been shown statistically by Professor Pearsoni, that there is a very marked preference for like to marry like, not only with regard to such obvious characteristics as general colouring, but also with regard to almost unnoticed or unnoticeable ones such as stature and span. The actual figures arrived at show that husbands are lighter than ordinary males by niearly three times the probable error.
The English stage affords an excellent examl)le of the l)ublic attitude towards fairness and darkness; there the ballet ancd chorus usually wear yellow wigs, anid the heroinie of the old-fashioined melodrama was inivariably a blonde ancd the feimiininie villain a brullnette. But, nevertheless, preference for fairness is not carried to the extent of admiring the extremely flaxen-haired, blue-eyed, doll-like type of
woman, especially in Englanld where the predominalit type is already
fair.
AIn interesting observationi has been made by Dr. Havelock Ellis, in the Natioinal Portrait Gallery. In spite of the difficulty of judging accurately of a person's colouring from a picture, because it must necessarily include the error of the painter as well as that of the observer, he has worked out a table which gives the co-efficient of fairness of the various classes of l)eople represented in the gallery.
The advantage of these observations lies in the fact that the sole qualification of being placed in the National Portrait Gallery is that of celebrity. The degree of fairness was indicated, by taking 100 to represent the meaii, so that an index of over 100 represented so many units of fairness, and an index of under 100 represented so many units of darkness (e.g., 120 represented 20 units of fairness, and 80 represented 20 units of darkness). After placing a value, in as unprejudiced a manner as possible, on every picture, the results were represented in a table, in which it was founid that meii of low birth (35) had an index nearly three times as low as that of created peers (102). Newly created peers (102) were found to be fairer than hereditary peers (82). Political agitators and reformers (233), soldiers and sailors (150), lawyers (107), all men of irrepressible energy and sanguine personal force, have the highest indices. Men of science (121), are very fair, as has already been said, and it would be expected that explorers would without doubt belong to the fairest category, but unfortunately there are no figures available. This interesting sentence, however, is taken from an account of Shackleton's polar expedition: "A curious point was noted, namelv that all the fifteen men of the shore party had blue-grey or blue eyes."
Philosophers and men of letters have a low index, and divines (59), men whose mission in life is to preach resignation to a higher will, are very dark, and belong to the small, dark, Mediterranean race. It is evident fronm these figures that the fair man is bold, ener-

FAIR AND DARK; IS THERE A PREDOM1INANT TYPE ?

217

getic, restless and domineerinig, and the dark mani resigned, religious, intellectual and conservative. This distinction in character between the two types is confirmed by an investigation of Dr. A. H. Hansen 's. He found that in Woneray, the fair population, who furnished three times as many mien for the volunteers as the dark population, was active, outspoken and progressive, possessing a "passion of freedom
and independence, caring nothing for equality." Hansen's method was to mark on the map the areas in which the tall and fair, and( the
short and dark types respectively predominated. When this had been
done it was found that this anthropological map coincided almost exactly with the political map of electors for the Storthing; the Conservatives being found in the dark-haired districts and the Liberals in the fair-haired districts. The Conservatives are described as being reserved, suspicious, lackinig in initiativle, caring little for freedom, with a passioni for equality, hatinig war, regardiless ofi money and very religious. This last characteristic is ev,idenced by the fact that they subscribed three times as miuch moniey as the fair leople for purposes of religious propaganida.
Thus it has beein slhowni that the good people were the masters,
the aristocratic )eople. They happened to be the fair-haired race
who have predominated throughout history; whereas the bad people,
the plebeians, the slaves, were the small dark, Mediterranean men. It has also been seen that throughout art and literature, there has been a preference for the fair, and a certain contempt for the dark. It does not then appear very difficult to account for this preference for the fair members of mankind; for if nobles are fair, the preference for fairness rather than darkness becomes immediately obvious. The aesthetic judgment that "fair" is "good" was originally caused by the fact that the fair were also the noble, the rich, the conquerors, whom the slaves of manikinid would always strive to emulate. It is clear, therefore, that the moral judgment "good" is ultimately based upon a very conierete fouindation. involving the pigments of the hair, skin and eyes.
LITERATURE CITED.
"The Genealogy of Morals." By Friedrich Nietzsche. ("Good and
Evil,'" "'Good and Bad.'")
"Tuberculosis, heredity and environment" p. 11 et seq. By Karl Pearson. And other publications of the Eugenics Laboratorv, especially "The Treasury of Human Inheritance."
"The Comparative Abilities of the Fair and Dark."' By Havelock Ellis. (MUonthly Reviezw, August, 1901).
"A Study of British Gen-ius." By Havelock Ellis. "Men of the Time." By Conani Dovle. "Men of Scieince. Bv Galton. "'Genius and Stature. ' Havelock Ellis. (Ninieteen th Century, July,
1897.) "Races of Britain." By Dr. Beddoe. 1885.
"Anthropological History of Europe." Bv Dr. Beddoe. 1912.

