THE
EUGENICS REVIEW

Editorial Offices: The Eugenics Society, as a means of meeting naked aggression.

69 Eccleston Square, London, S.W.1. But its influence on the qualities of future

(Telephone-Victoria 7302.)

generations cannot be other than disastrous. There is perhaps some truth in the view that

Editor for the Society-Maurice Newfield. modem totalitarian war will not discriminate

as did previous wars against the younger, the

Eugenics is the study of agencies under more energetic, the more courageous and

social control that may improve or impair enterprising members of society. Perhaps a

the racial qualities of future generations war waged on our doorsteps, against a whole

either physically or mentally."

people, will spare them better than did the wars that were waged between soldiers on

fields of battle. But even so, even if the

young survive, will they, in a sabre-rattling

EUGENICS AND WAR world, have the will to carry on the race? There can be but one answer to this ques-

tion. The world is an insecure place and

A* T the time of writing the immediate they are becoming less and less inclined to

crisis is over and only time can settle bring children into it. Even if not all young

the issue between those who believe people are of this mind, there are enough who

that the Prime Minister, by his gallant are to frustrate any policies that may be

enterprise, saved the peace of Europe, and adopted later for reversing the downward

those who fear that he succeeded only in trend in the birth rate. More calamitous still

putting off till to-morrow what it were is the fact that those who refuse to reproduce

better to have done to-day. If in the most are not the selfish or irresponsible whose

anxious days one fact emerged about which fertility could perhaps be spared, but the

there could be no doubt whatever, it was sensitive and foresighted whose contribution

that the people of this country wanted peace, to the generations of the future would be their

and were prepared to support almost any greatest asset. War and the threat of war

effort, almost any departure from conven- mean fewer children from the best stocks.

tional diplomatic usage, that might secure That there is not to-day general war in

it. For the moment it seems-and we can Europe is all to the good, but still not good

but hope-that the danger which threatened enough. Those of us who are concerned about

to engulf us and the whole of European posterity cannot evade our responsibility for

civilization has passed; if it should prove making-here and now-a world fit for

otherwise, if this newly-won peace should posterity to live in. We must not be content

after all prove to be but a prelude to battle, with a mere postponement of hostilities. The

we must take what melancholy satisfaction hatreds that cause wars must be resolved;

we can in the swift disiUusionment that the economic and ethnic grievances that are

awaits those nations which by their rulers offered as its justification must be objectively

are being taught to believe that love of peace examined and, if well founded, removed.

is a symptom of British decadence.

With their fellow citizens of all classes and

To eugenists war is and must ever be an all parties eugenists can serve the best of

abomination. It may be justified as an mankind by taking part in activities to these

instrument of policy; it may be inevitable ends.

i63

