SIR JULIAN HUXLEY
M.A., D.Sc., F.R.S.
Population Planning and Quality
0o Life

IN 1927 I ATTENDED the International that public opinion all over the globe has

Population Conference at Geneva in which suddenly and dramatically become aware that

Margaret Sanger played a leading role; and population is the most urgent problem now

I have remained deeply interested in the prob- besetting the human species. Research is being

lem. Much has happened in the thirty-two years pursued, action is being taken, and pressure is

that have elapsed since then. Public interest in mounting for more intensive research and more

the problem of population has grown in an effective and more widespread action.

astonishing way. It was then an unpopular It is especially encouraging that this Con-

subject, kept alive by a handful of devoted ference is being held in the capital of India,

pioneers: to-day you can hardly open a news- graced by the presence of our great pioneer,

paper, from the august and respectable Times Mrs. Margaret Sanger, and inaugurated with

to the most sensational organ of mass the active blessing of India's great Prime

circulation, without seeing some reference to Minister, Mr. Nehru.

population-pressure and even to the once- The theme of this conference is Family

unmentionable topic of birth-control. Important Planning: Motivation and Methods. I shall

nations like India and Japan have embarked speak mainly of the motivations. I would say

on official policies aimed at reducing birth- that the ultimate motivation for family planning

rates and a Pope has commended the subject of is to secure an improvement in the quality of

mounting population to the consideration of all life-to realize more possibilities of fulfilment

good Catholics.

for more people; while the immediate motiva-

On the other hand, the problem has become tion is the necessity to secure a reasonable

aggravated by an increase of about three- future for the human species before it is too

quarters of a billion people-much more than late. The latest figures from the Population

the world total only three centuries ago. In Reference Bureau show how urgent the global

some quarters there have been set-backs. The human position is. The net increase was 47

World Health Organization of the U.N., under million last year, and will be 50 million this

pressure from some of its Member States, has year. By A.D. 2000-well within two generations

declined to include population as a fit subject -world population will in all probability reach

for its concern, in spite of the obvious connec- 51 billion, and will quite certainly exceed 5

tion between over-population and health, both billion.

physical and mental. And many Governments

have been deterred from expressing an active The Growth of World Population

interest in population-control by fear of losing It is important to realize the historical back-

votes or by pressure from vocal minorities. ground of this process of human increase-the

However, the most encouraging change is trends of growth manifested by world popula-

tion. The number of human beings in existence

*A paper presented to the Sixth International
Conference on Planned Parenthood, New Delhi, February 1959.

has increased inexorably from prehistoric times to the present. Before the discovery of agriculture, world population cannot have num-

'49
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1959, 51, 3.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

bered more than a very few crores.* It must have reached 100 million a little before the
birth of Christ: in the mid-seventeenth century (the first date for which we can make a reasonably accurate estimate) it was about 650
million. The one-billion mark was passed about

its progressive enrichment. More scientifically, the aim of mankind must be to act as agent for its own improvement and for the further evolu-
tion of our planet, by providing for greater fulfilment of more human beings and fuller realization of their individual possibilities and

the turn of the nineteenth century and the two- social achievements, and in such a way as

billion mark before 1950, to reach a total of not to prevent or hamper the attainment of

over 2* billion to-day.

greater fulfilment by generations to come.

Furthermore, not only has the absolute total Fulfilment in this sense involves physical,

steadily increased, but also the rate of increase itself. Before agriculture, the annual compound interest rate of increase must have been below 01 per cent (one-tenth of one per cent). The rate reached 1 per cent only in the present century, but is now over 15 per cent-and still rising. This means that, whatever measures we take, world population will quite certainly go on increasing absolutely for the next hundred years.
Thus population has not grown at a uniform or steady rate, but by a process of acceleration. Furthermore, the acceleration has become much more violent in the last hundred years, and especially during the present century. This has been due to the progress of medical science, which has radically reduced the death-rate especially of children and young people in under-developed countries, without any comparable reduction in the birth-rate. This spectacular success of death-control has resulted in what can only be called a population explosion, world population having doubled itself in half a century, and being destined to redouble itself, whatever action we attempt, in well under that time in the future.
Population and Quality of Life
This continued and still continuing increase in the number of people prompts the question, What are people for? What is the aim of human life? It cannot be merely increase in quantity. Nor merely increased production of machines or gadgets. Nor merely increased comfort and passive entertainment. Nor merely increased power and domination, individual or collective. It surely must be increased quality of life, and
* Crore is the useful Indian word for ten million and billion the equally useful American word for one thousand million.

mental and spiritual well-being, understanding, enjoyment, hope, the satisfying exercise of one's faculties, creative activity, the integration of personality, participation in worthwhile projects, membership of a society which can be proud of its achievements, and a sense of significance in relation to the cosmos.
Population-increase is now infringing on the quality of life in many ways, and curtailing the realization of many or all of its desirable possibilities. Let us examine the present momentous period and look at the degree to which various
possibilities are falling short of realization owing to poulation-increase and are likely to
fall increasingly short in the immediate future.
Threats to Human Fulfilment
1. Physical well-being. Already two-thirds of the world's population are under-nourished, and as the absolute number of human mouths increases, the absolute total of under-nourished
human beings is bound to increase for a time, and also the acuteness of under-nourishment in under-privileged countries. By promoting undernourishment of all sorts-deficiency of proteins and vitamins as well as of calories-population increase keeps the physical and also the mental energy of people at a low level, and so reduces their possibilities of initiative and achievement in all departments of life, including science and art as well as material production.
2. The deforestation and erosion caused by expanding populations have already reduced the possibilities of agricultural production. They are certain to become really serious as population increases and spreads, unless drastic measures are undertaken.
3. Water-supply is beginning to prove inadequate in many areas, especially in the neigh-
bourhood of over-large and expanding cities

ISO

POPULATION PLANNING AND QUALITY OF LIFE

(e.g. London, Los Angeles). Furthermore, water -agriculture, industry, communications, enter-

for irrigation is the limiting factor for agricul- tainment, mass rallies and celebrations.

tural production in the world's huge arid and Alternatively, when for any reason produc.

semi-arid areas. Here, dams and reservoirs are tive efficiency cannot be maintained, over-

urgently needed. But even when they are built, population leads to social fragmentation and

the new areas that they supply become filled under-organization (e.g. in rural Haiti), and

with people in a few decades (e.g. the 5 million this again restricts other freedoms, such as acres irrigated by the Lloyd Barrage at Sikkur freedom from want and freedom for joint

on the Indus). Even a high dam at Aswan will creative and productive activity. not cater for the needs of Egypt's rapidly 7. Increased population is leading every-

increasing population for more than two or at where to hypertrophied cities and conurbations,

most three generations.

even up to 10 million people and over. These

4. Over two-thirds of the world's population are far beyond optimum size for efficiency, and

are still illiterate, and only a minute fraction far beyond optimum scale for truly human receives any higher education. And yet at all living. Where the standard of life is low they

levels, educational facilities (buildings, teachers, tend to develop into gigantic slums and largebooks, equipment) are not keeping up with the scale breeders of virus-fodder; where it is high,

flood of new minds and bodies to be educated. they become generators of frustration and

This holds up the progress of industrialization wasters of time and energy. Their spread is and the improvement of agricultural practice as creating large areas of man-made ugliness and

well as scientific and technological advance in drabness, and hordes of routinized people on

all under-developed countries, especially those their tiresome daily journeys to and from work.

that are already densely or over-populated, and 8. In technologically advanced countries

is delaying the possibility of mankind reaching large populations are resulting in increased a collective understanding of itself and its traffic congestion, and increased appropriation

destiny, or of engaging in collective projects of land for housing and communications. In

of world development.

some of them, such as Britain, there is already

5. Human variety is being threatened by a heavy pressure on mere space through the population-increase. The need for mass-produc- competitive and mutually exclusive demands of

tion and industrialization to supply food and a industry, defence, communications, housing, living to vast populations is tending to the and amenity on the rapidly shrinking areas of

destruction of cultural variety by a wave of open country.

drab uniformity, and is substituting mechanical 9. In various places on the earth's surface,

tasks for creative and enjoyable work.

over-population can legitimately be compared

6. Population-increase is also restricting to a cancerous growth. It causes suffering and

human liberty. Once population-density has discontent locally, and leads to large-scale reached a certain threshold value, further emigrations which are comparable to metastases

increase inevitably demands over-organization if efficiency is to be maintained, and overorganization reduces the area of freedom. Regulation and regimentation, direct or indirect, become necessary. Mass-production removes individual initiative, quantitative
norms imposed from above replace spontaneity and qualitative incentives. Daily life and work are routinized and existence becomes increas-
ingly mechanical as well as increasingly mech-
anized. After a longer or shorter time, the process eventually leads to more regimentation or mass activity in every sphere of human life

in cancer, and are creating social difficulties in the recipient countries (e.g. West Indians in Britain, Puerto Ricans in New York).
10. Over-population reduces the possibilities of employment-there are not enough jobs to go round, and certainly not enough worthwhile jobs of a satisfying nature. This is becoming serious in countries like India, where large-scale rural under-employment is already common and chronic urban and educated
unemployment is beginning to appear. China too is already aware of this threat of overpopulation and adequate employment.

INI

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

11. In under-developed and densely populated countries, continued population-increase
reduces the possibility of an economic breakthrough to a higher standard of living. Not only
does it tend to stabilize or aggravate underemployment with all its resultant inefficiency, but, through the demands that it makes on the national income for services of various sorts, it is constantly cutting down the amount available
for capital investment. Every million added to the population of a country means not only a million more mouths to feed, but a million more bodies to clothe, house, transport, and
keep in health, and a million more brains to train and educate. The amount expended on all this must be deducted from the amount needed to improve transport, to extend industrialization, to start new industrial enterprises and
power plants, new irrigation schemes, new schools and colleges and technological institutes; and this will be most serious in under-developed and densely populated countries, where the need for such new investment is most urgent. Thus in such areas expenditure on population-
control should be given extremely high economic priority. Further, planning authorities should constantly bear in mind the economic (as well as the social) effects of investment in projects (such as malaria control) which will reduce the death-rate, as against those of measures aimed at reducing the birth-rate.
12. The possibilities of wonder, enjoyment
and adventure available to man are being curtailed. Population-pressure is reducing the readily accessible areas of unspoilt wilderness
and natural beauty, while at the same time
increasing the number of people who want to
enjoy them. Even where National Parks and Reserves have been established, they are being whittled away by the economic, social and
military demands of an increasing population. Similarly, the famous and beautiful cities that are the goals of modern pilgrimage are
becoming spoilt by commercialization and congested with sightseers; so here, too, population-
pressure is curtailing another important pos-
sibility of human satisfaction. And all over the world wild life is being rapidly reduced or even
exterminated. The sight of an abundance of large mammals and lovely birds leading their

natural lives is a wondertul and satisfying experience: but, thanks to human population growth, the possibility of enjoying it is rapidly diminishing.
13. Human beings need to feel that they are in some harmonious relation with nature. This will become increasingly difficult if populationpressure forces us to an excessive or radical exploitation of natural resources, instead of aiming at a symbiotic existence, in ecological partnership with our globe. Over-population is preventing the development of a planetary ethic based on the moral duty of conservation.
For all these reasons it is urgent to reduce the rate of world population-increase. The basis of every real success here must be the development of a cheap and satisfactory oral contraceptive: and the prerequisite for this is research. If one-tenth of one per cent of what is spent on atomic missiles or space satellites were available for research on the control of human reproduction, we would undoubtedly have an answer within a decade. Research on this global subject should be international. Perhaps bodies such as our Federation and the Population Council could help in promoting and co-ordinating it.
Motivations for Family Planning
Thus there are various motivations for family planning and population-control. For governments, the realization that a reduced rate of increase is necessary for the general health and strength of their citizens, for economic advance, for social stability, for adequate education, for cultural achievement, and for intellectual and technical competence, will obviously be the prime motive for establishing an official population policy.
Official population policies are something new in the world, and we have to plan the best methods of implementing them. Usually, the Ministry of Health is put in administrative charge of the subject of population and its control. It would seem desirable to enlarge such Departments into Ministries of Health and Population, with their two sub-departments of equal importance. This would give the subject of population a higher status in national affairs. Propaganda, practical assistance and advice for family planning could then be provided by some

IS2

POPULATION PLANNING AND QUALITY OF LIFE

form of Health Extension Service operating at 1834 it was estimated at about 130 million; it

all levels.

had increased to about 200 million by 1871, and

Then Governments can provide some to 300 million by 1910. To-day, India contains

economic motivation. Just as bonuses for large about one-seventh of the human species: her

families encourage population-increase, so a population is now nearly 400 million. It is in-

system of family allowances in which the creasing by over six million a year* (more than

amount allowed decreases sharply for every all Australians in every two years). At this

additional child after the first two would annual rate, India's population will double itself

encourage family limitation. Taxation systems in around forty-five years, and will reach three-

might also be modified to operate in this direc- quarters of a billion before the end of the

tion. And of course Governments can help by present century-during the lifetime of many

devoting much attention to research.

Indians now living. This explosive increase of

For the individual, there may be various nearly 150 million since 1921 has been caused

motives. There is first the wish that his children by efficient death-control, the mortality rate

should have more opportunities and a better having been almost halved during this period,

education and start in life. As children cease to while the birth-rate has gone down by only

be an economic asset, the individual's desire to about 6 per cent. With all the health measures

raise his family's standards of living and enjoy- now in force and projected, the death-rate will

ment will become a more effective motive. And certainly continue to drop, thus tending to

if the individual can be made to realize that promote a still higher rate of increase.

family limitation will enable his country to have The careful study by Coale and Hoovert

a stronger and finer population, to achieve more of Princeton has brought to light many import-

in science and art, in exploration and sport, and ant points concerning the relation of India's

to play a more important role in the world, his population-increase to its economic develop-

patriotism too may be brought in as a motive. ment. It is not for me to enter into detail: but

Population Policy in India

I must mention some of their main points. They point out that unless the birth-rate is reduced,

Here I may be permitted a few words on India will be unable to achieve an economic

India's population problem, as it appears to an observer from another continent. In the first

break-through from its state of under-development and under-employment to a developed

place, India's position in this matter is crucial. and developing economy. This is because the

She is the largest democratic under-developed demand for servicing the additional population

nation, not only in Asia but in the world. Failure to solve her population problem will be
a political and social disaster: success will secure her leadership in Asia and give hope to the world at large.
Here again we must recall the historical aspects of the problem. People sometimes say that since India has persisted through millennia, she will continue to persist whatever we do or

(an increasing proportion of which will be children of an unproductive age and therefore an increased economic burden) will make it
impossible to provide adequate finmce for
industrialization and technological development. If present trends continue, a point of
economic no return will be reached in less than
thirty years. If, on the other hand, effective measures aiming at population-control are

do not do. This is a fallacy. India has not remained the same throughout its history: for

immediately undertaken, so that the birth-rate

one thing, it has grown in numbers, and its growth in numbers has changed its character
and modified its possibilities of further development. In early times, India's population can only be guessed at, but it seems clear that when the East India Company was founded in 1600, it cannot well have exceeded 100 million. By

* Accurate figures are hard to come by. Some authorities put the annual increase as high as 8 million! Certainly 6 million is a minimum. t Coale, A. J., and Hoover, E. M. Population Growth and Economic Development in Low-Income Countries: A case study of Indids prospects. Princeton 1958, University Press. (India, Oxford University Press). Summarized in Population Bulletin, December, 1958.

3-ER

I53

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

begins to go down sharply by 1966 and becomes would otherwise have been born. Just how

halved by 1981, then a break-through to a many, I leave to the economists to calculate.

developed economy will still be possible. The But it is clear that, even from a purely econ-

details of this dating may be modified by the omic standpoint, expenditure on population-

course of events, but the modifications cannot control is one of the most profitable forms of

be large. The broad conclusion is that for an investment for India.

economic break-through to be achieved by

India the birth-rate must begin to go down Conclusion

within a decade, and must be halved within a To return from India to the world scene, I

further two or at most two-and-a-half decades. am sure that the heaviest emphasis, and the

Coale and Hoover also draw attention to the ultimate motivation, both for nations and in-

disparity between the expenditures on birth- dividuals, must combine fear and hope. It must

control and on death-control. The Second Five- be on the urgent necessity of limiting world

Year Plan allocated $10 million for population population, to prevent it inflicting grave and

planning, but over $50 million for medical perhaps irreparable damage on the whole

health programmes, which will inevitably help human species and its terrestrial home, and to

to unplan population. The allocation for malaria give mankind the hope and the possibility of

control during the single year ending this March reaching new levels of fulfilment and new

was $14 million. This is an economic absurdity heights of achievement.

-$14 million for one measure which will
certainly increase population, as against $10 million for all measures which could reduce it!
The only possible conclusion is that the balancing of death-control by birth-control is a matter of the utmost urgency for India, econ-
omically as well as socially, and that measures aimed at reducing fertility should have an extremely high priority in all future economic planning. Much more should be spent on
research; a new army of doctors, nurses, midwives and health workers should be immediately recruited and trained, to encourage birth-
control and give free advice and distribute free

The International Planned Parenthood Fed-
eration can contribute to this end in various
ways, including the holding of conferences such as this. As a non-governmental but international organization with no political or religious bias, no axes to grind or outside interests to serve, it might become of considerable importance as a clearing-house and advisory body, whose help and advice could be sought by any country or any group. But to accomplish this, it would need a considerable increase of revenue and staff, including a Secretary-General of the highest standing, and with ample provision for

contraceptives to all classes in all regions; travel, and perhaps also officials who could be

financial inducements should be given for seconded for a period to countries in need of

limiting families, whether by sterilization or advice and assistance. The time seems ripe for

contraception; propaganda, through the press this transformation of the Federation from an

and radio and by travelling speakers, should organization mainly concerned with arousing

be conducted on a national scale. Every crore public opinion into one mainly concerned with

of rupees spent on such measures for preventing implementation and operation. Perhaps the

births would pay handsome dividends in the present Conference will consider ways and

saving of many crores that would be needed to means by which this desirable step might be

feed, clothe, house and educate the babies that taken.

I 54

