REVIEWS OF BOOKS
anthropology, sociology and psychology, the last being divided into the areas of intellectual differences, social learning and cognitive development. Each of the papers is in itself a balanced and well documented survey of the particular sector of the topic dealt with; they range from a discussion of the effect of sex hormones on the development of sex characteristics and behaviour to an anthropological survey of sex roles in terms of occupation in a large number of societies.
The general trend of these independent treatments is towards stressing the importance of social as distinct from biological determinants of differences in sex behaviour. All are agreed that the evidence available is incomplete and sometimes contradictory; all are also agreed on the importance of early sex identification, either by wrapping girl babies in pink blankets and boys in blue, or by the child itself learning to play the expected sex role. It is generally agreed that by the age of three to four years, children are not only aware of their sex roles, but are actively identifying themselves with these roles. The predominant factor is that with young children, the age role is common to both sexes, and the only role which can be ascribed is the sex role. There is in each society a structure of sex differentiated role and status for which children are groomed, either consciously or not, from an early age. This structure obscures other than the most obvious biological differences. The girl tomboy, for example, is tolerated more readily than the "sissy" boy, but in assessment of intellectual differences tests are constructed to eliminate a bias towards either sex. This is one of the difficulties about the book, the very diverse nature of the excellent individual contributions. The reader is left without a coherent picture of the process of sex differentiation.
One feature of the book must receive special commendation. The bibliographical apparatus is the most complete the reviewer has encountered. Each of the six contributions has its own list of references; an Annotated Bibliography by Roberta Oetzel, covering nearly 100 pages, gives a summary (about a paragraph in length) of all the main sources used by the contributors; this is followed by a classified summary of research, listed under the main behaviour areas, such as Aggression, Moral Development, Methodology and the like, covering some twenty-five pages, giving the essential findings of each piece of research in one or two lines of print. As some of the original sources, such as the Transactions of the New York Academy of Science, are not readily available, the bibliography is a real aid to the serious student of the topic. It may seem odd to select the bibliography as the most outstanding feature of a quite thorough and competent series of studies, but it is there, and justifies its occupying about three sevenths of the whole volume.
JAMES MAXWELL
ADOPTION
McWhinnie. Alexina Mary. Adopted Children. How They Grow Up. London, 1967. Routledge & Kegan Paul. Pp. xvi + 302. Price 42s.
THIS BOOK IS concerned with the attitudes and feelings of a group of fifty-eight people, eighteen years and over, of whom fifty-two had been adopted and six fostered when they were children. The knowledge so obtained is used to assess their adjustments to adoption.
Any study of this kind poses problems of selection and interviewing. Dr. McWhinnie
is an experienced case worker. She was anxious for the group to be representative and hit upon the ingenious plan of interesting the surrounding General Practitioners in her project and asking them to refer any patient aged eighteen or over whom they knew to have been adopted and who was willing to co-operate. She brought her special skills to the interviews, which, though they had direction, were conducted in the atmsophere of
199

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
acceptance and sympathy which encourages frank discussion. Usually one interview was not enough. In a few cases there were four interviews, though mostly two were sufficient.
The histories were then assessed, and it was judged that of the fifty-two adopted adults, fifteen were well adjusted (Group A), ten (Group D) had poor adjustment, six (Group B) had fairly good adjustment, and twenty-one (Group C) were intermediate. The book contains several case histories which illustrate the characteristics of each group.
Although this is a pilot study, not sufficiently large to be used statistically, it nevertheless does seem to answer many of the vexed questions surrounding adoption.
The most striking finding was the positive correlation between good adjustment and an emotionally stable family background, where the adoptive parents were contented with each other and accepting of the child as an individual, needing encouragement but also the right to develop along lines best suited to it.
There was unanimous agreement amongst Dr. McWhinnie's interviewees that adopted children need to be told of their adoption by the adoptive parents and on the parents' initiative. The optimum age for this is five years or under, and the book gives plenty of evidence for this conclusion. Yet adoptive parents, for various reasons, often find it difficult to impart this knowledge. Their difficulties are sympathetically described and ways of meeting their problems are discussed.
The factors leading to maladjustment are approached in the same sympathetic way. Some of the criteria hitherto thought necessary by many adoption societies do not seem to be important factors. For instance, in all groups there were families who adhered to religious beliefs, so that this, in itself, was not a discriminating factor. The shape of the family-whether the child was an only child, one of other adopted children, or one among the biological children of adoptive parents-seemed to matter less than the emotional climate of the family. These are only two of many aspects that are considered.
The small group of foster children-six in all-were placed in a category of their own (Group E). Two were fairly well adjusted and four had poor adjustment. Here again, the fact that they had been accepted for monetary gain did not seem to be the deciding factor. Once more it was the attitudes that the family members took to each other and to the foster child-attitudes which were also found in the homes of the adopted children -that counted.
This book is a gallant attempt to assess in depth the effects of adoption from the point of view of those who have been adopted. Even in the well adjusted group, it is obvious that these children have had to face difficulties which do not occur when a child is brought up in its own family. The book should prove of valuable assistance to all who are concerned with adoption and should finally dispel any complacency we may have felt that to find a child a good home is something straightforward and simple.
MARGARET PLATT
McWhinnie. Alexina M. Adoption Assessments. Petersham, Surrey, 1966. Standing Conference of Societies Registered for Adoption. Pp. 30. Price 3s. Obtainable from Gort Lodge, Petersham.
THE TWO LECTURES published in this booklet describe the work done by the Guild of Service in Edinburgh, especially with regard to adoption. This was originally a moral welfare organization which, under the direction of Dr. McWhinnie, has developed its case-work service to unmarried parents alongside its work as a registered adoption society.
There has thus been an integration of the two services. One advantage, among many, has been that the unmarried mother has been known to the case-worker for some months 200

