HEMILATERAL ASYMMETRY

Its Relation to Cross-breeding in Animals and Man By C. J. BOND, C.M.G., F.R.C.S.

LOP-SIDEDNESS, i.e., hemilateral A few words must be devoted at the outset

asymmetry, is the mark of a hybrid. to the embryological or developmental aspect

Just as the hybrid, by the segregation of the subject.

of hereditary factors among his germ cells, The old preformation theory of Roux

is liable to give rise to different types of and Wiseman (at any rate in its original

offspring, so, too, by an essentially similar form) has now been discarded by the newer

process of cell-division the body of the school of experimental embryologists. The

hybrid may itself be built so as to display process of growth and differentiation of parts

on the one side a quality derived from his in the fertilized egg-cell is now regarded as

father and on the other the contrasting dependent on a number of factors, among

quality derived from his mother. These, at which polarity, chemical differences in nutri-

least, are the suggestions I now want to put tive material, and a special capacity for

forward for consideration.

regulating cell growth in certain areas, are

In discussing the problem of asymmetry some of the more important.

from the genetic point of view, we start from The tendency to-day is towards an epi-

the fact that vertebrates, in common with genetic rather than a preformative theory of

certain invertebrate individuals, are built embryonic development.

up on a symmetrical plan. The two halves If we assume that a newly-introduced

of the body, as far as the boney and muscular character, such as the presence of the fifth, or

structures, limb appendages, sense organs, extra digit, when a four-toed breed of fowls

and accessory structures like horns are con- is crossed with a five-toed breed, is control-

cerned, resemble each other on each side led during development by the same factors,

of the median line, and are arranged on a and in the same way that old-established

hemilaterally symmetrical plan.

racial characters are controlled when they

We are now concerned with certain emerge at the appropriate time and place in

exceptions to this rule of hemilateral the growing embryo, then, a consideration

symmetry, and I propose to illustrate of these and other examples of hemilateral

my points with examples of individual asymmetry, such as gynandromorphism in

asymmetry drawn from irregularities of horn birds and insects, may throw further light

curve in oxen, heterodactyly (or odd-toed- on the actual method of embryological

ness) in fowls, tail-feather pattern in development.

pigeons, feather-colour pattern in birds, Thus, whatever be the method (preforma-

gynandromorphism in birds and insects, and tive or epigenetic) which starts the develop-

some abnormalities in eye-colour and ear- ment of the fertilized egg-cell on a bilateral

shape in the human subject.

plan or foundation, the fact that an old-

In addition to asymmetry in the two established racial character is distributed

halves of the body of this hemilateral kind, equally to both halves of the organism,

asymmetry may also occur in the serial or while a newly-introduced character (such as

" end on " reproduction of vertebrate (and the extra toe) is often distributed unequally,

some invertebrate) structures or parts. I suggests the idea that the new character

do not propose, however, to deal in any complex only fuses with difficulty with the

detail with this longitudinal or serial kind of old-established character complex; and that

asymmetry, except to mention one or two segregation tends to occur during the pro-

examples which bear upon the hemilateral cess of cell differentiation, which underlies

aspect of the problem.

bilateral develo-pment, with the result that

lO9

IIO THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the factor or factors which represent the new in the one case, and between the two halves

character are distributed unequally to the of the developing embryo in the other, and

two halves of the organism.

although it takes place at different stages

In fact it may not be altogether fanciful of ontological development, yet the actual

to regard the individual vertebrate organism process by which differentiation is brought

as built up of two half individuals, fused about is probably essentially similar in both

along the longitudinal median plane. In the cases.

same way we may regard a segmented In this way, the study of hemilateral

organism like a worm as built up of a num- asymmetry in animals and man (and per-

ber of potential worm individuals, joined up haps in some plants) becomes fundamentally

in longitudinal or linear series.

a study of cases of unusual or abnormal

segregation among the units (factors or

EACH INDIVIDUAL A TWIN

genes, whatever be their nature) which

This Siamese twin-like view of the struc- underlie and control the evolution of

ture of the vertebrate individual may indeed characters during individual development.

have some bearing on the view we take of the When I first dealt with this problem of

nature of segregation.

asymmetry in a communication to the Gene-

Thus, during the process of Mendelian tical Society in I926 and later in a lecture to

segregation, a heterozygous mother germ- the members of the Eugenics Society (on

cell, containing different chromosomes or April 24th, I929), I was able to illustrate

genes representing alternative or allelomor- my remarks with lantern slides, and to dis-

phic characters, derived from each parent, cuss at length each individual example. Un-

divides at a certain stage into two daughter fortunately, this is not possible in this

gametes, one of which may contain the article, and I must request my readers to

paternal, and the other the maternal group. accept instead the following shorter descrip-

From the division result two gametes, which tions.

differ in their chromosome or gene complex,

and, when fertilized, these give rise to differently constituted individuals.

ANCIENT BREEDS AND CROSS-BREDS

In like manner during the process of so- The shape and curve of the horns of cattle

called somatic segregation in the apical cell afford a good example of symmetry and

of a growing plant shoot, when the cell un- asymmetry in the individual. In the pre-

dergoes qualitative division: certain factors historic races (e.g., Bos Primigenius and

or genes are, or may be, eliminated, and a Bos Longifrous) the horns curve forward

shoot differing in genetic composition, the and upward, as they do, too, in the drawings

so-called " bud sport," results.

of the oxen of ancient Egypt and also in the

So also in the irregular distribution of modern Eastern races. The type is stable.

characters in the two halves of the vertebrate In Western Europe there has arisen a race

body, as in the various examples of hemi- of cattle with an equally stable horizontal

lateral asymmetry which we are going to sweep or downward curve of horn; and these

discuss, the same process of segregation or two ancient differences in horn curve can

qualitative cell-division occurs; but it takes still be seen in the modern breeds derived

place at a very early stage in the growth from the old types, such as the Longhorns,

of the dividing egg-cell, at the time when the Herefords, Lincolns, Welsh cattle, and

two halves of the embryo are being marked others. But in modern cross-bred animals,

out, with the result that one half differs from such as Shorthorns, asymmetric individuals

the other half in respect of the asymmetric occur with one horn curving up and the

character under observation.

other down. Such an animal exhibits in its

Thus, though the process of segregation right horn inheritance from one race, and in

occurs among different units in the two its left horn inheritance from the other race

cases, i.e., between two daughter gametes -just as it is liable to bequeath upward

HEMILATERAL ASYMMETRY

Illy

curving horns to.some of its progeny and double feathers to appear on the left side,

downward curving horns to others.

as in the case of the asymmetric toe develop-

I have observed similar results from ex- ment in fowls. Asymmetrical human beings

perimentally crossing four-toed breeds of are not uncommon-in fact few people's

fowls, such as the game-fowl, with five-toed faces look alike from both sides, while their

breeds like the Dorking or Chinese silky finger prints on the right and left hand are-

fowl. Most of the offspring of the first never identical, and further observations

generation in such a cross have five toes, but have led me to conclude that this phenome-

there are also a certain number of asym- non is precisely analogous to those already

metric birds, having five toes on one leg and quoted.

four on the other. I have also found (and

this has been confirmed by Barfurth and ASYMMETRY IN MEN

others), that the odd or extra toe more The ears of the English population are

usually appears on the left side. In later either (i) lobed; (2) lobe-less; or (3) semi-

generations the discordant influence of this lobed. I was recently able to examine the

cross-breeding sometimes causes asymmetry ear shape in the children of a marriage

or irregular development in other structures, between parents of different types. One

e.g., in the claws, both on the other toes, and parent had large ears with well-developed

at the end of the wing bones.

lobes, while the ears of the other parent

One remarkable instance of hemilateral were small with scanty lobes. Some of the

asymmetry of the secondary sex characters children of this mating showed one type of

was that of a pheasant in which the right ear-pattern, and others the other; while one

side was coloured like a female, and the left individual showed both, one ear resembling

like a male. The right foot had no spur, his father's and the other his mother's type.

on the left a well developed spur was pre- The condition known as Heterochromsa.

sent. An ovo-testis was present on the left Irides, in which one eye may be wholly or

side. To attribute the asymmetric coloura- partly dark and the other light, is compara-

tion and spur formation to the differential tively rare, appearing in only about i or z

action of the two sex-hormones is obviously per I,ooo of the population. But it is much

an insufficient explanation. The tissues more common among the children of certain

themselves which produced these secondary families where there is a marked contrast

sex characters must have differed on the two between the eye-colour of the two parents.

sides of the body; and this different recep- The same thing has been observed in dogs,

tivity can be attributed to abnormal segrega- horses, and rabbits. In the last the phe--

tion of the corresponding and controlling nomenon of so-called " wall-eye " is fre-

genes during the development of the ovum. quently associated with the " Dutch " pat-

Similarly in cross-bred fowls-such as the tern of coat-colour, and is an indication of

five-toed Houdan and the four-toed Andalu- cross-breeding between white and black or

sian hybrid-a spur on only the left foot may the wild agouti colour pattern.

be connected with asymmetric development It is significant that gynandromorphism,

of the ovary on the left side.

in which the individual is a complex mosaic

In the wild species of pigeons the tail of male and female characters, is most com-

feathers or rectrices are, as is well known, mon, as the result of cross-breeding, in in-

twelve in number, and they are arranged sects, whose secondary sex characters are

symmetrically, six on each side. But such directly controlled by the sex chromosomes

a cross as that between a Fantail and a Homer and not by sex hormones. Gynandromor-

produces the following results: (i) An in- phism, though present, is less common in

crease in the number of the tail-feathers in birds, in whom the secondary sex characters

the offspring; (2) An asymmetrical develop- are mainly controlled by the sex hormones

ment of tail feathers; and (3) double feathers. and only partly by the sex chromosomes

Here again there is a tendency for these directly. In man and other mammals the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

icondition of hemilateral gynandromorphism Segregation, the segregating or differentiat-

is practically unknown, because the influence ing process takes place among reproductive

of the sex hormones is all important. germ-cells, or gametes, during phylogenetic

Gynandromorphism, in short, only fully development, and results normally in the

appears where abnormal segregation during appearance of individuals from the same

-cell-division has a chance to make itself mating having different genetic characters.

manifest.

If during the course of racial evolution

Returning for a moment to man, my this segregating or differentiating process is

readers must often have noticed how chil- carried to the extent of causing physio-

,dren do, in fact, tend to resemble their logical incompatibility between the different

father from one side, their mother from germ-cells, sufficient in degree to prevent

the other, and that they will alternately ex- physiological fusion during the process of

libit the mental characteristics of both fertilization, then complete or partial steri-

-parents. May not these be instances of the lity may occur, as in the case of some inter-

same phenomenon which, when carried to an specific hybrids.

extreme stage is productive of those abnor- If, on the other hand, the segregating or

mal cases of " dual personality " ? The differentiating process takes place among

'brain is a dual organ, highly asymmetrical, the somatic cells of the developing ovum,

with a complex development of connecting at the stage of growth during which the

cross fibres, by which the right hemisphere bilateral plan is laid down, then it gives rise

controls the left side of the body, and the to one individual made up of two halves

left the right side. Any marked segrega- which differ in their characters, and hemi-

-tion of the duplex factors concerned might lateral asymmetry results.

indeed result in the two parts of the brain In an address to the Oxford Medical

working independently or alternately.

Society some years ago, (see B.M.J., Feb-

Perhaps my suggestions may eventually ruary 24th, i9212) attention was drawn to

-provide an explanation of the recently re- the fact that all variation-i.e., the assump-

-corded case of twins, of whom one was a tion of new characters by any individual

Mongolian imbecile. Segregation of the organism, cell group, or cell-is the outcome

-normal and Mongolian tendencies may have of segregation occurring among units of

occurred before the developing ovum divided different order, size, or complexity.

completely into two individuals. There may In the case of hemilateral asymmetry

be a similar explanation of the recent dis- which we are now considering, the units

*covery that so-called " identical " twins are among which the segregating or differentiat-

not always completely identical. They may, ing process takes place are the body cells

in fact, represent the right and left sides, which form the two halves of the individual,

so to speak, of one original heterozygous and it occurs at that stage in embryonic

individual. We have also the case of the development at which the bilateral scheme of

child, the offspring of a Chinese father and growth is being laid down.

English mother, in whom one eye was dark Finally, the study of hemilateral asym-

in colour and Mongolian in type while the metry offers a wide field for the collection of

other was light in colour and European in data regarding the influence of previous

type. cross-breeding on individual development,

CONCLUSION

and also on the mode of action of the hereditary influences which control it.

From our study of hemilateral asymmetry It is not wise to allow imagination to out-

in the vertebrate organism, we arrive at the strip present realities unduly, but one won-

-conclusion that the process of " Segrega- ders at times what men and women will be

tion," as it occurs among cells or groups of like in future.

,cells, is essentially one in nature.

Structural and functional asymmetry with

In the case of the so-called Mendelian a corresponding division of labour of a

HEMILATERAL ASYMMETRY

II3

physiological kind has become a marked tion of asymmetry of form and function

feature of the integrating and controlling bear on the practical problem with which

organ, the human brain. We know that eugenists are called upon to deal-the breed-

asymmetry has been and is associated with ing of a better race of citizens, that is, citizens

cross-breeding; and it may be that the inter- endowed with greater capacities of response

breeding between different races and peoples to good environmental influences, both intel-

which is now taking place in an increasing lectual and moral, and of greater power of

degree in many parts of the world, will bring resistance to bad and harmful influences?

about an increased asymmetry in human The answer, surely, is somewhat as follows:

beings, not only of external form and fea- Before we can advance safely along eugenic

ture, but also in the unifying organ, the lines, we must first know something of the

human brain.

laws which control the hereditary transmis-

The extent, however, to which such asym- sion of good and bad qualities from parents

metry can develop must be limited and con- to children and from generation to genera-

trolled by the necessity for integration and tion. Eugenics must rest upon a sound

a unified personality.

genetic basis. It is because I am hopeful

It is in this direction that the study of that the further study of asymmetry in the

individual asymmetry becomes of special individual, like the study of dissimilarity

interest to students of genetic and eugenic among individuals, will lead to further

problems. We have shown, for example, knowledge of genetic problems, that I ven-

that the gene complex, or factor which con- ture to bring forward these examples of

trols the development of the extra digit in hemilateral asymmetry.

fowls, the increased number of tail-feathers Whatever may have been the directional

in pigeons, and asymmetric eye colour in influences within or without the organism

man and animals, is not only transmitted which together determined the bi-lateral

hereditarily, but that under certain condi- plan of development along which the verte-

tions of selective breeding its influence tends brate family, including man, has evolved,

to spread to other characters and other that plan of growth has at any rate pro-

structures.

vided a field for the occurrence of asym-

This fact is of importance as indicating metry as well as an increased capacity for

the extreme complexity of the hereditary making spatial adjustments. For this, and

process, and the mutual interdependence of other reasons, the study of asymmetry, in

the factors concerned in it.

its serial, as well as in its bi-lateral form,

But, it may be asked, how does this ques- deserves careful attention.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 2.

