SEX-RATIOS AND MARRIAGE
Their Relation to Population Growth and Decline By G. H. L.-F. PITT-RIVERS, B.Sc.

Address delivered to the Society on January 23, I929.

I SHOULD like to make it clear to start unexplained. In all the older settled coun-

with that I am going to trespass as little tries of Europe where the population is

as possible into the domain of the bio- dense and increasing there appears to be an

logist, but if the latter cares to come to my excess of adult women over men. Yet in

assistance, I shall be glad. My subject is England and these same countries more

primarily a demographic one, that is to say a boys are born than girls, and since there are

problem concerning the growth of population invariably more male still-births than fe-

in relation to the distribution of the two male, an even greater number. of boys than

sexes within it.

girls must be conceived.

Of course the problem I am going to dis- The proportion of males to females in a

cuss may involve biological questions, as it population is expressed by sex-ratios, and

may also involve eugenic and social ques- apart from the ratio of total males to

tions. females, we usually distinguish the pri-

From time to time a great deal is said mary sex-ratio, which is that obtained at

about the surplus army of women in Eng- fertilization, i.e., the conception ratio, and

land, women for whom there are not enough of this we can form no exact estimate as we

husbands because there happen to be some usually have no complete statistics of the

2,000,000 more adult women than men. masculinity of foetal mortality. The male

Mr. Heape in a paper delivered to the sex-ratio of still-births in European coun-

Royal Society in I908' referred to a leading tries lies between 124 and 142. The second-

article in The Times of a previous date in ary sex-ratio is that obtained at birth or

which the writer, noting that in Germany hatching. And the tertiary sex-ratio is

as in England there are too many single that obtained among adults. The sex-ratio

women because the female population ex- is usually expressed by a single figure de-

ceeds the male, could find no reason to noting the ratio of males to ioo females and

account for the excess of females over males. sometimes by a figure denoting males to

In Germany as in England more male chil- females per hundred of both sexes com-

dren are born year by year than female, yet bined. In England we have a secondary

the population showed a rising excess of or birth sex-ratio of I04 :ioo and an adult

females. In England the excess had risen sex-ratio between the ages of twenty and

steadily since I851. The usual reasons forty of about 8i: ioo. How do we account

given-the greater male mortality, emigra- for the fact that in man the secondary

tion, and the absence of more men than (birth) male ratio is nearly always above a

women from the country at sea or in the ser- ioo and the adult ratio usually below a ioo ?

vices, the writer clearly saw could in no The reason for the high primary ratio is

way account for the increasing dispropor- bound up with the intricate question of sex-

tion. determination and still presents many in-

It was seen that there must be some soluble points, but the difference between

steady not a fluctuating cause. Up to now the excess of males at birth and the excess

that cause, or those causes, have remained of females at maturity is brought about by

I Transactions of the Royal Society, Vol. CC, " Pro-
portions of the Sexes produced bv White and Coloured Peoples in Cuba."

a differential sex mortality. For instance, at the beginning of the twentieth century in such different countries as Australia, Den-

21

22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

mark, England, France, Germany, Hol- SOME EXAMPLES CONSIDERED

land, India, Italy, Japan, Norway, Sweden,
Switzerland, and the United States the male death rate is higher than the female death rate. It is not accidental or due to the fact that men and boys lead more dangerous
lives and get killed in accidents more often than girls and women, for at each age cate-
gory in each chief group of diseases, those
specifically affecting the reproductory and secondary sex organs excepted, females
show a greater resistance and a lower mortality rate than males. Also, although general in those countries for which we have
statistics, there are reasons for supposing that it is not universal.

Let us consider some variations and fluctuations in the sex-ratios of populations. The negro population of the United States of America2 started to increase after the
emancipation. While the rate of increase
became more rapid there was a change in
the sex-ratio. At first we have few reliable statistics. Males exceeded females from I820 to I840; from I840 to I910 and up to
the present females have exceeded males.
In igio there were 4,885,88I males to 4,94I,882 females, which is a sex-ratio of 989 males to i,000 females. In the negro population there is a slight excess of females
under one year of age, a marked excess from

INFERIOR MALE VITALITY

fifteen to twenty-nine years of age, and a

Let us again be reminded of the facts deficiency up to eighty-five with the excep-

with which we are actually familiar. There tion of a few odd years. The proportion of

is in the first place a general tendency, females is greatest during the chief repro-

-widely observed and with very few excep- ductive period. In the enumerated mulatto

tions, in the human race for males to exceed population the sex-ratio tends to be still

females at birth; the actual ratios differ lower; and there is a marked tendency for

somewhat in different races, and also, a the mixed blood group to increase at a faster

point frequently ignored, the ratios may rate. The registered increase of mulatto

fluctuate under changing conditions.

to black from i85o to I910 was from II.2

In the second place in most of the coun- per cent. to 20.9 per cent. This is an in-

tries in which statistics are recorded male adequate indication of the infusion of white

mortality is so much greater than female blood into the negro population.

mortality that by the time maturity is reached there are more women than men.
At this stage all I wish to suggest is that this tendency for the ratio of females to exceed males during maturity and reproduction, whatever are the actual causes, is part
of the laws of population growth. That is to sav, we must assume that certain sex-ratios being more favourable to reproduction than others, surviving and increasing populations will necessarily tend to produce
favourable ratios. If this assumption is
true, we must expect to see reversed conditions amongst populations that are not sur-
viving. In other words, in decreasing populations males appear to show a post-natal survival rate superior to that of females, reversing the more familiar tendency in stable or increasing populations where the male, as Dr. Crew reminds us, exhibits " an

The Indian population of the United States has not increased like the negro population, on the whole it shows more
signs of decreasing. In the same year, 19I0, of the negro census, the Indian males
exceeded the Indian females by- roughly 135,000 to I30,000. The only almost pure-
blooded tribe of United States Indians which shows any substantial tendency to increase are the Navaho, and they alone of the full-blooded tribes show an excess of women
over men during reproductive periods, the ratio being 98.2 males to ioo females. This slight excess of adult women has some reflection in the fact that the Navaho alone
show any appreciable proportion of polygamous marriages, the enumerated 327 polygynous males in a population of 22,000 probably being short of the real number. It

inherently inferior resistance to the stresses of the act of living."

I Negro Population of the United States, 178o-i9iS.
Census Bureau of the IJnited States.

SEX-RATIOS AND MARRIAGE

23

has been remarked by those who know them countries is most nearly reproduced are also

that the Navaho are monogamous when the older and most densely populated

questioned by census officers but poly- colonies, those of Victoria, South Austra-

gamous at other times.

lia, New South Wales, and Tasmania. In

A further point of some eugenic interest lies in the fact that the full-blooded poly-
gynous' marriages among the Indians show a slightly higher fertility rate, the offspring an appreciably higher survival rate, and a lower sterility rate per wife than the full-

the first mentioned of which the females have for some years past, with the excep-
tion of 1913, exceeded the males.' The
same thing, is observable in the United States of America: the old and densely
populated State of Massachusetts shows the

blood monogynous marriages. Thus the lowest or one of the lowest sex-ratios. What

average number of children per mother in is conspicuous and significant is the very

polygynous marriages (I910) was 4.7, and much more rapid rate of increase of females for full-blood monogynous marriages 4.5. than males in regions where the population The survival rates being 75 per cent. for is dense and settled. Thus in Victoria, the offspring of polygynous marriages while the male population increased from against 69 per cent. for the offspring of -330,302 in i86o to 788,626 in 1922, the monogynous marriages. The sterility rate females during the same period increased

for polygynous wives was 6.2 per cent., and from 207,932 to 80I,599.'

for monogynous wives I0.7 per cent.

I might be reminded that in our Colonies THE RATIO AT MATING AGES

and in newly colonized countries generally, Here, I wish to call attention to a point although the population increases rapidly, that has invariably been overlooked. The

there is generally a dearth of women and an proportion of available marriageable women

excess of men. When a new colony is to marriageable men may, practically, be

founded far more men than women immi- greater than the adult sex-ratio suggests,

grate, though as time goes on an increasing if we take into consideration the earlier

though still smaller proportion of women maturity of women and the extent of male

migrate too. In these rapidly increasing postponement of the nuptial age. In com-

countries.it will be found that the sex-ratio munities where the men are polygynous and

of the native-born-that is to say of the off- often marry women half their own age, this

spring of immigrants born in the country- factor may greatly enhance the proportion

consistently tends to produce an excess of of wives to married men, but it will also

women over men which gradually overcomes affect monogamous communities as I shall

the excess of men caused by male immigra- illustrate.

tion. Thus the masculinity of the total In all countries and at all times there has

white Australian population (excess of males been a discrepancy in the marriage age of over females per ioo of both sexes) was men and women. The tendency has always

I6.72 in i86o and I.74 in I922.

been for the men to postpone marriage for a

In this matter of sex distribution the longer period after true nubility or physical

States in which the normal condition of older maturity than the women. In England in

I919 the average age for bridegrooms was

'The technical words used in the text carry mean- 29.8i and for brides 27.I6. But in the ings as follows: Polvgynous=a man mated to more eighteenth, seventeenth, sixteenth cen-

than one woman at a time; monogynous=a man mated to only one woman at a time; polyandrous=a woman mated to more than one man at a time;

turies, and earlier the difference was considerably greater and girls married at a

monandrous=a woman mated to only one man at a time; polvgamv=plural marriage, i.e., either poly-

much earlier age.

gyny or polyandry or a combination of both; monogamy = single marriage. N.B.-the last two terms

I Cf. Commimonwealth Year Book of Australia, No.

popularly used should be avoided so far as possible I4, p. II30 (1920).

as being ambiguous.

I C.Y.B., No. i6, p. 9I0 (1923).

24. THE EUGENICS REVIEW

In patriarchal or gerontocratic' com- 29 against 47,685 females aged 25, an excess

munities and among primitive people the of I,506 females or a masculinity of minus

power of the older men to add to the number i .6o.

of their wives, whether for economic or for

other reasons, will tend to lengthen the aver- IN DECREASING POPULATIONS

age male nuptial age; that is to say, the What happens when the opposite pheno-

exercise of their privileges will result in menon is observable and when the sex-ratio

postponing the age at which the younger of a population increases progressively-

men may expect to obtain wives of their when the surplusage of adult men over adult

own. Since the extension of the polygyny women goes on increasing?

of the older men is necessarily limited by The answer is based on observation, and

the available supply of nubile women, not so far as I know, there are no exceptions.

already absorbed in marriage, they can The population will go on dwindling as the

only take more wives (apart from the few sex-ratio increases.

older women who become widowed) from the I will give an example from the same

generation of girls reaching the marriage country, Australia. We have available but

age, and this will deplete the supply of two censuses of the aboriginal natives, those

wives available for the younger men, thus of I9II and i92i. New South Wales and

postponing their chances of acquiring wives Victoria were the only two States in which

nearer their own age.

the whole full-blood aboriginal population

Even in countries where the variation in (who were living in a civilized or semi-

the male and female nuptial age is least con- civilized condition) were enumerated. Dur-

spicuous the difference between the sex-ratio ing the decade the native populations in the

at the same adult year of life and the nup- two States declined from 2,0I2 to I,5oI, and

tial age sex-ratio is considerable. The sex- from i96 to III respectively; while the mas-

ratio at the respective nuptial ages or what culinity (excess of males over females per

I have called the effective mating sex-ratio I00 of both sexes combined) increased from

provides the best and most convenient indi- 14.5I to I7.I2, and from 5.I0 to II.7I.

cation of the available supply of wives in a There has been little infusion of white blood

population at the beginning of the average in the Australian aboriginal populations,

age at which men marry.

owing principally, it is supposed, to the

I will give an example from a civilized general disinclination of the natives to rear

community in which there is only three to half-caste children. The race is therefore

four years difference in the average ages at fast disappearing where it is brought into

which the sexes marry.

close contact with the white population. A

In Australia in I92I the average age for contrary tendency is now exhibited by the

bridegrooms was approximately 29' years native population of American Samoa,

and of brides 26 years. The census of that which increased from 5,679 in I900 to 8,oS6

year showed 2,762,870 males and 2,672,864 in I920. Here the Polynesian stock is

females, an excess of go,oo6 males. This largely adulterated with white blood, the

represents a masculinity of i.66 (excess actual extent of which it is impossible to

males over females per ioo both sexes). determine, though mixed bloods having one

If we compare the sex-ratio of adults of the white parent, usually a father, constitute

same age, say each sex at the age of 29, we about 3 per cent. of the population. Here

get 46,179 males and 46,949 females, an masculinity has steadily diminished in

excess of 770 females or a masculinity of recent years, and, in I920, females in the

minus o.88. Finally if we compare the sex- 20 to 34 years of age category exceeded the

ratio at the average nuptial age for the males of the same age.

respective sexes, we get 46,I79 males aged What we know of the nineteenth-century

Where leadership and aulthoritv is in the hands of councils of old men.

decline and twentieth-century rise of the Maori population appears to exemplify the

SEX-RATIOS AND MARRIAGE

25

same correlations between masculinity and phenomenon, but was always a characteristic

decrease. In New Zealand there was no of these races. Thus, in the report on the

proper census of the native population Decrease of the Native Population (Fiji,

taken until I906. Previous to that date I896), the Commissioners state: " As it is

only more or less unreliable estimates are certain that the females did not exceed the

obtainable. Governor Grey's estimate in males, and in view of the custom of female

the year I849 gives a population of I20,000. infanticide, more than likely that the males

Subsequent estimates show dwindling were then, as now, in excess, it stands to

figures, until the figures of the Colonial reason that, if polygamy was practised at all

Government, in I896, show a population of generally, a large number of males would

39,854. Since I90I there has been an appa- have had to go without wives altogether."

rent slight but steady increase. From the It can be shown, however, that there is

time that the population started to increase nothing less probable than that a surplusage

-and so far as can be ascertained for a of adult males always existed. Its im-

certain period before that point-the mascu- probability is not shown merely by quoting

linity of the population gradually dimi- contrary authorities in support, though

nished from being approximately 9 (excess these are not wanting. For instance, re-

of male to female per ioo both sexes) in ferring to the New Hebrides, Banks Islands,

I89I to S.8 in I92I. During this period and Tikopia, in particular, and Melanesia

the gradual and cumulative infusion of generally, Rivers quotes Dillon and

white blood into the population was effect- Gaimard, who both stated that women were

ing an increase in the crude (mixed plus formerly more numerous than men, " Dillon

full-blood) population and a diminution in going so far as to estimate the number of

its masculinity. In I89I the population of women as treble that of the men . . . as

half-castes was 4,865, and in I9I6 6,750, but elsewhere the evidence concerning polygamy

these figures give little indication of the indicates a change in the proportion of the

extent of miscegenation nor of the decrease sexes." Indeed numerous instances could

in the proportion of full to mixed-bloods be given of the abandonment of polygyny

having less than one-half white blood. owing to changes in the proportion of the

There are indications, however, that the sexes, and a recent growing deficit of

masculinity of full-bloods in I921 was very women. This fact is even referred to in

much higher (estimated at approximately the Report on the Fijian decrease, where

I4.4) than that of the total population, and " the growing disproportion of the sexes

that the masculinity of the mixed-blood owing to the increasing female mor-

population (approximately 3.9) was lower tality . . ." is cited by correspondents (p.

than that of the total population.

68). The principal indication that the

We observe that, throughout the Melane- deficit of women is a recent phenomenon and

sian and Polynesian regions, where the de- concomitant with a decline in the total popu-

population tenldency is marked, the males lation lies, however, in the fact that where

are largely in excess of the females. A large vital statistics are available, they show that

deficit of females is noticeable in New masculinity is progressive when the decline

Guinea, the Islands of the Bismarck Archi- is progressive, and that when the population

pelago, and among the disappearing Austra- shows a tendency to rise, it accompanies a

lian blacks. This phenomenon is seen tendency for the masculinity of the popula-

among the Maoris, the Fijians, and many tion to diminish.

other Polynesian and Melanesian groups; I must here make a passing reference to

it is, in fact, most conspicuous where the the Toda population where polyandry was

population declines most rapidly. The practised owing to the shortage of women.

significance of this excessive masculinity The Todas were studied by the late Dr.

has generally been ignored by reason of a W. H. R. Rivers. Available records show

widely held belief that it was no recent a diminution of the population from the

26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

earliest censuses until i88i; since about that exclusive of foreign whites and immigrants.

date the population increased again. I can- Between I899 and I906 there was a con-

not go into any details, which would take too tinuous increase in total population equal-

long; it must suffice to note that the increase ling a per cent. increase during the period

in the population of approximately 8 per of I2.96. There has been a decrease in

cent., in ten years accompanies a decrease masculinity, which was highest in I84I.

in the ratio of masculinity by nearly 3 per The sex-ratio was formerly highest amongst

cent. (excess of males over females per ioo whites. The proportion of coloured to white

of both sexes). Professor Punnett, who population has diminished during the past

analysed the data in Rivers' Genealogical half century. The relation of the birth

Records, showed that there was a marked (secondary) sex-ratio to adult sex-ratio is

diminution in the excess of men over contrasted as between coloured and white.

women. The Toda population was divided In the months of highest fertility Heape

into two districts or divisions: in the one found a marked increase in the proportion

Tartharol, for three succeeding generations of females, and an increase of males during

the number of males for every ioo females the months of lowest fertility. This was

was I59, 13I, and 129; while for the other the exhibited by both races, but the coloured

figures were 259, 202, and 17I. The census race showed the highest fertility and the

reports and the genealogical records agree highest percentage of females born. But

in showing a progressive diminution in the when it came to differential sex-mortality

excess of men over women.

there was a remarkable reversal of tendency,

I hope the significance of the facts I have for while amongst the coloured people the

been reviewing is beginning to assume sexes are born in almost equal numbers

shape. I have so far scrupulously avoided there is a net increase of -males; amongst

reference to any theory of causality.

the whites, although a considerable excess

It amounts to this, when a human popula- of males are born, the excess of male deaths

tion thrives and increases it tends to pro- causes the net increase to be in favour of

duce an excess of mature women of repro- females.

ductive capacity over men; when popula-

tions dwindle and die out the men tend to GENERAL CONCLUSIONS

increase over the women. Both these con- Scientific endeavour may be classified

trasted sex-ratios are determined by the according to three stages. Empirical obser-

original birth (secondary) sex-ratios and the vation of actual facts, analysis and diagnosis

subsequent differential sex-mortality. But explaining those facts, and application of the birth sex-ratio is no indication of what scientific knowledge obtained. These stages

the adult sex-ratio is going to be. Both the answer the three questions that in some birth sex-ratio and the differential sex-mor- form or other mefi of all ages have had some tality tend to be constitutional and differ interest in asking. What is happening?

amongst races, although they sometimes Why is it happening? What should we do

vary in one race. The mating sex-ratio to control what is happening or, if we can't tends to follow the adult sex-ratio modified control it, to make the best use of the conse-

to some degree by postponement in, and quences? It is the last need which usually

abstention from, mating.

prompts the first two.

I will give a further example to illustrate racial differences of tendency between racial

I was led to make some inquiries into variations of the sex-ratio of populations

groups in the same country. Mr. Heape during some researches into certain native

studied the proportion of the sexes produced populations of Oceania. No student of

by white and coloured people in Cuba. these populations can fail to be struck by

Between I900 and I906, 58 per cent. (ap- the rapidity of the changes that are taking

proximately) of the total population were native whites, chiefly of Spanish descent,

place. Races that were flourishing a few years ago no longer exist. The survivors

SEX-RATIOS AND MARRIAGE

27

lead lives as different from their ancestors density, for we are grossly over-populated.

of a few generations ago as ours differ from The problem of over-population is well

theirs to-day. Tribes that a short while presented in the recent book of that eminent

ago were healthy, warlike, and numerous, Australian statistician Sir George Knibbs,

are now dispirited, diseased, and weakly. The Shadow of the World's Future. One

Races are mingling their blood and ethnic of the most subtle indices of a change in

distinctions are becoming blurred. Some population tendency is variation in sex-ratio

tribes have (or once had) an abundance of -it is that aspect of the problem I am touch-

women, in others men far outnumber the ing on here. It has been neglected and our

women, while a careful study shows that the data are still very inadequate. What I wish

proportions of the sexes change in the same to call attention to is the variation in the

localities.

adult sex-ratio which must be brought about

What relation do these problems bear to either by a gradual heightening of the birth

one another, and to the two processes of sex-ratio, counteracting the differential sex-

adaptation and elimination which together mortality normally in favour of females, or

spell evolution?

by a reversal of the differential sex-mortality

Briefly stated, races decline and die out as so that males show superior survival.

do all living things when changes in the It is, of course, impossible in a short

environment render them maladapted. For article to go very fully into the greater part

maladaptation to show itself in decline in of the evidence or all the arguments that

population means, of course, that the death have to be dealt with in an intricate sub-

rate gradually overtakes and exceeds the ject, so if my main propositions and con-

birth rate, and the death rate, however cate- clusions appear insufficiently supported, I

gorized, represents the total factors of elimi- can only plead that I have tried to go more

nation. Increase in birth rate or death rate fully into the matter in the book on which

considered apart is no indication of the this paper is based.

stability or adaptability of a population. This is a summary of the main conclu-

The increasing negro population of the sions:

United States have a far higher death rate (25.7 per I,oo0-in I9IO) than the dwindling Red Indian stock (ii). A race shows its adaptability by breeding up to and beyond
its wastage. Human fecundity or possible fertility is potentially so much greater than the highest known death rate. The Pacific populations that are dying out are doing so

i. Disturbances and fluctuations in the sex-ratio of reproductive adults show some correlation with the increase or decline in population, according to whether sex-ratio becomes higher or lower.
2. Progressive surplusage of males is an index of decline.

because unadapted peoples will not breed up 3. A stabilized or increasing population

to their wastage. They are being replaced exhibits a tendency to produce a surplus of

by new mixed populations that are better adult females of reproductive age over adult

adapted. We in England are still increas- males.

ing because our declining birth rate is more 4. There exists a general and universal

than sufficient to exceed our wastage. But tendency (common to all polygynous

there are indications that we are reaching species, including men) for polygynous com-

the peak of the curve; the birth rate is munities to replace polyandrous commu-

likely to go on declining beyond the point at nities, which tend to die out. Since very

which the death rate can no longer decline few (if any) human populations or groups

at a greater rate. That in itself is not an produce an exact equality in the number of

alarming prospect. On the contrary it the sexes at reproductive age, practically all

would be more reassuring if the process groups fall into one category or the other.

could be accelerated before we suffer too The facts show (what is biologically under-

severely from the consequences of over- standable) that the monogamous or monan-

28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

drous woman outbreeds the polyandrous these conditions is bound to be productive

woman-in other words, polyandry hinders of much harm and great hardship. I con-

or is unsuitable to reproduction. In every fess that to maintain that morality is better

community there exists a tendency for the served by imposing monogamy is to me un-

men to become polygynous to the extent intelligible, or at any rate sounds to me like

that the ratio of women to men makes pos- the statement that it is more moral to be

sible; frequently, however, they are polygy- stupid. It may be so; that does not affect

nous even when the ratio is unfavourable, the merits of the question. What I am sug-

but in no community do we find any appre- gesting is that monandry, not monogamy,

ciable proportion of the adult males remain- has survival value, and monandry where

ing permanently celibate. It follows, there- there are surplus women is best maintained

fore, that if the men exceed the women, where the men are to some extent polygy-

the women become polyandrous, and if the nous. I know of no evidence that mono-

women exceed the men, a greater number gamy in the sense of a general monogynous

of the men become polygynous and a greater monandry has ever existed anywhere-not

number of the women remain monogamous or excepting England or Europe.

monandrous. Thus the polygyny not the Among relatively primitive people, and I

monogyny of the men becomes the real alter- think the same applies relatively toi all

native to the polyandry of the women-in people, the polyandrous woman tends to be

other words, polygyny is the only insurance sterile. It may be expressed by the gene-

of the general monogamy of the women. ralization that a woman is less fertile when

5. The progress of miscegenation is corre- she is sexually overworked. Among natives

lated with variations in the balance of the who tolerate a great deal of sexual licence

sexes.

among their unmarried girls, they are almost

6. The influence of miscegenation brings invariably temporarily sterile, without re-

about a change in the adaptability of a stock, sorting to abortion, during their short period

the hybridized stock being more adaptable to of pre-nuptial and polyandrous intrigues.

changed conditions, but less adaptable to the After they are married they have a better

unaltered or constant conditions that suited chance of raising their offspring when the

the more highly specialized stock. Cross- polygynous customs of their people impose

breeding will, therefore, only, promote a strict segregation on pregnant and lactat-

growth in population when a revolution in ing women. I have already mentioned that

living conditions renders the purer stock un- the wives of polygynous Indians were more

adapted to them. Variations in masculinity fertile than the wives of monogynous ones.

as the results of miscegenation are condi- The breakdown of the polygynous customs

tioned by this fact.

of the Fijians, for instance, led to the break-

As to 4, my study was made chiefly down of the taboos imposed upon child-bear-

among primitive peoples, who either were, ing women; over-gestation, short weaning,

or had been to a great extent, poly- and ill-nourishment of babies were the

gynous in their marriages. I have results. The natives called the violation of

no doubt, myself, that where there is their sexual taboos dabe, and not illogically

an excess of adult women among these attributed much of their decadence to this

people polygamy, which absorbs the sur- cause.

plusage of otherwise functionless women, is Among ourselves these problems are

the only form of marriage suitable to them. ignored, but I am not convinced that they

To attempt to impose monogamy under are unimportant.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 1.

