50 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

discusses in detail the movements of popula-
tion in England and Wales since the middle
of the nineteenth century and the developments and present status of population policies in France, Belgium, Italy, Germany and the Scandinavian countries. Whether

for consecutive reading or for reference this is an indispensable work for serious students
of population. In a later issue we shall deal with the bearing of Mr. Glass's data on eugenic policies to-day and in the period of
post-war reconstruction.

THE HEALTH OF WORKING WOMEN*
By M. L. SPRING RICE, M.A.

Ti HERE is no wealth but life. That
country is richest which nourishes the largest number of noble and
happy people." Eugenists do not need to be reminded of the truth of this dictum, which is indeed the guiding principle of their work. But eugenists besides, perhaps before pursuing this exalted activity, are taxpayers, politicians, members of the fighting forces, business or professional people-mere men

minimum, to maintain healthy bodies, with no margin at all for the spirit ? It is not, I believe, exaggerated or sentimental to assert
that a very large proportion of the people of
this country, especially of the women, are
leading existences in which not only happiness and nobility are impossible, but which are composed of so severe a struggle to keep alive, that life itself is a euphemism which hardly applies to them.

or women working and planning to acquire I want to speak to-day about the women

or maintain for themselves and their depend- in this section of the community, and

ants that standard of physical well-being, particularly about their physical health.

culture and leisure to which they are entitled Whether or not physical health is the most

as human beings. They have undoubtedly important of our blessings, biologically it

learnt, what Ruskin appeared sometimes to comes first. The body's demands must be

forget, that these benefits depend to a large satisfied, before we can look for leisure or

extent on the means to buy them; especially culture of the spirit. But good health is not

is this so under modem conditions which just a matter of being alive, or of satisfying

demand many auxiliaries, such as week-end the basic demands of the body. It needs

cottages, private secretaries, cruises, psycho- much more than that. It needs enough of

analysts, etc., to say nothing of the almost certain kinds of food, enough rest, enough

indispensable accessories like motor cars, leisure, enough fresh air, warmth and

telephones and central heating. The Chan- exercise. The people of whom I speak are

cellor of the Exchequer is going to put our alive, because they have been able to meet

capacity for nobility and happiness severely the minimum physical demands. But they

to the test when he deprives us, as he are not healthy because they cannot get

threatens to do, of many of these helpful enough of any of the right sort of com-

props.

modities for good health. It is not in any

What then of those, the vast majority of way their fault, though more might perhaps

the population, who, far from having ever be done with their very slender resources, if

known any luxury, have with difficulty they had the opportunity to learn more, to

acquired the minimum, or less than the buy scientifically and economically, and to

* Substance of a paper read at a meeting of the Eugenics Society on January 25th, I940.

pool a great deal of their labour. But the
more they need good healtlh to do their work

THE HEALTH OF WORKING WOMEN

5I

in life, the less able are they to attain it (or 300 million pounds a year on the cure of illto maintain it, if they have ever had it), and health, with probably another ioo million on consequently the harder and less efficient time lost through irl-health. We can analyse their work becomes, and the more rapid the insurance statistics, and we can count the decline in their health. It is more than a blind and the deformed and so on. Many of icious circle. It is a tragic one for the the great industries have excellent medical individual sufferer, and a terribly dangerous welfare supervisors who really watch the
one for the nation. The health of these good health of their employees as well as people must not be thought of in comfortable treating their ailments. But we can only middle-class terms. Whereas ill-health may make a wild guess at the morbidity of that
be irksome or painful to the comparatively vast section of the community with whom I
well-to-do, they, generally speaking, have am concerned, the mothers who come under no one but themselves to blame for it. They no insurance scheme, who work in no can lead healthy lives, eat the right sort of factory and under no supervision, and whose food, keep warm, have enough air and home conditions are not subject to any
exercise, leisure, rest and recreation. When inspection as a factory is, unless they fall they fall ill they can take immediate steps obviously and dangerously below a certain to get well again. And what is more, their very low level (for which even then there is world does not stand still while they lie often no remedy at all). abed. But the working mother, upon whose Luckily, however, there are occasions when labour the health of her whole family depends, the mother impinges upon the public con-
cannot command any substitute for her science, namely when she is bearing a child. work, and if she gives way half a dozen other The public and the Ministry of Health began people may suffer very seriously indeed. to be seriously alarmed a short time ago at She needs good health to a degree which the the figures of maternal mortality, and a
middle-class woman finds it very difficult to departmental enquiry was held. High morunderstand. It seems to me that the first tality figures imply a widespread morbidity, function of a civilized nation should be the and it was suggested in the Final Report of provision of all the fundamentals of good the Departmental Enquiry on Maternal health for all its citizens, but first and fore- Mortality (published in I932) that there was most for its working-class mothers, whose a very great deal of ill-health amongst labour is the most indispensable in the world. working-class mothers which could not be
Let us, as far as we can, look at the facts. assessed. Moreover, the report stated that
It is true that there is no official measure- while much ill-health was due to insufficient ment of ill-health in this country. Certain care in child-birth and during pregnancy, and statistics help us to form a rough estimate of to lack of post-natal care, probably a great
the state of the nation's health. We have deal dated back much further in the woman's birth and death rates; we know the ages at life, and might be traced to certain diseaseswhich people die, and, generally speaking, such as rickets-in early childhood. the causes, or the immediate causes. We have At this time (I932) I and some colleagues maternal mortality rates, and infant mor- had been running a women's welfare centre tality rates, and we have the opportunity of for eight years. Our function had been observing and counting those people who originally to give scientific birth-control come for treatment to the hospitals or centres advice to poor women who were unable to
for special diseases, whether they do so pay the fees asked by the very few doctors voluntarily or are compelled to notify their who at that time knew anything about this condition. We have regular inspection of branch of medicine. We had found to our certain classes of people, for instance school dismay that well over 50 per cent. of our children (three times in their school life!), patients, coming only for contraceptive advice, army recruits, police-force recruits and so on. needed treatment for post-natal conditions Moreover, we know that we spend about of some sort or another. Moreover, it was

52 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

clear that their general health was extremely What are the causes of this poor health

poor. They were often aneemic, nearly and how can it be treated, or better still

always badly constipated, often rheumatic prevented?

and very seldom indeed in what could The main cause is of course poverty. The

properly be termed good health. We sent woman is simply not able with her income

them at first into hospitals or special clinics, to buy sufficient food and decent housing

but it became clear that we could only deal conditions for a family of more than two or

adequately with the gynecological ailments three children at the outside. And where

by treating the minor ones (i.e. those not there is not enough of these things to go

needing operations) ourselves.

round, she will inevitably do without her

As a result of this experience and of read- share of them. Poverty causes all the

ing the Final Report of the Matemal difficulties under which she labours. The

Mortality Committee, I consulted Mrs. work of a poor house is heavier and more

Hubback and we formed a small representa- difficult than that of a good one. She has

tive committee to investigate the general fewer utensils to clean or cook with, and this

conditions of life and health of married adds to her problems. She is longer hours at

working women. We made dossiers for I,250 work which means less rest and leisure. This

women from all parts of the country, and in its turn means less time to take the pre-

taken seriatim so that there should be no cautions to maintain good health both for

selection of those who were known to have herself and her family.

bad health. The results can only be treated as The average number of pregnancies for

a sample, but I think it is a fair sample, and the I,250 women was 4 6. For the 400 in

that other figures bear out our discoveries. really bad health the average was 5 *6; for

I can only summarize our results. About the 400 in apparently good health, the aver-

one-third of the women appeared to be in age was 3 6. This tells its own story. A

good health; another third were obviously woman in normal health should be able to

in very bad health; and the remaining bear five or six or seven healthy children

third in indifferent health. They received no without any injury to her own health. But

medical examination nor were any medical when the arrival of each child after the

records about them referred to. The investi- second means that everyone in the family

gators were for the most part municipal and has to do with a little less food or good

county Health Visitors. Now it is interesting clothes or warmth, and when in these respects

to compare these figures with those of the the mother is the first sufferer, then a large

Arny Recruiting Board. In I936 from one- family directly impairs her health. Her work

third to one-half of all recruits for the Army grows heavier, and yet with each arrival she

and the Air Force were rejected. Again, is able to get less rest after the birth and must

during the last war medical examination of get back to her daily tasks sooner. She

42 million men revealed approximately the becomes progressively less able to keep her

same proportion of good, bad, and indifferent pace. Only a very few know how to control

health as amongst our group of 1,250 women. the numbers of their children, or to provide

It is pretty clear that the life and functions for proper intervals between their births.

of the average working-class mother impose We are recruiting the next generation from

a far greater strain on health than a young the poorest and weakest class, simply because

army recruit is subject to, and therefore that the large family is frequently the direct

if these I,250 women had been medicaly cause of poverty, and poverty is the direct

examined a far larger proportion would have and fundamental cause of ill-health.

been found in poor health; conditions would A difficulty about treatment is the woman's

have been found the presence of which would heroic, often indeed very foolish indifference

not be suspected by the women themselves, to her own health, and the absence of any

although they might be aware of a general teaching or empirical knowledge which might

feeling of discomfort, pain or debility. have enabled her to form a high standard of

THE HEALTH OF WORKING WOMEN

53

good health. Knowing as she does that upon woman is very important) about their

her ability to keep going depends the well- children and not about themselves. The

being of her family, she will only ask advice Maternity and Child Welfare Centres of this

in the very last resort, i.e. when her condition country are the greatest experiment in

gets to the point of crippling her work. It preventive medicine that we have ever tried,

was clear in our investigation that ailments and it is along these lines that we shall find

of this nature received a far higher per- the most encouraging results in the field of

centage of treatment than those which could women's health. Of course there are other

be overlooked. Women with bad legs, for desperately needed reforms as well; better

instance, or with rheumatism or gynaeco- and more scientific housing, more free meals

logical disorders, sought for advice far more for pregnant and nursing mothers, and

readily than those with anaemia, headaches, allowances for children. These are all

or constipation. Another trouble is that the reforms for which we cannot afford to wait.

remedies for much ill-health are quite But what has happened now? We were

beyond the purse or the resources of the just beginning to think about these matters

average woman. Thus, when told that for seriously, we were becoming " fitness-con-

the treatment of anaemia-the commonest of scious," and then the bottom falls out of this

all the conditions on which advice was brave new world, and we are told that all our

sought-they must eat more nourishing food, plans must wait. All our money and savings

and get more rest and more fresh air, the and energies are to go to one end only, the

patients' comment over and over again was prosecution of the war. The dysgenic effect

"That is quite impossible."

of war is a commonplace; the selection of

Another factor is ignorance. These women, the youngest and strongest for sacrifice is a

like most of us, received practically no health first-class national tragedy, but there is more,

teaching while they were young. Women of to it than that. Not only shall we be left to

the middle classes have at least been brought carry on without these young men, the

up in healthy conditions, and to a certain fathers of the next generation, but our efforts

extent instinctively follow the habits of their to provide decent conditions of life for that

childhood in matters of general health. But next generation are frustrated at the very

even that knowledge is denied to the working- outset. Surely we need such efforts more now

class mother, whose mother before her was than at any other time. This is not the

equally ignorant and had as little oppor- moment to make it more difficult for this

tunity to give herself or her children the generation of mothers, for those whose young

fundamental conditions of a healthy life. and unborn children are to replace the men

What then should be done ? The working- who are killed, to provide for themselves and

class mother cannot be forced to submit their families the essentials of good health.

herself to medical examination more often, For whom do we fight if not for these? I

or to follow a treatment which she cannot can imagine no more evil a confusion of

afford. It is quite clear that the main thought than to see in the problematical

emphasis must be on preventive measures. victim of an air raid a patient more worth

At little or no cost, according to her means, treating than the present victim of tubercu-

all the conditions which are necessary for the losis or an underfed pregnant woman.

maintenance of good health must be made One of the most dangerous and insidious

available for her. Psychologically, this is of effects of war is that the effort needed for its

the greatest importance. The answers given immediate prosecution is allowed to destroy

by our I,250 women showed that whatever what is most worth saving. Homes are being

knowledge they had gained about health was broken up, children are being deprived of

not in the course of consulting their doctor normal educational opportunity, and about

when they were ill, but while visiting the I,500 people a month are being killed on the

welfare centres with their children, and roads as a direct result of our efforts to

talking to a medical woman (that it is a protect ourselves against air raids. It may

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

be the right policy, but at least we should not let those things go which need not go,
and in the preservation of which alone this
sacrifice and slaughter can be justified. If at the end of this struggle we have allowed an increase of the rot and wastage already far
too extensive amongst that section of the
community on whom so much of our hope for the future must depend, we shall have no nation worth trying to save. We must be
ready to make the sacrifices as the Chan-
cellor of the Exchequer and the Prime Minister have told us. But not all for guns. . . .Nor must we ask for sacrifices from those who already have less than enough to live upon. If they are fortunate enough to find themselves with more to spend, let them,
encourage them to spend it in any way which will procure for themselves and their young families a little more of those material
benefits which lie at the very base of a healthy and civilized nation.

The Eugenics Society stands for a type of progressive and constructive thought of which we were never in greater need than during the devastating progress of war. It must cling to its ideals with all the force at its command, and oppose all legislation or orders in council which threaten the quality
and quantity of the life from which we must draw in the future. It must insist on a full measure, a far fuller measure than we have had hitherto, of those protective social services, especially those for women and children, which are the most valuable concrete contribution to the vital wealth of the nation. It must see that no energy, whether of money, thought or work is withdrawn from these fields, for if it is, the victory which we hope to win over the evil forces we are fighting will turn to dust and ashes in our mouths, and our struggle will have been utterly in vain.

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION

"For the promotion of knowledge of the course of legislation in different countries, more pticulardy in the several part. of His Majesty's Do n, and in the United States."

President : The Rt. Hon. S. M. BRUCE, CM., M.C.

Chairman of the Executive Committee The Rt. Hon. Lord MACmILLAN, G.C.V.O.

Honorary Seceties: C E. A. BEDWELI Esq. Professor H. C. GUITERIDGE, KC.

Annual Suhseription

One Guinea

Address: 1 Elm Court, Temple, London, E.C.4

Egenics Review, Vol. XXXU, No. 2.

