THE
EUGENICS REVIEW
THE EUGENIC ASPECTS OF NATIONAL BABY WEEK.
By NORAH MARCH, B.Sc.
THE War has just precipitated, not inaugurated, this national effort for the better preservation of child life; for many years now, urged on by the periodic publication of official and unofficial reports on various matters related to child life and health, a steady development towards this effort has been evident to those who had eyes to see and ears to hear. Time was when child life was of little moment, except to those to whom the child belonged; babies were ignored; a life here, a life there, to flicker out meant nothing to the State as a whole. Then, under the pressure of sentiment, of the humane spirit, of economy, of justice, or of sense of the common good, came, one by one, the pioneers, and, one by one, improvements in the condition of things. During the last fifteen years, specially since the Midwives Act (I902) came into operation, great attention, social and administrative, has been given to the subject of infant welfare.
Official reports, heavy though they be to digest, have their verv great value; they give us hard facts, devoid of adornment, and quite unsoftened. Year by year new reports on national health come out, each making clear some appalling facts, which the Press helps to drive home into the minds of the general public. When we learn that of every i,ooo children born during the four years I9II-1914, I64 died (575,078 of them in

96 EUGENICS REVIEW.
all) before they were five years of age, and I90, 120 of those
died before they reached the end of their first year of life, and that there is reason for thinking that approximately the same number of children died before birth; when we learn that the Chief Medical Officer's estimate of the number of seriously defective children in I914 was 75,I00-34,500 physically defective, 30,800 mentally defective, 5,550 deaf and dumb (including
partially deaf), 4,250 blind (including partially blind); when we
learn also that of the children examined under the school medical service during I914-1915, 13 per cent. suffered from malnutrition, 69 per cent. from dental disease, and 2I per cent. from nose and throat diseases; when, moreover, we look into the causes-direct and contributory-of this mortality and this weakness of health, we realise how far short our national efforts towards the proper nurture of child life have fallen.
During the first year of life after birth, roughly 9 per cent. of deaths are due to infectious diseases (measles, whoopingcough, diphtheria, scarlet fever, and tuberculosis), I8.4 per cent. take place through diarrhoeal diseases (usually due to food poisoning during hot weather), I6.7 per cent. are attributable to the respiratory diseases, bronchitis and pneumonia, I.3 per cent. to meningitis, usually of microbic origin-that is to say, that 45 per cent. (approximately) of infantile deaths are due to these named infections; in fact, including the considerable number of cases of congenital debility which are identified as syphilitic in causation, it is evident that over half of the deaths of infants are due to infectious diseases, and a considerable number of those-theoretically, all-might have been prevented. Of the remaining causes of death during the first year after birth, 34 per cent. are found to be due to congenital causes (prematurity, atrophy, congenital malformations, marasmus, etc.), many of which, had proper ante-natal supervision been given, might have been avoided.
Such is the account for the first year of life. For succeeding years it varies in certain directions, the mortality from measles, for example, increasing to 17.2 per cent. for the year 1-2, and 17 per cent. over the period from 2-5 years of age, pneumonia also being an increased cause of death during the

EUGENIC ASPECTS OF NATIONAL BABY WEEK.

97

second year of life. During the first year, congenital causes

took their heavy toll; in the next four years just 0.5 per cent.

of child deaths are due to those conditions.

We learn also that children die more easily in the great

towns than in the country. Out of every I,ooo children born in

the country, on an average, go die before they are one year old,

but out of every I,ooo children born in the average great town,

122 children die during the first year, while in some localities

many more than this fail to survive-in Middlesbrough, e.g.,

the infant mortality rate for the period under review, in Sir

Arthur Newsholme's report, was I44 per I,ooo births, while

Burnley reached the appalling figure of I72. A similar asso-

ciation of high death-rate with crowded industrial areas is found

to obtain in the succeeding years of childhood. For example,

in London the figures are:

Death-rate per 1,00 per 1,000 per I,oOO births. survivors. survivors.

o-I years. 1-2 years. 3-5 years.

Hampstead ... 74 ... 21.2 ... 20.1

Bermondsey ... I31 47.0 ... 34.8

Lewisham

82...

...

I9.8

Shoreditch ... 148 ... 67.I ... 44.8

Hampstead and Lewisham are healthier, less congested districts

than are Shoreditch and Bermondsey, where some of the worst

London slums are to be found. In the northern county boroughs (large industrial areas), the infantile mortality rate is

almost twice as high as it is in the southern rural districts, and

during the second year the strain on child life is even greater.

Out of every I,ooo children between one and two years of age

in the typical crowded industrial town 54 die during the year,

whereas only I5 die in the southern country districts.1

The illegitimate child has less chance of survival than has

the legitimate child. In St. Helens, to take the figures from the

Medical Officer of Health's Report for I9I5, we see that while

one-eighth of the babies born in wedlock died during infancy, one-sixth of the illegitimate babies died. Dr. Hope' has shown,

in greater detail, how poor is the chance of survival of the ille-

1 Carnegie United Kingdom Trust Repovt on the Physical Welfare of Mothers
and Children (1917).

98 EUGENICS REVIEW.

gitimate baby as compared with the legitimately-born child,

for during the first month of life, 72 out of every I,ooo illegitimate babies die, as compared with a rate of 32 per I,000

legitimate births, this death so shortly after birth being evidence

of prejudicial conditions operating during pre-natal life, con-

genital syphilis, for example, being apparently more frequently

found in illegitimate children than in legitimate ones; a certain investigation,1 admittedly small, yet very suggestive in its

results, showing a prevalence of 27.6 per cent. among the

illegitimate and I4.3 per cent. among the legitimate children.
The preservation of child life, specially during the pre-

natal period and the first post-natal year is very largely wrapped

up in questions concerning maternal health, maternal mortality

in childbearing being very closely related to early infant mor-

tality, as shown by the following figures2 summarising the ob-

servations made in certain hospitals:

Hospital.
(A ...

PER 1,000 INFANTS BORN. Maternal Still-birth
Mortality Rate. rate.

6.7 52...

...

B 46J ... ... 2.9 ..
In-patients I C *.. . 55.7 ... I94

D i6829.2(

...

...

...

Out-patients(E ... ... 4 .. 26

FOut-pat s

...

... 0.41 ... 27

Not only is there a close relation between maternal mortality in

childbirth and early infant mortality,, but the close physiological

dependence of the child upon its mother, both before and after

birth, makes the problems of maternal health and child success

to a great extent inseparable, most of those deaths occurring

during the lirst year, and particularly during the first weeks

and months of that year, being due to some ante-natal condi-

tion impairing the viability of the child; alcoholism and syphilis

in the mother are two specially prejudicial influences over the

child's health during uterine life, while maternal nutrition is also

a very important aspect of ante-natal welfare to consider.

Report of the Royal Commission on Venereal Diseases, Appendix XV.
2 Local Government Board Report on "Maternal Mortality in Relation to Child-
bearing" (C d. 8,505), p. I I I.

EUGENIC ASPECTS OF NATIONAL BABY WEEK.

99

RELLATION between Maternal Death-rate per I,ooo births from Childbearing, Stillbirth-rate, and Death-rate among infants dying in Hospitals or at home during the first few days after birth, in the experience of Hospitals A to F.'
Death-rate per I,OOO Births.

200

1750

125
100
75 _
'X:50 j~~~~~~~~'~
25 -7

Hospital- E F B A 0 C

Stillbirths.

Infant Deaths.

Deaths of Mothers.

Obviously then, as so many deaths of children are due to

preventable causes, not only from the national point of view,

in order to maintain, in the face of decline in the birth-rate, the

natural rate of increase in the population, but from the humani-

tarian point of view, we must make an effort to prevent as far as

possible the mortality, and to minimise the suffering which at

present is inflicted on weakly children and weakly mothers, suf-

fering borne all to no purpose. But such prevention, con-

1 Reproduced from Local Government Board Report (Cd. 8085), " Matemal Mortality in relation to Child-bearing," p. 51.

IOO EUGENICS REVIEW.
cerned as it is with the elimination of so many causative factors, cannot, in the face of things, lie in the hands of one body of persons; it will be the outcome of united, co-ordinated effort, in which the State, the Group, and the Person must each play their
part. The National Baby Week Campaign is to be the result
of a gradual cumulation of preventive effort and enlightened opinion, the initial steps in its promotion being taken by a Provisional Committee consisting of representatives of the following societies: The National Association for the Prevention of Infant Mortality, the Women's Imperial Health Association, the National Society of Day Nurseries, the Association of In-
fant Welfare Centres, the National Institute of Mothercraft, the Eugenics Education Society, and the National Institute for the Blind. Through this Provisional Committee, representatives of national and central societies variously concerned with the welfare of mothers, children, and infants, were invited to form a Council, from which an Executive Committee was appointed to organise a National Baby Week Campaign, the object' of which is to focus municipal, public, and private attention upon the need for more organised effort towards the promotion of maternal and child welfare. Lord Rhondda, President of the L ocal Government Board, in consenting to be chairman, brought with him the cordial support of the Local Government
Board, and other State Departments are lending their itid.
Local conditions and circumstances vary so greatly that it was considered advisable for each locality to organise the campaign in its own district, the Executive Council undertaking
the London area and affiliating the Local Committees. But, beyond making certain recommendations for the guidance of Local Committees in order that a general uniformity of purpose
1 The aims of National Baby Week are thus stated by the Council: The prime
aim of the National Baby Week is to help to save the lives of 50,ooo babies every year and to improve the health of the whole infant community. The immediate objects are as follows: (i) To arouse the sense of racial responsibility in every citizen in order to secure to every child born in the United Kingdom a birthright of mental and bodily health; (2) To explain, assist, and extend the work of the various children's and mothers' welfare societies; (3) To promote the immediate provision of additional cr&ches, visitors, mothers' schools, and maternity centres; (4) To assist in the combating of disease, ignorance, caTelessness, and the evils arising from improper conditions; (5) To raise a large and adequate fund for achieving these aims and objects with the least possible delay.

EUGENIC ASPECTS OF NATIONAL BABY WEEK.

IOr

and scheme may prevail, the Central Committee exercises no jurisdiction or control over the Local Committees. In return for advisorv help, however, Local Committees are asked to contribute, on a certain basis, towards the Central Fund. Part of the campaign is directed towards the collection of funds, the sum of £25,000 being aimed at, and after the expenses of the campaign-which include the installation of a Mothercraft and Child Welfare Exhibition-are defrayed, the surplus funds are to be put to the continuance and extension of infant welfare work, in directions which the results of the campaign will, to
some extent, determine. The National Baby Week Council has converted itself into
a permanent body, so that the work thus initiated will not die
out. Being largely a propaganda effort, every available oppor-
tunity of focussing attention upon the needs of child life and maternal well-being are to be taken in appropriate fashion. Publicity is sought through various channels, by baby shows, pram parades, exhibitions, garden parties, cinema films and so on, through the Press, where articles and stories relating to baby life are appearing, through distribution of leaflets and other literature, through public speaking by trained, well-informed speakers on the various aspects of child-welfare problems, to all manner of audiences-and in many other ways, each locality working out its own scheme and making its own adventures. All municipal authorities have been approached by the Central Committee, with the result that about 400 Local
Committees are participating in this campaign, which is intended to be a reasonable, well-balanced propaganda effort, devoid of superficial sentimentalism which would be merely evanescent in its impression.
A combined attack is ultimately to be directed against many foes to child life, for not only the immediate causes of mortality must be reduced in their incidence, but the contributory causes which are so largely weakening to resistance, and thus conduce, in the end, to death, or to a life which may be impoverished by weakness or deformity, must be ameliorated. Many environmental circumstances unite to pull

102 EUGENICS REVIEW.
down the child's resistance to disease attack, and, unfortunately, they tend, in the main, to combine. Poverty, parental intemperance, poor housing, inefficient mothercraft, defective sanitation, unhygienic food, and so forth, act in conjunction one with another rather than alone; they form a vicious circle, very complex in its balance, of detrimental influence.
We are very prone on superficial judgment to attribute the higher mortality among the children of the poor and uneducated sections of the community to maternal ignorance and neglect. Yet a more thorough examination into causes shows the folly of any such sweeping assertion. The high death-rate of children in the crowded industrial areas is much more the product of the complex environmental factors constituent of such areas, than it is of ignorance and mere shortage of money; otherwise, 'why is the death-rate not equally high in the rural areas, where opportunity for education is even less, and the proportionate wage-earning power also less? We must look further into things.
The industrial pre-occupation of man has necessitated the congestion of many of his fellows into a space limited by its convenient nearness to the industrial pivot. Thus, under pressure of constant influx of workers, any given area becomes overcrowded, and, through lack of municipal foresight, the attendant evils of overcrowding have arisen, narrow streets, lack of sunlight penetration, airlessness, and so on. More than that, again through inadequate provision by the group for the well-being of all its constituent groups, the evils of defective sanitation have crept in. Where, for example, a large house, at one time in the history of the community occupied by a wellto-do merchant and his family, and fitted with conveniences up to date of the period sufficient for the needs of that one family, has come to be occupied by several families, each occupying one or more of the rooms, alterations in the structure and sanitation, laying-on of sufficient water supply, and so on, have been long omitted, with the resultant degeneration of the property, the neighbourhood, and the dwellers therein.
Back-to-back houses constitute another device whereby large numbers of workers can be accommodated in one area,

EUGENIC ASPECTS OF NATIONAL BABY WEEK.

103

and investigations go to show that the death-rate of children, as well as of adults is higher in these dwelling-places than in well-
spaced-out property. Where conditions of life are difficult and unattractive, the
habit of intemperance gains hold, and through intemperance of the parents much suffering is imposed upon child life, and much physiologic impoverishment entailed, especially by maternal intemperance during pregnancy. We do not need to digress upon the chain of evils thus initiated, the existence of which is realised by all eugenists.
Poverty in itself is a relative term; moreover, the cause of poverty is not simple. It may be due to actual low wages, or it may be, as is very characteristically the case in the North Country mining areas, due to mal-administration of domestic finance and to unbalanced expenditure on wasteful pleasures, a state of things largely attributable to our faulty system of education. Or, again, other causes of poverty may be identified, for example, impairment of wage-earning power through parental illness, or wage-earning capacity may be unequal to the demands of a large family, though perhaps it might be sufficient for the support of a small one. Whatever be the causes of poverty, the unfortunate consequences follow-cheap dwelling-places, usually overcrowded and insanitary, poor food obtained and prepared under unhygienic conditions, maternal employment to supplement the family wage-earning, leading to enforced neglect of children-these and many other related environmental conditions all contributing to the spread of infectious diseases, the lowering of physiologic resistance, and the ultimate damage to child life.
The industrial employment of mothers, in so far as it tends to keep mother and child apart, and in so far as the strain of it may impair her maternal physiologic efficiency, especially during pregnancy and lactation, is bound to bear a definite, direct relation to infantile sickness and mortality, but the findings do not otherwise justify any sweeping assertion in so far as the industrial employment of married women is concerned. Cases may be, and are, where the wages earned by the mother contribute to the actual reduction of infantile sickness and death,

104 EUGENICS REVIEW.
for she is thereby enabled to give her children better food, and, under certain circumstances, better care (through the medium of the cr&che) than she would were she to give up that wage. It should be made more profitable for a woman to stay at home and look after her children than to go to work. A system of Child Pensions, which, under the title of " Mothers' Pensions," is so widely adopted in the United States, and which provides for State assistance to parents (in some States, to mothers only, the scheme in certain States including the unmarried mother) might find a valuable function in adaptation here.
Maternal ignorance is not confined to any one class of mothers: the well-to-do mother certainly has more opportunities of receiving education in the art of motherhood than has the poor mother, but she does not always avail herself of them by any means; she also has more help available in the prosecution of her maternal duties than has the poor mother. In all classes of mothers, lies a great need for a more serious preparation in mothercraft, and, on the whole, the poor mother is the readier to avail herself of any educational opportunities. Indeed, it is among the well-to-do mothers that one finds, in one direction, a shirking of maternal duty more prevalent, for a greater number of those mothers refuse to suckle their children than do their poorer neighbours, yet owing to the unfortunate general conditions surrounding the poor mother, her children, if artificially fed, are more liable to suffer from the evils of such a system of feeding.
A vast amount of maternal ignorance obtains in connection with the care of expectant motherhood, imperfect ante-natal hvgiene being one of the great causes of early death, before, during, or shortly after birth, and primarily responsible for much child debility. Malnutrition, for example, may be initiated before birth, as well as post-natally. The poor mother, often in unselfishness, thinks of herself last; if any goes short in the family, it is she. Her very poverty prevents her from providing all that she needs during pregnancy, and cuts her off to a great extent from the chances of perfect care during the birth of her child, to say nothing of enforcing labour, domestic or otherwise, at a period soon after the confinement

EUGENIC ASPECTS OF NATIONAL BABY WEEK.

IOS

is over, long before she is fit to bear the double strain of lactation and work.
These, then-bad housing and sanitation, intemperance, poverty, industrial employment of mothers, ignorance of mothercraft, lack of ante-natal, natal, and post-natal care-are
some of the main contributory causes of child mortality, and any scheme of prevention, to be successful, in addition to attacking the immediate causes of child mortality, must be directed against each and all of these.
Have we any evidence that attack against these various prejudicial conditions will favour healthy survival? Undoubtedly so, and therein we derive our great impetus for further and more united effort. Let us cull a few examples.
The Medical Officer of Health for Newport in his Report for 1915, gives the following interesting figures, illustrating the better survival chance a breast-fed infant has over one artificially fed. During the first six months of life, he found the mortality per i,ooo births to be 84 only, among breast-fed infants, and 142 among those entirely artificially fed. Other medical reports throw similar light upon the improved chance of life given to the child by breast-feeding.
The Newport Health Committee reported at its recent quarterly meeting (May, 19I7) that only one death had occurred among the infants attending their welfare centre during the past quarter, this being equal to a death-rate among infants of 15.8 per i,ooo, as compared with 92.9, the infantile death-rate for the whole town. A fairer comparison, because extending over a longer period, is found in the report of the Infantile Health Committee for I9I6, during which year the death-rate among infants attending the centre was 63.4 per i,ooo births, as contrasted with IIO.9, the rate for the whole town.
The work of children's hospitals not only impresses us with the serious extent of preventable damage to child life, but with the great possibility of mitigating its permanence and its extent. For instance, out of a total of 154 children who were
discharged from the Royal Liverpool Country Hospital for Children during I915 (where open-air treatment is given), 52 were cured, 55 who had been suffering from various forms of

I06 EUGENICS REVIEW.

tubercular infection had the disease arrested, 37 had their diseased condition relieved to the maximum possible extent. One has only to see the children in this hospital, where they live in the open air under well-ordered conditions, to realise how greatly preventive a hygienically-governed environment may
be. One of our greatest steps in the safeguarding of child life
occurred when statutory regulation for midwifery service was made in 1902. Since that time a steady decline in the maternal
mortality rate from puerperal septiczemia has taken place, with,
of course, an associated benefit to infant life. During the years previous to this step, the maternal death-rates from puerperal
septic diseases per i,ooo,ooo females were:-

1900 ... 121 per i,ooo,ooo females.

I901 ... I23

,.

I902 ... ii8

,.

Then a decline sets in:

1903 ... 97 per i,ooo,ooo females.

I904 ... 95

,.

1905 ... 99

,,

Proceeding with fair regularity to: I912 ... 68 per i,ooo,ooo females.

1913 ... 63

,.

1914 ... 75 "

A direct result of improved midwifery service has followed in the better control of ophthalmia neonatorum. Through the hospital treatment of i,io8 infected babies (largely brought to the notice of the authorities through the midwives) in Liverpool from I908 to I915, I,050 had their sight entirely saved, 7 only becoming blind. How great has been the saving in efficiency
there ! These few instances may serve to indicate the nature of evi-
dence in welfare work which provides every encouragement for
its further developments. That being so, how are we to proceed? The various influences are so involved and so interrelated in their effect that to no one group can the task be deputed. The State in its administrative capacity must do still

EUGENIC ASPECTS OF NATIONAL BABY WEEK.

107

more than it has already done (chiefly through the Local
Government Board and the Board of Education) to consider the child as citizen-to-be. Herein lies a great field of activity for the proposed Ministry of Health. Municipalities must be more elastic in availing themselves of the facilities which the State places at their disposal; they must be more vigorous in their processes of domestic, social, and town sanitation.
Competent midwifery service should be at the disposal of every mother, by virtue of her motherhood, and competent guidance (through schools for mothers, health visitors, medical advice, etc.) at her service.. The health visitors' service, though greatly increased during recent years, is as yet far from adequate to the needs, while the midwifery service, though improved, is far from perfect, an improvement in training and in status being greatly urgent. Education should include in its appreciation, the child as potential parent, and such education should be given to boys and to girls as shall tend towards the cultivation of a sense of parental responsibility in each, that thereby they may be urged towards the more perfect performance of their parental duties. Specially in this connection must be recognised the function of the School for Mothers.
Obviously then, there is infinite scope for administrative, educational, and social effort, and much opportunity for the voluntary worker, as well as for the paid official; the best results will come where the two are successfully co-operated.
What may we anticipate as the eugenic value of National Baby Week? Its object is to direct attention to the prime needs of child life, and thus to all aspects of infant welfare, thereby giving impetus to their further progressive development. The needs of all babies and all mothers are thus embraced, without any selection either of type or of class. But the ultimate benefit will tend to gravitate eugenically, though an all-round chance of better survival, through improved nurtural conditions, will be distributed. The most intelligent parents will be those most likely to avail themselves of facilities offered for their help, and the most intelligent-particularly of the mothers-be most likely to put into effective practice the teaching given them.
Thus their children will tend to survive.

I08 EUGENICS REVIEW.
But, in addition to all this, a further eugenic value lies in the cult of parenthood and recognition of the child. So many women of the poor and uneducated classes have lost the sense, if they ever, indeed, possessed it, of their part in the social fabric, that to find that their motherhood itself, is of importance, is a source of great personal uplift to them, as workers in the schools for mothers know. Very many children suffer not only through physical channels, but are warped mentally and morally because their essential impulse to be, is stifled. We have expected of the child too much of an adult standard and too great a submission to the domination of adults. We shall hope that one good result which should follow this cult of the child will be found in the better, more sensible appreciation of the child as a self-developing individual, and a wiser provision for its growth.
Such consideration of child life as is proposed will necessarily involve an approximate standardisation, in itself of eugenic value, of fitness, in which connection direct eugenic teaching will find its important work. The majority of our nation's children are well-born, and, given a fair nurtural opportunity, they would ensure a strong race. To forward this has the National Baby Week Campaign been inaugurated.
All information concerning National Baby Week will be supplied by Miss Alice Elliott, Secretary to the National Baby Week Council, 6, Holles Street, London, W. I.

