TREASURER'S PAGE,No0

AST, quarter cd¢osed by saying: "It civilization and Western population prob
as' therefore become obvious that we lems, a form of caution verging on insanity; _ must make strenuous efforts to increase (2) More especially because our experence in
our ncomlfereni othe or'es " Before this recent yeats having shown that eugenics is a
view is accepted with suffiient conviction to SUDjecI. wblch tend .'to attract legaes, we yield the large Sums I want, I feel that it may assume that the better known and may be necessary to prove, despite the appreciated our work is, the larger in number
apparent financial strength of the Society, and amount will be the legacies we shall
how wholly inadequate are its present re- receive. (Please note the hintl)

INCOME AND EXPENDITURE ACCOUNT FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER
31ST, I935

To Printing and expenses of £ S.d.

, PropagandaREVIEW *............ .. ,,GeneralExpenses..

. 5.7.3 4 4
.1,082 6 9
... 2,7814 0

By Subscriptions .*.0 .. ..521 £1-0S.d.6

,, Donations *.. ...

...

14 10

0

,, Sales andLecture Receipts 227 I6 4

,, Investment Income **. 3,483 8 4

3,834 5 I
Balance, carried down ... 3,3 0 I

4,247 5 2

4,247 5 2

Special Expenditure

... 2,384 I3 9

,, Balance brouht down. Balance, being Excess of
Expenditure over Income, carned to Balance
Sheet ... ... ... 1,971 13

8

£2,384 I3 9

£2,384 '3 9

sources for the work that has to be done. At This quarter I shall analyse the Society's

the rate.of one page per. quarter.my total income and expenditure, the general. struc-

allowance-.this will take time, but I hope ture of which is shown clearly in the table.

that in the interval the Society will not falter Both columns could, of course, be arranged

in its policy of spending, without waste or m.a variety of groups and details, but I

inefficiency,' all that may -be necessary for believe that as shown they clearly illustrate

taking advantage of the urgent opportunities that present themselves. My reasons for

the dhief sources of income and causes
expenditure. The expenditure column

of
is

recommending this course are these: (I) divided into two main parts: (a) General

Because to retain £70,ooo of capital to provide an incoome for an indefinite future when

Budget ; which includes.all items of e pendi-
.ture. unavoidable i. conducting such an

jtuhdegrmeenilst,u.rgine.n.tthew,oprrkesteon-.bsetadtoeneof.i

i,n my
Western

organiz.ation as this Society, and must be regarded as a basic cost of its activities (e.g

D 49

50 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

rent, rates and salaries); (b) Special Budget,
which includes all items not of a defiiitely
continuing annual character, such as those which are concerned with passing or
transitru obiectives which, having been
achieved, no longer require budgetary support.
It may be observed that I have shown
separately the amount expended on propaganda (i.e. lectures, health exhibitions, and so forth) and also the cost of editing, printing and publishing the EUGENICS REVIEW, which is distributed free, quarterly, to
Fellows and Members; both these items are regarded as part of the general expenditure of the Society.
At this point I want particularly to draw
attention to the fact that the REVIEW costs
more to produce than is provided by the
whole subscription and donation income
received from Fellows and Members. I have
often challenged the wisdom of so expensive
an item, but have been told it is all our Members and Fellows get for their subscnrptions if they live outside the London area.
I dispute the whole basis of this argument inasmuch as I am convinced that the supporters of our Society do not look upon their subscriptions and donations as something for which they must " get " something, but that on the contrary the vast majority regard it

as their contrilbution, however small, to.
wards the solutioh of one of the most import. ant problems that face the human race.
It will be observed that whereas the regular income of the Society covers all the, items of
the general. bget ,mwith a margin, that
margin is very quickly exhausted by the items of the special budget; these indeed are the items, and not those of the general budget, that provoke considerable discussion at the
Annual Finance Meetings of the Society.
Almost every member of the Council has a different emphasis on the value of the items of the special budget; but every item has to
be pressed for by a majority of those voting at the Annual Finance Meeting in November
each year before it is included and approved. The Council has been reluctant to refuse
support to any scheme which promises real progress towards the achievement of- the Society's aims and objects, relying, as it feels justified in doing, upon the increasing sup. port which a more widespread understanding of the quality and quantity of the Society's work will produce.
Next quarter I propose to outline briefly the problems which the Council has regarded as sufficiently urgent to justify expenditure of capital, and shall draw attention to those problems which await consideration until such time as funds become available.

THE EUGENICS SOCIETY OFFERS A | LEONARD) DARWIN STUDENTSHIP OF £250
for the year from the Ist October, 1937, renewable for a second year, tenable in any approved Institution in the United Kingdom, for Research on subjects bearing on Eugenics, such as the quantitative study of genetics and evolution, human heredity, vital statistics, fertility, the eugenic eects of econonic conditions and
legislation, etc. Application should be made before 3ISt lay, 1937, to
|THE GENERAL SECRETARY, THE EUGENICS SOCIETY
69 ECCLTON SQUARE, LONDON, S.W.I
from whom further parcuilars may be obtained.

