The True Aristocracy.
Anl Address contributed to the Liternational. Eugenics Congress held in New York in SeptembeA, 1921.
By GEORGE. ADAMfr, C.B.E., M.D., F.R.S., Vice-Chancellor of the University of Liverpool.
..Students of heredity are inevitably eugenists: they are forced by their studies to recognise that men are not equal, are not even born
equal save and possibly this is all that Montesquieu had in his mind-
in t.he eyes of the law: That equal justice with indulgent face
May shine unclouded on the budding race.
They are forced to see that men come into the world endowed with different powers: that these endowments have descended to them from their progenitors, and as regards any power, it may be either from the paternal or the maternal side, in such a way that the different members of one family, from the varying admixture of paternal and miaternal attributes, themselves differ in their powers: that defects tend to be inherited every whit as much as do positive or beneficial attributes: that where any particular defect, or, equally, any beneficial property, is present on both sides the likelihood is that it will show itself in the majoritv of the offspring and then, it may be, in an intensified form: that, therefore, if the race is to be improved, or even to be kept from deteriorating, steps are to be taken to encourage the mating of those with the bette, endowments and to discourage the mating of the defectives. Whether they join the Eugenics Society or no they are eugenists. And-though in so saying I may shock my audience-as eugenists they are, if not themselves aristocrats, believers in an aristocracy. Their desire is that for the good of the race the best shall prevail,,that we shall be led and governed by them.
Now from the earliest times up to the present man-and woman toohas sought after, and, indeed, experimented over rule by the best. Or ever' the tribal or clan system became established and for long generations after, the best woman either actively by her own will, or passive-
ly, by the superiority of his, became in the ordinary course of affairs the possessor, or possession, of the best, most virile man, and if in many parts of the world for a time, for reasons that are reasonably obvious, it seemed better to establish the matriarchate and the child became a member of its mother's and not its father's family, nevertheless everywhere that system died out from its inherent weakness. The woman might nourish and bring up, but could not protect the family. The man must be the huntsman and provide the food and, what is more,

THE TRUE ARISTOCRACY.

175

must be depended upon to defend the familv. And once fromn the family the clan system developed, for purposes of defence' as for aggression and enrichment of the clan, it was essential to choose the most powerful, most resourceful, and most all round man of the tribe as leader. It matters little whether he fought his way to the top, or found himself there through recognition of his prowess and free will appointment by the other men of the tribe. Such was the first aristo-
cracy.
And in those simple days seeing that this best man had a practically unfettered choice, and that the most comely and capable girl of' his generation was his to secure, the probability was that their children likewise would be of superior quality so that they in their turn would make the best leaders. Wherefore, through experience men came first to be prepared for and then to accept an hereditary aristocracy, acknowledging the existence of first families and finding it for the good of the tribe that an Amurath should an Amurath succeed, and Harry,
Harry. Now entertaining as it would be, more particularly here in New
York, to trace the further development of this hereditary aristocracy until it came to include emperors and kings, and a succession of grades of nobility, and reached its fullest elaboration in the feudal period, I am not going to attempt it. All I want to impress upon you is that the elemental idea of an aristocracy is sound and natural, but, granting this, that thus far, however successful we may have been in the practical application of the idea to the establishment of the four footed 'aristocrats' of the turf and trotting ring, and in the breeding of animals possessing superlative speed, or power, or form, or mass of flesh, be they racers or Clydesdales, greyhounds, red Berkshires or Plymouth Rocks, we have, to speak frankly, made rather a mess of it among ourselves, until to many the idea of an hereditary aristocracy of any order is intolerable, an opinion strengthened by the observation that those who most loudly proclaim their aristocratic relationships are most often such as those aristocratic relations least care to acknowledge, the said claimants having family and beyond that nothing of -worth. Wherefore one has come to doubt the worth of family.
And yet so perverse is humanity that those to whom aristocractic regime is most abhorrent, cling in their innermost hearts to their family tree and either pride themselves on the possession of this or that ancestor or upon the mingling of this or that stock into theirs. I may note incidentally that here, in this great republic, genealogy is pursued to an extent unknown elsewhere. While those unfortunates, who, to put it generously, cannot look down their family tree, look up'to the fair tree that is to spring from their loins and see its future growth overtop its neighbours.
In other words, the love of good family, either as something already attained or as something to be attained, is inherent in the human race. We seek higher things. Through all the centuries we have'been eugenists in principle, even if in practice we have made a painful-mess of it. For in practice all these centuries we have mistaken accidentals for fundamentals, have elevated immediate advantages above futu're well-being. With royal and princely families the stamina' and

I176 EUGENICS REVIEW.
capacity of the bride-to-be has been the lesser instead of the prime consideration: the choice of consorts has been limited to a parlous not to say sinister extent, and the political importance of alliances between royal families has too often led to matings that could but result in a deteriorated progeny. And where, as in France, among the people in general, there is a well-established opinion as to the importance of carefully selected matings, there also the quality of the stock has been subordinated in general to the size of the 'dot': more has been thought of the property that will come into the family than of the richness of the blood that will be commingled. The results on the whole have not been any more satisfactory than have been those of the 'Mate as you please' system which obtains in Anglo-Saxon countries.
Now, with the twentieth century, we have awakened to the fact that the principle of 'laissez faire' is as pernicious in the matter of marriage as it is in politics. Our eyes have become unwillingly opened to the fact that with the improved well-being of the people and the very material lessening of the death rate it has come to pass that the multitudinous children of defectives and those who both physically and mentally are of the lower order are forming the bulk of our population, since those who are pre-eminent, intellectually and bodily, marry late and have small families. In other words the social conditions of the present day are such as to favour the preponderance of what are from every point of view the lower classes, the survival of the unfit and the inevitable deterioration of the race.
But here is the difficulty. Among what we regard as the lower classes are included not a few families of good quality, both mental and physical, which through accident, as for example, illegitimacy, or the fortunes of war, or the premature death of the breadwinner, are in poor circumstances, occupying a menial position. Circumstances have been against them. Thus it follows, that from time to time we encounter men sprung from the ranks, who, given the opportunity, come to the front and make their mark in the world of commerce or of intellect. Even when the feudal system was at its height and when caste was most repressive, men of this order could occasionally, although rarely, force their way to the front, eithei through the Church (although then they still more rarely founded families) or through their military prowess as leaders of mercenary troops, or, like the Medici, through the city guilds and the power of the purse. The last, industrial, century. with its broad middle class forming a bridge between the working and the ruling classes has seen this becoming so frequent a phenomenon that it, with the equally obvious but, I think. less frequent examples of the decadence of families that for generations have been held in high repute, have led to what was a widespread conviction, namely, that birth and breed count for little and that fortunate upbringing and envirorment are the more important factors in a man's success. Even to-day this opinion is held by a large number.
Now I am not goino to discuss the still debated problem as to the extent to which environment modifies-the individual and so the family and the rate. I am going to satisfy myself with the well established principle or biological law, that by cautious selective mating, qualities

THE TRUE ARISTOCRACY.

177

of very various orders, in man, equally with other animals and with plants, can be strengthened and intensified. I do not say that they are
capable of indefinite expansion. We have, indeed, no proof that this is so. Rather the evidence indicates that we can, by selection lead up to what I may term optimum development-development best suited to the full and harmnonious working of the various parts of the individuals of any particular species in its particular environment. Developments
in excess of this proper correlation may, it is true, show themselves in -individual members of the species, but, even when mated with others showing a similar excess, the progeny do not exhibit the excess. Let me give an example of what I mean. By careful selection, proper feeding and surroundings, we can gtadually improve the laying properties ,of various breeds of fowls, but thiL only up to a certain point. OccasionE Ily, it is true, we encounter individual pullets of a particular
breed who yield it may be ten or twenty eggs per year above this testablished optimum. But now it is found that if we mate the male and female progeny of such excessive layers, they only produce at most the optimum, most often less than the optimum. It is as though the
exhibition of a particular property, above a certain limit, exhausts the
individual in other directionm and leads to deterioration rather than to
improvement.
I am not suggesting therefore that, the environment remaining
unaltered, man, as man, is by selection capable of indefinite improve-
ment. The most I urge is that to-day so large a proportion of human
;inlividuals is so far below the optimum that there is vast room for im-
-provement: that under modern conditions through the larger families
of the unfit the race is deteriorating and not improving, and that it behoves us to take active measures whereby we may encourage the selective mating of the best and the production of those endowed with
sound and useful qualities. Now the function of societies for the promotion of eugenic-, is, I
hold, to promote this better mating, but, if I may speak bluntly, I am -impres,-ed with the fact that they have begun at the wrong end. Turning over the pages of the volumes of the Eugenics Review what I find in them is, with all due deference to the high-minded ideals of the leaders of the movement, a vast amount of spade work in the establishment of the broad principles of heredity, a profound appreciation of Mendelism, sundry lamentations of latter day prophets, such as the
most witty, albeit most doleful, Dean of St. Paul'., upon the downfall of Jewry, or more accurately, the sure and certain deterioration of humanity: the qualified approbation of sundty destructive procedures such as restriction of criminals and segregation of defectives as adopted by certain states, but with this singularly little constructive policy; or if I may so express it, a ha 'porth of bread to an intolerable deal of
sack. Possibly the leaders in this movement are acting most wisely in
devoting their time to making sure the foundations, and, in the first place, driving home to people the extent and the dangers of national degeneracy. Possibly the fear of degeneracy is in this matter of ,eugenics the beginning of wiser courses. Nevertheless, I cannot but feel that usually in this world with the planning of foundations some

178 7UGENICS REVIEW.'
considered design of the building that is to rise upon those foundations is requisite, and that design is here largely wanting.
As for what I have just termed the destructive procedures, I have strong doubts as to their political value. Some experience of the world has taught me that while a majority of mankind is law-abidinig and will obey commands of the order of "Thou shalt not," there exists a very considerable minority to whom such commands act as a stimulus or incentive to set them at defiance. Grave as are the consequences, prohibition of marriage on account of the existence of venereal disease in one or other of the contracting parties will not put a stop to such marriages; nor will segregation of the feeble-minded prevent those feeble-minded seeking or consenting to illicit conjugation whenever occasion arises. The ordinarv every-day individual, thinking only of matters of moment and careless of the future, will not hesitate to transgress laws which inteifere with his liberty. The only laws interfering with personal liberty that are generallv kept are those the transgression of which is followed by a perbonal penalty, such as that of the judicial murder of those committing murder. Public opinion is not
as yet ripe for the infliction of castration upon those who, for instance,
enter into the married state while knowing that they suffer from venereal disease, richly as they deserve it.
What is more, even granting that bv these and like methods we reduce the number of defectives, thereby we only advance the average quality of the race: we do not activelv increase the number of those of first-class ability. This I am glad to see is being recognized in the United States.*
The need is to promote the propagation of the best in the race. And it is to show how this can be accomplished that now I want particularly to direct your attention.
In the first place I would lay down that encouragement is more effective than punishment: that the 'thou shalt nots' of the decalogue and older dispensation have given place to the blessing of the positive virtues in the new; in the second, that the war has supplied the sQlution.
Making enquiries as to the proportion of rejections from the British Army, to compare with the Canadian figuies, it was my good fortune to be promptly appointed by my late colleague at Montreal, then Minister of National Service, nov British Minister in Washington, on to the scientific committee of the Advisory Council of his Ministrv-and as a member of that Committee it fell to my lot to oversee the analysis of the physical state of the manhood of Great Britain in the last -year of the Great War. That you should understand the significance -of this analysis and of the figures presented to us it is necessary that I enter into certain explanations.
I may remind you that service-in the British Army had at first been voluntarv and then as the situation and needs became more and more grave, first conscription became what I may term persuasive with
* "While the need of cutting off defective and degenerate lines is beoaiing
widely recognised and is being met with legislative enactment, there is as yet little organised effort to direct the evolution of lines among our mediate and superior
classes." W. E. Kay. Journal of Heredity. 11. 1920. 859.

THE TRUE ARISTOCRACY.

179

"combing odt," and then in 1917, became generally compulsory, all able-bodied men between the ages of 18 and 51 being called up. In the middle period, large bodies of men employed in industries of primary importance to the nation had been directed not to join the colours. Their industrial services, indeed, were deemed of such importance that then began that undue augmentation of wages which has been at the root of the present economic trouble in Great Britain.
For generations prior to 1914 men volunteering for military service had, prior to acceptance, to undergo medical examination into their physical fitness. Hitherto this had been conducted by adequately trained officers of the Royf 1 Armv Medical Corps. The war with it6 sudden augmentation of the Army and need for battalion nmedical officers ann ambulance and hospitl1 corps at the front and at the base found the Corps all too small. Every well-trained man belonging to it was needed at the front along with many times the number of surgeons and practitioners enrolled out of private life. Inevitably the younger and more vigorous of these joined the Army and went overseas, leaving behind the older and less vigorous who now were called upon not only to take over the patients and practices of their absent colleagues, but also, without adequate training, to undertake for the Government at different centres throughout the country the routine examination of would-be recruits for the Army. The results were what might be expected. Many were passed for service who were totally unfitted, who subsequently had to be weeded out of the Army at heavy cost to the nation; there were repeated case of wide and inexcusable differences in the findings of suiccessive examiners, damaging criticisms in the public press; and development of a feeling of public insecurity. As a result the Government determined to take from the Royal Army Medical Corps the responsibility of examining recruits, and under the Military Service Act of 1917 it withdrew the matter of 'catego.Lisation' from the A:my, placing it uinder the control of the Minister of National Service, who forthwith proceeded to organise the physical examination of the men called up, placing the task in the capable hands of Dr., later Sir James Galloway, and a small buit carefrully selected Committee.
The country was divided into regions, Commissioners were placed
in charge of each, with Deputy Commissioners and a staff under them. The Deputy Commissioners were brought together and' trained. so as to employ common standards and arrive at a common ag;eement regarding the categorisation of border line and doubtful cases: a clear and admirable code of di:ections was placed in the hands of evety member of the new boards, and, in short, every endeavou1 was made to conduct the physical examination from one end of the countrv to the other under a single standard. Thus, at the end of 1918, it fell to our Committee to direct an analysis into the results obtained from the physical examination of close upon two and a half million men conducted under these
btandardised condition3. Here' it will be out of place to detail the. difficulties encountered
in analysing and, weighing the figures before us. Those are to be found discussed in the Government Blue Book containing the Report of the

180 0EUGENICS REVIEW.
Committee drawn up by Dr. H. W. Kaye as Sec:etary to the Committee .*
Nor again am I going to dwell upon the alarming picture this report disclosed of the widespread physical unfitness of the adult male population of Great Britain.t That is apart from my present object. What is to the point is that for the purposes of arriving at the significance of the figures under review, Professor Arthur Keith, F.R.S., the distinguished anatomist and anthropologist, who was a member of the Committee, pointed out that the established 'categories' of the Army,
A.B.C.D.,4 could be translated into 'Grades' I to IV in the teiLms of
the polygon of frequency. Let me explain. It was found that a thousand Cambridge Uni-
versity students measured for stature, arranged themselves in a significant manner on either side of the mean, or most common height. (The same has been found true of other human measurements). In this particular set of men those measuring more and less than this tailed off inch by inch on either side of this mean with striking symmetry.
There were roughly, within a few digits, as many men of stature 1

Aife 1t" "A 3" 4' J" 6' s5o e You r 6pi 1"4$'A $".,

G97R/DE /V

./.

1

* Report upon the Physical Examination of men of military age by National Service Medical Boards from November 1st, 1917, to October 31st, 1918. London.
February. 1920.
tThose to whom the British Government publications are not easily available
will find an abstract of some of the main findings of the report in the Lancet (London); 1920, I, pp. 557, 726 and 780.
t Category A. Men physically fit for active service at the front. ,, B. Men able to undergo a considerable degree of physical exertion and' with fair hearing and vision, but in consequence of partial disabilities unable to stand severe strain; fit for any form of serviceoverseas savre active service at the front. ,, C. Men who in consequence of physical disabilities could not under--take marching but could -be employed -for the less arduous andL sedentary occupations. D. The rejected, unfit for any form of military service.

IHE TRUE ARISTOCRACYT.

181

inch below this mean as there were men I inch above, and from this mean of 5 foot 9 inches those more or less in height formed classes tailing off in a curiously balanced manner:-On such a "polygon of frequency" as shown in the diagram one can construct a curve of frequency.
Keith pointed out that the mean class (that of 5 foot 9 in.) together with all those above the mean and the class just below the mean, together constitute 70 per cent. of the total, and he assumed that the
combined measurements employed to determine a man 's physical
fitness should follow the same general law. Along these lines he laid down that the active service group should include all average men and those above the average in physical fitness together with those just below the average, and that therefore we should expect in a reasonably healthy sample of the male population:

700 out of each 1000 should be 'A' men, belonging to Grade I.

200 ,,

,,

'B' ,, ,, Grade II.

75 ,,

,,

'C' ,,

,, Grade III.

25 ,,

,,

'D' ,, ,, GradeIV.

As a matter of fact these index figures of Professor Keith showed themselves close to the mark and moot useful for purposes of comparison. Certain mining and agricultural distreicts indeed yielded well abov%e 700 per 1000 Grade I men. Scottish miners between 18 and 21 years of age yielded 80.62 per cent, young adult Scottish ironworkers 86.18 per cent. But while in geneLal mining and agricultural districts yielded the expected 70 per cent. or thereabouts, the great towns afforded conscripts gravely below the standard. I take the 18 year old group as that which should physically be fittest, least affected by the deleterious influences of industrial and commercial or sedentary occupations. Even in this most favourable class, studying the results obtained in different areas, cities like Liverpool and Birmingham yielded 49.5 and 86.0 per cent. Grade I men respectively: they were lower in the big manufacturing towns, for example 1000 youths in Burslem yielded only 270 in place of 700 physically fit for active service, in Dudlev only 219. So seriou,. a statue of affairs was disclosed that it is of the first importance to
the nation to discover whether this is due to progressive deterio1ation of the town-bred and industrial stock, oL whether the effects of unfavourable environment on the growing individual are wholly responsible.
For myself I cannot imagine the stunted and anaemic mill-hands of Lancashire bringing forth offspring which under the most favourable environment could develop into men and women of full stature and all
round physical capacity.
This, however, is away from my immediate point. What is of first importance is that the report of the Ministry of National Service has demonstrated that it is possible to establish a series of tests for the exact and uniforn measurements of physical capacity, and, having these, to grade those who undergo the tests into a succession of clearly defined classes.
For eugenic purposes, however, it will never do to take over the National Service grading. We do not want to clump together the average, those just below and all above the average into one common
group. That was well enough for determinping men capable of becom-

182 EUGENICS REVIEW. ing front line troops. But we need to select the best, not the average. Thus as I suggested three years ago,* just as the army for its purposes recognised thlee categories below the mean, so for our pu:poses we might well establish, as shown in the diagram, three classes above, making in all seven classes.
In this way Class A would contain the very pick of manhood, a select cla.;s of some 2 per cent. of the whole body, men of exceptional all round physical development. Class B, men thoroughly well developed, who might, only in some one respect, ouch as stature, fail to be included in Class A: Class C, good all round men distinctly above the average, while Cl ss D would represent the large group o: ordinary average men, and Classes E, F, and G would correspond with Grades II, III, and IV of the National Service system (Army categories B, C, & D.)
G. 'FE.' D. IC.'B ' A.
This however, is only half the matter. Neither Great Britain or any European nation made any attempt to pick out from the start the men most likely to develop into good officers and non-commissioned officers. For that they depended upon the actual test of army condition,. In other words, not a single European nation applied any test of intellectual capacity. It was left to the United States to apply this eminently rational procedure to the Army she raised fo; overseas service. Scarcely had War been declared by the United States in the SpAing of 1917 than the American Psychological Associationbrought
* "The Physical Census," an address delivered before the Medical Society of London, 25th November, 1918, and printed in the Transactions of that Society, as also in the Canadian Medical Association Journal, September, 1919.

THE TRUE ARISTOCRACY.

188

together its members to consider how they might serve the country in
the emergency. It should be explained that the pioneer work of the late Professor
Alfred Binet of the Sorbonne had made a greater impression in North America than it had in France or Europe in general. In 1905 Binet had shown that it was possible to devise reliable tests of mental capacity applicable for each year of age of the developing child, so that according to the way a child responded to the tests, it might be accurately
graded-e.g. a child of the actual age of 10 years might be shown to have the mental capacity of, it might be, the o.dinary child of 12 years of age, or on the other hand, only that of a child 5 years old. This method had been extensively tested by various American psychologists more particularly for the elimination or segregation from the public schools of those mentally defective. Important advances in the methods of testing and evaluating the tests had been represented by the Goddard revision of the Binet scale, the Yerkes-Bridges Point scale, and the later and fuller Stanford revision of the Binet scale, for which Terman was largely responsible.*
The chief purpose of the psychological assistance originallv offered to the Army Medical Department in the Spring of 1917 was the prompt elimination of recruits whose grade of intelligence was too low for satisfactory service. But when in the autumn in order to test the value of the methods of the Committee, they were applied to enlisted men of all orders in four selected cantonments the results obtained tallied so
closely with the more slowly acquired judgment of the officers in command as to warrant the recommendation "that all company officers, all candidates for officers training camps, and all drafted and enlisted men be required to take the prescribed psychological tests" and in January 1918 the recommendation was acted upon. Every soldier was tested and assigned an intelligence rating on the basis of a systematic examination. Through this system men of superior intelligence were selected from the first for advancement for special posts and paiticular types of military duty, or recommended to enter military training schools. A school for training in military psychology was established, and by Armistice Day, in November 1918, the psychological personnel attached to the Army Medical Department had risen to 120 officers and 350 enlisted men together with some 500 additional clerks engaged in the examining service in thirty-five camps throughout the country. The tests had been applied to 1,726,966 men, of whom 43,000 were officers; 7,800 men had been recommended for immediate discharge on account of mental inferiority: 10,014 had been recommended for labour battalions and other service organisations on account of low grade intelligence. Men qualified to be non-commissioned officers and candidate-officers on the basis of satisfactory intelligence scores were picked out within forty-eight hours of their arrival in camp.t

* There is abundant American literature on the subject, for which consult more especially the "Manual of Mental and Physical Tests," by Whipple, and "The Measurement of Intelligence," by L. M. Terman (Houghton, Mifflin Co.). Boston.
t For further particulars see "Army Mental Tests," compiled and edited by
ClaTence S. Yoakum and Robert M. Yerkes. New York, Henry Holt and Company. 1920.

184 EUGENICS REVIEW.
The new procedure must have proved itself eminently serviceable and practical to have become applied universally to all recruits within six months of its experimental introduction into the Army. As a matter of experience the rating awarded to a man as a result of the tests was found to furnish a fairly reliable index of his ability to learn, to think quickly and accurately, to analyse a situation, to maintain a state of mental alertness, and to comprehend and follow instructions. The score was little influenced by schooling, or, more accurately, it was so influenced,* even though at the same time some of the brightest records were made by men who had not completed the eighth grade of the U.S. public school system.
It is a not uninteresting coincidence that the American scale was worked out in percentages, 100 being taken as the highest available mark, and that here also seven classes were recognised. Namely:
4. (rated 96 per cent. and over). Very superior intelligence-usually earned by from 3 to 5 per cent. of a draft-men of pronounced intellectuality of the high officer type (if endowed also with capacity for leadership and qualities whici admittedly are not revealed by the standard tests.)
B. (80-95 pei cent). Intelligence superior but not exceptional. Obtained bv 8 to 10 per cent. of a draft-men of the officer type and many non-commissioned officers.
C. x High average intelligence, comprising from 15 to 18 per cent. of all soldiers, with a large amount of N.C.O. material. With power of leadership men of this grade are fitted for commissioned rank. (The three C groups include those grading from 40 to 79 pel cent.)
C. Average intelligence, the main mass (25 per cent.) of soldiers. Excellent 'private' type.
C.-= Low average intelligence (about 20 per cent. of material). Men satisfactory for work of - routine nature.
D. (20-39 per cent.) Inferior intelligence (15 per cent. of all soldiers). Fair soldiers but low in rank. Slow in learning with little initiative, rarely attaining higher rank than 'private.'
E. (0-19 per cent.) These along with D. are of very inferior intelligence. D-men were considered fit for service. Some E men were placed in labour battalions but most were rejected. D- and E men were below ten years in mental age.
It deserves emphasis that the tests only indicate intelligence. They do not measure loyalty, bravery, power to command, or those emotional traits that make a man 'carry on.' Nevertheless, next to physical fitness, intelligence is the most important single factor in
military efficiency. Thus, to come to the point, the Gleat War has in one respect been
of service: it has afforded material for testing on a great scale, and demonstrating, the possibility of devising accurate and satisfactory methods of measurement of physical and intellectual capacity. From
* Thus while stating (p. 22) that the rating was little influenced, Yoakum and Yerkes give a table showing that there was a steady increase in intelligence in the students of the successive years at the University of Illinois. 91.4 per cent. of the Freshman class were rated in the two topmost grades, as compared with 92.3 per cent. of the Sophomores, 94.1 of the ' junior' and 95.9 of the final year.

THE TRUE ARIS'OCRACY.

185

henceforth there can by no question as to the practicability of establishing standards of efficiency and quality. Nor is there any reason whv these tests be not applied to women as to men. The method has
been tested and found of proved value. And what I would urge is that here at last we have before us the
obvious line of practical work for Eugenic Societies and the Eugenic movement in general. Encourage the best! Either organise, or make the State organise in every district a trained staff provided with a wellequipped set of rooms for the routine testing of every young person, whether male or female, who has reached the age of eighteen years. I
say eighteen because while intelligence does not, so far as we can see, improve beyond the standard which some are capable of reaching at the age of sixteen, undoubtedlv there are slow developeis whose intellectual capacity, below nornal at this life period, improves after the age of sixteen, while, in general, physical capacity is at its best at the age of eighteen, and from other practical considerations this latter age
is the best for purposes of record. Do not make the tests compulsory. What indeed is the need to
trouble about the average man or woman? We want to pick out the best in the community. And having picked them out, publish their existence in the world. Establish an annual record of all the Al youths and maidens of the year. 'A' standing for the first class in physical fitness, 'I' for the first class in intelligence. Nay, I would say publish the list of all who attain to 'A' and all who attain to 'I' standards. There are positions in which physical fitness is sought after, irrespective of rnental capacitv, and vice versa. Like considerations might favour the publication also of all the 'B' and the '2' classes, for
both are well above the average. Think of the effect of such a publication. Think of the start in
the world it would give to a man or a woman to be able to refer to his or her record as belonging to the Al class; think of the status it would
give hinm or her for the vears to come, of the preferential treatment that would be afforded when applying for posts. Consider the preference
the Al man or woman would have in nmarriage, how parents before giving their consent would require that he who sought their daughter's hand should produce his Euigenic Society ceitificate and show whe-e he stood in phvsical and mental capacity; of the advantage the Al man would have in seeking the hand of a desirable damsel. Think how in years to come these annual publications would establish the good strains, the desirable families with which to become associated, how in short they would become the human stud book.
But, it may be objected, the man who at eighteen is rated as Al might from a variety of causes-tuberculosis for example, or grave accident such as fracture of the skull, or acute infectious disease, or venereal disease, or overwork, mental or bodily, fail to mantain his rating: the fact that in youth he was Al is no assurance that by thirty he is not an undesirable. Quite so. But this is by no means an insuperable objection-once the published record appeared, the first class man would come to ask to have his rating renewed so long as he continued to be first class, say everv five years, at 23, 28 and 83 years, and if he could not produce certificates of continued efficiency this would

186 EUGENICS REWVIEW. tell against him, unless he could give a satisfactory explanation of the cause of his reduction in rank.
Now the indications are that there is a natural-or under present methods of life, an expected reduction in physical efficiency after twenty five years of age* and of mental alertness after thirty-five or so. These would have to be taken into account.t So fai. we do not possess data sufficient to establish what may be terrned the normal curves of physical and mental efficiency for successive age periods after eighteen. The accumulated statistics of Al men and women would supplv material for the establishment of a table of what may be termed age-efficiency, mental and physical, for successive years of age from fifteen to fifty.
Here would be the ideal Debrett-here the establishment a of veritable aristocracy of the country, personal and hereditary. I ask you to think it over. The scheme is not impossible. It only needs to be started to show its usefulness. Nay, moie, it would be selfsupporting. Men and women of good quality would gladly pay a moderate fee to cover the cost of the examinations, and for the cost of announcement and publication of their superior merits. Compare the cost of encouragement thus of the best to that of hunting out and suppressing the unwilling worst. Again I say, it only needs to be taken up seriously and started to demonstrate its value and desirability. Here at long last we aid and encourage the improvement of the national stock, the advancement of the quality and well being of the nation through the establishment by scientific and democratic means, irrespective of wealth and influence, of the real aristocracy of the nation.
* See Adami, loc. cit. t A beginning has been made. The Bulletin of the National Research Council on the 'Intellectual and Educational status of the Medical Profession in the United States Army' by M. V. Cobb and R. M. Yerkes (Washington, February, 1921) shows (p. 483) that there is no significant decrease in intelligence rating (of officers) rating from 20 to 26 years, but thereafter to the age of 60 there is a marked decrease. The relations of intelligence to age of 95,742 medical officers examined at Camp Greenleaf gave:
Age of 25 (303 cases) . . 277
30 (334 cases) .. 258 34-35 (257 cases) .. 262
40-40 (305 cases) . . 255
44-45 (241 cases) . . 235
50-51 (131 cases) . . 223 54-55 ( 63 cases) . . 212 These figures indicate a slow descent from 25 to 85 and after that a more rapid
one.

