WHAT NATIONS AND CLASSES WILL-
PREVAIL ?
GALTON LECTURE, FEBRUARY 17TH, I9I9.
By DEAN INGE.
IN the heyday of British imperialism, towards the end of the last century, when we were all blind to the Gernan petril, Dilke prophesied that " tthe world's future belongs to the Anglo-Saxon, the Russian and the Chinese races., The Germans were then working out their own theory of the' world's future, in which none of these three nations counted for much.
Their belief is that they belong to the nobl.e Aryan race, which, they maintain, dies out in a southern, climate. There is some tru!th l.n th,s contentioan; but northern Europeatns have proved that they can thrive, when they live on the land, in any but a tropical climaite. The Jews and Chinese, who have survived in Ghe,ttos and pestiferous towns, can live anywhere.
T,he fact is that the prevailence of a people is determined not byracial characteristics, but by economic circumstances. " R,ace " and "nnati-onality " are catchword.s for which men will fight as they fought for what they called religion four hundred years a-go. But there are no pure races in Europe, aad political anthropology is not a genuine science..
Population increases when (I) more food is produced in the countxry, (2) goods are manufactured whikch can be exchanged foT foreign food, (3) the stanaid.ard of livinig is reduced. The, war has prevented twelve million' biirths and effected eight million dea,ths, but the losses, may soon be made good. Limitation of births only brings down the death-rate, and emigration. does not reduce the home populatio'n by a siingle unit. Emigration, therefo.re, is the true means of spreading the English race and language, for which theTe is ampie scope in. Canada, temperate Australia and New Zealand.
Devices for stimulating populaition, such as endowment of parenthood, savinng babies and housi-ng refonm, merely tend to tax the good stocks ouit of exis-tence for the benefit of-the bad. As a rule, the higher the
stage of civilisation at 1which both 'nations and individuals have arrived
the fewer are both the births and rhe deaths which take place in their midist. Thus, a superior race in a conquered coun,try is' generally doomed. Nothing fails like success, and the ruling people rule th,emselves out.
Likewise the upper ainid mid,dle classes of to-day, in England, wil.l prdbably disiappear in favour oif the aristocracy of labour of which we are now witnessing the creation. They, in tiheir turn, will become exclusive :a,nd conservative, and will exploilt the public for their own profit. Further, it is likely that when they have c:onsumed th,e surplus
wealth of the community they will repudilate the burden of mnaintaining the proletaTriat.

EUGENICS REVIEW.
This privileged class Nvill be unable to competewiith races who have a lower sitanda:rd of living, and who wilHl therefore undersell them in the world markets. Then, they will restriict their numbers, anid will reverse
the 'capitalistic process of crowditng huge populations in.toi the towns which bega,n wit,h the " iin-dustrial revolution " of 176o and the succeeding years, and wa;s initiated by the plun,der of Bengal. The trade unionist, perhapis, will be allowed ito plaice only one son. in his union, and accordingly will take care to have no more; and the womain industrialist will further reduce the birth-raite by working more and more in factories.
Thus there will be a progressive decrease in every claiss, anrd gradu,ally we may return to the quiet, maiinly rural England of 1750, in which. ithe growth of porpulation was very slow. From the eugenic stan&d'
lpoint thiis consummation will not be a misfortune. The En,glishman is
not naturally a town-dweller or a mo,ney-gru.bber, but a countryman and an idealist. The quintessential Englisbhnan is a' Raleigh, Drake, Shakespeare, Milton or Wordsworth. London may one, day be the spiritual centre of the world, when the labour parties, by destroying .capital, have dissipated her wealth, committed suicide, :and made etr dense populations a thing of the past.
Reactions may be set up which will prevent the fulfilment of these p'redictioins. What i's important is that we should -see the direction i'n which we are moving. It amnay even pay some of us to learn to thinkthere is so little competition.
Sir Auckland Ged-des, in proposing a vote oif thanks -to Dean Inge, said :-I came here in the spilit of a studenit, in the spirit of one who was to learn, and I have learned a,great deal. There were many true wordis which fell from. the lecturer's lips. Those that stiuck me as quite the truest were "All government is ba.d." (Laughter.) At -all evenits, I can ,assure you at present government is very bad. I knoiw ithalt perhaps as well as ainybody else, a,nd we are, as a matter of fact, at the present mr.omernnt grappling with ta series of problems the solution of every oine of which depeend's upon the correct interpretation of the future of the En,glish raice. With regard to the lecturer's conviction as to the future of the English frace, if the inhabitants of these island,s iare cut down from 40 mil'li' to some 5 millibn I do not know t-hat that would make a popula!r elec.tion, cry. (Lalugh-ter.) But even if we did get a Parliament elected with that cry, with thait policy, the process of 'the execution. Oif 40 mill,ions is 'n unpleasant one, and so, although I am re.sponsible for puitting in the Government ideas as regard's reconstruction, I am afraid I cannot uirge upon! them the main thesi,s of ouT lecturer this evening. (Laughter.) I have no doubt that if we did cut the popullation down to 5 illions things woiuld -be much easier-'but are we quite sure th'alt this islian,d i's' overpopulated ? We have only to ,go 6o minles from where we a-re now to' meet peciple who have never seen a railwaty 'train, to 'meet people whb have me.reliy "beaird " of London, -to meet people who have never sen any selfprropelled vehicle. En-gland is undeveloped, unicolonised. England i;s a land of iinfinite wealth, lying ready to the ihbandgs ifthse who. will

WHAT NATIONS AND CLASSES WILL PREVAIL?

I9

develop the resources of this country which were left lying idle at the time when the industrial- revolution started'. There are parts of thie
cou-ntry -which have never moved from that time tO this. There is little
dioubt-zhetre is norne-that within ithe 'boundaries of Englaind-I do, not
say Britain lest I should offend the isubtile senses olf our lectureir-food
can be grown to support the 40 odd millions of inhabiltants. I't is Mnot that
the populaIion of Englanid is tWo great; 'in my opinion, iit ils that the population of England is wrongly employed. We have set ourselveis to mianufaicture goods for exporrt .and lefit others to grow foad upon which
we livei. It i's quite poisisible ifor us to treverse ithiat process and to set
-ourseilves now to grow food upon whildh we should live, whi'l-e tihe suriplus
population oveir those -engaged in growzing 'food-iAn, the healthy occupiation
of growing food-might well be engaged in manufacturing for exporits to those iprofitable lands in whdch Europeans cannot live and in which raw
mateiri'ails grow which we w-ant iand neeid fotr the full development of our civiLisatiion. And so I would, lif I mighlt, urge upon .oiur lectuirer to think
.perhiaps oonce again over whait I understand to be his main thesis, namely, that this increase of population was possibly encouraged by ithe iindustrial revolution, buit to adtmit the possibility is one thiing, though even t,o p,rove it in one instaince would not establish it as a law
without exception; for not invariably doeos the needle of a compass
point -to the, Pole. No one, not a sou,l, whoi knows the facts will diis-
agiree with him when he .says that teree is martification in the ooidy of the State aAt 'the piresent miornen. Tihere is a very serious mortificatibn and thhatt mortification cannot, believe me, be cured by anything but by the growth of the great emottio which i!s sitirring the people of this country, which is stinrring the people of 'the wthole world, at this time, the emotin of human betterment. We have passed through a
peariod which has lasted a century vin whioh self-dependence was a. watchword, and' we are passing rapildly into- a period of t-hought in which *comonun,ity over aill iis t'he moto. Thtait is the changing spiri-t Which is
-making the great differencie in this land at the present time. Always, when you look baick in history, you will find ithat imn times when this great in;fluence spread and swept through humanity there would be
revolution, it may be bl6odished. Gvreat movements of -the sppirilt -do oeffect
in the truest sense revolutio,n, ibut we are at present in the throes of a revolution whiich hias now been going on for ten years and has chainged
the whole outlook. Ideals are changilng, not ionly the ideals oif the
woTrking class, but the idetalls of ithe o0her claisses. I have been more !struk during -the last few weeks 'than by anything telse in the couorse of my life to find' miany great ermployers of 'labour, whom one perhaps foolishly iregarded as absolutely immersed ilnbmoney-making, coming to me or writinig to' me and indicating how they are affected by this new spirit of which I have spoken. I do not thi.ink that you cain faiirly speak
or think of the future -of the English race withoult thinking that this
great spiritual movement, the ,emotion of human betterneinit, sweepinga ithrough ithe land just now-because in ipolitics, in the affairs with whiich GCdvenmments have to deal, it i's not accura-te knowledge thatt matters,

20 EUGENICS REVIEW.
it is emotion, and thi-s great emtwion momiang now, as no emotion has
moved in oux or oux fathers' times, is goiing to achieve moxe, I believe,
foir the Emnglsh race within the 'next generation than anythiing we have ever read of. So I -am no pessimnist. (Cheers.) There aire years of
difficulty ahead of us for readjustment, and we know that in our own
lives the future is full of uncertainty. I would not have the lecturer or
you believe that I have not enjoyed an.d profited by the lecture. I have lea,rned a greaat deal this evening firom it.
Siir Bernaxd Mallet, Registrar-General, in seconding the vote of thanks, said :-I a.m afraid the Dean takes a malicious pleagsure in living
up to his repustation, but I generally f-eel that I aqgTee with him more
than I wanit to. At any rate, he thinks for himself and is never afraiid to say exactly -what he thinks, and he is one who ha's the gift of expressi.nig his views and his conclusuions with absolute clearness, and in simple, vigorous and terse language. He ha-s taught me a great deal abo-ut the use of the figures for which I am officially respoinsible. (Laughter.) I thiink there are one or two points I would like to say a word or two upon, but I think perhaps I had better not. I am not able t-o look upon theloss of population with qui.te the same equanimi,ty as our distinguished lecturer. At any rate, we ca-n say this, thaat our .populati,on in 1914 was. sufficient to withstand the threat of German domination.

