THE HORMONES
And Their Control of the Reproductive System

By B. P. WIESNER, Ph.D., F.R.S.E.
The substance of a lecture to the' Society, February 26th, 1930: From the Animal Breeding Research Department, Edinburgh University.

H ORMONES controlling reproduc- as the prediction and discovery of Neptune.

tion can be defined in a wide and For instance, the accessory genital glands,

in a narrow sense. Obviously, every the secretion of which forms the bulk of

hormone which affects the constitution the ejaculated semen, degenerate and

and the general functions eventually affects atrophy after castration within a short

reproduction. For example, thyroxin de- time. Injection of testicular hormone leads

creases the viability of rats in high to a regeneration of these glands, which

temperatures; and hyperthyroid individuals recover their functional activity. The comb

will be less fertile than normal animals of the castrated cock also recovers its

in a habitat of high temperature. These normal size and appearance after in-

general effects of many hormones neces- jections of this testicular hormone. All

sitate a restriction of the discussion to those these effects may seem not so very impor-

which specifically influence reproduction. tant in themselves, but they are to be re-

Even so, a short review cannot do more garded as indications of the activity of the

than just outline some of the problems and hormone; and they are important since

results of recent research.

normal comb growth and normal function

The case of the male hormones is com- of the genital glands are usually associated

paratively simple, but perhaps only because with the other and more important actions

we as yet know little about them. It had of the testicular hormone-such as the in-

been known since pre-historic times that duction of the sex instinct, male develop-

removal of the testicle before puberty pre- ment of the body, etc.

vented the full development of maleness. Apart from its effect on the growth of

Then Berthold showed that the implanta- the prostate and seminal vesicles, the

tion of a testicle in a capon prevented the testicular hormone is necessary for the

atrophy of the comb which usually results normal function of the epididymis-an

from castration; and it is to him that organ attached to the testicle and important

we owe the conception of the endocrine as a storehouse of spermatozoa. The

function of the testicle-i.e. the idea that spermatozoa present in the epididymis lose

the testicle exerts its effects upon the their motility very soon after the testicles

development of the sexual characters have been removed even if the epididymis

through a substance secreted into the has been carefullv spared. But animals

bloodstream.

will remain fecund after such an operation

A long series of researches by many if they are injected with the testicular

workers has since carried us much farther. hormone. Apparently the epididymis gains

The testicular hormone has been extracted and retains its ability to provide the neces-

from the testicles of various animals, and sary conditions for spermatozoa only as long

has actually been shown to produce many as it is supplied with this hormone. The

of those phenomena which were ascribed to retention of fecundity under its influence

its action when it was only an abstract will render a castrated male fertile as

hvpothesis-a feat probably as wonderful long as the store of spermatozoa lasts.

r9

20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Obviously the motility of the spermatozoa mone also determines the structural or-

is indirectly determined by, among other ganization of the gonad, so that the male

factors, the quantity of the supply of gonad is dependent in its development on

hormone. This must be of some importance the action of its own hormone! This may

in relation to the reproductive power of a at first sound rather absurd, since it is

male, particularly in double or manifold difficult to understand how the male gonad

matings, relative fertility being influenced can develop if it needs its own products to

not only by the genetic constitution of the do so. But one must not forget that the

spermatozoa determining motility, but also testicle is a composite gland, consisting of

by the endocrine conditions of the male, the tubuli, wherein the spermatozoa are

which are influenced by many and various produced, and the interstitial tissue, where

environmental factors.

the hormone is elaborated. The formation

of hormone-producing cells precedes and

THE INFLUENCE UPON SEX

conditions the development of the spermatogenic elements, which produce the

The action of the male sex hormone offers spermatozoa and are thus directly respon-

many more points of interest, quite apart sible for reproduction. It still remains to

from its influence upon the constitution of be discovered in what degree the produc-

the body, which is very considerable; for tion of the hormone in the later phases of

there is good ground for the assumption life is necessary for, and of influence upon,

that the development of the male form is the production of spermatozoa.

largely, if not exclusively, dependent on The production of the male hormone in-

the timely action of the testicular hormone. fluences reproductive processes in many

It also seems that this hormone even has other ways as well. The complicated re-

an influence upon the formation of the flexes which lead to erection and eventually

testicle itself.

ejaculation also depend on the previous

As is generally known, in the very early secretion of testicular hormone. But even

stages of fcetal development, male and with all its many influences upon sexuality

female embryos are completely alike, each and reproduction, the hormonic system in

possessing the rudiments of the genital the male appears, at least at present, to be

organs of both sexes. Sex development much simpler than in the female. Here

(or rather differentiation) consists normally not one sex hormone, but at least two are

in the atrophy of one set and the develop- involved; and in considering them a some-

ment of the other. In cattle it sometimes what wider biological survey is necessary.

happens that blood-vessels of hetero-

sexual twins, male and female, fuse at an early stage. In these cases the female is

THE HORMONES OF THE FEMALE

transformed, more or less completely, into In the males of all vertebrates the

a male or an animal. resembling a male in ejaculation of semen represents sexual as

its genital organs. The transformation of well as reproductive activity. In many

these so-called ' freemartins ' is not re- fishes the parallel function in the female,

stricted to the accessorv sex characters, but the extrusion of the eggs, is equivalent to

includes also the gonad, which instead of the ejaculation of semen: it represents

becoming an ovary (as it does in undisturbed both the reproductive and the sexual act

female development) develops into an organ of the female. In the higher vertebrates

resembling a testicle in structure. This conditions are much more involved. First

transformation of the female twin into a of all, the sex act in the female no longer

' freemartin ' is due to the action of the consists in an extrusion of its own gametes,

male twin's testicular hormone, which is but in the reception of the gametes of the

carried across in the joint blood circulation. opposite sex or in the processes accompany-

Thus it appears that the testicular hor- ing this reception. The actual reproductive

THE HORMONES OF REPRODUCTION

function in the female of the higher verte- realized that this ' sex cycle ' is divided

brates starts with the liberation of the into two phases: the phase of the changes

ovum, preceded by sexual activity and connected with insemination and fertiliza-

followed by more intensive reproductive tion to which mating is restricted-the

activity-particularly in mammals. This sexual or oestrous phase-and the second

separation of sexual and reproductive phase of changes connected with the creation

functions is very clearly expressed in the and maintenance of the conditions of preg-

behaviour of the genital organs in the nancy-the reproductive phase.

great majority of mammals. Not only are

there stages of relative rest, when the genital organs do not function at all-this

INDUCING PSEUDO-PREGNANCY

inactivity sometimes lasting the greater The changes in both phases, whether of

part of the year-but the functional stages behaviour ('heat') or anatomical and physio-

are clearly divided into a " sexual " and a logical, are incited by hormones liberated

" reproductive " phase. During the sexual bv the ovary. There are at least two such

phase, before ovulation, an enlargement hormones and they are, in mouse and rat,

occurs in the vagina which during the liberated in succession. During the first

periods of relative rest is too small to phase of ovarian secretion, which precedes

admit the penis. The uterus, which ovulation, cestrin is produced. It is a

is of small diameter during the phase hormone which has now been prepared in

of sexual rest, undergoes parallel changes- a highly purified state; and some even

in the rat, for instance, it is filled with et believe they have produced it in crystalline

fluid which permits the approach of the form free of any impurities. Its injection

spermatozoa to the fallopian tubes and thus into ovariotomized mice, in which no sex

to the egg. All these complicated changes cycle occurs in the absence of any ovarian

are co-ordinated with ovulation, which hormone, causes the complete series of the

occurs during their progress; after it has cestrous changes. The animals mate under

occurred they are neutralized; the fluid its influence and also display the anatomical

from the uterus (again taking the rat as conditions of cestrus. During the second

an example) is ejected, the uterus collapses, phase of ovarian secretion which follows

the special epithelium formed in the uterus ovulation there is produced another ovarian

and particularly in the vagina is destroyed hormone, kythin or progestin, which is

or thrown off, and the tissues relapse into responsible for the changes in the uterus

a more undifferentiated state.

permissive of pregnancy development. The

Thus a starting point for a fresh and actions of this hormone are best de-

different activitv is reached and made use monstrated in rats and mice. If one injects

of. For now begin the changes in the kythin and then imitates the stimulus

uterus which permit the nidation and de- exerted by the egg upon the uterine mucosa

velopment of the egg, conditions being by irritating it mechanically, the so-called

created which are entirely different from 'deciduomata' are formed, representing

those accompanying fertilization and in- the maternal part of the placenta. But

semination. These pregnancy changes per. deciduomata are never formed after injec-

sist and develop until the special structures tions of cestrint. Kythin not only prepares

(decidual elements, etc.) formed during the uterus for the duties it has to perform

their progress are eliminated in the act of during pregnancy, but is also necessary

birth or immediately thereafter, when a for the maintenance of pregnancy. Re-

neutral stage again is reached and the moval of the ovaries-the source of kythin-

initial conditions of rest are restored.

leads to abortion; but injections of kythin

Thus the changes in the genital organs prevents the interruption of pregnancy.

form a complete cycle, leading back to the These experiments demonstrate most

point whence thev started. It will be clearly the influence and role of kythin,

22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

which is the pregnancy hormone and thus rence depends on accessory factors, such as

the reproduction hormone par excellence. mating).

There is good reason to assume that it is While this independence of the kythin

also responsible for the post-partum activi- secretion relieves the germ-plasm of any

ties connected with reproduction, such as somatic duties (a situation analogous to

the display of maternal reflexes and lacta- that in the male, where also the germ-cells

tion. Its supply to the uterus in sufficient are not involved in the production of a

quantities is necessary for the normal de- somatically active hormone), the organism

velopment of the embryo, which depends on pays a heavy price for this relief; for the

the functions of the uterine wall or their secretion of kythin in the absence of ferti-

derivatives for its nutrition.

lization leads to the occurrence of a stage

While the fundamental role of kythin is of pseudo-pregnancy. For some time after

now established, there is still very little ovulation the uterus undergoes all thoseq

known of the actual mechanism of its changes which are characteristic of, and

action. But still, its biological role as the necessary for, the early stages of preg-

hormone which creates the conditions of nancy; and in some mammals, such

reproductive activity in the full sense of as the bitch of certain marsupialia,

the words is established.

the ovary does not realize, as it were,

that its efforts are in vain before the

'RELIEVING' THE GERM-PLASM

normal term of pregnancy has actually passed. These empty pregnancies are, of

It is perhaps worth while also to mention course, so many ' unnecessary ' strains.

two points in which kythin bears upon But while the actual duration of pseudo-

general questions. In one sense it acts as pregnancy varies very considerably, and

a ' reliever ' of the germ-plasm. If one the intensity of its phenomena differs very

had to construct an animal in which in- much, its occurrence is a universal

ternal development occurs-as is the case phenomenon-much more so than cestrus,

in mammals-one would have to make sure which does not occur in some mammals,

that the uterus provided for the conditions such as the primates, including man.

of development after fertilization had Here the anatomical and psychological con-

occurred. If this provision depended on ditions for sexual activity, once developed,

the actual occurrence of fertilization, the persist and show little or no regular

egg would have to send some message, so fluctuation. The sexual phase of the cycle

to speak, to the uterus, informing it that is abolished; there is no definite pre-

preparation for pregnancy was necessary. cestrous development, and therefore no

This would involve the elaboration of a process of post-cestrous neutralization, such

hormone on the part of the egg-in other as occurs in the diaphasic animals, is

words, a somatic activity of the germ- necessary. The cycle in primates is

plasm.

monophasic and represents, in the main,

The elaboration of kythin in the ovary only a reproductive phase. Thus ovulation

relieves the egg of this somatic function; is either followed by pregnancy or, in the

moreover, it has been established in a absence of ovulation, by the vain develop-

long series of observations and experiments ment of pregnancy conditions-by a pseudo-

that the elaboration of kythin on the part pregnancv which ends after a few days in

of the ovary is entirely independent of the a pseudo-birth. The latter is called men-

actual occurrence of fertilization and even struation owing to the almost accidental

not conditioned by the presence of an egg. fact of its monthly occurrence.

In other words, the second phase of ovarian While pseudo-pregnancy is universal

function is in all mammals independent of among the mammals and is biologically

the occurrence of fertilization (though comparable in all of them, its anatomy and

there are some species in which its occur- physiology are not completely comparable

THE HORMONES OF REPRODUCTION

23

in the various forms. The anatomical In man and monkeys no cestrous phase oc-

characteristics vary with the particular curs, and therefore (so to say) cestrin is not

form of placentation (or absence of placen- needed to prepare the uterus and vagina for

tation), and the mechanism is also different insemination. Its power to influence the

in the various groups of mammals. While growth of the uterine elements and

the second phase of the cycle (it may be hyperaemia is therefore utilized in inducing

pseudo- or true pregnancy) in the mouse re- the pregnancy changes in collaboration with

presents an effect of kythin-at least there is kythin. Here the reactions of the genital

no indication that any cestrin is present in systems to kythin and cestrin are not alter-

either pseudo- or true pregnancv-it is cer- native, and their effects are not antagonistic,

tain that in other forms, such as the cow or but synergetic.

human, the second phase is due to the It must be assumed, however, that a cer-

combined action of both aestrin and kythin. tain balance of the hormones is necessary

This needs some explanation, since it is for the progress of pregnancy (or pseudo-

of importance for the understanding of pregnancy) on its normal course. It is

hormonic action.

surprising that similar conditions also appa-

rently prevail in diphasic animals like the

TWO ANTAGONISTIC HORMONES

cow: but we know as yet too little about the details. All we can say and have to con-

One of the effects of cestrin, which is an sider is that the differences in the form and

integral part of the cestrous phase of the nature of the sex cycle, as they occur in

diphasic cycle, is the incitement of cornifica- various species, are due not only to a differ-

tionl. The vaginal epithelium, which dur- ence in the amount and time-coordination

ing the period of rest consists of ' low' of hormone secretion, but also to a differ-

cubic cells, undergoes proliferation (an aug- ence in the mode of response on the part

mentation of cells), and the newly formed of uterus, etc. This is obvious although-

cells then become keratinized, forming or perhaps because-there has not yet been

horny scales. But under the influence of time for much research on this fundamental

kythin those ' low ' cells of the interval fact.

stage are transformed into ' high ' mucous

cells with great secretory activity. Thus one of two alternative reactions is possible-

EXTRA-OVARIAN FACTORS

cornification or mucification. The epi- The story of the ovarian hormones is long

thelium can react either way, and if a suffi- enough to fill a day's narration; but it is

cient amount of cestrin is injected when bound to remain incomplete if it does not

mucification is in progress, the mucified epi- refer to the extra-ovarian factors which con-

thelium is destroyed. Vice versa, the injec- trol the production of ovarian hormones.

tion of a sufficient amount of kythin pre- The existence of such extra-ovarian factors

vents the occurrence of cornification. There had been assumed for a long time. The

is obviously an antagonism between the re- English biologist W. Heape postulated the

actions of the vaginal epithelium to the hor- existence of a generative ferment, the pre-

mones. The same applies to the reactions sence and concentration of which directed

of the uterus: cestrin prevents or interrupts and conditioned gonadic function. It had

the pregnancy changes if injected in large also been shown that the implantation of an

quantities, and kythin prevents insemina- immature ovary into a mature female led

tion by preventing the oncoming of oestrous to immediate maturation of the graft, which

changes. Thus it is possible to prevent the otherwise would have remained immature

occurrence of fertilization by the administra- for some time. Vice versa, the transplanta-

tion of these hormones, and so negatively to tion of a senile, inactive ovary into a

control the processes of reproduction. In mature, still sexually active female was

monophasic animals conditions are different. found to lead to a regeneration of the senile

24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

graft. These experiments showed that the results. If kyogenic extracts are injected

beginning and termination of the functional into a pregnant mouse, pregnancy is pro-

life of the ovary were determined by factors longed beyond the normal term, since the

outside the ovary itself; some of them, it extract prolongs secretion of kythin. On

should be said, have since been identified. the other hand, one can prevent pregnancy

Thus it has been established that the re- with the same extracts if one injects them

moval of the pituitary prevents the onset of before the cestrous cycle comes on. The

puberty and retains the ovary in a state of extract, by inducing the second phase of

immature inactivity. On the other hand, ovarian action, prevents the first phase; and

grafts of the anterior lobe of the pituitary the animal becomes pseudo-pregnant before

lead to a premature occurrence of oestrus having been in cestrus. On the other hand,

in immature animals. Quite rightly it had the injection of cestrogenic extracts prevents

been concluded that the anterior lobe is the development of the pregnancy changes.

necessary for, and actually incites, the func- Among the many facts to be deduced from

tion of the ovary-that it invokes the pro- these experiments, some are particularly

duction of an ovarian hormone. We have, worth mentioning. It appears, for example,

however, to consider a further complication. that the sexual periodicity as it occurs in

We cannot speak of " the " ovarian hor- most mammals is ultimately due to a

mone, since we have learned that there are pituitary periodicity, and that pregnancy

at least two such hormones, which are in also is ultimately maintained by pituitary

many animals, such as mouse or rat, action.

secreted in two distinct phases of ovarian This leads us on to another point of some

activity. Now, in the absence of a pituitary interest. Both pseudo-pregnancy and preg-

gland neither phase occurs; but, as has nancy are due to the same hormone (kythin)

been shown recently, pituitary extracts can and differ only in degree; but their dura-

incite either phase of ovarian secretion, ac- tion, in most species, differs greatly-

cording to the method of extraction applied. pseudo-pregnancy, as a rule, being much

Thus one kind of extract incites cestrus shorter than true pregnancy. This is due,

though it has no direct influence upon as we can state on the basis of many experi-

either uterus or ovary-but it induces the ments, to a difference in the duration of

production of cestrin. And another kind of kythin secretion. Prolonging kythin secre-

extract incites pseudo-pregnancy-again by tion by means of kyogenic extracts leads to

activating the ovary and inducing kythin a prolongation of pseudo-pregnancy to the

production. It seems that this difference full extent of true pregnancy or even beyond

in effect is due to the relative concentration it. How is it, then, that the actual occur-

of two factors of the anterior lobe (Gonado- rence of fertilization leads to a prolongation

tropic hormones or Rho-factors as they were of kythin secretion?

called when their existence was deduced The answer is simpler than one might

hypothetically). It appears that one of expect. In the mouse, for instance, the

these hormones is cestrogenic-it induces placenta produces a kyogenic hormone,

the formation of cestrin. The other one is thus stimulating the ovary and prolonging

the hormone responsible for the elaboration the production of kythin. The placenta,

of kythin on the part of the ovary. Thus the formation of which depends on the pre-

one must be regarded as the super-ordinated paration of the uterus by kythin, itself

sex hormone, and the other as the super- prolongs the conditions of its maintenance.

ordinated pregnancy hormone. They have

been referred to as the cestrogenic and kyogenic hormones, respectively.

THE CYCLE IN THE PRIMATES

Many experiments with these gonado- What has been said in the above para-

tropic hormones have already been per- graph applies directly only to the diphasic

formed and have produced interesting animal, e.g. the mouse. When we come

THE HORMONES OF REPRODUCTION

25

to the monophasic animal-man, monkey- fore the follicle has had time to enlarge and

things become more difficult. Here both to ovulate. Thus the egg is enclosed in a

ovarian hormones are involved in the deve- mass of cells and no ovulation and fertiliza-

lopment and persistence of pregnancy con- tion are possible.

ditions, and the production of both must be It appears, therefore, that the same sub-

maintained throughout pregnancy. It ac- stance which induces ovulation can also

cordingly appears that both gonadotropic prevent it. It is of some interest that

factors are produced by the human placenta. experiments show that the same mechanism

And while it is easy to prevent in the mouse prevails in monkeys, which are directly

either phase of the cycle by inducing the comparable with man.

other phase, it is not possible to do this in Space does not permit the discussion of

the monophasic animal where the hormones the many other phenomena and problems

work synergetically.

connected with the action of the gonadotro-

However, the influence of gonadotropic pic hormones. There is, however, one field

hormones is not restricted to the incitement which must be briefly touched.

of the production of one or the other ovarian

hormone, but also affects phenomena even more intimately connected with reproduc-

THE MALE PITUITARY GLAND

tion. While no ovulation occurs after the What has been said of the ovary also

removal of the pituitary gland, grafts of its applies to the testicle in some degree. Here

anterior lobe incite ovulation; and so do again we find inactivity after removal of the

cestrogenic extracts. The follicles enlarge, pituitary gland, and restoration of the func-

burst, and render mature (fertilizable) eggs. tion after application of anterior lobe grafts

A sufficient number of grafts even increases or extracts. Moreover, precocious maturity

by several hundred per cent. the number of can be induced by such extracts. On the

eggs which are liberated by the ovary at other hand, it has been shown that the senile

any period of ovulation.

decay of the testicle, which is connected

But the same influences which thus induce with the loss of spermatogenetic power and

ovulation can prevent its occurrence. It is endocrine activity, can be restored by

generally known that the enlargement of means of gonadotropic hormones. The

the follicle which culminates in ovulation is senile testicle resumes its secretion and again

followed by proliferation of the epithelium produces spermatozoa, which appear to be

which lines the follicle. Finally the cells perfectly viable. Thus apparently fecun-

of this epithelium fill with their proliferated dity and testicular secretion also depend on

mass the whole cavity of the follicle, anterior lobe secretion, though it is as yet

having undergone a certain transformation uncertain whether both gonadotropic hor-

which renders them rich in a substance mones exert a positive influence upon the

which gives them a reddish-yellow appear- testicle. In fact, it seems that the kyogenic

ance. The whole body of these cells which extracts have a rather detrimental effect

replace the follicle-or rather fill it-is upon the testicle.

called corpus luteum (yellow body). It is Doubtless further research will reveal

these cells, by the way, which are richest in many other important actions of these hor-

kythin.

mones upon the reproductive system. And

Now, normally the gonadotropic hor- having said, in the beginning, that, in a

mones are produced at a rate which guaran- way, all hormones control reproduction, we

tees the proper sequence in the enlargement now must invert the statement and stress

of the follicle, its bursting (ovulation), and the complementary view-that the hormones

the luteinization following ovulation. But controlling reproduction in the n'arrower

a considerable increase in the amount of sense of the word have effects far beyond

gonadotropic hormones leads to very fast the reproductive system. It is well known

luteinization, which is almost complete be- how much they influence constitution-the

26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

comparison between castrates and normal individuals has taught us thus much. Their influence upon the energy-production of the
body, upon the mental activities, and upon many other functions of the organism, can-
not yet be wholly visualized; but they seem

to be of very great importance. Therefore the knowledge of the action of these hormones means much to the physiologist and physician; and we may say that control over the reproductive hormones means much more than control over reproduction.

MR. PUNCH ON EUGENIC FAMILY ENDOWMENT
(Reprinted by special permission of the Proprietors of " Punch.")
T- HIS strange case, in which the accused are the principal members of the late Conservative Government, was concluded at the Old Bailey to-day.
Mr. Justice Trout, addressing the jury, said: " This painful but important case has revealed a singular story. The prisoners in the dock are indicted at the instance of a Naval officer, Commander Paravane, upon two counts-first, that they did obtain a considerable sum of money by false pretences, and, second, that they did, severally and collectively, libel the Commander.
" Now a number of the officers in His Majesty's Navy are married and have children; and, as you have heard, it is the principle or habit of the State to look with especial favour upon those who take upon themselves the responsibilities of matrimony and parenthood, since, for reasons not wholly clear to all of us, it is still considered desirable that the population of these already over-crowded islands should continually increase. Therefore the taxes exacted from a bachelor are greater than those required of a married man; and the income-tax of a father is reduced, though not extensively, in exact proportion to his fertility. Pensions are granted to widows, but not to spinsters equally needing support. In addition, the officers and men of His Majesty's fighting forces receive higher pay (or allowances) from the dav that they lead some happy girl to the altar-that is to say, the officers and men of the Army, the officers and men of the Royal Air Force, and the men (but not the officers) of the Royal Navy. The exception is a startling one. ...
" It does credit, no doubt, to the heart of the nation that we deny to the officer what we are willing to grant to the simple seaman, but it will not, I think, enhance our reputation for common-sense. Is it to be understood that it is correct and desirable for an ordinary or able-seaman to take a, wife, but not for the Captain of his ship? Are the children of a stoker satisfactory additions to the race but not the offspring of an Admiral? Surely we are agreed that the blood and spirit of Nelson and Drake are not confined to the forecastle? ' Hearts,' if I may be permitted to imitate a celebrated poem:
'Hearts just as hard to check Beat on the quarter-deck,'
and the arguments which support the endowment of marriage in the one place cannot miraculously lose their substance in the other.
" One of the Naval witnesses, a bachelor, ventured to attack the principle itself; but it is too late, or perhaps too early, to do that. If it were accepted
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 1.

