PROBLEM FAMILIES IN SOUTHAMPTON
By H. C. MAURICE WILLIAMS, O.B.E.. O.St.J. M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.P.H., F.A.P.H.A.

W HEN I was invited to speak on order to bring together representatives of all

the recently published report on the statutory and voluntary social welfare

Problem Families, by the Depart- agencies in the town. This Committee, was

ment of Economics of the University of set up just one month before the circular on

Southampton* I should perhaps have de- Co-ordination was issued by the Home

clined and instead suggested that either one Office and the Ministries of Health and

of the three authors responsible for its Education, so that when the recommenda-

compilation should be asked to undertake tion contained in the circular of appointing

this task. I can, however, justify myself by a "-designated officer " came before my

the fact, as stated in the preface of the Council I was in the strong position of

Report, that the survey was a joint project already occupying that office.

between the University and the Local Health

Authority. This experiment of collaboration Appointment of Special Officers

is in itself a matter of some importance for it illustrates the usefulness of combined research between an academic body with its trained statisticians and equipment and an adminis-
trative department of a Local Health Authority and its field workers.
There is an unlimited field of medical and social conditions in our community life still
tunsolved that might benefit by the same
pattern of research.

There is at present a great variation throughout the country in these appointments of designated co-ordinating officers. About half the local authorities have appointed the Medical Officer of Health, but the other half have appointed either the Town Clerk, the Chief Education Officer or the Children's Officer to occupy this office.
In advocating the appointment of the Medical Officer you may think that I have a

The Initiation of the Report

vested interest, but- let me quote Dr. C. P. Blacker, who is outside local government

Let me now turn to the actual survey and employment, when he says " The Medical

the steps that led to its initiation. As Officer of Health sees the problem family in

Medical Officer of Health of a fairly large its broadest context. He is in touch with

urbanised area I am frequently confronted both adults and children and is also con-

with problems relating to the conduct and cerned with the conditions of the home."

living conditions of families within my May I therefore detail some of the services

administrative area. I have sometimes felt that are available to him in collecting in-

that the information that I gathered from my formation and introducing remedial measures

own field workers about certain of these to deal with these intractable families.

families might be supplemented by essential In the first place he has usually a large

information only known to social workers staff of medico-social workers operating as

outside my administrative jurisdiction. For health visitors. These women have an

this reason I suggested to my Council the intimate knowledge of the living conditions

formation of a Co-ordinating Committee in of the families in their district and are

excellent as a means of ascertainment, but

* Blackwell Scientific Publications, 1955. Price 4S.
See EUGENICS REVIEW, 47, 3, PP. 143-6.

when it comes to follow-up and remedial action I am sometimes doubtful whether

2I7
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January I956. 47, 4.

2I8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

their nursing, midwifery and health visitors training is the right kind of background for dealing with families that are not usually receptive to health education. Are we, therefore, as local authorities, wasting the services of these highly qualified officers, except for ascertainment, in using them on a small section of the community who seldom benefit by their advice?
I am personally in favour of specially trained officers to cope with these families. Such officers should be able to mix intimately with the people in their locality, perhaps visit the public-houses and while there, in conversation and gossip, ascertain the families that are going downhill. They must be men and women who have had a wide experience of life which is seldom possible in the sheltered precincts of our hospitals and university departments.
The personality and the right form of approach is, in my view, of far greater value as a qualification for these rehabilitation officers than any academic training. The family service units, in the selection of their personnel, favour a social service diploma, but realize that in addition they require an intensive practical experience before dealing with these social parasites.
Apart from the health visitors, the Medical Officer of Health has, in about one-third of the local authority areas, control over the welfare services responsible for providing help and accommodation to the homeless. He also has the services of the child guidance clinic, the mental health workers and the midwives, together with personnel who conduct the ante- and post-natal clinics. His close association with the family planning clinics also helps but unfortunately so many of these families are of such low mental intellect or so irresponsible that the advice they receive about family planning is seldom carried out.
Classification of Problem Families
In our weekly meetings of the Social Rehabilitation Committee we have, like other authorities, found great difficulty in classifying our cases and in ascertaining the incidence of problem families. There is no

common yardstick of measurement. The late Sir James Spence in his investigation into A Thousand Families in Newcastle-onTyne* attempted to place them into three types, determined largely by attributes and attitudes of the mother. His classification was (a) the friendly type, (b) the sullen type, (c) the vicious type.
In a paper I addressed to the American Public Health Association last year at Buffalo I also tried to classify our problem families into three categories.
In the first group there are those who show affection toward their children and supply them with sufficient food and clothing, although the food is usually unsuitable and given at irregular times. This type of family is usually characterised by complete inability of the woman to undertake the average routine work of domestic life-which should be the knowledge possessed by any normal housewife-with the result that the mother is generally of poor intellect or that her health has been so undermined by recurring pregnancies that she is unable to fulfil her responsibilities. The father is often lazy and fails to give his wife any encouragement in the home; he indulges in long periods of unemployment. Some of these families are able to obtain from the Labour Exchange, the National Assistance Board and their Family Allowances nearly as much as they would receive while working. These monetary benefits naturally increase the incentive to laziness in this type of individual. We have found that a large majority of the families come within this category. Seventy-seven of the I04 received National Assistance during the two years under review. Seldom is there fundamental viciousness in this group, and unless there is a marked mental defectiveness these particular members of society are generally capable of rehabilitation if caught in the early stages.
In my second group the father and mother are devoid of any sense of responsibility toward their children. Many of these people are educated above the average of their station, but they have a low moral sense and
* Oxford University Press, I954. Price ios. 6d!

PROBLEM FAMILIES IN SOUTHAMPTON

2I9

seem unconcerned about the welfare of the Another interesting observation in the

children or their legitimacy. In our survey of report is the fact that reproduction began

104 families, I37 out of 470 children were early in these families. Twenty-nine out of

illegitimate, nearly one-third compared with sixty-eight women were under twenty at the

one-fourteenth in the remainder of the birth of their first child, a very much higher

Southampton population.

ratio than in the rest of the population. A

In the third group you have those whose fairly typical story in the case histories of

living conditions are satisfactory, but who a large number is that the couple marry at an

subject their children to physical cruelty. early age before the man has established

Fortunately, from our own experience, this himself in any regular trade or employment.

group is in the minority.

Owing to the housing shortage in the postwar

You will therefore appreciate the diffi- years most of these couples started their

culties that we encountered in the selection married life in one or two rooms in the

of our families for this investigation, and as parents' houses. After the birth of the first

the authors of the report say " There is no child family quarrels commenced until even-

one distinguishable characteristic which tually they were forced to leave and find

makes a family a ' problem ' as distinct from their own accommodation in furnished rooms

a normal one" and in the absence of a at a rent far higher than their weekly wage

precise definition a particular social worker's permits. The husband then begins to visit

definition of what constitutes such a family the public house to get away from the

will depend upon several factors, personal discomforts of a confined space and the noise

and contingent. This is borne out by the of an increasing family. The wife becomes

five pilot surveys undertaken by your Society suspicious of outside female associations and

in I952, when you found the average inci- so joins him in his nightly visits. Their debts

dence in the West Riding of Yorkshire to be pile up, they resort to football pools and

I-2 per I,OOO, whereas in Luton it was 7-2. gambling in the forlorn hope that by some

In Southampton we believe that our inci- stroke of luck all their worries will disappear

dence is about 3 per I,OOO.

as if by magic. If such a family is to be saved

Although the Wood Committee report of from developing into social parasites this is

I929 showed a higher incidence of mental the time when our preventive work must be

deficiency in the rural areas, and we of concentrated on rehabilitation to break these

course recognize that mental sub-normality links which make up this chain of the vicious

plays a big part in the creation of problem circle.

families, yet I believe that the incidence One-third of the I04 families gave betting,

of these families is higher in urban than in drink and gambling as the main reason for

country districts for two main reasons, their financial difficulties. There was a

namely, that in the villages the critical natural reluctance to confess to these

surveillance of their neighbours acts as a extravagances so that a true picture would

deterrent against cruelty, filth and squalor, probably indicate a much higher figure of

and further there is a tendency for this type wasteful expenditure.

of individual to gravitate to the towns.

The survey showed that in ten of the I04 families the man or woman had been men- Rehabilitation

tally ill and admitted to hospital for treat- Let me now pass on to our efforts to

ment either as a voluntary or certified rehabilitate these families. In the first place

patients. In thirty-two of the families one we try to select one officer to be responsible

or more of the members were considered to for each case to avoid duplicating visits.

be mentally sub-normal. This opinion was We don't want a cavalcade of social workers

based simply on the opinion of the social cascading into the homes of these families.

worker, without a detailed assessment by The more one has to deal with these sub-

intelligence tests.

merged groups, the more one realizes the

220 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

almost insurmountable difficulties of apply- They had no cooking or feeding utensils and

ing remedial treatment. At first, from my the family used their hands for eating just

own experience, I was very despondent like young savages. The father and mother

about any hope of improving their state of were both sentenced to six months' imprison-

life, but after talking to many of these ment, and during the mother's term in prison

people in their homes I began to feel that she gave birth to another child.

there was quite a lot of good in some of them On their discharge we rehoused them in a

and if we could alter their circumstances we corporation flat in the poorer part of the

might succeed in bringing them back to some town. The children had, in the meantime,

degree of normality. The Committee there- been taken over in the care of the local

fore adopted my suggestion that we should authority. We gradually returned the chil-

approach the Housing Committee of the dren from the care of the local authority,

Council and get them to allocate a certain and by constant visitation we got the man and

number of houses for families selected by the woman to realize their responsibilities and

Rehabilitation Committee. The Housing to make some saving from the man's weekly

Committee was at first reluctant to accede to wage for the purchase of necessary household

our request because they rightly felt that equipment. When they satisfied us that they

these problem families would be " jumping were making a real endeavour to rehabilitate

the queue" in being given a Council house themselves we rehoused them in a Council

before many worthy and deserving appli- house. Since then there has been a remark-

cants. However, when we pointed out that able transformation in their standard of

this was in the form of a social experiment living and they now compare favourably with

they agreed to provide a certain number. the rest of the tenants on the housing estate.

Here I must emphasise that the greatest Some of the children are still in the care of

care must be taken in the selection of the local authority. When we are satisfied'

families, otherwise the public reaction to this that the parents are able to cope with the

form of priority will be most critical. Help complete family we shall return them to their

must also be given either by loan or grant of parents.

furPiiture and household equipment to give Another family-man, wife and six chil-

them encouragement and avoid their starting dren-who had been evicted for arrears of

off with debts. It is important not to rent, went to live in one room with the

segregate problem families in groups of husband's mother. When visited we found

Council houses.

that their state of living was beyond descrip-

Case Histories

tion. Eventually we offered them accommodation in the Welfare Services hostel. The

In Southampton we have been most woman had completely lost heart with her

fortunate in this work in that we have circumstances and her recurring pregnancies.

brought about some really spectacular re- The husband at this time was lazy and

sults.- A few examples will illustrate my case: seldom kept his employment for more than a

A man and wife who had been prosecuted week or two and stayed away from work on

and sent to prison because of the filthy the most flimsy excuses. Here again by

conditions under which they were living have constant visitation and advice they were

made a remarkable recovery. At the time of told that if they made some real effort to

the conviction this man and wife were living improve their conditions, rehousing would be

in a slum dwelling with eleven children. considered. This was eventually done with

They were sleeping on the floor of the very gratifying results in that the conduct of

kitchen without any proper bed covering and the husband has completely changed; he

no mattresses. There was very little food in takes a pride in his home and has kept

the house as most of the money which was regular employment. The wife's outlook on

earned by the man, who was a dock labourer, life has greatly improved, and she attends

was spent on drink or wasted in other ways. regularly at the birth control clinic and no

PROBLEM FAMILIES IN SOUTHAMPTON

22I

further pregnancies have occurred. One fairly costly, it is far cheaper than leaving

must sympathize with some of these families the problem untackled with the continuing

who have to perform most functions of life liability on national and local funds.

herded together in one or two small rooms, often with the added difficulties of being Institutional Homes

harassed by a domineering landlady or In the past, the children of problem

criticised by a querulous mother-in-law.

families have eventually had to be admitted

A family consisting of husband, wife and either to local authority or voluntary homes.

five children occupied the ground floor of a Although the parents were unsatisfactory, in

seven-room house which was in a filthy the majority of cases they were often dearly

condition, being damp and dirty, the wall- loved by their children who greatly resented

paper hanging off, and the walls crumbling. being parted from them. Although most

The wife stated that the agent was not extravagant arrangements were made for

collecting rent as the owner wanted them to these children in institutional homes, the

move so that he could sell the house. The children suffered emotional starvation and,

children were fairly clean and well fed. The as they were not emotionally satisfied, they

family was eventually evicted for rent exhibited behaviour difficulties, and in a

arrears and obtained two rooms in a different large number of cases developed into psycho-

house in the same street. After a few months logical problems. We found seventeen cases

that landlord required the rooms for his of juvenile delinquency drawn from twelve

daughter. The family was told that we of the I04 families.

would be prepared to consider them for In several recent cases where children have

rehousing if they made an attempt to pay the been admitted to local authority homes it

rent arrears owing from their previous has been found that their mothers or fathers

accommodation. The mother again became were also brought up in these homes. In the

pregnant. At this time the parents were case of one girl who was brought up in the

sleeping on a mattress on the floor, and as homes and who is now only thirty-four years

they were not allowed to use the kitchen of age, her four children, all illegitimate, are

downstairs, water had to be drawn off and now wards of the Local Authority. In the

taken upstairs to their-room. The mother case of a man aged forty-two years who was

was admitted to the' maternity unit and also brought up in the homes, his t-wo

during her absence from home the children children have had to be taken into care by

were placed in the care of the local authority. the Local Authority. These people who

After visits and advice the husband arranged have known no love in their childhood have

to pay off some of the rent arrears. It was frequently nothing to offer their children.

felt by the Committee that with the pro- Where children have been taken from

vision of better accommodation and help unsatisfactory parents it has been found that

toward their furniture,' together with the more children have then been produced and

curtailment of future pregnancies, there was that aftera fewyears the same position prevails

some hope that this family would improve. as when the first children were removed. The

Fortunately, this opinion has been amply satisfactory method of dealing with so-called

justified and they now take a pride in their problem families is as a family unit. In my

new home and their garden.

view, birth control is indicated when recur-

There are many other families that could ring pregnancies occur in poor housing

be mentioned who also show marked im- conditions because this is one of the main

provement, and I am convinced that re- factors conducive to deterioration in the

housing, with help toward furniture in standard of living for people of this type.

selected cases, is one of the best practical Even voluntary sterilization may be advised

means of bringing about rehabilitation. where it is obviously detrimental to the

Although the methods of dealing with mother's health that further pregnancies

problem families appear at- first sight to be should occur.

222 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Since the war Local Authorities have had three times a week and gives health advice

permissive powers to employ domestic helps and organizes mothercraft classes.

in relieving the overburdened mother with My Council are considering the purchase

her household duties. Unfortunately, the of a further house. We are also trying to give

scale of charges made to the recipient of this the female children of problem families some

service by most of the Local Authorities is so additional instruction in housewifery in our

high that these families are quite unable to secondary modem schools.

pay for the help.

Robert Owen, supported by many reformers of his day, believed that environment

Slum Conditions in the Nineteenth Century

was the only factor that influenced human Many of the general public seem to think

nature, he. argued that all persons were that problem families are something new that

universally plastic and the infants of any one have developed like a canker on our postwar

class in the world could be readily formed as social fabric, for the " man in the street"

men of any other class. He stated that if the knows little of the horrors of slum life with

children of Quakers had been at birth its conditions of filth and squalor under which

exchanged for a similar number from the these derelict families exist. The official

loose fraternities of St. Giles they would have evacuation scheme of the last war introduced

grown up to participate in every degree of many of these families into districts whose crime, while the exchanged St. Giles children residents were previously unaware of the

would have developed into good, temperate, existence of such people, and gave consider-

moral characters. If the judges of the realm able publicity to the situation.

had been born and educated amongst the It is undoubtedly true that to-day the

poor and profligate their natural abilities public conscience is sensitive to any devia-

would have taken them to the head of the tion from the normal standard -of living,

cnminal profession, and they would have therefore those who fail to attain these

suffered imprisonment, transportation and standards are more apparent. Yet, those of

death.

us who have studied social conditions in

To-day we know that such a dictum is not bygone days know that there is nothing new

correct for we recognize that the biological in the problem. In fact, in the last century,

inheritance is the most important factor, yet after the Industrial Revolution, with its child

it must be acknowledged that an improve- labour, cheap alcohol, poor wages, and bad

ment in environmental conditions can bring landlords, there must have been a much

about some surprising results. In South- higher proportion of our working-class famil-

ampton we established a home for eleven ies living under conditions far worse than

families, something on the lines of the anything we see to-day. Charles Booth,

Mayflower Home at Plymouth. Since this in his Life and Labour in London at the end of

home was opened twelve months ago the last century, spoke of -the " submerged

eighteen families have been admitted to the tenth."

house. Ten of these families had previously As social amenities became more readily

occupied Council houses and been evicted available to the people so the great majority

because of arrears of rent. Eleven of the took advantage of the benefits and improved

families, after a period of six months in this their conditions of life. With better educa-

home under supervision and instruction, have tion, better housing, and higher wages most

been rehoused in suitable Council houses and of the working-class people are to-day living

have continued to be satisfactory.

at as high a standard as the middle classes

Only two families have failed to co- enjoyed during the nineteenth century. Yet

operate. We were fortunate in obtaining the one finds a small minority, either through a

services of two retired Salvation Army temperamental instability or mental defect,

officers who undertook the supervision. In who fail to keep pace with the advancing addition, one of the health visitors visits times. In our Welfare State to-day there is

PROBLEM FAMILIES IN SOUTHAMPTON

223

seldom need for real poverty in the homes of these submerged families.
Southampton, like other provincial centres in England, is determined to continue this important work of rehabilitation. We undertake this work with the confidence that we shall save at least a proportion of the families from a continued life of degradation. In this we are inspired and encouraged by the words in the final paragraph of Booth's monumental work:

" The dry bones that lie scattered o'er the long valley recorded in my volume of Life and
Labour in London bring to light the terrible
conditions under which many of our fellow beings exist. Mlay some great soul, master of a nobler and subtler alchemy than mine, disentangle the confused issues, reconcile the apparent contradiction in aim, melt and comingle the various influences for good into one uniformity of effort, and make these dry bones live so that the streets of our Jerusalem may ring with joy."

