C. H. WADDINGTON
C.B.E., Sc.D., F.R.S.
The Woodhull Lecture

Evoultionary Systenmis-Animal and Human*

T HE MAJOR ADVANCE in the theory of genetic system itself evolves. This I shall return

biological evolution since Darwin's day to later.

has been the rise of Mendelian genetics. It The third point concerns the origin of new

is hardly an exaggeration to say that, when variation. It is essential to any theory of evo-

Darwin wrote, biology possessed no theory of lution that there must be some mechanism by

inheritance. Since then, the existence of more or which new variation is brought into being.

less discrete hereditary factors has been dis- Darwin was driven to speculate as to what this

covered, their position in the cell ascertained to mechanism might be. In the absence of any

be on the chromosomes in the nucleus, and the understanding of how hereditary qualities are

behaviour of these chromosomes analysed in transmitted, he made no pretence that he had

great detail both in normal and in various more found a solution fully satisfactory to himself,

or less unusual conditions.

although he was somewhat tempted by the

theory, usually associated with the name of

The "Genetic System"

Lamarck, that characters acquired by organisms

The whole of this complex of phenomena which
are concerned with the manner in which here-
ditary determinants are passed on from one generation to the next may be referred to as the "genetic system". From the point of view of evolutionary theory three main points have
emerged concerning it. The first is that the existence of discrete hereditary determinants safeguards variation against being lost if dissimilar animals cross-breed, as Darwin feared
it might.' Indeed, the fact that during the greater part of the life cycle of most animals and plants the hereditary factors are present in the diploid condition implies that most organisms carry within them much greater potentialities for
variation in their offspring than would appear at first sight. The second point, which is one that we owe primarily to the insight of Darlington,2 is that the genetic system itself can be regarded not only as an agent but also as a subject of evolutionary change, which is to say that the

in the course of their lifetime might be transmitted to their offspring. Later experimental investigations have shown that in general this
is not so. Our knowledge of the genetic system, which
is very extensive and detailed, forces us to the conclusion that the origin of new hereditary variation is to be found only in alterations and rearrangements of the atomic groupings out of which the hereditary factors of the chromosomes are composed. These alterations follow rules of stability which are still entirely unknown to us, but which must be properties of the hereditary molecules themselves and have little or no relation to the precipitating events by which the alterations were stimulated. One of the most firmly based doctrines of modern genetics is that mutation is a random process. I do not wish to challenge this, but I shall suggest later that some care is necessary in interpreting the word "random."
In present day biology, evolution is envisaged

* The Woodhull Lecture was given on February 27th, as resulting from the interaction between, on the

1959, at the Weekly Evening Meeting of the Royal Institution, L. B. W. Jolley, M.A., M.I.E.E., VicePresident in the Chair. It is here reproduced by kind permission of Professor Waddington and The Royal

one hand, the genetic system characterized by random mutation, and on the other, natural selection. The evolutionary pressures exerted

Institution, having first been published in the Proceedings of The Royal Institution, 1959, volume 37, Part 5, Number 169.

by these two factors are exhibited as being quite external to the nature of the organisms involved.

23 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1960, 52, 1.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The essential evolutionary pressure exerted by
the genetic system is that of mutation, and mutation, it is explained, is a random process. Any explanation which might be offered for the
nature of the mutational changes would have to be found, it is asserted, in the chemical composition of the genes and not in the nature of the complete biological organism in which these
genes are carried. Mutation thus appears as essentially an external force to which the organism passively submits. Again, natural selective
pressures are usually thought of as arising simply from the external environment. When the climate changes, a new predator appears, or industrial fumes blacken the tree trunks on which the animal lives, the populations of organisms concerned cannot, it is usually implied, do anything but submit to these pressures and wait untfl the equally uncontrollable process of mutation throws up a new hereditary variant which enables them to meet the environment's challenge more successfully.

Genotyp of genration nT

apfth SPIllS

Anima chooses ~~~~~~~Possble eajvlroinments

_modifis
?~sepaes

Sses5ereveal

Ensv rnental

certain potentiaNltes

niche

Mutation modifis the

Genotypes of geneation n. I
The Evolutionary Mechanism FIGURE 1
The time seems to have come when we need to THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE BIOLOGICAL

take into account two further aspects of the

EVOLUTIONARY SYSTEM

evolutionary mechanism.3 In the first place,

natural selective pressures impinge not on the mental stresses by the production of a well-

hereditary factors themselves, but on the organized modification which is of adaptive

organisms as they develop from fertilized eggs value. It will, as it were, build into the genotype

to reproductive adults. We need to bring into a gun which is not only set on a hair trigger but

the picture not only the genetic system by which which is aimed to hit the target when it goes off.

hereditary information is passed on from one In so far as such a developmental response

generation to the next, but the "epigenetic becomes precisely delimited and easily initiated,

system" by which the information contained in it becomes the more likely to be produced by

the fertilized egg is translated into the function- unspecified changes in the chemical nature of

ing structure of the reproducing individual. the hereditary substance. Mutations, which we

Each organism during its lifetime will respond in can think of as random when we are considering

some manner to the environmental stresses to the nucleo-proteins of the chromosomes, will

which it is submitted, and in a population there have effects on the phenotype of the organisms

is almost certain to be some genetic variation in which are not necessarily random, but which

the intensity and character of these responses. will be modified by the types of instability

Natural selection will favour those individuals which have been built into the epigenetic

in which the responses are of most adaptive mechanisms by selection for response to

value. environmental stresses.

Two consequences can be expected to follow, Since this is an unfamiliar point of view it may

and have in fact been demonstrated experiment- be as well to illustrate it by actual example.4 If

ally. In the first place, natural selection will build eggs of the fruit fly Drosophila are submitted to

up genotypes which set going developmental ether vapour shortly after laying, a proportion

mechanisms which easily respond to environ- of them tend to have their development modified

24

THE WOODHULLL LECTURE

so that they produce a very peculiar phenotype, tendency to reach its normal end-result in spite

known as bithorax, in which the third segment of disturbing circumstances. If a strain of

of the thorax of the animal is transformed from animals is selected over many generations for

its normal small and obscure structure into a its capacity to respond in a particular way to a

duplicate of the large second thoracic segment. certain stress, a set of genotypes will be built up

We can treat the response as though it were in which this response is easily exhibited when

favoured by selection, and in each generation the environmental stress is applied, but the

breed from those individuals in the population developmental resistance to change may be

which respond to the stress in this way. When sufficient to ensure that some of it is still retained

this was done with a population taken from a even if the stress is removed. If that happens,

normal wild type stock, it became apparent we should have a system which exactly mimics

that there was some genetic variation of the the inheritance of an acquired character, but

capacity to respond in this manner. If selection one which depends not on the direct induction

favoured the response, the frequency with which of a hereditary variation, in the manner suggested

it occurred increased from generation to genera- by Lamarck, but on selection operating on the

tion, until after some time it became practically genetical structure of the population.

universal when the selected stock was sub- Again, there is a practical chapter and verse

mitted to the ether. After some time a new gene for such a suggestion in the experiments with the

mutation occurred; this was a sex-linked factor bithorax modification. After rather more than

which had not been present in the original stock. twenty generations of selection for ease of

Its effect is that females homozygous for it lay response to ether vapour, the strain had reached

eggs which tend to develop the bithorax pheno- a condition in which a high proportion of

type. This is particularly striking when the factor bithorax individuals appeared even when the

is present in the selected stock, in which, as it ether treatment was not given.

were, the bithorax modification has been set on In another experiment a population of wild-

a hair trigger. If, by various types of cross- type Drosophila was grown on a normal medium

breeding, the factor is removed from this stock to which sufficient sodium chloride had been

and transferred into an unselected wild-type added to cause the death of the majority of the

stock, the tendency to produce bithoraxes is larvae. The osmotic regulation of the Drosophila

very much reduced, though it remains just large larva is known to involve a pair of papillae on

enough to make it clear that the factor could not either side of the anus. After twenty-one gene-

have been present in the strain with which the rations, flies from four strains which had been

experiment started. We have here an example in submitted to this selection were grown in various

which selection has built up a genotype which concentrations of salt, and the size of their anal

exhibits a particular type of developmental papillae compared with that of the initial strains

instability. A gene mutation has occurred which on which no selection had been exerted.

in the normal Drosophila would have only a The selection had increased the capacity of

very slight tendency to produce this phenotype, the individuals to respond to the stress of the but which does so with considerably frequency salt; the curve relating the size of the anal organ in the selected stock. Thus, if one merely refers to the salt content of the medium is steeper in to such a gene mutation as "random", one does the selected strains than in the unselected.

not say by any means everything of interest Secondly, at any particular concentration of

which can be told about it.

salt the size of the anal organ is larger in the

The other main evolutionary effect of the selected strain than in the corresponding un-

epigenetic system depends on the fact that the selected one. The modification provoked by the

development of organisms is usually to some salt has become, to some extent, genetically

extent canalised, in the sense that even though fixed or "assimilated". This is the process which

it may become somewhat modified in response I have spoken of as the genetic assimilation of an

to an environmental stress, it also exhibits a acquired character. Although its mechanism is

2S

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

quite different from the Lamarckian inheritance undoubtedly persist in man, but, just as the

of acquired characters, being entirely based on genetic system is itself subject to evolution, so in

the concepts of orthodox Mendelian genetics, it broader terms we may say that this whole four-

can in fact play the same role in evolutionary component evolutionary system, of which the

theory for which Lamarckian hypotheses have genetic system is only a part, itself evolves. The

often been invoked.

human situation is characterized by an enor-

To obtain a complete picture of the evolution- mously important step in the evolution of the

ary system, we need to take into account one evolutionary mechanism. Indeed, it might be

further set of factors. These may be spoken of not unreasonable to define humanity by this fact.

as the exploitive system. Animals-the following In man, the processes of teaching by the older

considerations do not apply so directly to plants members of the population, and learning by the

-are usually surrounded by a much wider range younger ones, have been carried to an incom-

of environmental conditions than they are parably higher pitch than is found in any of the

willing to inhabit. They live in a highly hetero- prehuman forms of life, where they play only a

geneous "ambiance", from which they them- relatively minor role, for instance, in the deter-

selves select the particular habitat in which their mination of bird song, and a few other examples.

life will be passed. Thus the animal by its In man, they have developed not only to highly

behaviour contributes in a most important way effective person-to-person learning, as in appren-

to determining the nature and intensity of the ticeship, but, by the invention of writing and

selective pressures which will be exerted on it. other more recent devices, to an extremely

Natural selection is very far from being as elaborate system by which the whole conceptual

external a force as the conventional picture might understanding of the past is made available to

lead one at first sight to believe.

present recruits to human society. We have here

The problems which arise in this field have as what in effect amounts to a new mode of here-

yet been rather little studied, even in the bio- ditary transmission. It may be referred to as the

logical field, where the relations are likely to be cultural or "socio-genetic" system.

relatively simple. This area of study is, however, Within the last few millennia, the human race

likely to be of particular importance for eugenics, has acquired capacities which in the non-human

since human behaviour is incomparably more world could only have been obtained as the

elaborate than that of the majority of animals, results of evolution. To give a banal example, and in particular the behaviour associated with one may mention the ability to fly. Man has

choice and the seeking of particular goals is certainly not achieved this capacity by waiting

much more fully developed. Darlington5 has for genes to turn up which have transformed his

already expressed opinions about the import- fore-limbs into wings. In fact there is no evidence

ance of the exploitive system in human evolution, that changes in the pool of genes available to the

in his suggestion that hereditary differences human race had any specific effect on the

between various human groupings have led them development of the human conquest of the air.

to choose or to create appropriate types of This does not mean, of course, that the genes

selective pressure amongst the diversified possi- were irrelevant. Human inventiveness and skill, bilities offered by human society. Before such just like any character of any organism, are

hypotheses can be accepted, however, it is produced by the interaction of genes with one

necessary to consider how, if at all, the human another and with the environment during evolutionary system differs from the biological. development. But so far as one can tell, all the

A "Socio-Genetic" System

genes necessary to produce men capable of inventing methods of flying had been present

Biological evolution, then, is carried out by a in the human population for many generations.

mechanism which involves four major factors: What the development of ffight was waiting for

a genetic system, an epigenetic system, an was not some change in the genetic system, but

exploitive system, and a system of natural some change in the cultural system.

selective pressures (Figure 1). All these factors When one attempts to consider the problem

26

THE WOODHULL LECTURE

of human evolution, the type of phenomena Although it would seem prudent, when faced

which should rise to one's mind are all the most by a phenomenon of human evolution, first to

crucial changes which have occurred between, consider by what cultural means it has been

say, the late Stone Age and the present. It is not brought about, it is also very necessary to

in any important sense the slight changes in inquire into the biological or genetical pheno-

bodily structure which differentiate us from mena associated with it. This is, however,

Cromagnon man which make the greatest exceedingly difficult. Suppose a marked change

impression. Human evolution has been in the takes place in the gene pool of the human

first place a cultural evolution.

population; under what circumstances should

It is important not to overlook this first we expect this to have an important influence

impression of what human evolution is all about. on the essential cultural achievements of the

It is clear that for an understanding of how the group concerned? It is extraordinarily difficult

human race has come into the possession of to find any factual evidence, since most examples

those characteristics which we now think most of marked changes in the gene pool of a popu-

valuable in human life, a theory is needed which lation involve the immigration or emigration of

is primarily one of cultural evolution.

individuals who carry with them not only their

transmissible genes but also their transmissible

Cultural evolution

culture. For instance, one may postulate, as

It seems probable that in the cultural evolutionary system there are parallels for many of the factors operative in the biological system. For instance, parallel to the process of gene mutation there is the arising of new ideas capableof cultural transmission; and there are undoubtedly processes, fulfilling a function similar to that of
natural selection, which determine whether newly arisen ideas will in fact be perpetuated in future

Darlington5 has done, that the emigrants from Ireland in the middle of the last century carried out of the population many genes for various types of socially effective behaviour, leaving the home population impoverished. But in practice the existence of these genes is only hypothetical, and even if they did exist the emigrants carried with them, also and undoubtedly, culturally transmitted tendencies to vigorous behaviour.

generations or not. How far is the arising of There are a few cases however,-for instance

culturally novel ideas a process which can be when Jewish populations have migrated into

characterized as random, even in the restricted or out of a country, with whose population they

sense in which we have seen this term should be have not engaged in extensive cross-breeding,

used in the biological sphere? What is it that but on whose life they have exerted a consider-

determines the intensity of the natural selective able influence-in which one may deduce that

pressure for or against the preservation of new this influence has been primarily a cultural

ideas? Again, items capable of cultural trans- rather than a genetic one. Even if we were to

mission such as ideas, techniques or skills do make the unsafe assumption that it is their genes

not occur in isolation but are found in co- which endow the Jewish people or the Chinese

ordinated groups. Can we find here some parallel with great ability in trade, the effect which a

to the genetic phenomena of linkage and re- small number of Jews or Chinese may have on

combination? The cultural exploitive system, the economic existence of the people surrounding

the system of choosing and modifying the them can only be the result ofcultural rather than

environment, is also obviously very highly genetic transmission. Again, the rapidity in

developed. Again, cultures reacting to external terms of numbers of generations, with which

stresses may become particularly liable to many steps of evolution take place (such as, say,

modification in certain directions, exhibiting the formation of the characteristic United States

phenomena similar to those we have attributed culture out of an extraordinarily mixed European

to the epigenetic system. All these parallels, immigrant population) is hardly compatible

however, remain as yet very incompletely with the operations of the genetic evolutionary

worked out. It would probably be profitable to mechanism and, it would seem, must in the

pursue them.6

main be attributed to the actions of the

27

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

human cultural evolutionary system. consider of major importance in the evolution

When we can discern cultural differences of mankind, the cultural system of transmission

between two human groups, does the main usually contributes incomparably more than the

responsibility for these lie with the system of genetical. Even when we can be certain that

cultural transmission or with that of genetic genetical changes have occurred, as for instance

transmission? Again, from an a priori stand- in the comparison between Africans and

point one must expect differences in both Europeans, there are only one or two examples in

systems to be involved, and it is exceedingly which these changes can be shown to have any

difficult to assess the relative importance of the practical importance.

two contributing factors. It is quite clear that races such as the West Africans, the Maoris and
the Chinese, differ genetically from Europeans. Some of these genetic differences are obviously expressed in skin colour; there must surely be others, more difficult to detect. But is there any reason, for instance, to suppose that it is the differences in the gene pool between the Chinese and the European populations which have caused the one to develop a social system based on such relatively unindividualistic systems as
Confucianism and Buddhism and the other a civilisation inspired by such a different system of thought and feeling as Christianity? I see no a priori reason to suppose anything of the kind; nor is there sufficient factual evidence to estab-
lish such a conclusion.

The genetic system of a population, as Lerner,8 in particular, has pointed out, shows a
considerable power of resistance to factors such as natural or artificial selection which attempt to alter it. I have argued that the epigenetic system shows similar characteristics of unresponsiveness.3 One might expect, and I think the evidence suggests, that cultural systems also have some tendency to stability. This is probably
correlated to some extent with their size. The fantastically rapid transformation of Manus society occurred in a minute population of only a few thousands; one could hardly expect the fifty millions of Nigeria or the five hundred millions of China to alter as rapidly. One cannot, therefore, always expect the processes of change mediated by the cultural evolutionary system to

Again, one can find examples, particularly in occur in a shorter time than those which might

quite recent times, in which human populations be carried out by the genetic system. It is only in have undergone important changes in periods of favourable cases that the critical evidence

time which seem much too short to allow of emerges which shows that steps in human evonoteworthy alterations in their genetic endow- lution can take place at a rate much faster than

ment. The change in West Africa from the conditions described a century ago, to the

the genetic mechanisms could bring about. Cultural phenomena which involve stability

present highly sophisticated and technologically over long periods, need not necessarily, on a

competent modern societies, can only have been
accompanied by exceedingly small, if any, changes in the general gene pool. One of the most striking of such changes, and one of the very few that has been carefully studied by a

priori grounds, be attributed to the genetical system; there is no reason to doubt that cultural transmission may operate over many generations. Such questions will only be answerable when we find further methods of gathering empirical data

highly trained specialist, is that of the Manus people of the Admiralty Islands in the Pacific,
studied by Margaret Mead.7 This transformation from a palaeolithic to at least the beginnings of

which will enable us to distinguish the contributions of the two information-transmitting systems in each particular case.

a modern society has taken place within a life-

time; that is to say, it has involved no genetic

REFERENCES

alteration. It is a most remarkable example of 1. Bateson, W. 1909. Mendel's Principles of Heredity.

how powerful the cultural evolutionary system

Cambridge University Press.

may be.
These examples suggest, in my opinion, that in producing the changes of the kind which we

2. Darlington, C. D. 1939. The Evolution of Genetic Systems. Cambridge University Press.
3. Waddington, C. H. 1957. The Strategy of the Genes. London, Allen & Unwin.

28

THE WOODHULL LECTURE

4. Waddington, C. H. 1956. Genetic assimilation of the bithorax phenotype. Evolution, 10, 1-13; 1957. The genetic basis of the "assimilated bithorax" stock. J. Genet, 55, 241-245.
5. Darlington, C. D. 1958. The Control of Evolution in Man. (Woodhuil lecture.) Proc. Roy. Inst. 37, 77: Nature, London, 182, 14: The Eugenics Review, 50, 169: See also The Facts of Life. 1953. London, Allen & Unwin.

6. Waddington, C. H. 1959. The human evolutionary
system. Proc. Conference on Darwin & Sociology, Edinburgh, April 1959 (in press).
7. Mead, Margaret. 1956. New Lives for Old. London, Gollancz.
8. Lerner, I. M. 1954. Genetic Homeostasis. Edinburgh, Oliver & Boyd.

THE EUGENICS SOCIETY
DARWIN RESEARCH FELLOWSHIP
Applications are invited for a Darwin Research Fellowship from persons qualified in science or in medicine wishing to pursue (preferably) Full-time Research Work in the field of human population genetics with special reference to the range of human variability.
The Fellowship is offered in the salary range £800 to £2,000 plus superannuation. The appointment will be for up to three years.
Application forms may be obtained, together with further information, from the General Secretary, The Eugenics Society, 69 Eccleston Square, London, S.W.l. (Tel.: VICtoria
2091.)
29

