PRO.LEMS OF POPULATION FROM THE
cONSERVATIVE VIEWPOINT

AT te discussion on population prob- Empire and our standard of life ? WVhile we

lems Which 'was held at the Conserva- and the other Western Powers would be

tive Party Conference in September declining in numbers, the countries of the

I937, MR, DUNCAN SANDYS, M.P. (Norwood), Balkans, Soviet Russia, and the peoples of

move& the following resolution.:

the Far East (with their already vast popula-

"That this conference, viewing with concern tions) would still be continuing to multiply.

the progressive, decline in the 'birth-rate, con- He was certainly not advocating what was

gratulates the, Minister of Health on having

decided.to i

a special inquiry into this

problem and sss.itssupport for any mneasures

which the (ovenment may think it wise to

called " breeding babies for cannon fodder." Nevertheless, we should be shirking our responsibility if we were to conceal from

adopt to.encour the increase in the numbers ourselves the fact that a great empire like

of healthy children: on which the future welfare ours, whose population would be growing

of the nation depends."

progressively smaller and older, must m-

He said that ever since about I870 our evitably become increasingly vulnerable to

birth-rate 'had been failing more and more attack.

steeply. In three or four years' time it was A declining population must inevitably

expected that the number of births would be involve a deterioration in the whole standard

fewer than the - nmber of deaths. That of life of our people. With a population

meant that our population would then start whose numbers are declining, and whose

decreasin first slowly, then prose average age is rising, we should be faced

gressively. faster.

with the situation of a smaller and smaller

The population 'of England and Wales proportion of active workers having to

was now. 4I,000,000. It was estimated that support an ever-increasing proportion of old

even if the birth-rate and death-rate were to people. Old-age pensions at present

become stabilized at the present level (and amounted to £40,000,000. In less than

that was a-;most optuiistic assumption) our thirty years' time they would be costing

population would. n sixty years' time have nearly £65,000,000.

fa len to 28,000,000.- If, on the other hand, Those were the dangers. What could be

the birth-rate continued to decline (which -done to avert themn? There were two ways

for a time was.more .than probable) then by of attempting to raise the birth-rate: one

thatsame date bour numbers were likely to was to do what they had done in Italy, and

,i~e shrunk 'to. less than one-half of what make birth* control illegal---a most retro-

they were to-day,, -and in. a hundred years' grade step. The other was so to improve

time it, .migh,t wel be that we should have social and economic conditions as to make

dwindled to somewher between 4,000,000 parents glad to have more children, and that,

and 5,o000,oo0.

he was sure, was the only civilized way to

Perhaps th.e most disquieting phenomenon approach this problem. There were many

of a declinin.g birth-rate ,was the progressive reasons which made people restrict the size

rise .in. the average age of the ,popullation. of their families--the hardships of confine-

For exam.ple, .in, forty years' time, although ment, the interference with a woman's

our total population- would .then be con- earning capacity, the expense of feeding and

siderab,ly' smaller .than it was now,,*.there clothing, the cost of education, the smallness

would 'be .more than twice as. m.any :peopl.e over sixtyfwe Kyears of age as there were

of the home, the drudgeryr of housework,
and numerous other reasons.

Many different methods of encouraging

How would ths affect the security of ithe larger famiilies had- *been -*-advocated:

253

254 TE EUGENICS REVIEW

marriage loans, family allowances, a longer could not get married at all till he wa.

period of rest before confinement for working earning a certain salary. Let them contrast

mothers, attendance by children of all this with the action of one of their universi.

classes at the free elementary schools, the ties, which gave £60 benefit to every member

de-urbanization of industr, more labour- of the staff for each child he had. The

saving dwellings, more crEches and nursery marriage rate was as important as the birth.

schools. Some of these measures, together rate, because if they had fewer marriages

with others, would very likely have to be those who were married would have a greater

adopted.

responsbility thrust upon them. rhe people

The Government had, however, wisely who said that a smaller population was going

decided that before determining their policy to improve the unemployment problem were

they must have the fullest possible informa- very shortsighted. A smaller population

tion. Hence the welcome announcement of would only mean a smaller demand for

an inquiry. The Minister of Health and the goods and an increase. in the costs of produc.

Government were to be warmly congratu- tion, and that naturally would make things

lated on having had the courage and far- even more difficult to carry on the export

sightedness to tackle this difficult and trade. This was a national problem, and it

delicate problem. The purpose of the resolu- could be best left to the National Govern.

tion was to assure them of the wholehearted ment to deal with.

backing of their supporters in the momentous MR. E. S. OAK_RHIND (Isle of Thanet)

task they had undertaken.

moved as an- amendment to delete all the

He was confident that as a nation we words after the word " problem."

should not be found lacking in a sense of He said that if the Conference adopted the

responsibility for the future. We were not resolution they would be pledging them.

going to let our British Empire go the way selves to accept any measure that might

of the great empires of the past-dwindle, arise from this Government inquiry upon an

decay, and disappear. Britain's destiny still issue which affected every man and every

lay ahead of her. The hopes of the world, of woman not only in that Conference but

democracy, of progress, of civilization were throughout the whole country. He had no

to-day centred in the British race. Brtain objection to an inquiry. Indeed, he con-

had a part to play in history, and she meant gratulated the Government on taking up this

to play it. (Cheers.)

inquiry, but he did feel that in an issue of

LT.-COL. J. SANDEMAN ALLEN, M.P. (West such domestic magnitude the findings of this

Birkenhead), seconded the resolution. He inquiry should be put before the people, and,

said that he knew of a case of a German above all, before a Conservative Conference,

woman whose mother was English. She had before they became part of the law of the

forty-two first cousins; forty-one of them land. Parents had one great fear, and that

were German and one English. That showed was that after they had made their sacrifices

the decline in the productive capacity of the for their families, they would be faced with

English. This was not a motion to produce the position that their children would not be

cannon fodder and to encourage war. It was able to find places in which they would be

one which was far more likely to push war able to earn -their livring in this great country

into the background. The problem that they of theirs.

were facing might be the problem of the MR. H. JENNINGS (Isle of Thanet) seconded

future, but it was the responsibility of the amendment. He said that his association

to-day, and they must stand by their re- believed that the correct way to proceed was

sponsibility. It was little shnort of criminal first to know what w.as to be d-one and to

that municipalities should prevent men and- agree afterwards. Speaki;ng- as a single man

women teachers from getting married and (laughter) hle assured them that there was a

remaining in their jobs. The same thing certain amrount of fear in the younger

applied to large firms, which said that a man generatiotn in these days, because the rearing

POPULATION PROBLEMS

255

Todfhreefrnaem*miiwligaehsstwallsaw.naday-sovietrhtyehehfeesaalrva"gyt-hhraeetasppoonnoesfi'bsuinlciehtimyl-.-
ployment. They were heartily in support of

the Government's plan, but they did not

want to sign a blank cheque. (A delegate:

"Get married.")

COUNCILLOR MRS. STEVENSON (Leeds) said

that there was a serious omission in that the

resolution asking the Govuernment to en-
courage an increase in the population said

nothing as to the quality of the proposed

increase. During her municipal work, par-

ticularly on the West Riding Mental Health
Board, she' had been gradually filled with

alarm and apprehension for the future of this

country because she- found that our lowest

types were increasing out of al proportion

to our highest types. She begged the

Goverrnment to take due account of this

factor while they were inquinrng into this

vital problem. Things would be made

worse, not better, unless we. saw to it that

our better strains were encouraged to produce more population, and unless at the

same time our worse strains were dis-

couraged. -To take an analogy from garden-

ing, it was fairly
plant dandelion gladioli.

obvious that they could not
seeds and expect to raise

icpGnooatpSvmeuhelelrelaentfc-ditrmiouoednamnl.ntottmthySuephosebetrsjiegschewwtteeerlttdecooioriaemtacnetttdhiioapnntrc.ierttsehae-Oesnbuetiurnticbnrmeeooitasunhstrgee kaicntdi.velyShdeisacgorureaegdedthfartomsoprloopnaggaatsinwgotmheeinr

teachers and women in the municipal and

civril services, were penalized on marriage by

having to leave the service, so long should we

continue to discourage the bearing of chil-

dren by some of the most valuable and

intellectual types of people, thus preventing

that increase in the population in the direc-

tion that all so earnestly desired.

theLADMiniLsItMerE'RsICKdescaiisdiotnhattwohilienswteiltuctoemiianng

inquiry, she felt that she would be voicing

the views of a large: number of delegates in

stresng the importance-4or the
of the community~f supporting

protection
only those

mdptlmwcucpiAhdwJptbbawpppeHobcOwiiasmyvMcspNioaaaauherrhrnhhosutatmruoarenietaeauhemifexaonoaahogorecuieeaodptptlioentipiasntatpanupeptSglmrnmetimntlmadesaiugdneprdigurocitnttetulolatiItelhr.eiydtimlsuaetuci,rlgninoraserhaldierdtoseRrnsotewgiceytetruatnnttecattsareo,onsthofvnahhrdbmbthusetdttisiTeeonktbaanttivsKaapanaoaewreinescewtooisiyoesrltocienshmioeelantblIeaweorntnadoddnhinsraokaiecofottrloescn.w'nNooenatnmchlileslenwftnopfeterya.tefyseidrilguGeyaihpahncneiohmloswolhnwawnfatreoicleSnanrtaccocpoheAoHamlctoielsohibobtidssaefethcaoTfdhooLwtdifkhnTeaoofcihiltudnaiosebltrtyuihuewhublgiEaaqeawhmeh.swhbtcdshIeewhotwneslesrwrsrtbuaauenlYsontseeyeeeohsinbmahedciejyahreaaatetmsnyhcsuuuadltypwtwureyeqqacllrlagfugluleThuWcloloolbo.ieeluuoorlyeobsbciticeodtoirnihdccthoneoocrOa-deuermewutodtfnooaobhg%ngendeoehhfnkaib.nswncOhyainligoernnlundmeedLtvimuenuaoyreattmpnaenosfamdtdnoDeagelronneaalrelrteiselribtdpatiAnhnotsstrddprefdlseddtu,hnsteyntcoteiortdlafteiroihtoemite.fgvgeepaeha.dtnevhtiopelahmereewoieliiddmsgnteetientteonikMnnegannpnaeritrniieaepgiilohohdmsahdcdtioemenher,ngbtyanpacnbstardfrIeecnttdkeeu.fhuoniolenhrsiabelyoheotercarisneteaifeiutedesnwngmila,dettsxssmsobmenCnsnlrdfspsfhretvtsotey,ynttvhuwnylinetqohiaoTsisotolreouhrsahtm.tec.seaenittfusatdlblrmsateihswplseongeaehmrnti.scaitsetiiahwtebsrtntdreueeorewrttcidwryfhctsofiaImnpieMius.puItlupomotleeeyoynpaoshfntnofogsHaiicntrnmtotosaroyd.iranrbmteekcteuiafq.mranrohmtoieppsgeresaynocIosllhohuotldiirwpenmnpittunrietbtftinnHettbnaeeieessmisrdInhohrtaFoucnloelhoanelowfionsemamftetiifdtieeroogdasuraetwnifvnasgyntcyastloiseocoopstittttbattmtsliaiieuhtartrnsntngltn,tntnttocwihhlahuotteftiteoornaeostahhmlhehlhhnhtohobnotloeeaxanihhehoyrnu.unrigsasayeiiyey.sye-letet-rone-nt.fywy.e,ettamedssrsrsssne

256 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

There was anxiety on the future trend of giving the n ary information to t

the population, and it was growing in many registrar confidentially, not for entry on the

countries. There were other countries where public registers but for statistical purposes

life was hard, and often precarious, where only, as in the case of the census inquiry

the population was increasing in some cases He hoped it would be possible to proceed at

rapidly. In this country until recently the an early date on these lines. There was no |

trend had been unmistakable, and it was question of the* Governrment acting on its

true that if we accepted certain assumptions own account without any Parliamentary

our population would fall in thirty years authority.

perhaps to some 30,000,000, and in a hun- He would advise considerable caution as

dred years to 5,ooo,000. Since the birth-rate to the reasons 'for the causes of the fall jin

reached its lowest level in this country in population. He had had a large correspon..

1933 it had remained during the three dence on this matter. Some people suggested

completed years which had elapsed not only that our population had declined because of

without any further decline but with a high taxation. On the other hand, sorn

slight upward tendency. This tendency had people pointed out that families were prob.

so far continued. during the present incom- ably smaller among those who paid the

plete year. That was a remarkable, and he highest rates of taxation. Others had

thought unprecedented, phenomenon. Too suggested that we must put it down to the

much must not be built on it. The more the effect of unemployment and other adverse

check in the decline was prolonged, the more conditions. Others had pointed out that

it appeared that continuous decline was not this decline in population had -proceeded

inevitable and irresistible. It might also during a period. when there had been a

show that forces existed in this country continuous improvement in the 'conditions

having an upward direction which might of the people. It was true that a number of

well provide a basis for a constructive people said that they had no desire to pro.

policy in this country. The fact was that duce children as cannon fodder. It had also

much more information was wanted on the been pointed out that the fall in the.popula.

whole subject. There were two inquiries tion was the sharpest when there was the

going on at present-one voluntary under least fear of war. One expert observer said,

the chairmanship of Professor Saunders, "The dwindling family is the result of what

and the other by the Registrar-General- is worst and what is best in the potential

and they were closely co-operating.

parents, Caution and sell-idulgence, re-

Before anything effective could be sponsibility-and the careless love of pleasure,

achieved steps would have to be taken to both cry out against the large family and

obtain really complete vital statistics. Our even the small one."

present ones were unsatisfactory and incom- He thought he would have the support of

plete. We knew the number of children born all parties in the House in saying, particu-

to the population as a whole, but we wanted larly in view of the doubtful success which

more facts like the ages of the parents, the so far had been achieved in relation to the

date and duration o-f the marriage, the order steps taken by certain foreign countries in

of the births and matters of that kind. He this matter, that it was essential;that we

hoped we would be able to build up annually should secure a foundation of evidence and

a continuing volume of statistics, and he fact as to the operative causes before any

thought it would be best done through the step could usefully be takten. He believed

registration system. Parliamentary autho- that was the practical and the best way to

rity would be necessary for this step. Hle deal with this difficult and complex problem.

wanted to emphasize that the confidential The amendment was~carried, and the

aspect of this matter must be strictly pre- motion as amended was- agreed to unani-

served. He thought it could be done by mously.

Nuggic Rew1, Vol.XI, Nlo.4

