G. C. L. BERTRAM,
M.A., PH.D.
A Population Picture of British Guiana

O NE OF THE placards, carried in the pressure of numbers. Active "development"

peaceful processions through George- programmes are in operation.

town, British Guiana, on the day before Whatever the outside view may be, the internal

the riots of February 16th, 1962, carried the opinion on the demographic position is the

slogan " The Budget means Birth Control". one that is reflected in local policy. In this field

Another, in a different vein, read "Capitalists there is indeed wide divergence at present

are not Angels but we still need them". Muddled between the two. Reminding ourselves that the

thinking and mixed motives were very evident in limitation of conception-the work of the Inter-

this land of kindly, courteous people now so national Planned Parenthood Federation and of

sadly reft by racial tension between those of national Family Planning Associations-has

African and those of Indian origin.

two primary reasons, the one personal and

The political background in B.G. is not for humanitarian, the other demographic and

discussion here though its ramifications and economic, let us view the British Guiana scene.

influence are quite inescapable. The whole At present there is seemingly complete local

Caribbean region is both one of great demo- belief that "development" will be sufficiently

graphic interest and one which offers immense rapid to take care of the spreading population

scope for intensive humanitarian effort.

increase, indeed that such increase may even

British Guiana, which totals just on 600,000 be valuable to help forward "development".

people, has now one of the very highest rates of British Guiana, by Caribbean standards, is a

population increase in the world, at 3.43 per large country, some 83,000 square miles of the

cent per annum.* There has been a spectacular South American continent. A single island in the

fall in mortality in the post-war years. This mouth of the Essequibo River exceeds in area the

results primarily from the almost complete whole of Barbados which supports nearly a

eradication of malaria from the populous quarter of a million people, tight packed though

coastal region following an intensive campaign they may be. The present population of British

actuated and led by Dr. Giglioli, the eminent Guiana is confined to little more than coastal

malariologist. Anopheles darlingi is now virtually and riverine strips totalling perhaps two hundred

extinct: a strongly anthropophil species of miles long and about five miles wide. The remain-

mosquito, it was exterminated by spraying the der of the country is occupied by few other than

inside walls of all dwellings when D.D.T. first some thousands of Amerindians. The "develop-

became widely available immediately after ment of the interior"-hydro-electric power,

World War II. The decrease of infantile mor- forestry, ranching, gold and diamonds-is a

tality has been astonishing. Unemployment and goal which raises high hopes beyond the present under-employment are rising. The educational reliance upon bauxite, sugar and rice. Potentiality

problem is increasingly severe through the mere may glitter, but feasibility is always open to

* See 1960 Demographic Yearbook, the latest issued by the Statistical Office of the United Nations. The British

debate when real attempts are made to appraise the situation. Further, the observer will prob-

Guiana rate of population increase is only exceeded by (American) Samoa 3'45; Grenada 3-46; St. Vincent 3.52; Cook Islands 3-56; British Honduras 3-67; Surinam (Dutch Guiana) 3-77; and Brunei 4-5.

ably conclude that whatever developments may come they will not be such as to demand large numbers of individual men and women for

83

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1962, 54, 2.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

their advancement. Capital and vigour, expertise Contrasting, and somewhat simplifying, the

and a few skilled men, would seem the real racial and other divergences, the urban people

requirements. The outsider may think that the in B.G. are mainly of African origin and nomin-

actual rate of the "development of the interior" ally Christian; they are fortunate in the posses-

will by no means be commensurate with a sion of a markedly higher standard of living

population increase already as high as 3.43 per than is common in the whole Caribbean region.

cent per year, a doubling in under twenty years. The rural people, in general of Hindu Indian

The previous doubling in numbers took just origin, live much closer to the earth, and are

forty years, which is about the present rate for mostly engaged in the cultivation of sugar or of

the world as a whole.

rice. To the urban population, whose wants are

On the other hand local opinion is totally now largely met by imported articles of every

different: there is faith that "development" will kind, contraceptives are available as from

absorb all the extra hands which the years will chemists' shops in England. The ignorance of

bring. There is faith that gifts and loan capital the majority, rather than lack of availability

will flow in (or ought to flow in) from the out- and opportunity, is there the obstacle. In the

side world to speed such development. There is rural areas the standard of living is low by

determination that mainland British Guiana contrast with the capital, Georgetown, but less

shall provide for its own and not for the over- low than in the majority of the tropical areas

spill populations fast-multiplying in the Carib- of the world. Total ignorance of contraception,

bean islands. Any suggestions that contra- lack of availability and lack of facilities are,

ceptive measures are desirable on demographic as elsewhere, the normal features of this mode

and economic grounds at present find few listen- of life.

ers. Local belief of this kind among leaders is, The condition, in particular of rural Indian

however, inadequate to check an outward flow mothers, is now so often one of indescribable

of individuals who, making decisions for them- dejection and anxiety. The marriages still are

selves, seek opportunity in the United Kingdom mainly arranged and the young girls start their

and elsewhere.

pregnancies as soon as biological fertility

In the realms of family planning, in terms arrives. The seventh or eighth pregnancy at age

personal and humanitarian, the position in B.G. twenty-three is far from rare and by that early

is very different in one sense, yet similar in age the total figure is not yet reached by half.

another. Political emotion and insinuation, Until fifteen years ago malaria took its toll of

racial tension and the desire for a maximum of infants while now all, or nearly all, just live.

voters, all aid the burying of heads in sand. No The marriage bond is far from secure so that

political leaders nor public figures will out- the increasing economic burden often leads the

spokenly demand or strive for a programme of man to wander, the woman to bear the fruit in

birth control, even on purely humanitarian progressive anxiety.

grounds, to relieve a maternal misery which is Of high significance was a paper read by the

appalling. Private discussion with potential eminent Dr. B. P. Bhattacharya (the head of

leaders or activators of opinion demonstrate the Maternity Hospital in Georgetown, B.G.)

clearly the difficulties in which they find them- to the Caribbean Medical Conference in April

selves. They are aware, but seemingly they cannot 1959. His paper dealt with mortality in relation

act even though they aver that substantial efforts to multiparity, and the sterilization of "grand

in family planning would be acceptable almost multips"-i.e. women already with ten or more

everywhere. Opposition they regard as small and children. There are many who bless him for his

likely in any event to be ephemeral-if only aid in a hospital much overcrowded through

somebody would do something, somebody not sheer population pressure.

inhibited by local political and other pressures. Of birth control clinics there are none at all

The Roman Catholic difficulty here is not large save the one run privately by the redoubtable

and experience elsewhere has demonstrated its Nurse Rose in Georgetown. She, recently, was

wasting nature.

greatly encouraged by a personal visit from

84

A POPULATION PICTURE OF BRITISH GUIANA

Mrs. Ottesen-Jensen, the President ofthe I.P.P.F. weary women already with ten or more children.

and Mr. T. Griessemer, the Secretary of its Turn now to the future. It must be admitted

Western Hemisphere Region. Her work is re- that in the world setting B.G.'s population and

markable, but she is alone. Additionally there is importance are not great. Yet its 600,000 people

information that birth control advice is available have almost the highest natural rate of increase

from one clinic run by a Christian denomination. in the world. Its women, in particular the rural,

The government rural hospital services are suffer a misery which is avoidable only by the

very importantly enlarged by the philanthropic rapid growth of family planning facilities.

efforts of the Bookers group of companies. However, if prophecy is to be made it is that

This group has many activities among which its in fact there will be no early amelioration of

management of 80 per cent of the sugar estates their present distress through local effort.

of British Guiana is notable. In this activity Further, whatever nucleus there may be of

Bookers are substantial employers of labour, potential local leaders in this area of sorely

largely of cane cutters who are very subject to needed social service, those leaders are likely

miscellaneous injuries and ills. Kindness has for some while to feel so restricted by special

led now to an embarrassment, in the extension impediments that mere monetary aid and

of care to the families of employees. And that encouragement will be insufficient. This normal

means maternity work both in the provision form of encouragement to indigenous effort may

of estate midwives, and in the hospital treat- on occasion be inadequate. If the observer may

ment and after-care of worn-out girls. The pro- be permitted a judgement, it is that, in the special

priety ofcontraceptive advice and facilities under local circumstances pertaining to B.G., the need

these conditions would be debatable quite is for outside aid in the form of clinics set up

apart from the usual difficulties in the humble with outside money and outside staff, both

homes in which the women live and breed. It is provided by a philanthropic international or-

noteworthy, but not novel, that the midwives ganization or great foundation. That would be

are paid on the basis of actual deliveries. Their the yeast which might then in quite a short space

help with contraceptive advice would naturally of time activate local leadership and so leaven

be problematical.

and transform the Guianian family pattern

The outside observer may note with interest towards a personal happiness which is not

the historical evolution of social customs which possible for a multitude of women to-day. In

has led to the wide acceptability in peninsular the first instance the minimum local require-

Indian villages, of voluntary sterilization of ment might be an informal assurance from the

men with three or more children, in government Prime Minister that any internationally reputable

clinics. Among people of like antecedents a clinic organization would receive no official

few generations back but now living in B.G., obloquy. It is not too much to hope that such

sterilization is so far a special medical aid for an assurance would become available.

85

