STATISTICAL STUDIES IN
GENETICS AND HUMAN
INHERITANCE

THE
ANNALS OF EUGENICS

Edited by R. A. Fisher, F.R.S.

will continue, until further notice,

to be published in quarterly parts,

without reduction in size. or
increase in price.

Subscriptions, in advance, 50/- per volume. Four

quarterly parts obtainable separately at 15/- each

from the Galton Laboratory, c/o Rothamsted
Experimental Station, Harpenden, Herts.

 

@ ANATOMY

@ ANTHROPOLOGY
@ MORPHOLOGY
@ NEUROLOGY

@ NUTRITION

@ PHYSIOLOGY

@ ZOOLOGY

@ Journals of The Wistar
Institute of Anatomy
and Biology merit your
careful examination.

@ Contributed to and
edited by outstanding
scientists in the respective fields.

Authoritative ! Informative !

Invaluable to the scientist
and research worker.

For further information, address

The Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology

WooDLAND AVENUE and THIRTY-SIXTH STREET
PHILADELPHIA, Pa.

 

  

 

 

 
 

ROYAL ECONOMIC SOCIETY

The Membership Subscription now covers the
receipt of the following :

  

  
 

THE ECONOMIC JOURNAL. Quarterly.
Economic History. -Asnual.

Statistical Bulletin on Economic Conditions in
Great Britain.

Reviews, Recent Periodicals and New Books.

By joining the Society, all these varied publications,
enabling the reader to keep abreast with the developments of economic science, can be obtained for
£1.1.0 a year.

The privileges of membership also include the
right to subscribe at reduced prices to books published under the Society’s auspices.

 

     
  

  
   

    
 

  

Application for membership should be addressed to:
The Secretary, Royal Economic Society,

   

4 Portugal Street, Kingsway, London, W.C.2

   
 

  

Annual Subscription 21.1.0.
Life Composition 2£10.10.0.

    

YOUR BABY’S
FIRST YEAR

| By
Dr. Marie Stopes

 

 
 
 

5 S, et, postage 6d.

“ This stimulating and sometimes
provocative book is addressed to
mothers of moderate means and

contains much useful advice.”
—LANCET.

  
  

    
  

PUTNAM & CO. LTD.
42 Gt. Russell Street, London, W.C.1

  
66

Mr. Lafitte suggests that family allowances
should be largely paid, not in money, but in
coupons exchangeable for specified quantities
of such foodstuffs as milk, butter, eggs,
oranges, and perhaps for children’s clothing
and footwear. The existing children’s ration
books could be used, with very little modification, as “ earmarked money ”’ for such a

e. In war-time our problem is the fair
distribution of scarce supplies. Couponrationing restricts the amount (in weight) of
a particular commodity which each individual may buy each week. But except in
the case of meat, which is rationed by money
value, there is no restriction on the amount
of money which may be spent on rationed
goods. Particularly in the case of clothing,
where the well-off are able to buy goods of
far better quality than the poor, couponrationing does not ensure “ fair shares for
all.”” Even in the case of foodstuffs ratzoning
by prices prevents a considerable proportion
of poor families (which include a large pro
portion of the nation’s children) from buying.

the full amount of their rations. Since our
problem is to make the most economical use
of the man-power and material resources
needed for necessary consumption and to cut
down unnecessary consumption as far as
possible, so as to free as large a proportion
as possible of national resources for the war
effort, coupon-rationing may not be the best

way of organizing scarcity equitably. It 
might be better to adopt a general system of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW ¢

“‘ earmarked money ’’ for all basic necessities,
and to apply it not only to children but to
the entire population. Every individual
would then be ensured a fair share of every
rationed commodity, and none could complain of poverty. “‘ Earmarked money ”’ is
the logical implication of siege-economics.
But it might be developed in the post-war
period as the basis of a social policy which
eliminates want and insecurity by ensuring
to every citizen a free supply of the basic
necessities of life. In the post-war world the
State could use “‘ earmarked money ” to see
that every citizen, not merely every child,
gets an adequate supply of milk, bread,
butter, eggs and other essential foodstuffs,
free of charge. People would naturally be
allowed to buy additional quantities of basic
necessities, and their money incomes would
naturally vary, as at present, according to
the value and amount. of work they per-.
formed. There would be no question of
deducting from wages the price of the free
commodities supplied to a family. The
necessary adjustment of purchasing power
could easily be effected by changes in the
price level of other commodities. The provision of basic necessities as a free social
service for all would not only greatly facilitate
economic planning ; it might well prove a
major measure in a programme for the
reconstruction of Europe on the basis of the
principles of the Atlantic Charter.

SCIENTIFIC BOOKS

in MEDICAL, CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL and PHYSICAL SCIENCE
supplied from stock, or obtained promptly to order.
FOREIGN BOOKS not in stock obtained under Licence.

A visit to this Department is respectfully suggested.
Please write for CATALOGUES, mentioning interests

H. K. LEWIS & Co. Lid.,

Phone: EUSton 4282 (5 lines)

 

136 GOWER STREET
LONDON W.C.1
80

in my locality (McFeeters, 1939), and have
shown there pedigrees of rodent ulcer and
hydramnios (conditions not previously, so
far as I am aware, reported as familial), and
also a sex-linked pedigree of muscular
dystrophy.

It would be of immense value if large-scale
investigations could be made into the hereditary or familial elements in various morbid
processes. The system of clinics for the study
of disease in varying aspects, common in the
United States of America and in Germany,
might well be imitated in this country, while
a closer co-operation between practising
physicians, hospitals and geneticists might
lead to notable discoveries in the realm of
heredity.

The realization that any given disease is
inherited as a dominant or recessive character is of immense importance and puts a
valuable weapon in the practitioner’s hand.
It assists him, not only in diagnosis and
prognosis, but also in the realm of eugenics,
which Rolleston (1934) has termed “ the
most effective, economical and humane of
the departments of preventive medicine.” 
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

References

Baur, E., Fischer, E., and Lenz, F. (1931)
Human Heredity, London.

Campbell, M. (1934) Chances of Morbid Inheritance, London.

Cole, L. (1938) Brit. Med. J., 1, 157.

Davenport, C. B. (1923) Proc. Nat. Acad. Sct., 9,
226.

Gates, R. Ruggles (1929) Heredity in Man,
London.

Goddard, H. H. (1914) Feeblemindedness, New
York.

Hines, E. A., jr. and Brown, G. E. (1935) Proc.
Mayo Clin., 10, 371.

Lewis, A. (1934) Chances of Morbid Inheritance,
London.

McFeeters, J. W. (1939) Brit. Med. J., 1, 218.

MacLaren, J. P. (1929) Medical Insurance Examination, London.

Moore, E. (1934) Heredity, Mainly Human,
London.

Penrose, L. S. (1938) Spec. Rep. Ser. Med. Res.
Coun., No. 229.

Rolleston, H. (1934) Chances of Morbid Inheritance, London.

Weitz, W. (1923) Z. Rlin. med., 96.

Weitz, W. (1936) Verh. dtsch. Ges. Kreislauf-.
forsch., 9, 11.

’

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY

Articles appearing in forthcoming issues :

REACTIVITIES OF COLPODA DUODENARIA TO ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS. I. FACTORS
INFLUENCING THE FORMATION OF RESTING CYSTS. By C. V. Taytor and A. G. R. STRICKLAND,

Stanford University.

RETARDATION OF EARLY CLEAVAGE OF URECHIS BY ULTRA-VIOLET LIGHT. By Artuur

C. Gmse, Stanford University.

ON THE KILLING ACTION OF OPTICALLY ISOMERIC NICOTINES IN RELATION TO
PROBLEMS OF EVOLUTION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM IN ANIMALS. By G. F. Gause and

N. P. Smaracpova, Institute of Zodlogy, University of Moscow.
THE PRODUCTION OF DUPLICITAS CRUCIATA AND MULTIPLE HEADS BY REGENERATION
IN EUPLANARIA TIGRINA. By Robert H. Srtser and Vixtor HamBurcer, Washington University.

Edited by W. C. ALLEE, Professor of Zodlogy, The University of Chicago. Published

Quarterly by the University of Chicago Press.

English Agents: CAMBRIDGE

Subscription : 35s. 2d. per year.
UNIVERSITY PRESS
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXIII, No. 3
NOTES AND MEMORANDA 85

resumed, and twenty-four lectures on “ Social
Psychology ”’ by C. A. Mace, M.A., D.Litt.,

ill also begin on Sunday, October roth, at
2 p.m. These will be open to Ordinary, as
well as Diploma, students.

The General Secretary will be glad to send
full particulars, and early applications are
advised. The fee for either Course of twentyfour lectures is {2 ; single lectures 2s.

Informal Luncheon

AN informal luncheon will be held at the
Eccleston Hotel, Eccleston Square, London,
S.W.1, on Tuesday, November 25th, 1941,
at r o'clock. Dr. H. Crichton-Miller of the

National Council for Mental Hygiene will
speak on Nature and Nurture in Mental
Health. Price 2s. 6d. to be paid at the time.
Fellows and Members and their friends who
wish to attend should notify the Secretary of
the Eugenics Society, 69 Eccleston Square,
S.W.TI.

Elections to the Society

THE following have been elected Fellows
(starred) and Members of the Society during
the past quarter:

*C. E. Bedwell, Esq.

A. Dodd, Esq.
2/Lieut. K. J. Burton,
R.A

S. H. Halford, Esq.
N. S. Percival, Esq.

C. O. Carter, Esq. Mrs. Walling.

C. B.C
CONSTRUCTIVE BIRTH CONTROL

SOCIETY AND CLINIC FOUNDED BY Dr. MARIE STOPES IN 1921

The oldest Birth Control Clinic, the first to establish Birth Control
Case Sheets and collect scientific data; C.B.C. Clinics are still the
only free clinics: the only birth control clinics dealing from the first
with all aspects of birth control, i.e. prevention of detrimental births,
spacing of healthy births and inducing potentially desirable pregnancy
in sterile women, and general marital help.

THE PIONEERS OF THE CLINIC MOVEMENT
Library, Museum and Clinics open daily, 10-6 (except Sats.)
Books and Racial supplies may be obtained direct.

TECHNICAL DEMONSTRATIONS for MEMBERS of the MEDICAL PROFESSION
First Thursday each month

Applications to The Hon. Secretary, Headquarters Clinic,

106 Whitfield Street, W.1
PERIODICALS

is often less than the minimum salary of an untrained workman and that this is of great psychological importance because it protects the expert
against the suspicion that he is financially interested. The case for a law of diminished responsibility and the difficulty of diagnosis and the
individualization of treatment to be applied is
discussed. In regard to diagnosis Dr. Aschaffenburg considers the difficulty can be eliminated by
providing a better training for all physicians
especially court physicians and psychiatrists ; but
that all progress in diagnosis and therapy will
never prevent mistakes being made in the choice
of our means of treatment.
W. Norwoop East.

Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly

July 1941, Vol. 19, No. 3.—The greater part of this
issue is devoted to the publication of parts 4, 5 and
6 of the series of studies of Medical Evaluation of
Nuiritional Status and there is also an article on
Haemoglobin Values in Pennsylvania Mass Studies
in Human Nutrition.

93

Dr. Regine K. Stix contributes part 2 of his
analysis of Contraceptive Service in Three Areas—
New York City, Cincinnati and Spartanburg, South
Carolina. In all three clinics the diaphragm and
jelly technique was prescribed for 90 per cent of
the patients; but the clinic prescription was
considered zsthetically unacceptable, uncomfortable, difficult to place or too much trouble to use
by 30 per cent of the New York patients (by whom
other contraceptives are easily obtainable) and
by 20 to 24 per cent of the patients of the other
two clinics. The author shows that many couples
returned to the contraceptive methods they had
used before clinic attendance, and suggests that
some attempt should have been made to teach
these patients how best to use the methods with
which they were already familiar. There are, of
course, those people with high fertility and a low
standard of living for whom the use of any contraceptive would ‘be too troublesome. In their case
improved social conditions will probably give rise
to a desire to limit the size of their families.

K. H.

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION

“ For the promotion of knowledge of the course of legislation.in different countries, more particularly in the
several parts of His Majesty’s Dominions, and in the United States.”

President: The Rt. Hon. S. M. BRUCE, C.H., M.C.

Chairman of the Executive Committee: The Rt. Hon. Lord MACMILLAN, G.C.V.O.
Honorary Secretaries : C. E. A. BEDWELL, Esq.
Professor H. C, GUTTERIDGE, K.C.
Annual Subscription = Address: 28 Essex Street, London, W.C.2

One Guinea

 
EUGENICS SOCIETY

OBJECTS :—I. Persistently to set forth the National Importance of Eugenics in order to modify public
opinion, and create a sense of responsibility in the respect of bringing all matters pertaining to parenthood
under the domination of Eugenic ideals.

II. To spread a knowledge of the laws of heredity so far as they are surely known and so far as
that knowledge may affect the improvement of the race.

III. To further Eugenic Teaching, at home, in the schools, and elsewhere.

Applications for Fellowship and Membership should be addressed to the Secretary, Eugenics
Society, 69 Eccleston Square, London, S.W.1. Fellows, who are elected by the Council and vote
on all matters concerning the constitution, pay one guinea per annum; Members pay ten shillings
per annum. Both receive the EvuGEnics Review free, are entitled to attend lectures, discussions
and general meetings, and have the use of the library.

These who are not members can subscribe for the Eucenics Revigw. Communications regarding
subscriptions to the Eucgenics Review should be addressed to Messrs. Macmillan & Co. Ltd., St.
Martin’s Street, London, W.C.32.

Editorial communications and Books and Periodicals for review should be addressed to the Editor.

APPLICATION FORM
To the General Secretary of the Eugenics Society
Sir,
I desire to be admitted as a of the
Eugenics Society, and I accordingly enclose £

in payment of my annual subscription.* I hereby authorize you,

immediately upon my election, to enter my name in the Rebister in
accordance with the terms of the Memorandum and Articles of

Association.

Yours faithfully,

SUS MAatwsrecccsecsscsecsssscsecsrssessnssceeenseccesnessesnneseessanssessassscensnnssses sessersnesccosanssscneaeesen

AAAESS. ovesescsssscscccccvescccerccsssescccnvcscecersusseecessoseesencessecesceconesseescuveseenscuneceessenassensssanssssenen

seseoeeseosese: eeece BOOS OSSOS SOS OO 0 OF OSSOSSOO6O05 0008 08000O0800S00608H05000058 CSO COOSCOOOE SOO ORSCECRSCCOSEER

*Fellowship, £1 10; Membership, 10/-; Composition for Life Fellowship, 7 Ten juineas. The Secretary will be pleased
to send a banker's order form—for regular payment—to any who prefer it. p

 

96
