THE EUGENICS REVIEW

could occur in due course in southern Asia itself. Although the data are not plentiful or easy to handle, he has made a very thorough study, with the aid inter alia of techniques created by Professor Brass.
Indians in Africa are predominantly urban, educated and commercial-at least when considered relatively to their country of origin. Although fertility within marriage is high, marriage itself takes place later than in Asia, and consequently the birth rate is not so large. Such a development would be useful in India as a way of reducingburdensomepopulation growth; it would achieve this without recourse to forms of birth control to which the author's Church might be opposed. One wonders, however, what the prospects really are that the 500 millions in India and Pakistan, mainly rural and uneducated as they are, will in the forseeable future adopt the habits of a million or so persons of their race who live in quite different circumstances in Africa. In spite of this doubt about the author's main reason for writing the book, his study of this group of people is not "slanted" and has a considerable interest of its own.
P. R. C.
PSYCHOTHERAPY
Axline, Virginia M. Dibs: In Search of Self.
London, 1966. Gollancz. Pp. 186. Price 25s.
"DIBS" IS A sensitive, moving and absorbing account of the treatment by play therapy of a highly intelligent five-year-old boy who was living in such a state of unhappy rejection of the world around him that his parents and some of his teachers had assumed him to be mentally defective or hopelessly schizophrenic.
In school the child had refused to participate in any activity; he spent much of the time cowering against a wall, and resisted, often violently, efforts to get him ready to go home. His parents, a gifted and intellectual couple, felt there was nothing which could help him, but they eventually consented to his going to a weekly play session of one hour with Miss Axline at the New York Child Guidance Clinic. In the play room the only direction given to the child was that he should decide for himself what
166

he would do. Miss Axline maintained a passive role, offering neither praise, nor blame, nor affection. She merely quietly repeated some of the comments the boy made, or described in a few simple words the activity in which he had been engaged.
The story is unfolded through the medium of the fully recorded weekly sessions which con-
tinued from the winter until the summer vacation. Apart from a brief and rather cool
initial interview with the boy's mother, there
was for a long time no contact between the therapist and the parents, but as the boy began to make headway the mother came of her own accord to see the therapist and revealed her own and her husband's earlier bitter feelings towards him, and his disturbed early history.
In his unrestricted play he relived many painful experiences and expressed his hostile feelings while comforting himself by infantile activities like sucking a feeding bottle. He also disclosed his innate ability, his love of order, his excellent reasoning powers, and his appreciation of language and of beauty. An independent assessment of his intelligence made at the end of his treatment gave him an IQ of 168: by then he had made a happy adjustment to life at home and school.
This account, beautifully and faithfully related, should be read particularly by those who doubt the profound effects which loneliness and lack of affection can have on the behaviour of a young child.
Another case-history with an equally remarkable outcome has recently been reported by Cyril Williams in the Journal of Developmental Medicine. The child's parents were of the professional class, and his mother had refused
to have any contact with her baby when she learnt soon after his birth that he was hydrocephalic and blind. At five years, after a series of changes of placement in institutions and foster-homes, he was assessed as an idiot, unable to walk, stand, talk or feed himself. His hearing was doubtful, and he had unpleasing mannerisms.
He was admitted to a home for the ineducable blind, where his condition was considered one of psychotic withdrawal. He improved dramatically with the stimulation he received there,

REVIEWS OF BOOKS

rapidly acquired speech, and his IQ score rose. Monsieur A. Isambert describes the develop-

At eight he entered a school for the blind, and at ment of the well-known "Schools for Parents"

sixteen the Royal Normal College for the Blind. which have been successfully developed in

At eighteen he was a well-poised young man France since the last war, having been founded

with considerable charm and good looks, and in 1929 as part of a scheme to overcome the

wide interests. The remarkable change in mental indifference of parents to their children's sexual

and emotional development was due to skilled and emotional problems. The school in Paris

teaching, warm interest and affection.

at first concentrated on teaching parents about

child development, based on psychoanalytic

HILDA LEWIS principles, but was later drawn into much

broader fields of educational psychology and

sociology. It also provides personal psychological

Aspects of Family Mental Health in Europe. By various authors. Public Health Papers, No. 28. Geneva, 1965. WHO. Pp. 124. Price 8s. 6d.

help for the parents themselves, marriage guidance, and advice for young people. M. Isambert enumerates similar organizations in
other European countries, but comments on the relatively slight interest shown in Britain.

THIS BOOK, CONTAINING papers written by Among other papers dealing with the role of

psychiatrists, therapists and other workers from individual and group psychotherapy in clearing

a number of European countries, is evidence of up family upsets, an account by Drs. Jirina

the current widespread interest in the family. Knoblochova and Ferdinand Knobloch of the

The first paper is a stimulating account by methods practised at the Psychiatric Department

Dr. H. Hoffmeyer of the work done for the of the University Polyclinic, Prague, shows how

mother and the family particularly in Scandi- far such efforts have advanced in Central

navian countries, through family protection Europe.

schemes, and specifically in Denmark through The British contributions include an account

the famous "Mothers' Aid Centres". These of the Family Discussion Bureau at the Tavistock

centres provide legal, social, medical and Institute of Human Relations, and of the Child

psychiatric services for unmarried as well as Therapy Clinic at Hampstead, described by

married women. They have a duty to interview Mrs. L. Pincus and Dr. Joseph Sandler

and help women seeking abortion: to provide respectively.

contraceptive advice, to supervise adoptions,

HILDA LEWIS

to support with financial and other aid over-

burdened mothers, and to help resolve family

discord. There is much in these schemes which

ABORTION

is relevant to the revision of our own abortion laws and the Seebohm Committee's inquiry into better ways of integrating our local authority

Abortion: An Ethical Discussion. London, 1965.
Church Information Office. Pp. 70. Price 4s. 6d.

and personal social services.

THIS REPORT IS the work of a committee set up

Among the papers dealing with practical by the Board for Social Responsibility of the

social welfare, there is an interesting account by Church Assembly of the Church of England,

a psychiatrist of the slowly changing situation under the chairmanship of Canon I. T. Ramsey,

in the employment of women in Spain-a Nolloth Professor of the Philosophy of the

country particularly late in making use of this Christian Religion at Oxford, the secretary being

reservoir of labour and talent. Various suppor- the Reverend G. R. Dunstan. It is lucid, impartial,

tive schemes and centres to protect the family and thorough, and presents a cogent argument

from breakdown have already been found for a limited reform of the present law, while

necessary, although at the same time the stopping short of the proposals made by Lord

cultural value of widening the women's horizons Silkin in the Bill which has recently been before

has been recognized.

the House of Lords.

167

