E DITORIAL AND OTHER NOTES

THE appearance of another new Review, when there are already

so many of them, may seem to the casual observer to require

justification. This is easily supplied. THE

Features of this Review

EUGENICS

REVIEW

is

not

like

other

Reviews.

It has a definite plan and purpose, the noblest

that can be imagined-the betterment of the Human Race. It is

not a collection of papers arranged to suit the miscellaneous tastes

of the British public. Nor, on the other hand, is it a dry scientific

serial only to be understood by the initiated. And yet its

catholic, and at the same time solid character, gives to it some of

the qualities of each of these productions. It owes no allegiance

to any political party; it is neither liberal, nor conservative,

nor socialist; still it is each of these in turn in the interest

of the progress of humanity. Lastly, it conflicts with no

theological system except when such a system forbids inquiry

into Nature's methods, or would extinguish the torch of truth

which it is the duty of each generation to.hand on to the next.

THE range of the REVIEW will be, as Mr. Galton says of Eugenics in his " Foreword," "very wide and varied." It will
comprise: (i) Biology, in so far as that branch
Its range of learning is concerned with Heredity and
Selection; (2) Anthropology, in so far as it throws light on questions of race and the priceless institution of Marriage; (3) Politics (in the classical and broad sense of the term), in so far
as it bears on Parenthood in relation to Civic Worth; (4) Ethics, in so far as it promotes ideals that lead to the improvement of social quality; (5) Religion, in so far as it strengthens and
sanctifies the sense of Eugenic duty.

4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

THE REVIEW, whilst laying great stress on Heredity, will not

ignore the importance of Environment. Environment un-

doubtedly exerts a potent influence on those

Its Attitude towards

individual tendencies which, latent at birth,

Social Reforms are capable of being moulded by circumstances

after birth. It will, therefore, advocate all

social reforms that allow such tendencies free play when they are

calculated to be beneficent to the community, and that restrain,

or serve to repress, such tendencies when they are calculated to

be harmful to the community. As a means to this end, it will

stimulate public opinion in favour of that wholesome desideratum,

a sound mind in a sound body, without, however, neglecting

the cultivation of the spiritual side of human nature, which is

quite as important as its material side. It will, with a view to

racial progress, earnestly strive to impress on all classes the

dignity, the privileges, and the responsibilities of parenthood.

ONE way of checking the frightful infantile mortality now rife in

our great cities is to assist " Nature" by "Nurture," and the

proper nurture of young children is a subject

Nature and Nurture

on which so much ignorance prevails that the

more said about it the better. Our asylums,

our hospitals, are crowded with cases in which the pre-natal

conditions have been such that any biologist or other expert well

acquainted with them beforehand would have been able to

predict their natural consequences. It will be part of the busi-

ness of the REVIEW to study this class of cases and to show

how their number may be reduced to a minimum. In short, as

is said by an active member of the Council of our Society in

a forthcoming book from which we are at liberty to quote:

" The idea of Eugenics must be instilled into the conscience of

civilisation like a new religion-a religion of the most lofty and

austere, because the most unselfish, morality-a religion which

sets before it a sublime ideal; terrestrial, indeed, in its chosen

theatre, but celestial in its theme." Happy the people by whom

this ideal is translated into fact !

EDITORIAL AND OTHER NOTES

5

IT is satisfactory to be able to announce that friendly relations have been already established between ourselves and the
Managers of a periodical akin to our own
A Greeting from published on the Continent of Europe and
now in its sixth year. We refer to the A rchiv fur -Rassen-und Gesellschafts-Biologie, edited by Dr.. Ploetz, of Munich, and others. We append a rendering of a letter addressed to the Honorary Secretary of our Society in answer to an inquiry made by her of these gentlemen:

DEAR MADAM,-We tender you our best thanks for your friendly invitation, and heartily welcome in your EUGENICS REVIEW an English "sister-organ " of our own periodical.
I express the united opinion of my colleagues and myself when I say that we, too, consider it very desirable that those who are engaged in Eugenic Research in different civilised countries should be in close touch and sympathy with one another. On that account we joyfully grasp the hand you hold out to us. Meanwhile I forward to you a volume of our Archiv.
Personally, I should be glad to hear further details of the work of your Society, in which I am extremely interested.
Yours faithfully, (Signed) ALFRED PLOETZ.
*

WE3 have set out this letter in full because it is a type of what we may expect when Eugenics has become not only of national
but of international concern. As soon as the
fHaPrbinger nations of the earth shall compete with each other not in armies and navies but in the art of Race-betterment, they will be less disposed to sacrifice the flower of their youth and manhood in disastrous, devastating war; also, when their numbers are so kept within due limits that extension of territory will no longer be a necessity, they will cease to hanker after each other's possessions in order to find an outlet for their surplus population. Eugenics will thus bring a new blessing to mankind, for it will prove to be a harbinger and handmaid of
Peace.

6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
MISS ETHEL ELDERTON lectured on first cousin marriages last December before the Eugenics Education Society at the Grafton
Galleries, London, W. We are unable to
FMiarrsrtiCaogeussionfisPpublish the lecture in full as it is reserved
for the volume on "National Eugenics" to be issued under the superintendence of Prof. Pearson. The following abstract of it from the British Medical Journal of
December igth will interest our readers:
" Miss Elderton said that the objections alleged against first cousin marriages were decrease of fertility, a high infantile mortality, and the occurrence of deaf-mutism, or albinism, or insanity in larger proportion than among the general population. The only evidence Miss Elderton could offer in regard to the fertility of cousin marriages was from the pedigrees of albinos collected by Prof. Karl Pearson, showing that in albinotic families there was no diminution in fertility in cousin marriages; there was, however, no evidence as to whether absolute sterility more often followed a consanguineous than a non-consanguineous marriage. The occurrence of a high infantile mortality was vehemently denied by some and as vehemently affirmed by others; it was stated that the Todas, a people among whom the marriage of cousins is frequent, were dying out, owing to a high infantile mortality; but Mr. Rivers, in a recent work on these people, had stated that there was little doubt that infanticide was practised among them, a very effectual way of producing a high infantile mortality. With reference to the third objection, Miss Elderton pointed out that the matter resolved itself into the question whether, assuming that the proportion of first cousin marriages to all marriages in the population was known, the proportion of cousin marriages in any special class of the community, such as albinos or deaf-mutes, was greater than among the ordinary population. Unfortunately, the proportion of cousin marriages to the general population was not known with certainty. Sir George Darwin found that there were 3.5 per cent. cousin marriages in the middle classes and 4.5 per cent. among peers. Prof. Karl Pearson, from an inquiry addressed to medical men through the columns of the British Medical Journal, found the percentage of first cousin marriages to be 4.69, but he considered that that was

EDITORIAL AND OTHER NOTES

7

too high a proportion, because it seemed from the answers received that doctors who had married cousins had replied more readily than those who had married otherwise. Miss Elderton thought that 8 per cent. would be a fairly accurate estimate of the number of cousin marriages among the parents of deafmutes. From a consideration of the cases of persons of unsound mind in nine counties in Scotland it had been calculated that i8 per cent. was the percentage of cousin marriages among the
parents of the patients. The figures taken from Prof. Pearson's albinotic pedigrees showed 34.5 per cent. consanguineous marriages among albinos. Mr. E. A. Fry, in an inquiry into the marriages of the deaf in America, found that when the parents were consanguineous, one or both being deaf, 30 per cent. of their offspring were deaf-mutes, and when no consanguinity was reported only 8 per cent. were affected. Miss Elderton's conclusions were that if any person was a deaf-mute or an albino, or came from a stock tainted with either disease, marriage with a cousin should not be allowed. She thought that there were good grounds for assuming that the same was true for persons belonging to a family in which a tuberculous tendency or any heritable disease showed itself. Cousin marriages tended to accentuate any family trait in the offspring, even though that trait might be dormant in the parents. Very few individuals could boast of an absolutely healthy pedigree, and it was advisable that cousin marriages should be avoided unless the family histories were without flaw."
The lecturer might have added to her last sentence that where flawless family histories can be found- and we believe that many examples of them exist-the marriage of first cousins may be a positive advantage to the community, since parental traits, whether good or bad, are more readily transmitted when the two partners have a proximate common ancestor.

THE following case was reported in a London newspaper of
January Ist, I909:
" At Southwark, yesterday, Dr. F. J. Waldo opened an
Deaf Mutism inquiry with reference to the death of Thomas George Raxworthy, aged two months, son of a labourer living
in Duke Street, Blackfriars, who died in Guy's Hospital.

8 THE BUGENICS REVIEW
" Elizabeth Raxworthy, a deaf-mute, whose evidence was interpreted by the Rev. Frederick Gilbey, Chaplain to the Association in Aid of the Deaf and Dumb, Oxford Street, stated that the child was one of twins, and both were now dead. Her husband was also deaf and dumb.
"Dr. Waldo elicited from Mr. Gilbey that deaf and dumb women generally married deaf-mutes. Mrs. Raxworthy had been married three times. Her previous husbands were both deaf and dumb.
" Mrs. Raxworthy added that she had twins by her first husband. By the second husband she had three children, two of whom were alive, one being deaf and dumb. The other could hear, but not speak. She spent Christmas with her husband at the house of her brother, who was a deafmute, his wife being deaf and dumb. As she was coming home on Boxingnight she trod on a piece of orange-peel and fell with the baby in her arms, and it was quite possible that the infant struck its head. She thought she was a little the worse for drink when she fell. On Sunday morning she found the child dead in bed.
" In reply to the Coroner, Mr. Gilbey said he had married hundreds of deaf and dumb couples. They did not advocate marriage, but the people came to them, and they married them for the sake of the children. In special cases it was dangerous to marry, especially, as in this instance, when the woman married the child of a cousin; sometimes it was dangerous to the secoutd anld third degree."
We must bear in mind that deafness and dumbness when inherited may skip a generation or two. Of this Mr. Nisbet, in his recent book on Marriage and Heredity, cites the following example: "A deaf-mute man married a woman of normal faculties, and by her had two children, namely, a deaf-mute son, who died childless, and an apparently sound daughter, who married a sound man. This woman had two daughters and a son. In the daughters their grandfather's infirmity reappeared. The son escaped it and married a sound woman. But his son was a deaf-mute, inheriting thus the infirmity of a great-grandfather." All Mendelians will understand.
IN March last Dr. C. W. Saleeby lectured on " Obstacles to Eugenics " before the Sociological Society. He pointed out
that Positive Eugenics-the encouragement of
Eugetics to parenthood on the part of the worthy-and Negative Eugenics-its discouragement on the
part of the unworthy-were one and the same principle, since selection involved rejection. He went on to discuss Spencer's

EDITORIAL AND OTHER NOTES

9

law of multiplication, or the existence of an inverse ratio between individuation and genesis. The higher the standard of the individual life the lower the birth-rate. This meant that, failing selection, the lower must out-breed the higher.
The celebrated generalisation of Geddes and Thomson was really an instance of Spencer's law. Woman was more anabolic than man and less individualised, because of the greater demands of " genesis " upon her. The woman acrobat, whether of muscle or of mind, tended towards sterility. Organic progress had occurred, despite persistent lowering of fertility, because Nature maintained selection. We must establish eugenic selection. And in education we must educate as for parenthood, in both sexes. It was of little use that the girl had played centre-forward at hockey, or had been a wrangler, if she could not nurse her baby or even produce one. That education which taught a girl to despise motherhood, whilst making her incapable of it, was not "higher" but " lower" education.
One of the main " obstacles " to the spread of Eugenics was ignorance. Even Mr. Balfour, lecturing on Decadence, wholly ignored the principle of selection within a society or nation. From our ex-Premier downwards none of our rulers knew anything of the laws of life of which all social phenomena were nothing but the consequence.
There was ignorance, too, as to the nature of education itself, i.e., of the truth that we can only educate what heredity gives-that the most we can do is to provide a good environment in which inherited qualities may expand.
Another "o bstacle " was ignorance as to the existence and the conditions of the defective. Hence the cry of " liberty " and protests against " tyranny " which were raised when the segregation of the feeble-minded was suggested. Only ignorance could raise the cry of liberty when it was proposed to care for the feeble-minded girl all her life rather than throw her on to the streets. What liberty had the feeble-minded prostitute or inebriate ? In such cases the highest interests of the individual and the race were one.
Another " obstacle " was misstatement by friends: as when lethal chambers were commended, or infant mortality approved

IO THE EUGENICS REVIEW
as eugenic (e.g., by Prof. Flinders Petrie). Eugenics proposed to kill nobody, either directly or on the principles of Clough's " New Decalogue." The whole theory of eugenics rested on its distinction between the right to live (which we questioned in no case at any age from the moment of conception onwards), and the right to become a parent. There was nothing antihumanitarian about eugenics. Spare and save: but distinguish between right to live and right to propagate, was its maxim. As to misstatements by enemies, eg., by Mr. Chesterton, when he lately asserted that Eugenists desire " that people shall be forcibly married to each other by the police," this was too absurd for refutation.
Lastly, there was the " obstacle" of political bias. When Eugenics maintained that the expectant mother must be cared for, the parrot cry of " Socialism " was raised. When it taught that paternal responsibility must be enhanced, the cry of " Individualism" was raised. Eugenics was not to be judged by these obsolescent catchwords: it judged them. The true Eugenist, having an absolute, final, peerless ideal, hailed every political party and every reform which contributed to his main end. "The soul of all improvement is the improvement of the soul."
THE Hon. Mrs. Norman Grosvenor, writing as a member of
the Committee of the South African Colonisation Society to The Spectator last March, on the demand for female domestic servants in South Africa, says:
"The Society will send only those who are physically and morally sound. Every candidate has to be passed by the Society's doctor, and must have absolutely first-class references. In thus sending out young women the Society is not merely performing the functions of a registry office. It is looking to the future of South Africa. A large proportion of these young women eventually marry and settle in the country of their adoption. It will be seen at once how vitally important it is, where the foundations of a new country are concerned, that the mothers of future Colonists should be healthy in body and fit to bring up their children as good citizens. . . . Should the recruiting of the population of South Africa be left now to the morally and physically unfit, it would be a standing reproach to the Mother-country."
The Colony at all events will heartily welcome this Eugenic line of action of the S.A.C.S.

