By PROFESSOR DR. NILS VON HOFST
(Member of the Government Commission)

A STERILIZATION law was accepted It occurs without legal procedure. Control
by the Swedish Parliament in I934 exists only through the obligation on the

and came into force on January ist, surgeon performing the operation to report

1935. This law governs only the sterlization thereon to the Ministry of Health. From this

of persons suffering from insanity, feeble- point of view, it appears that Sweden stands

mindedness or other mental disorders, who in a unique position among those countries

by reason of such condition are permanently which have legislation or contemplate legis-

inhibited from giving a valid consent to this lation on this matter.

proceeding. Such persons may be sterilized Another point of difference is that in

pwithout their consent if the assumption is Sweden sterilization of the feeble-minded

established that they will not in the future does not depend on examination by a central

be able to look after their children or that board, but may be carried out when two con-

ey might transmit to offspring by heredity sulting physicians agree on the condition.

ental disease or defect. The law recognizes In other cases, falling within the law, the

ial, as well as eugenic, grounds for consent of the Ministry of Health must be

erilization. In practice, the lack of capacity obtained.

give a valid consent to sterilization plays

emajor part; for persons who by reason of The Preliminary Investigations

isase or defect are thus incapacitated may taken to be permanently incapable of ental responsibility.

Before the law came into force, considerable anxiety was expressed in regard to voluntary sterilization. Parliament regarded

rinciples of Swedish Sterilization Law
The intention of the law as outlined by
e Minister of Justice prevents the statute om being interpreted as permitting the use f compulsion.* In principle, only voluntary
erilization may be undertaken, despite the ct that certain persons may be sterilized *thout their consent when suffering from al incapacity. Thus, the Swedish sterilization law is ctly limited. Voluntary sterilization of sons who can give legal consent is outside
scope of the law. This does not mean that ch sterilizations are not allowed. On the
trary, since the Act came into force,
yiyng on the above-mentioned intention,
le position is now accepted that voluntary tiiation is allowed on adequate grounds.

as of some importance the arguments adduced for the introduction of regulations thereon, and in passing the measure asked for further investigation of these points. The Swedish Population Commission, to which I belong, was instructed to carry out these investigations in I935. For this purpose, a committee was meanwhile set up, consisting of Professor H. Nilsson-Ehle, Medical Director, Dr. Torsten Sjoegren, and myself.
The Committee came early to the conclusion that the Swedish law contains some obvious defects. Of these, the most important is the above-mentioned omission of regulations in regard to voluntary steriliza-
tion. I see nothing to prevent my mentioning
at once that we regarded decisions of this
character as highly desirable. On the one
hand, it is clear that when no regulations

Areport of the Commission of Population, includ- exist, there is a danger of ill-advised opera-

recommendations for a law on voluntary steriliza- tions without examination by specialists in

e,was submitted to the Ministry of Justice in tber T936. This report has been published in
bccolin.

the supposed condition, where the decision is left entirely to individual physicians. A

257

258 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

further point of view is equally important. The present law, being as has been said strictly limited, fails to deal with the most important group of cases for sterilization, both on eugenic and social grounds-namely, the higher grades of the feeble-minded; at present, only idiots and low-grade imbeciles fall within the provisions. Of greater importance are cases of retardation or mild mental defect, cases of which it cannot be said that they are incapable of consent. In particular, sterilization is desirable for the category which show not only retardation but strong asocial traits, among which are lack of sexual inhibitions. The fertility of this group is admittedly high, although exact statistical data are wanting. A reduction of this fertility by sterilization would be of importance both from the eugenic and the social point of view. The extent of improvement in the genetical composition of the population by sterilization will not be dealt with here. If results are to be obtained, it will certainly be of critical importance to include as widely as possible the abovementioned group, which is hardly touched by sterilization at present. The law has, without doubt, produced some good effects, though it must be admitted that these are smaller than was generally anticipated ; this is undoubtedly owing to the exemption of this category.
Legislative Possibilities
To remedy the situation, two courses can be envisaged. One is to tighten up the law now obtaining for operations without consent by removing the condition that the patient is incapable of valid agreement ; the feeble-minded should certainly be eligible without this condition. Such extension ought not to arouse misgivings, for the individuals under consideration are intellectually so near to those which now are included that they may be treated on the same footing. Indeed, the concept of legal incapacity may to a considerable degree be regarded as a fiction. This possibility has been seriously considered by the Committee.
The second part of this desirable objective may be attained by regulation of voluntary

sterilization. As matters stand, only a* ligible number of the mentally ret have the operation, and under suitable e ments a great increase would take within this category.
Comparison with Denmark
Without anticipating the results of findings of our Committee on these methods, I will merely add the interes' point of view on this question which I countered on a recent tour in Denmark consultation with several of the more pro nent experts there. I got an excell impression of the splendidly organized of the feeble-minded, including their r tration and guardianship, and collabora between the institutions and the Ste' tion Commission. Operations on the fee minded are there put on a plane which gi the widest possible extension of the la According to the Danish enactments, retard and asocial individuals fall for the most in the same group as the feeble-minded there being a special law for these distinct from the sterilization law. The culties would be much greater in Sweden there is not the same basis on which organize treatment of the feeble-mind This probably makes it advisable to folIo another course than that adopted by th Danes..
Views of Investigation Committee
It is permissible to give a general summary1
of the views of our Committee:
I. We would extend voluntary steri1izationn
to the mentally disordered and the mentallyq subnormal (including sufferers from mentals diseases, psychopathic conditions and every-
grade of mild mental defect) as soon as such persons show tendencies of incompetence in the upbringing of children.
2. Eugenic indications should be recognized not only in these cases, but as covering
a widely extended group, namely wherever there is danger of the transmission of mental
or physical disease, deformity or subnor-
mality to posterity. Moreover, persons of whom there is a high probability that,

STERILIZATION IN SWEDEN

259

though themselves normal, they may be carners of such disastrous heredity, should
have the right to sterilization. 3. Mere social dependency should, in our
view, not be admissible for sterilization. Cases, however, exist in which social inadequacy and other conditions occurring together justify sterilization. These other conditions would be medical or eugenic, but taken by themselves not sufficiently strong to justify the operation. We have here to do with socio-medical or socioeugenical indications. It seems to us important that such cases should be included. This is not the place to consider the formula
required.

Sterilization under the law of I934

Feeble-minded, with consent of

the medical authority

0*- 33k 128

without such consent 0... ... 95 f

Insane

... ... .'.*

Other mental disorders le .. ... I

Total *.. ... ... I36

Voluntary sterilizations as reported Purely medical cases ... ... *.. 56 Other cases (overlapping somewhat with
the above) ... *.. ... ... IOo
Total 00.0 ... I56

It will be grasped from the above that we consider a want of economic capacity to bring up children as a suitable reason under certain conditions for voluntary sterilization. Whoever harbours doubts of this principle should realize that on the average the persons whose sterilization would thus be promoted and made possible compose a body of human material whose procreation is neither socially nor eugenically valuable. One inescapable condition in the view of the Committee is that for all sterilizations not based on purely medical indications, authorization by a central board must be forthcoming. Such decisions resemble in some degree the proposal of the English Departmental Committee on Sterilization, though at some points they would go beyond it. The principles, if not the formulation, are akin to those of the Danish law. The German sterilization law admits of a form of compulsion incompatible with Swedish legal conceptions, while it admits of voluntary -sterilization with undue restriction.
KSterilizations in 2935
I give now data on the operations in Sweden during 1935. The total is 287. This figure includes operations performed on medical grounds. When these are deducted, .the total falls to 229. The cases may be subdivided as follows:

In the last-mentioned hundred cases,
while about twenty had adequate medical
indications, the rest were partly medical but partly influenced by other conditions. It may be well to consider these hundred in
detail.
The non-medical indications fall into two main categories, namely, eugenic and social; that is, on the one hand, incapacity to bring up children, and, on the other, a condition of social dependency which would be rendered more grave by the birth of further children. True epilepsy in what follows is regarded as both eugenic and medical. Eugenic grounds occur in not less than seventy-five cases if, without going into the particular determining factor of each case, the positive danger of disease or deficiency in offspring is accepted; in more than sixty, these reasons
alone would have justified action. Medical reasons hold in fifty-nine cases and social grounds in seventy-two. The greatest inter-
est attaches to the diversity in type of the series:
Cases Purely eugenic grounds ..... ... 2 Medical and eugenic grounds ... 25 Social and eugenic grounds ... 35 Social, medical and eugenic grounds 12
Social and medical grounds 1.9
Social or indeterminate grounds ... 5
In the last two categories, several cases occurred which would probably not have

200 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

been accepted for sterilization without addi-

tional grounds had there been legal regula-

tions in force. The distinction of these types

is, of course, schematic and open to several

sources of error. A further survey follows

of the eugenic reasons which are, in part, also

medical or social.

Cases

Mental disease ... .. ...I

Psychopathics ... ... ... 22

Mental deficiency (retardation) ... 30

Epilepsy ....

..* ... 10

Hereditary progressive muscular

atrophy ...

. .S * * *

. ..

Total ... ... ... 75

The line between psychopathic conditions

and mental disorder is somewhat arbi depression being reckoned with the la, Mental deficiency embraces amentia,
feeble-mindedness, rather than what characterized as intellectual retardation. few cases are included with pronounced
social tendencies, which in all proba entail a certain intellectual failure.
as^I cannot here discuss in detail cases:
which sterilization was not granted, do not fall under the present Swedish
Here would belong fourteen anti
women who had between them fifty-:
children. This throws a clear light on present position of the sterilization probi in Sweden in so far as it emphasizes importance of regulations for the operati beyond those included in the present law.

Each Number of
11SCIENCE AND SOCIETY
Edited by Pryns ,Hopkins, with whom are associated William Stephenson and Alexander Farquharson
considers one human problem from a variety of aspects, among which the genetic approach is regularly included. It appears three times a year. The topic which the October-January number so discusses is internationalism. Prof. Ernst Jackh, director of the New Commonwealth Institute, has written the leader. Prof. H. J. Fleure, Doctors C. M. Fillmore and Adrian Stephen and Messrs. C. A. Mace, J. C. Trevor and R. Herdman Pender then follow with a series of contributions at once readable and authoritative.
Subscribe now, at i os. for six numbers, or send for a free sample copy to
TH E M4ERCURY PRESS
BUSH HOUSE, LONDON, .C.2
EugenicsReview, VoL Xo.4.

