BURTON BENEDICT
London School of Economics
Co-operation in Primitive Human Societies

HUMAN LIFE, AND indeed many forms of animal life, would be impossible without some measure of co-operation. The very words "community" and "society" imply it, and we cannot think of any human beings, apart from the occasional hermit or castaway, who live outside some co-operating group. The forms of co-operation vary greatly from society to society and even those which we might think the most obvious, such as that between husband and wife, are not necessarily universal.
On what bases do humans co-operate? Social anthropoligists look at co-operation primarily from the point of view of social relations. In this they share common ground with the ethologists who analyse the social behaviour of animals. Among human beings the social relations which go to make up such activities are complex. Anthropologists take them apart and analyse them in terms of roles, kinship, local grouping, hierarchy, economic relations and ritual relations. Social anthropologists often, though not always, take as their subject matter so-called "primitive societies". By primitive we usually mean four things:
(i) that the society is characterized by a simple technology,
(ii) that it is small in scale, (iii) that it is homogeneous in the sense that there
are relatively few roles to be played in the society, and (iv) that the society lacks or lacked a written language.
Yet it is obvious that, in order to exist, even the most primitive of communities requires a great deal of co-operation among its members.
Homo sapiens is distinguished from other animals by his relatively long period of dependence as an infant and child, and by the very

large amount of learning he must acquire in order to cope with his environment as an adult. In every society this dependence creates a division of labour by sex and age and thus an elementary degree of co-operation. The care of young children in most societies is the task of the mother, but, in some, much child care is performed by other women ranging from a whole set of female kinsmen in Samoa to the wet nurse of upper-class Victorian households. The care of small children restricts the physical mobility of women and in hunting and gathering economies, which are among the simplest that we know, the hunting is almost always an exclusively male activity. Yet the picture of women in primitive societies sitting by the camp-fire waiting for the men to return with the game is a false one. Women may provide a substantial part of the diet by collecting berries, roots and other vegetable products and men are often unsuccessful in the hunt.
Role Playing
Co-operative activities require that the individuals concerned play different roles. There is conflict where two or more individuals attempt to play the same role at the same time. Studies in animal behaviour reveal this very clearly. When two animals meet, both may assume threatening attitudes. Each is attempting to play the dominant role, but this rarely leads to serious fighting. Usually one animal assumes a submissive posture and this is recognized by the other who assumes a dominant one, and roles are thereby differentiated. This has a high survival value as it limits competition and promotes, if not co-operative, at least peaceable relations between animals in close proximity. Human

71

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, June 1966, 58, 2.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

beings have, of course, carried this much further.
We all assume many roles in many situations. In a single day a man may play the roles of husband, father, employee, friend, son, brother,
customer, committee chairman, guest, neighbour. The playing of these roles enables him to
co-operate with others in many situations
according to well defined rules. Roles, you will note, always refer to a relationship between two
or more individuals. Even when day-dreaming we fantasize in terms of imagined role relation-
ships. How, then, are roles defined? Largely in terms of expectations. Suppose instead of lecturing to you I were to begin to eat my lunch
and were to continue to do so throughout the twenty-five or thirty minutes which my talk is
supposed to last. What would you do? Some of
you might laugh. Others might walk out. Some might lodge complaints with the organizers of this symposium, or suggest that I seek mental therapy. You in fact would be applying sanctions against me because I had failed to fulfil the role of lecturer. Yet my behaviour would be perfectly appropriate at Lyons Corner House. On the other hand, if I went to Lyons and began to deliver this lecture, my behaviour would be equally bizarre and sanctions would rapidly be brought to bear against me. I do not do this because I understand the differences between the roles of diner and lecturer and where each is appropriate, even though I may now be hungry or feel the urge to enlighten my fellow diners at Lyons. I know the expectations defining the roles of diner and lecturer, just as you know the expectations of your roles as members of an audience, i.e. to keep quiet while I am speaking. Roles vary in the strictness by which they are defined. They change over time and vary from society to society, but unless there is some definition of them no group can survive. People must be able to recognize roles appropriate to various situations quickly and efficiently.
Role learning begins very early. Parents and other adults continually define the expectations of the behaviour of children. Many children's games in all societies consist in playing at adult roles. Toys are often models of objects used by adults. In most primitive societies learning before puberty is largely informal. Teachers tend to be members of the immediate co-resident kin

group. Children learn the techniques of food
gathering, agriculture, stock raising or domestic duties, but theirs are still largely child roles. When it is time for children to assume adult roles a
radical change occurs. The change is marked by
elaborate ceremonies, sometimes by ordeals, circumcisions or other mutilations of the body of the initiate. An initiate often receives instruction in the religion and philosophy of his society,
information which is only compatible with the
assumption of an adult role. Here his teachers are not his parents or other members of his domestic group, but outsiders.6 When he has been through these rites, he emerges as a new person. Arnold Van Gennep in his famous work, Les Rites de Passage,12 has examined initiation and other rites associated with life crises such as birth, marriage and death and has distinguished three phases: separation, in which the subject is removed from his previous social environment;
transition, a period in which he undergoes the rites; and incorporation, when he is re-integrated
into the social group in his new status. Human beings in all societies have made important symbolic occasions out of major changes in status which bring with them the assumption of new roles. The individual who has gone through
such rites can be in no doubt about the new role
he must play and how it commits him to co-operation with other adults. In most societies these rites of passage are for males, as males perform the chief jural and economic roles, but in many societies there are rites of passage for women as well. Marriage, which occurs in all societies, is a major rite of passage for a woman and brings with it new roles and new forms of co-operation.
Sociologists and social anthropologists generally classify roles broadly into ascribed and achieved.8 Ascribed roles are "givens". Whether one is born male or female automatically ascribes certain roles. Age, too, brings the automatic ascription of roles in all societies. Kin roles may also be ascribed. In some societies one may be ascribed certain roles by reason of one's birth, such as being born into a royal lineage or into a certain caste in India. All societies have these ascribed roles, but they also have roles which are open to competition, which can be achieved. In small-scale primitive societies there

72

CO-OPERATION IN PRIMITIVE HUMAN SOCIETIES

are fewer of these than in complex industrialized ones.
Kinship
In all societies individuals are linked together by ties of kinship. These links are of two kinds: those of common descent and those based on sexual union. In all societies some of these links form the basis of co-operating groups, but no society can use them all. This point is easily proved if you think of your eight great-grandparents. The chances are you cannot even name them, but if you could, could you name all their descendants? Could you conceive of co-operating groups made up of all these living descendants? How would such a group differ from all the living descendants of, say, your father's brother's son (your first cousin in English terminology)? Clearly, you would have some relatives in common, those on your father's side, but your maternal relatives would differ. If, in addition, you should count all relatives through marriage, you can see that an enormous network of relationships would be created in which everybody would be related to everybody else. If all these relationships were given equal weight, it would be impossible to form discrete groups. You can work this out very simply. If you formed a co-operating group with all your own first cousins and all your first cousins did the same, you would not have discrete groups and would be faced with the problem of whether you should co-operate with your first cousins on your father's side and their cousins or with your first cousins on your mother's side and their cousins. Each of your cousins would be faced with a similar problem. This being so, no society we know uses all possible links through descent and mating relationships to form co-operating groups. Some are ignored as bases for group formation and others are emphasized. One common way of doing this is by incorporating members into a group through a single line of descent only. In a patrilineal system, for example, only the descendants of a male ancestor are counted as being members of your group. You, your brother and your sister will belong to the same group, all being descendants of your father. Your children (assuming you are male)

and your brother's children will continue to belong to your group, but your sister's children will not. They will belong to her husband's group. If you extend this principle, you will see that your father's brother's children will belong to your group, all being descendants of your paternal grandfather, but your father's sister's children will not, neither will your mother's siblings nor their children.
All societies use some kinship links to form co-operative groups even if, as in the industrialized societies of the West, it is as small as the nuclear family of mother, father and children. In primitive societies kinship links are a great deal more important. The major economic activities in such societies are organized on a kinship basis. Political power is exercised through kinship networks. Religion itself may be based on kinship as in ancestor worship.
Local Grouping
One of the most striking findings of ethologists has been the territorial behaviour of animals. By territory they mean "that section of space that is defended by the occupying individual or social unit"7 such as a pair, a herd or a flock. Indeed, the social behaviour of animals in relation to their territories may be one of the principal means of limiting their populations.13 When we hear a blackbird singing from the top of a tree, he is not just expressing joie de vivre or even primarily attempting to attract a mate. He is demarcating his territory and warning other birds away. Some animals use olfactory methods of demarcation such as urine, for example, in dogs, or other bodily excretions. Indeed, some animals have special glands for this purpose.
Man, too, is a distinctly territorial animal except possibly for some of the hunters and gatherers who inhabit a considerable range, but do not mark its limits precisely. Within this local territory there must be co-operation for existence and common residence everywhere is correlated with co-operating groups. Often co-operating local groups are largely composed of kinsmen, but a number of factors operate to prevent local groups being entirely made up of kinsmen.
One reason for this concerns marriage patterns. All societies have incest prohibitions of one kind

ER-F

73

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

or another. No society permits the marriage of Ethologists have shown that animals which live

parents and children or of siblings, though a few in groups show a hierarchical ordering of

societies have permitted certain members to positions. This is often referred to as peck-order,

make such marriages, as the royal families of from the behaviour of flocks of chickens. It is

Hawaii or the Pharaohs of Ancient Egypt. Many one way of reducing fighting. Individuals quickly

societies extend these prohibitions beyond the learn to avoid those higher in the peck order.

immediate family. This means that spouses must The number one individual dominates all below

be brought in from outside and that means some it, the number three all but the two above it, the

members must leave the kin group to marry lowest ranking individual is dominated by all.

outside. The people that we know that came This ranking is not fixed for all time. New

nearest to avoiding this problem were the individuals joining the group can change it and

Nayars of South India.5 Before they reached the age or disability may erode the power of high

age of puberty, girls were married en masse to ranking individuals. Lorenz 9 found that when a

men from another kin group. They might never high ranking male jackdaw took a low ranking

cohabit with their husbands or even see them mate her position rose to that of the male and

again, though they were required to go through she was able to peck those who had pecked her

mourning ceremonies on the husband's death. before. Sometimes high ranking animals are able

These girls then took lovers from a suitable caste to "settle" disputes between two individuals of

and the resulting children remained with their lower rank by intervening on behalf of the lower

mothers. The Nayars traced descent matri- ranking individual.

lineally so that the male heads of households Ranking is, of course, very important in

were women's brothers or mother's brothers who human societies, not only as a way of reducing

themselveswere lovers of other unrelatedwomen. aggression, but of promoting co-operation.

Apart from the needs of procreation, other There must be leaders for activities requiring

forces bring non-kinsmen into the local group. organized effort. Even in very small scale

Economic, ecological or demographic conditions societies such as the Bushmen or the Semang of

may force individuals or small groups to Malaya which have no chiefs, one man may

migrate from one area to another. Other things assume leadership for a given activity or the

being equal such individuals may try to trace advice of an older man may be followed as to

kinship links with a group which they wish to where to pitch camp. These societies which have

join. Adoption, which is a fictional form of a hunting and gathering economy do not have

kinship, is often resorted to. For some peoples a large co-operating groups. A man may hunt

non-kinsman is automatically an enemy and can alone or possibly be accompanied by his son.

be killed with impunity. A man without kin has Gathering berries or roots can also be done alone

no one to avenge him. Yet strangers and distant or in small groups requiring very little organiza-

kinsmen do get incorporated into local groups tion. More complex technology requires larger

even though they may maintain some contacts co-operating groups. This has been demonstrated

with their place of origin. The interplay of local by Firth in his description of fishing techniques

grouping and more distant kin ties is well of the New Zealand Maori.4 The simplest form

illustrated in Evans-Pritchard's well-known study of co-operation requires only two men working

of the Nuer of Southern Sudan.3 These are a the rocky channels of the coast. One holds a net

people without chiefs. They are warlike and near the mouth of the channel and the other

feuding is well institutionalized among them. drives the fish into it. The man with the net

Yet feuding is kept within bounds because of the directs the operation. More men are required to

interplay of ties of propinquity and ties of kin- organize a fish drive. It is often an impromptu

ship with possibly hostile groups.

group which engages in this activity. The leader

is apt to be the oldest or most expert male.

Hierarchy

Sometimes it is a more permanent group which

One of the most important aspects of the carries out this form of fishing. This would

distribution of roles in a society is hierarchy. usually be a family group and we see again the

74

CO-OPERATION IN PRIMITIVE HUMAN SOCIETIES

operation of the kinship principle which is so fishing expedition in 1886. The generals did it

marked a feature in the economic activities of before D day in 1944. Religious activities also

primitive societies. Still more men are required serve to bind members of a group together. The

to form a net into a large arc in deeper water. great French sociologist, Durkheim,2 saw religion

Some must dive to place the net in position on as a reflection of human social structure on a

the bottom and then hold it there by means of a supernatural plane. A chief is often an inter-

long pole. To take in the net those furthest from mediary between men and gods and this super-

the shore must dive first to retrieve the edge of natural aspect of his role reinforces his authority

the net. Here there must be someone to co- and enables him to direct large co-operative

ordinate the taking in of the net or the fish will enterprises. We do not have to go very far back

be lost. This is a simple combination of labour. in European history to find kings who ruled by

Except for the leader all are doing the same task. divine right. The symbolization of the unity of a

A more complex combination of labour is kin-group, a tribe or a nation appears to be very

required to operate a very large net. On one important in fostering co-operative action

occasion in 1886 a net nearly a mile and a quarter whether the symbolization be in supernatural or

long was used. It took several hundred people a in political or ideological terms.

number of months to make it. It had to be

transported in sections and magical ceremonies were used to ensure its success. To take it to sea

Reciprocity

required two war canoes lashed together and If you send Christmas cards, you probably

thirty paddlers. The expert in charge climbed to have a list of those who sent you cards last year.

the top of a telegraph tower to shout his You may even have a few extra in reserve to send

commands. A huge shoal of many thousands of off quickly when you receive unexpected cards

fish was captured. In this enterprise the division from cousin Agatha or the neighbour who

of labour was more complex. There were the net moved to Aberdeen in 1961. You are unlikely to

makers, the canoe paddlers, the men who paid send cards to people who year after year do not

out the net and those on shore who helped haul send you one. In other words, in receiving a card

it in, the expert on his telegraph tower and you recognize an obligation to return one and

finally the chief providing initiative and stimulus conversely when you send one, you expect a card

to the enterprise. Each task had to fit into a in return, but not the same card. If your own

complex whole. As the complexity of co-opera- card were returned to you, without explanation,

tive effort increases, leadership roles become you would feel rebuffed and your relationship

more important. The leader can no longer join in with the sender would very likely be terminated.

the work himself but must spend his time giving These principles of reciprocity in gift giving are

orders. He must have a grasp of the whole very important in primitive societies. They set up

situation.

a network of reciprocal obligations which can

lead to co-operation in many activities. They

Magic and Religion

have been analysed by Marcel Maussll as the obligation to give, the obligation to receive and

I mentioned that magic was used in setting up the obligation to repay. Yet gift giving is not a

the fishing nets. All co-operative ventures involve commercial transaction like buying a bottle of

an element of uncertainty. When every technical aspirin at the chemist. Here you simply give the

feature has been checked and re-checked and money and receive the aspirin. The obligations

everyone briefed as to his job, the enterprise is to give, receive and repay are there, but a

still uncertain. It is at this point that men call on minimal social relationship is involved. Malin-

supernatural aid to control those factors, like the owski 10 in his studies of the Trobriand Islanders

weather, over which they themselves have no has shown that gifts and counter-gifts comprise

control. The control may be attempted by pray- "one of the main instruments of social organiza-

ing to a deity or by manipulating magical tion, of the power of the chief, of the bonds of

formulae. The Maori did it before their great kinship, and of relationship in law". To give a

75

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

gift is to place the recipient under an obligation to you. Unless he wishes to rupture relationships he must accept and eventually he must return the gift. The return may be in the same form as the gift received or in services. People who are called in to help construct a house or build a canoe may be given gifts or, more usually, a feast. Sometimes gift-giving can take the form of rivalry as among the Kwakiutl and other tribes of the north-west coast of America.1 Here a chief through gift exchange with his followers amassed huge quantities of blankets, carved boxes and other valuables. These were presented to a rival chief in a ceremony known as potlatch. The receiving chief, if he wished to retain his status and prestige, had to accept the gift and return even more at a later date. Yet the system of credits set up by a chief bound his followers to him. All were involved in the confrontation with the rival chief. Gift exchange between chief and follower is very common in primitive societies. If a chief accepts a subject's gift, he accepts the obligation to assist him. If he distributes goods to his followers, they acknowledge his chiefship and their loyalty by acceptance. These exchanges also serve as a means of distribution of goods in a non-monetary economy. But the gift must be appropriate to the relative ranks of the giver and receiver. You will remember from Shakespeare that when the Dauphin sent tennis balls to Henry V he immediately went to war with France. The gift was intended and received as a calculated insult. The social relations set up by gift exchange are forces which bind a social group together. One does not fight those who have given one gifts.
Scale
Gift giving is particularly effective in binding small face-to-face groups together. On a larger scale, only representatives can exchange gifts, so

it is a less effective mechanism for binding whole populations together. In complex societies there is less emphasis on gift giving in running day-today affairs and more on contractual relations in which the terms of the exchange of goods and services are explicitly set out and backed by legal sanctions. In complex societies kinship becomes a less important principle of co-operation and is replaced by political and economic institutions which are not kin based. In complex societies there are many more roles to play, particularly in the occupational sphere. Division of labour is greatly elaborated and there emerge more formal types of hierarchical organization to ensure co-operation.
REFERENCES
1. Cordere, H. 1950. Fighting with Property. Monographs of the American Ethnological Society XVIII. New York.
2. Durkheim, E. 1915. The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life. Trs. J. W. Swain. London, Allen and Unwin.
3. Evans-Pritchard, E. E. 1940. The Nuer. Oxford University Press.
4. Firth, R. 1959. Economics ofthe NewZealand Maori. Wellington, R. E. Owen.
5. Gough, E. K. 1952. Changing Kinship Usages in the Setting of Political and Economic Change among the Nayars of Malabar. J. R. Anthrop. Inst. 82, pt. 1.
6. Hart, C. W. M. 1963. Contrasts between Prepubertal and Postpubertal Education. In Education and Culture. Ed. G. D. Spindler. New York, Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
7. Hediger, H. P. 1961. The Evolution of Territorial Behavior. In Social Life of Early Man (p. 36). Ed. S. L. Washburn. New York, Wenner-Gren Foundation.
8. Linton, R. 1936. The Study of Man (p. 113 ff.). New York, Appleton-Century.
9. Lorenz, K. Z. 1952. King Solomon's Ring (p. 150 ff.). New York, Thomas Y. Crowell.
10. Malinowski, B. 1932. Argonauts of the Western Pacific (p. 167). London, George Routledge.
11. Mauss, M. 1954. The Gift. Trs. I. Cunnison. Glencoe Free Press.
12. Van Gennep, A. 1960. The Rites of Passage. Trs. M. B. Vizedom and G. L. Caffee. London, Routledge and Kegan Paul.
13. Wynne-Edwards, V. C. 1962. Animal Dispersion in Relation to Social Behaviour. Edinburgh, Oliver and Boyd.

76

