SIR MACFARLANE BURNET
O.M., F.R.S., Director, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research

Migration and Race Mixture from the Genetic Angle*

FROM THE LONG-TERM point of view, immi- effects such as sunburn or scars, depend on

gration is chiefly important to Australia the existence of differences between the corre-

for the overall changes that it will even- sponding units at certain parts of one of the

tually make in the genetic character of our chromosomes. In one sense a chromosome

population. Every growing country that receives is like a string of beads and when mating occurs

substantial immigration from other parts of male and female chromosomes temporarily

the world is in a sense a melting-pot from which unite, bead for bead. The rules by which the

new combinations of body-build, of skin colour, units which we call genes in the double string

and even of personality, may eventually emerge. of beads are derived from one or other parent

The process is immensely complex and can and are duplicated and redistributed to off-

only be described in broad outline. In many ways spring can be found in any textbook of genetics

our description can be no more than an attempt and need not be described here. All that needs

to interpret the human observations in terms to be said is that any given human chromosome

of genetic ideas that have been developed from can be equated in detail to the corresponding

the study of such very different animals as chromosome in any other human being. No

fruit ffies and mice. Yet the very fact that matter how extreme the difference between the

basically similar gentic laws are evident in the parents, Nature can see to it that a self-consistent

behaviour of mice, of fruit flies, and of bacteria, healthy offspring will result. In a rough sort of

makes us confident that they are equally applic- way, every visible difference, e.g. in skin colour

able to man.

or hair texture, will depend on one, two or

more unitary differences between parental

The Genetic Background

genetic units. A child will receive the units

It may be desirable first to give a very brief which make up his chromosomes, one from

recapitulation of the facts of human inheritance. each parent, and it is the interaction of these

All human beings belong to a single species pairs ofgenes which will determine the character-

and healthy male and female individuals of any istics of the child.

two races can produce healthy children who, One of the most important genetic processes

in their turn, are fertile. In terms of the genetic occurring in the course of race mixture is

mechanisms that are responsible for inheritance, heterosis or hybrid vigour. In very simplified

this means that all human beings have the same and not quite accurate form, one can vizualise

number of chromosomes and that each chromo- this as resulting when there are very many gene

some has a basic structure common to all differences in each corresponding pair of

human types. Differences between human beings chromosomes. In general, the body tends to

that are not due to simple environmental develop according to the pattern of the "better"

* This paper was prepared at the request of the Department of Immigration for discussion by delegates at the

of each pair of dissimilar genes and with so many choices available the overall result is likely to

Australian Citizenship Convention. The views expressed be better than when each parent contributes

in it are those of the author and do not necessarily represent the official views of the Department.
It is printed here by kind permission of the author.

many similar mediocre genes. This is a positive advantage of hybridization to which may be

93 5-ER THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1959, 51, 2.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

added the related potentiality of new gene English will be absorbed into the melting-pot

combinations providing on occasions an indi- much more rapidly than the Italians.

vidual with exceptionally valuable new character- If we are to make the best use of our uinmi-

istics. And sometimes, of course, we must grants in Australia, it is important that careful

also expect exceptional but undesirable charac- statistics be kept of the extent to which marriage

teristics.

outside the new Australians' own racial group

For most of the qualities, like height, strength is occurring. Geneticists are not yet unanimous

and intelligence, which are socially important, on the best way to, as it were, collect the bonus

as well as for others like skin colour and body of exceptional vigour that hybridisation offers.

build, it is close to the truth to say that these Some consider that what has virtually always

characteristics show blending inheritance in happened as a result of social forces may be

that children will, on the average, exhibit biologically the best compromise. This is to

characters intermediate to those of the parents. allow the existence of unabsorbed groups of

It is, however, a necessary consequence of the aliens of a single race who, by fairly close

way the genes control inheritance that this intermarriage, maintain a stock of genes different

blending is, as we might say, rather lumpy from those of the country at large. With each

in the sense that an occasional descendant generation there will be a proportion escaping

will strongly favour one of the parental strains from the group to marry outside and confer

in some particular character. There are other the resulting hybrid on the offspring. Yet it is by

characters which do not blend, such as eye no means certain that the freest possible range

colour, but it would probably be correct to of marriage, i.e. random mating as far as race

say that if a Negro-European marriage produces is concerned, would not give even better results.

offspring who in all successive generations Certainly if our objective is a homogeneous

marry Europeans, the offspring after four or national population every tolerable step should

five generations will almost all be within the be taken to break down and enlarge the mating

range of variation seen in the rest of the white groups.

population.

Race Mixture in the Pacific

Mating Groups

One of the most famous examples of racial

If a nation were really a single melting-pot, mixture is that of the Pitcairn Islanders. Most

any type or proportion of human beings could Australians know something of the Mutiny

be absorbed to produce a variable but basically of the Bounty, of Captain Bligh's epic voyage

homogeneous community within, say, five in an open boat from the central Pacific to

generations. In real life, however, this does Timor and of the vicissitudes of Fletcher

not occur, primarily because of the existence Christian, the leader ofthe mutineers. Eventually

within each community of social, racial and eight of the mutineers, with a group of Tahitian

geographic barriers which divide into what men and women, reached the uninhabited

have been called mating groups. Gene mixing Pitcairn Island and settled there. After a few

is only free within the mating group.

years of incessant conflict and murder, all the

As an example, we may mention a study of Tahitian men were dead without offspring.

the extent to which various European nation- One Englishman and six Tahitian women sur-

alities were assimilated in the Boston area of vived with a total of twenty-five children,

the United States. A formula was used in esti- every one of whom had an English father and

mating proportion of marriages within the same a Polynesian mother. By a complex of circum-

language group so that a value of 100 indicated stances, the community developed wholly from

that all marriages took place within the group, these twenty-five half-breeds with no significant

while 0 represented marriage completely ran- entry of other elements for several generations.

dom as to racial group. The figures were: It is almost the only example of a half-breed

Italians 91.8, Swedes 75.9, Irish 64.7, English group growing up without cultural contact

28.8, French 25.4. Obviously French and with either of the parental cultures. As is well

94

MIGRATION AND RACE MIXTURE FROM THE GENETIC ANGLE

known, the Pitcairn Islanders flourished as a evidence is slighter-a greater likelihood of

healthy, intelligent and socially advanced com- exceptional mental ability.

munity despite the disparity of the two human Serious attempts have been made to show

stocks that gave rise to them. Medical and that where different racial groups mingle,

anthropological study of these people gave there the likelihood of an outcropping of genius

no evidence of any type of genetic abnormality is highest. Kretchmer considered that where

that could have been derived from either their the Alpine race containing Neanderthal genes

hybrid origin or from the close inbreeding that made contact with Nordics in the German-

subsequently occurred. Their teeth were poor speaking parts of Europe, there had appeared

compared with those of most Polynesians an exceptional number of outstanding men.

but no worse than those of our own people. Toynbee generalized that "the geneses of civiliza-

Early visitors commented on the special vigour tion require creative contributions from more

of the first generation, who were significantly races than one". It seems to be the general rule

taller than either parent group, good looking, that there is a lag period of a few centuries

and in their marriages achieved an amazing between the beginnings of race mixture in a

fertility averaging 11.4 children for each married given region and the full flowering of a new

pair. The absence of disease on the island was culture or civilization.

probably in part responsible, but as loss of There are potential genetic disadvantages of

fertility in the offspring is the most direct sign race mixture and it is probably true that par-

of genetic incompatibility, we can at least ticularly in later generations than the primary

conclude that there was nothing biologically hybrid, occasional individuals with discordant

unsatisfactory about the first generation of characters, e.g. teeth over-large for the jaw that

Pitcairn Islanders.

carries them, can be seen. It has not been shown

In 1856 the whole group was transferred to decisively that such discordancies are more

Norfolk Island where most of their descendants frequent than in people not descended from

still live, now as Australian citizens.

recent racial mixture.

Another region where interbreeding between Of the same general quality are the more

widely separate races has been physically and subtle genetic discrepancies laid bare by what

socially satisfactory is the Hawaiian Islands. the public knows as Rh babies.

Here there was the important social factor that Where husband and wife have genetic differ-

during the vital period of race mixture the ruling ences in the composition of their blood cells,

class on the Islands was Polynesian and it was it is possible for the embryo to have cells quite;

often economically and socially expedient for different from those of its mother and to set

a European man to marry an upper class going an interaction that ends by the mother's;

Polynesian woman. This automatically created blood destroying the baby's cells and sometimes.

an important group of half-breeds of high social also damaging the brain. It has been suggestedX

status. Once this was established it was impos- in view of the very high incidence of Rh negativev

sible for any general stigma of inferiority to character in the Basques, that this particular

be attached to persons of mixed blood.

gene was introduced into Europe by the pro-

Advantages and Disadvantages of Race Mixture

genitors of the Basques. As far as I am aware,
there is no evidence that such incompatibilities

Extensive reading has failed to locate a are more common in marriages between very

single example where it can be shown that dissimilar races than within the normal com-

hybrid races or individuals living under cir- munity. On general grounds, one might expect

cumstances where no social disability attached a moderately increased incidence but probably

to their condition, were demonstrably inferior not one that could be recognized without careful

to both parents. Where healthy typical indivi- study of the point.

duals of each race are concerned, the offspring Occasionally a mutation may flourish in a

can be expected to show greater physical particular race for special local reasons which

health than either and-though here the have no relevance elsewhere. In Africa there is

9S

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a very common abnormality called "sickle animals. In any domestic animal we strive

cell" which is due to a recessive gene. If an to maintain "pure breeds" composed of uniform

African has two such genes he will probably animals possessing just those characters which

die young of a severe anaemia; but if he has appeal to us as best for a given purpose. Any

only one he will, as a result, have red cells in such ideal for a human community would be

his blood which will resist the malarial parasite quite fantastically wrong. With every develop-

much more strongly than normal cells. In other ment of scientific, technical and social skills, a

words a single dose of the gene is positively wider and wider range of human aptitude is

advantageous in a malarial environment, but required. There are special tasks for small

a double dose is lethal. Obviously a balance men and others that only the big fellows can

will develop which gives the best compromise do. And we pay special tribute to the man who

for survival and in heavily malarious African can do something supremely better than his

regions some 30-40 per cent of individuals fellows, whether this is running a mile in record

carry the gene in single doses. In a non-malarial time or writing Hamlet. Supreme achievement

country the single gene has no advantage and probably always demands a unique genetic

from the fact that it seems to have become combination-and of course much else, but the

significantly less frequent in American negroes, genetic contribution above all.

it is probably mildly harmful. Probably other It is fortunate that no opportunity is ever

local characteristics ofsimilar genetic significance likely to arise which will allow deliberate

will be recognized in the future. It is too early breeding of human stock towards a desired

to say for certain what effect the entry of such pattern. It would be only too easy to make

genes into a European community would be terrible mistakes. But if within the realms of

but everything suggests that in fact the "dilution" practical policy I were asked to say how best

of the trait would be so great that there would our physical and mental vigour could be im-

be almost no chance of the appearance of indi- proved by genetic means, I believe the following

viduals with a double dose.

points would have to be included in any answer.

At the purely genetic level the entry of any 1. There will always be mating groups within

dissimilar group that can be effectively assimi- the community, but every artifice should be

lated into the community is on the balance used to make these as extensive, as fluid and as

desirable. The only types of genetic disability variable as possible, e.g. by providing free oppor-

to be expected are likely to be of much the same tunities for the movement of young people in

type and number as those shown by a standard the community and by making every effort to

population. From the gentic angle, there would incorporate groups which for any reason resist

be no objection at all to the entry of a small the process.

proportion of non-Europeans into Australia 2. A steady inflow of foreign genetic material

and probably much to be gained. In the real will probably help to maintain vigour and diver-

world, however, where mating groups are sity, always provided there is opportunity for

relatively small and prejudices against marriage the foreigner to find a spouse amongst the home

with any one outside the group often extremely population.

strong, the position is entirely different. The 3. Appropriate incentives might be provided

community gains no genetic benefit and may to influence those who carry grossly harmful

develop a major social problem when an immi- genetic defects to have few or no children.

grant group remains a closed mating group The essence of this can be summarized

so that no blending of characters with the bulk very simply by saying: Provide for everyone the

of the community can occur.

widest possible opportunity to find the mate

The Virtues of Diversity

he or she desires and put no additional barriers in the way of any form of inter-racial or inter-

There is one very important difference community marriage.

between ourselves-considered simply as a In recent years, it has been generally accepted

mammalian species-and any of our domestic than an Australian marrying a non-European

96

MIGRATION AND RACE MIXTURE FROM THE GENETIC ANGLE

can as an act of grace confer Australian citizen- However, the important feature is surely to

ship on the spouse. From the genetic angle, make the most of the genetic diversity that has

there is much to be said for allowing into the come to use from Europe and the British

country as much non-European genetic material Isles, and will continue to come in future years.

as the community can safely assimilate. The There are good human reasons for believing

practical approach to this is perhaps to estab- that for the first generation like will tend to

lish the rule that the spouse of any Australian mate with like, and that complete assimilation

citizen of European blood, is automatically will be a gradual process. On the whole, we

admissible to citizenship irrespective of race are on safe ground if we strive both to bring

or nationality. Experience everywhere indicates about the full cultural absorption of all migrant

that it would be disastrous to open the doors to a large dissimilar minority introduced to provide cheap lower grade labour. Experience, however, equally points to the acceptability of upper class cross-racial marriage and, where this is accepted, clearly no general contempt for the half-breed can develop. Small dissimilar groups provide as a rule no social problemn.
With these points in view it might in the long run be wiser to foster, or at least not dissuade,

groups and in the process make it easier for an increasing proportion of marriages to take place outside their own racial group. In this way we can feel reasonably certain of maintaining the genetic stimulus needed to create a vigorous nation drawn pre-eminently from European stocks, but, I should like to think, also willing to accept into the "gene pool" of our community a contribution from any section

marriage of non-European students working of the human species that has a worthwhile

in Australia to Australians of European stock. inheritance to offer.

Population and Birth Control 1
The only international journal concerned solely with the world-wide problems of population and birth control.
-requested by libraries, universities, and sociological organizations; -quoted by public speakers and newspaper correspondents.
Published ten times a year by the INTERNATIONAL PLANNED PARENTHOOD FEDERATION
The IPPF, a federation of voluntary associations for family planning and governmental agencies in twenty-two
countries, believes that
-family planing is a fudament hnan right; -a favourable balance between the populations and natural resources of the world is an indispensable condition of
lasting world peace;
-that such a balance is unattainable unless knowledge ofplanned parenthood is extnded.
Annual subscription to the Nzws, IO/-; $2.00. For information and sample copy, write to: IPPF, 69 EcaLsToN SQUARRE, LONDON, ENGLAND.
97

