STERILIZATION BILL

The Eu,enics Society's First Draft
Extract from the Minutes of the Eugenics Society, July I3th, i928.-" The Council have had usnder consideration the question of Sterilization, and in order to serve a. a basis for discussion a Bill was printed. Although all its details were not finally approved, it is given here below in order to direct attention to the lines along which this problem should be attacked.""-Ed.

N Act to prevent the practice of that he is in a fit condition to leave the

Sterilization when morally or socially institution.

objectionable, thus safeguarding its 3. (i) If any person intermarries with or

use for the preservation of the race, and to attempts to intermarry with any person make provisions as to the marriage of whom he knows is certified as mentally de-

mentally defective or insane persons.

fective or insane or solemnizes or procures

i. The local authority for the purposes of or connives at any marriage knowing that

the Mental Deficiency Act, 1913, may under- one of the parties is certified as mentally

take the sterilization of a mentally defective defective or insane, he shall be guilty of a

person who has in pursuance of that Act misdemeanour unless the consent of the

been ordered to be sent to an institution or Board of Control to the said marriage has

placed under guardianship, subject to the been obtained.

following conditions:

(ii) No minister of religion shall be under

(a) that the treatment has been approved any obligation to solemnize a marriage if he

by the Minister of Health.

has reason to believe that either party is

(b) that the consent of the Board of Con- certified as mentally defective or insane.

trol has been obtained; and

(iii) Any person who is aware that he has

(c) that the parent of the defective has been sterilized, with whatever object in view,

consented to the operation being per- and marries without making known to the

formed.

other party that he has been sterilized shall

Provided that such consent shall be be guilty of a misdemeanour, and the mar-

dispensed with if the parent has com- riage may be annulled on appeal to a duly

mitted an offence against the defective, constituted court.

or has been deprived of the custody of the defective by due process of law or is certified as mentally defective or in-
sane or cannot be found.

(v) If a mental defective marries whilst an Order under the Mental Deficiency Act is still in force, the local authority may, with the consent of the Board of Control,

2. (i) At the request of any patient who appeal to the court to declare the marriage

is about to be discharged from an asylum void, provided that the said marriage was

provided under the Lunacy Acts the visiting contracted after the passing of this Act, and

committee may undertake his sterilization the court shall have power to declare it void

subject to the condition that the treatment and to make such provisions as it thinks

has been approved by the Minister of necessary in regard to the custody of any

Health.

children resulting from the marriage and to

(ii) The treatment shall be given at financial matters.

the expense of the visiting committee and This Act shall be read as one with the

the patient may be retained in the asylum Lunacy Acts and the Mental Deficiency

until the medical superintendent certifies Acts.

i66

STERILIZATION BILL

I67

EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM

7. Nevada ....

......... I9II

(i) It is believed that, if the Bill were passed, no medical man could be liable to
any action because he had performed the operation of sterilization at the request of a local authority.
(2) It is hoped that the policy of the Board of Control would be to continue to regard segregation as the normal method of
dealing with mental defectives, and never to permit sterilization on the plea that it would be an economical way of dealing with them, sanction for the operation only being given when the defective was about to be given increased liberty involving risk of procreation, such liberty being for his or her advantage.

8. New York .....

........ I9I2

9. North Dakota ............. I9I3, I927

io. Kansas ...... ........ 9I3, I9I7

ii. Wisconsin .....

........ I9I3

I2. Michigan ............. I9I3, I923, I925

I3. Nebraska ........ I5.......

I4. New Hampshire ............. I9I7, I92I

I5. Oregon ............. I997, I923, I925

i6. South Dakota ......... I9I7, 919,1I925

17. Montana ....

......... I923

i8. Delaware .............

I923

I9. Virginia ....

......... I924

20. Idaho ............. I925

2I. Minnesota ..... ........ I925

22. Utah ............. I925

23. Maine ............. I925

(3) It is believed that to perform the
operation of sterilization of a lunatic, without his free consent, for other than adequate therapeutic reasons, is and would continue
to be a crime.
(4) The consent of the Board of Control is inserted in Clause 3, Section iv, in the hop'e that their consent to the marriage of a
certified mentally defective or insane person being either contracted or declared void, would only be given after inquiry had been
made as to the probability of the said
marriage being infertile.

In addition to these the Canadian Pro-
vince of Alberta now has a eugenic sterilization law, assented to on March 2ISt, I928, and the Swiss Canton of Vaud has recently passed a similar Act.
We have, as yet, only the Press reports to go upon, but the Swiss Act, in making sterilization compulsory in some cases, appears to go even further than the Canadian. The Daily News quotes the " new Article in the Constitution " as providing that " a person affected by mental disease or mental infirmity ' may be the object of

***

measures of a medical order having for their object the prevention of children if a person

EXISTING STERILIZATION LAWS

is recognized to be incurable, and if in all probability the progeny will be affected '."

It is sometimes said that sterilization The reference to " incurable " (if a cor-

has been " proved to be unworkable " in rect translation) seems irrelevant. Steriliza-

the United States, where twenty-three tion does not in any case protect society

States during the last twenty-one years have from the individual, but from his or her

passed sterilization laws. Dr. H. H. progeny; and it is therefore the heritable,

Laughlin adequately answered this charge not the curable quality of the affliction

in his address to the Munich (1928) meeting that is the issue. Some lunatics are cur-

of the International Federation of Eugenic able, yet liable to bequeath their disease

Organizations.

to their children: others, the victims of

The States, with dates of statutes, are injury or encephalitis lethargica, are incur-

i. Indiana .........

I907, I927 able yet will have normal children. How-

2. Washington ........... 909, I92I ever, even if there has been a little confu-

3. California ......... I909, I9I3, I9I7 sion of thought on this point, the main

4. Connecticut .........1909, I9I8, I919 object of the measure is clearly to check the

5. New Jersey ...

...... I9II perpetuation of hereditary mental disease.

6. Iowa .....1.... III, I9I3, I9I5 " Medical intervention, states the law " (we

B

i68 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

quote the same journal), " can only take I925, 3,307 on males and 2,937 on females.

place with the authorization of the Public Most of them, 4,636, have been performed

Health Authority, and the Authority itself in California.

will only give this consent after inquiry, Mr. E. S. Gosney has made a supplemen-

and with the concurrence of a doctor desig- tary survey and found that between July

nated by it." Other reports explicitly use Ist, I925, and January Ist, I928, a further

the word " compulsory."

2,27I operations have been performed-

Switzerland is one of those small coun- making a grand total of 8,5I5 (Eugenical

tries which have made a conspicuous success News, September, i928). Mr. Gosney

of civilization-in the best sense of the further reports that several hundred males

word-a fact which gives this advance were sterilized in Indiana, for eugenic rea-

especial significance. The measure was sons, between I899 and the adoption of the

passed unanimously. Some correspondents law in I907. They are not included in the

state that other cantons are likely to follow above total. In some States without sterili-

suit, and that the Swiss Government may zation laws institutions occasionally sterilize

approach the League of Nations " with a on their own responsibility. These, again,

view to securing world-wide legislation on are not included in the total. Idaho and

the subject."

South Dakota, he adds, are just starting to

That last is probably too optimistic, but put their laws into effect.

it is only one of many indications that edu- For further data, on the effects of sterili-

cated public opinion is everywhere awaking zation, readers are referred to the series of

to the urgent need for racial reform.

pamphlets by Paul Popenoe, reviewed in

Of the American States, Dr. Laughlin this and in our last two issues and now in

said, six have been declared " unconstitu- the library. The important point to notice

tional " by the Supreme Court of the is that purely legal causes have been

United States-New Jersey, Iowa, Nevada, responsible for the few sterilization

New York, Oregon, and Indiana. In four " failures " in the United States. Most of

more no attempt has been made to enforce these laws had a punitive object, aimed at

the laws since their enactment-in Maine, sexual offenders, and as such were declared

Minnesota, South Dakota, and Utah. In unconstitutional. Acts whose aims are

the remaining States 6,244 sterilizing opera- purely eugenic are not unconstitutional, and

tions had been performed up to July ist, have been entirely successful.-Ed.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XX, No. 3.

