EUGENICS, ACADEMIC AND PRACTICAL*

By PROFESSOR R. A. FISHER. Sc.D., F.R.S.

T HE title chosen for my address to the Now, has the eugenics movement in this

Society at this Annual General Meeting country, as represented by the Eugenics

is " Eugenics, Academic and Prac- Society during the last twenty-odd years,

tical." I cannot claim to have chosen this really deserved the opprobrious epithet

particular title, but the attempt to fathom "academic"? Looking back over past

the intentions of its originators has been pro- numbers of the EUGENICS REVIEW, it is not

ductive of some reflections which may, easy to find examples of the elaboration of

perhaps, justify its choice.

barren distinctions, so dear to the academic

In the first place, I am reminded that the mind, nor of that suave but dogmatic in-

word " academic " possesses in our language sistence on trivialities by which the same

two distinct meanings. In the one sense, that type of intellect may be recognized. Looking

is academic which pertains to an academy or over these pages, we do not seem to have been

institution devoted to higher education. In oppressed by that intolerance, directed

its other and more familiar sense, the sense in against originality of outlook, characteristic

which it is used by the man in the train, it of uncreative minds when expected or allowed

means 'impractical,' 'pedantically ob- to pose as authorities. The volumes are, in

scure,' 'irrelevant,' 'far-fetched,' and general, a record of freedom of discussion,

' negligible for purposes of decision.' I need even of individual preju'dices, and of fruitful,

hardly say that, for every one time in which though often incoherenL, planning for racial

the word is used in the first sense, it occurs betterment. I think any impartial reader

fifty times in the second, in common speech would conclude that eugenics is not an

and on subjects of common interest. This, in academic subject. The only thing about it

fact, is its practical meaning: the other which strikes one as academic is, perhaps, its

meaning is merely 'academic.'

name, eugenics, which has certainly a pedan-

To a Society which sets itself to achieve a tic ring to some ears, and is perhaps partly

national task, and seeks to gain national responsible for the undoubted fact that, of the

support, the psychological reactions of the many thousands of our countrymen who are

man in the train are not to be neglected. If already inclined to take racial dangers some-

eugenics were thought to be academic, in the what seriously, only a small minority have

sense in which he uses the word, that would become Fellows or Members of our Society.

be a fault, for which this Society would be to

blame, and a fault which this Society must GALTON LABORATORY AND EUGENICS correct. For I submit that, in using the word SOCIETY

as he does, the man in the train shows con-
siderable penetration. He is not, and does not
often pretend to be particularly well-informed about our educational institutions, yet his attitude proves one point decisivelythat the pretentiousness of pedantry has made a far wider and deeper impression on the English population than have the reali-
ties of learning.

In scientific subjects, the natural remedy for dogmatism has been found in research. By temperament and training, the research worker is the antithesis of the pundit. What he is actively and constantly aware of is his ignorance, not his knowledge; the insufficiency of his concepts, of the terms and phrases in which he tries to excogitate his problems: not their final and exhaustive

* A lecture delivered at the Annual General Meeting of the Eugenics Society at Burlington House, on May

sufficiency. He is, therefore, usually only a good teacher for the few who wish to use

14th, 1935.

their mind as a workshop, rather than to

95

96 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

store it as a warehouse. It was, perhaps, some to Galton's own researches, is the study of

such considerations as these which led Fran- man as an evolving organism. Many pro-

cis Galton, in considering how his fortune found thinkers have formed the opinion that

should best, after his death, further the aims civilized man, by his very success in con-

of eugenics, to establish a Laboratory for trolling his environment-by the influence

eugenic research in the University of London. he has achieved over the incidence of death

For many years this Laboratory was incor- and the occurrence of birth-is encountering

porated in the same department as the through evolutionary agencies, through the

teaching of statistics, and it was only some same types of cause which have brought him

eighteen months ago, on the retirement of into existence, a relatively rapid decadence

my predecessor, Professor Karl Pearson, that of his highest attributes and powers. The

its duties were disentangled from the business thesis may be argued with eloquence, for or

of teaching, and freed for that of learning. against, on historical, biological or genetic

Now that the Laboratory is, if I may so grounds. Very diverse opinions may be held

put it, united in interest with the Society, with equal conviction, and it is, I think, clear

which is the other product of our founder's that agreement can only be approached, and

life work, it may seem appropriate that I the way paved for concerted action, by an

should, from time to time, give an account of understanding of the evolutionary forces at

the work in progress, or in preparation, to work, and of their quantitative efficacy in our

the Members of this Society. This, perhaps, existing population. That, I believe, has

was one of the intentions of those who always been the aim; the means of research

framed the title of my address.

have changed with change of opportunity,

LEONARD DARWIN STUDENTSHIPS
But first I should like to congratulate the
Society, and all those responsible for the project, on the recent decision of the Council
to establish one or more research studentships, in the name of our Honorary President Major Leonard Darwin, tenable at any one of a number of universities and research
institutions where facilities exist for research of value to eugenics to be carried out. This, I believe, is a step of profound importance, the fruits of which may be slow in maturing, as the fruits of research invariably are, but which is destined, I believe, to exert a cumulative effect; by bringing the subject of eugenics before the minds of a large number of able candidates; by initiating them, at an
early stage in their career, in the problems practically in need of solution, and in the methods available for overcoming their difficulties; and finally, by adding, year by
year, some substantial item to the body of ascertained fact by which our policy must be
guided.

and with the advance of scientific knowledge
in other fields. These fields must be laid under contribution if the situation in man is
to be elucidated. We cannot experiment in human heredity,
so the experimental side of the work must be performed with animals, where the matings can be controlled and the results followed
through a long series of generations. Men can only be observed, their relationships recorded, and numbers of cases counted. The
rest is inference. Our only means of knowing that such inferences are scientifically valid is by demonstrating the validity of the arguments used in analogous experimental material, in which conclusive verification is possible in subsequent generations. That, in a nutshell, is the principle on which our
knowledge of human genetics is being built up. For each type of problem which the human data present, we must find the appropriate experimental material which may supply the key to the puzzle.
For example, our practical interest in the well-being of human populations turns

AIMS AND METHODS OF EUGENIC predominantly on what are known as quanti-

RESEARCH

tative characters, such as exhibit themselves

The controlling aim of the studies at the in intelligence tests, or in resistance to dis-

Galton Laboratory, tracing back, as they do, ease. What matter here, above everything,

EUGENICS, ACADEMIC AND PRACTICAL

97

are the agencies which are capable of experiments with poultry, during the last

influencing the average of the population in a six years, have already confirmed in that

desirable or an undesirable sense. We are, species.

therefore, much concerned with the theo- On the clinical side, we are concerned, not

retical and practical study of quantitative with the average of the great mass of the

inheritance, with cases in which many population, but with the special pedigrees of

Mendelian factors contribute to a single a number of hereditary defects and abnor-

measurable effect, an aspect of genetic study malities, each in itself comparatively rare.

which, owing to its difficulty, has been In this field Dr. Julia Bell is continuing her

avoided in most centres of genetic research, investigations for the Medical Research

but which plays such a central part in all Council, the results being published from

human problems that, with us, it must time to time by the Laboratory, in those

constitute a major objective.

large pedigree collections which many of you

will know as the " Treasury of Human

PROBLEMS OF MENDELIAN DOMINANCE Inheritance." Attention is being particu-

Many years ago, when I first attempted larly directed towards hereditary defects of

the interpretation, in genetic terms, of my the nervous system, and the last issue con-

distinguished predecessor's studies in the tains the material so far available on that

correlation of human measurements, it terrible, though fortunately rare type of

became clear that one of the largest elements hereditary insanity known as Huntington's

of uncertainty in their interpretation lay in chorea-not, let me say, to be confused with

our ignorance of the manner in which the the chorea of childhood, which is a frequent

Mendelian phenomena of dominance affected symptom of acute rheumatism. In these

the factors involved. At that time, domin- clinical studies, the difficulties introduced by

ance was regarded as a bare fact of observa- variable dominance form one of the great

tion, apparently causeless, about which pitfalls in the way of accurate prognosis, for

nothing could be known, save by isolating even the most reliable of the so-called

the factor concerned by continued experi- ' dominant ' defects, which are usually

mental breeding. During the last seven transmitted in the direct line from parent to

years, however, a study of the incidence of child, have been known, on occasion, to skip

dominance in the known factors of experi- a generation, or, in other words, to be hidden

mental animals seems to have thrown light in transmission as though they were reces-

on the manner in which dominance comes sive. It is, however, another peculiarity

into existence, and the causes by which it is brought to light by genetical research,

produced. -If these theories may be relied on, namely linkage, which is likely in the future

then the general character of the dominance to revolutionize the methods of individual

phenomena to be expected in human in- prognosis.

heritance is no longer an unobservable un-

known. But we could apply to man such LINKAGE AND INDIVIDUAL PROGNOSIS

theories, based on animal genetics, with the Apart from sex linkage, we know almost

degree of certainty that is required, only on nothing at present of linkage in man. Yet it

the condition that they are supported and is certain that every defect determined by a

confirmed in detail by a wide range of dif- single factor must be located in one or other

ferent organisms. We have, therefore, at the of twenty-three linkage groups. Each defect

Galton Laboratory, quite a selection of divers nust therefore be linked in inheritance with

animals, snails, for example, and the grouse numerous other observable traits, and with

locusts, chosen for the facilities they offer in some of them it is probably linked closely.

this study, which may confirm, or may en- The search for such linkage will certainly be

large, the views as to dominance which were lengthy, and at first, disappointing. For the

originally derived from that invaluable simple, harmless characters which are our

experimental fly, Drosophila, and which my tools in this work have not in the past

98 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

received the attention which they deserve. might enable the geneticist to say to some of

Yet they are probably very numerous, and the children of such parents: " The chance

must be observable, by an observer who that you have received the hereditary defect

knows what to look for, in the majority of is only about one in twenty," while in other

families. There is probably no way in which cases they would perceive that it was nine-

an observant amateur can do so much to teen in twenty. The degree of certainty

further eugenic progress as by detecting such attainable by this method depends on the

small but definite distinctions among his own closeness of the linkage; but those who find

neighbours and acquaintances. Any such themselves under the shadow of such an

trait as the possession of red hair, ear lobes hereditary disability would not underesti-

free-hanging or attached to the cheek, the mate the value of any objective guidance in

presence and absence of hair on the second the uncertainties of their case.

joints of the fingers, and innumerable other At the Galton Laboratory, therefore, we

differences may, if found to be diagnosable are endeavouring to introduce, step by step,

with confidence, supply one more of the test the examination of these auxiliary traits into

factors so badly needed in the detection of the work of pedigree collection. One such

linkage with the rare abnormalities.

test which we use depends on the capacity to

What such a detection may mean in prac- taste certain organic compounds, which was

tical prognosis I may illustrate in the case of discovered, I understand, from the observa-

such a dominant defect as Huntington's tion that, while most people observe a,

chorea. This 'disease attacks many of its bitterness in the pulp of grapefruit, others are

victims late in life. Uncontrolled, involun- unconscious of any such flavour. A number

tary movements, formerly often called St. of other such innocuous factors may be

Vitus's dance, increasingly afflict the patient, detected through the reactions of the blood.

and are followed, after years of distressing

illness, by partial or complete loss of the reason. Children may have been born before any recognizable symptom appeared, and

STUDIES OF SEROLOGICAL INHERITANCE

these, in adolescence, may show no sign of That the serum of some persons has the

the defect, yet 50 per cent. of such children power spontaneously of agglutinating the

ultimately fall to the disease. At present, if blood-corpuscles of others, and that these

a young man with such a family history were differences are readily detected and simply

to present himself for eugenic advice, we inherited, has been known for many years.

could only say: " There are two alternatives. By means of this spontaneous agglutination,

Perhaps, like your father or mother, you have four types of men and women may be dis-

received the fatal defect; there is no known tinguished. More recently Landsteiner, in

remedy. You should undertake no family America, has shown that another distinction

responsibilities, nor run the risk of trans- may be drawn, using immune serum from

mitting such an affliction to your children. rabbits, which increases the number of dis-

Perhaps, on the other hand, you are free tinguishable types from four to twelve.

from the defect. In that case there is no Already it is possible, by blood tests, to

danger, or even possibility, of your trans- settle disputed paternity in the majority of

mitting it to any child or descendant. The cases. In at least one case, the error of a

probabilities of these opposite alternatives maternity centre in interchanging two babies

are, so far as we know, exactly equal." That has been corrected by this means. But the

is the position of eugenic prognosis in such a rabbit is not the only animal which can be

case to-day. But suppose we knew that one used. Further distinctions, of which, so far,

or other of these harmless traits which I have less is known, can be drawn by means of

mentioned were closely linked in inheritance serum from horses and from sheep; and

with Huntington's chorea, such knowledge every new distinction which can be estab-

might altogether change the situation. It lished multiplies the number of types which

EUGENICS, ACADEMIC AND PRACTICAL

99

can be identified, and the prospects of detect- truths to the needs of a particular nation at a

ing genetic linkage.

particular period is one for the legislator, and

I believe I can say with confidence that the when we speak of 'Practical Eugenics' I

study of serological inheritance is only at its hope that we shall always mean practical

beginning. A few years ago, Dr. Todd, of the action in the legislative sphere, based on and

National Research Institute, published some prepared by educational propaganda appeal-

remarkable researches on the immune reac- ing directly to the eugenic conscience of the

tions of chickens, in which he had found it nation. Only by framing legislative pro-

relatively easy to prepare a serum which posals, as in the advocacy of voluntary

would identify the blood corpuscles of any sterilization, and by preparing ourselves to

individual bird from those of all other birds. mobilize our political influence, can the

He showed, too, that the reactions respon- Society, I believe, achieve aims which

sible for these tests were definitely genetic, deserve to be called practical.

while the factors concerned were certainly In doing this there are, of course, lions in

very numerous. I see no reason, personally, the path. I have said that I believe that there

to doubt that they are equally numerous in are thousands outside the eugenic movement

mankind, or that ultimately, at the end per- fully prepared to take our racial dangers

haps of prolonged and disappointing re- seriously. No effort should be spared to gain

searches, it will be possible to use the sero- the active support of this body of opinion;

logical reactions of human blood as a direct and I do not think that it is merely the some-

means of investigating the genetic potentiali- what pedantic flavour of the word

ties of a human being. That, perhaps, will be 'eugenics ' which has made it, hitherto,

the final solution of the problem of the normal hold aloof. The great obstacle to our gaining

carrier of a hidden defect. However that may the support of this body of sane and solid

be, it is my business this afternoon to explain opinion seems to me to be the fear of

our aims, and not to make promises. What I crankery. Just as the pedant, even when

have said of the recent progress of serology learned, makes of himself an obstacle to the

will at least explain why it is that, through advance of knowledge, and by his vanity has

the munificence of a great scientific Founda- brought the pursuit of knowledge itself into

tion, we shall be able, before the end of the some disrepute, so it is the temperamental

year, as I have just heard from America, to weakness of the crank which makes him the

establish a laboratory for serological genetics deadly enemy of the statesmanlike use of the

in addition to our previous activities.

existing machinery for public co-operation.

Combine in one person, personal vanity, a WHAT IS "PRACTICAL EUGENICS"? passion for interference, but little knowledge

I have not attempted to give a full account and much zeal, and you have a potential

of the work at the Galton Laboratory, and crank. The crank acquires, for example,

especially, I have left aside the scientific some little item of scientific knowledge-such

detail-the tactics, as it were-of our attack as that Dr. Helen King's white rats have

upon special problems. For these I must been bred brother to sister for over a hundred

refer the curious to the Annals of Eugenics generations, and are still as healthy as ever:

which, through the co-operation of this immediately, driven by the other elements of

Society, it is now possible to publish quar- his character, he becomes an advocate of

terly. I have only hoped to give a sketch of incest, on " eugenic " grounds. To him,

the controlling strategy of our work, the aim eugenics becomes the advocacy of incest. Or,

of which is to supply a solidly established again, he may hear that artificial insemina-

body of fact which may be of service to the tion can be successfully practised on many

statesman in framing our laws, and to the farm animals. It matters little to him that

administrator in working our institutions. the number of advantageous births which

Science is international, and of universal could be brought about by this method is

application. The task of applying its general ludicrously insignificant. It seems positively

B

zoo THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to attract him that human generation by character. My imaginary examples will serve

this process would be abhorrent to the feel-. to emphasize my point that any element of

ings of the thousands of sane citizens, to crankery in any society's policy is deadly to

whom the eugenics movement might other- its political influence; and, on the other

wise appeal with success. It is enough that side, that the serious organization of the

notoriety can be based on offended senti- Society's political activities is to be wel-

ments, and he becomes an advocate of comed, quite apart from its other effects, as

" eugenics," by artificial insemination.

closing the door, once and for all, on the use

I need not enlarge upon the reactions of of our Society for the self-advertisement of

experienced politicians to activities of this irresponsible monomaniacs.

CHARACTER AND PERSONALITY
An International Psychological Quarterly
Edited by ROBERT SAUDEK
Contents of June 1935 issue Robert Saudek: An Obituary, by A. A. ROBACK (Cambridge, Mass.). On the Nature and Structure of Character, by WILLIAM STERN (Duke University). Personality Characteristics of Happily Married, Unhappily Married, and Divorced
Persons, by WINIFRED BENT JOHNSON and LEWIS M. TERMAN (Stanford University). Some Fundamental Laws of the Psychology of Needs: Hunger, by DAVID KATZ (University of Manchester). Involuntary Self-expression in Gait and Other Movements, by WERNER WOLFF
(Barcelona).
Subscription, 7s. 6d. per annum; single copies, 2s.
LONDON: GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD.
Eugenics Review, Vol. XVH, No. 2.

