C. P. BLACKER, M.A., M.D.
Dr. Yoshio Koya: A Memorable Story*

T WO SIMPLE BUT historical facts give principal restraint on fertility? From the start,

meaning to a collection of papers by nobody has believed more passionately than

Dr. Yoshio Koya.t The first is that, in Dr. Yoshio Koya that it can. But how to prove

May 1948, there was enacted in Japan a Eugenics that it can?

Protection Law which widened the practice The fourteen papers included in this sympo-

of induced abortion. The second is that in the sium give Dr. Koya's answer. Two-the first

following year (1949) a Population Problem and the last-have not been published before.

Council was set up in the Japanese cabinet The penultimate paper (entitled Problems in

which recommended to the government that procuring Contraceptive Materials in a rural

all restrictions on family planning be removed. Area in Japan) is written by Dr. Minoru Mura-

But the recommendation was rejected and the matzu (1962). The remainder, ranging in date

Population Problems Council, having failed in from 1954 to 1962, are the work of Dr. Koya

its object, was dissolved in March 1950, less and named colleagues.

than a year after its formation.

The main theme throughout is expressed by

Thus was abortion encouraged and family the book's title-Pioneering in Family Planning.

planning discouraged.

The object is practical. It is "dictated by the

But it did not take long for the Japanese urgent demands of the time. More leisurely,

authorities to recognize the mischief of this scholarly, and analytical work", says the author

policy. Eighteen months later (October 1951) on the last page, "remains to be done".

Japan's Minister of Welfare announced a cabinet If, as an article in an almost missionary faith,

decision that:

you believe that contraception is better than

Abortion exerts undesirable effects on maternal abortion, how do you set about proving that

health. It is therefore necessary to disseminate contraceptive information to decrease these undesirable effects.

the thing can be done? You devise social experiments in diverse contexts. You begin by desig-

Nevertheless, the practice of abortion spread in Japan and has done more than anything else to accomplish what has been described as a
near-miracle-the halving of Japan's birth rate in thirteen years (from 34-3 in 1947 to 17-2 in 1960). From 1953 onwards, induced abortions
have exceeded a million.
Can contraception replace abortion as the

nating a geographical area or an occupational
group. You make a census of the people in your
selected area or group, separating them by sex, age, and marital status. You are primarily interested in families wherein the wife is of
reproductive age. Your numbers are thus whittled down. They are further whittled down by the time you have excluded permanently sterile women, widows, and wives permanently

* An extract of this paper appears in the October issue of Around the World News of Population and Birth

separated from their husbands. Of your finally reduced group you begin by making various

Control.

inquiries relating to abortions and their effects

t Pioneering in Family Planning by Yoshio Koya M.D. New York, 1963. Published with the assistance of the Population Council Inc. Printed by Japan Medical

on health, still-births, losses of children, earlier practice of contraception (if any), and present

Publishers, Inc. Tokyo. Pp. vi + 173. Price not stated. attitude to contraception. What proportion want

ERRD

I 53
TETM EUGENICS REVIEW, Octoberl1963, 55,T3.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to know about, or more about, contraception? a mine some 100 miles N.E. of Tokyo (Joban)

These last are the subjects of your essential was selected. The period covered was the five

experiment. You arrange for them to have years April 1953-April 1958. By the last year,

appropriate instruction, you supply their needs; 590 families were included of which 314 (53 per

and you keep them under observation for the cent) were "exposed to pregnancy". Of these 314

period pre-determined in your original design. families, 266 (84 per cent) were using contra-

You keep a yearly record of births (planned or ception. The birth rate fell from 36-9 to 9 3 per

unplanned), of involuntary miscarriages and thousand. "People", says Dr. Koya, "were

still-births, of induced abortions, of contra- amazed at this decline; but the explanation is

ceptive failures, or dis-use of contraceptive simply that the mothers had borne more

methods (which may be for one of several children than they wanted." Abortion rates (per

reasons), and finally of whether, at the end of the 1,000 of population) were nearly halved from period, contraception is still being regularly 16-2 (716 families in 1952-53) to 8-4 (590 families practised. You finally compare the reproductive in 1957-58). At the start "neither the Company

experience of your group before your inquiry nor the workers were what might be called

was begun with its experiences during defined co-operative"; but at the end "the Company

phases of your experimental period. You can greeted our programme with eager co-operation,

state how many women have become users of especially in view of the obvious satisfaction of

contraception, how much (if at all) their preg- the wives who were successfully practising birth

nancy rates have fallen, and how far (if at all) control". Indeed, in 1956 the Company offered

they have resorted to abortion. But there are to pay part of the costs; and in 1956 a prize was

various statistical snags which provide exercises awarded to it by the Ministry of Welfare. "News

for academic demographers and "scholars". of these developments exerted much influence

Four such inquiries, concerned with different upon many industries in Japan, and more

groups of people over different time-periods are than eighty industrial enterprises have started

reported in this coUection. I will summarize family-planning programmes."

their main features and findings.

3. Families in receipt of public relief. As

1. Three villages-a rice-cultivating village, a candidates for instruction in birth control, this

farming village in mountains, and a fishing group was about the least promising that could

village. The reactions of rural populations were be found. The families were living in one of

of special interest because of the circumstances the poorest wards of Tokyo. The survey was

in which the recommendations of the above- begun in 1953 and was continuing when Dr.

mentioned Population Problem Council were Koya, with six named co-workers, published his

rejected in 1950. Opposition came "not only joint report (March 1957). Results of the third

in the government but also by the Diet members year's work were then available. The survey

representing the rural parts of the country who covered 1,789 families of which 418 were cbosen

thought ... that their constituents would not for the experiment. The average age ofthe wives

welcome the idea of family planning".

was 36-9 years. Of the 418 wives, 264 (63 per

These three villages contained over 1,300 cent) wanted to have guidance and were mostly

families of which 687 (53 per cent) included supplied with condoms and tablets. Abortions

wives "exposed to pregnancy". Of these 687 (277 families) were halved from 45 (per 1,000

families 62 per cent were using contraception population) in 1952-53 to 22 in 1955-56; and

at the end of the experimental period (1949-57). live births were reduced by three-quarters from

Abortions dropped by over 70 per cent-from 44 to 11. If this group in receipt of public relief

4-8 to 1-2 per thousand of population; and is in any way comparable with our social prob-

birth rates were nearly halved-from 26-7 in lem group, the results are truly remarkable. But

1950 to 13-6 in 1956. Satisfactory findings they are probably not comparable. Illness seems

indeed!

to have been the main cause of their dependency.

2. Coal-miners. In view of Japan's rapid "Of the 418 husbands under observation, only

industrialization a group of coal-miners working 157 can be regarded as healthy or normal. The

I 54

DR. YOSHIO KOYA: A MEMORABLE STORY

remaining 261, or 62 per cent, are either actually Railways, was responsible for this organization,

suffering from disease or are unwell. Of the all the more credit to him!) The railways them-

diseases reported, the most important was selves are administered by a Head Office in

tuberculosis with an incidence of 40 per cent." Tokyo and by nine Regional Offices. Each of

The result surprised the investigators: "What these nine regional offices has a family planning

did astonish us was that our experiments with committee consisting of at least five persons.

relief recipients were as satisfactory as those with The committee's chairman (the idea may sound

married couples in the farming villages and the peculiar to us) is the chief manager of the

coal-mining districts." Dr. Koya adds: "These railway's regional office. Other members include

people, we discovered, were less a gathering of executives of "the Japanese National Railways

people of low quality than of unfortunate beings Labour Union" (there is apparently but one

who had either lost their property during the such union. Lucky Japan!), members of "the

war or their employment because of illness." women's society of the area", an officially

4. Japanese National Railways. This inquiry placed gynaecologist and the head of the

differs from the preceding three. It is on a much regional office's welfare section. These nine

larger scale, but was conducted less intensively. regional family planning committees are con-

Dr. Koya has been consultant in family planning cerned "not only with ... numbers of pregnan-

to the Japanese National Railways which are cies, still births, live births and abortions, but

served by some 450,000 employees belonging also with the desired number of children and

to some 290,000 families. Dr. Koya contended intention to practice conception control".

that family planning not only benefits these For collecting this information, the nine

half million employees and their wives but that committees use case-workers. These are specially

it is a highly remunerative proposition for the trained midwives, one being allotted to every 400

railway company. The replacement of abortion householders in the area. These case-workers are

by contraception not only benefits individual paid 15,000 yen (about £15) monthly and their

families; it benefits the industry's economy. travelling expenses are paid. Proceedings in an

Dr. Koya contributes two papers about the area begin with an "inauguration ceremony"

Japanese National Railways. The first covers which is "usually attended by the principal staff

some 4,300 families and seems to have been members of the railway's regional office and by

mainly designed to show how family planning noted persons in the area. This produces the

could both reduce abortions and save money. desired effect of impressing upon the wives

Instruction on family planning reduced abor- of the railway employees the importance of the

tions from 9-2 per cent (4,294 families) before programme." Later the case-workers make door-

instruction to 5 6 per cent after; the same to-door visits where they distribute contracep-

instruction saved the railway company nearly tive supplies in the form of condoms (eight a

11 million yen. If it had been applied to all month), diaphragms, jelly and foam tablets

240,000 families for whose members the railway (twelve a month). They also note on cards the

then provided employment, the programme couple's contraceptive experiences, past and

would have saved some 603 million yen.

present, and particulars about abortion. It is

The second paper describes a later survey from the data thus collected that the following

which, from the standpoint of Dr. Koya's figures emerge.

objectives, is important. This because it consti- Not all the 290,000 families of railway

tutes a transitional enterprise between relatively employees were first reported on. (It seems that,

small and privately organized surveys of such in the two years intervening between the

people as villagers, coal-miners and recipients publication of Dr. Koya's first paper in 1960 on

of relief, and a comprehensive national pro- possible economies and that of the later paper

gramme administered by government servants. (1962) now being considered, the number of

The family planning services of the Japanese relevant families increased from 240,000 to

National Railways are systematically organized. 290,000). The elaborate regional arrangements

(If Dr. Koya, consultant to the National above described cannot fructify over-night. At

I S5

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the end of 1961, we are told, "we were giving guidance in the manner described above to some 80,000 households". (These amount to some 27 per cent of the total of 290,000.) From these 80,000 households a selection was made. "We selected those who had been receiving guidance for three years and among whom the wife was under 50 years of age." There resulted a sample of 9,282 households. This sample (3-2 per cent of the total of 290,000 railway
families, and 11 6 per cent of the 80,000 families who had received guidance by the end of 1961) is substantial. The figure is much larger than those involved in the earlier-mentioned surveys of villages, coal-miners and recipients of relief. Dr. Koya knows how to graduate the tasks he sets for himself, his co-workers, and the employees of the company which he serves as consultant. The figures which follow are based upon the reports of the case-workers responsible for guiding and following up these 9,282 families.
Seventy-five per cent were, at the end of the first year, using the methods to which they had been introduced, and the proportion of users was highest (84 per cent) among women aged 35-39. These women, though capable of further
child-bearing, had mostly had as many children as they wanted. Users of all ages compared with non-users increased as follows during the three years: after the first year, they formed three-quarters of the total (75 per cent); after the second year, they formed 79 per cent; and at the end of the third year, 82 per cent.
Births in the total group of 9,282 (users and non-users combined) diminished by a halfover the three years. The birth rate before the programme began was 40 8 per thousand; after the first year, it was 30-8; after the second, 23-0; and after the
third, 19-4.
Abortion rates seem to follow a different pattern from those of the three previously mentioned inquiries. The figure for the third year is smaller than that for the year before the survey began. But the difference is not sensational. It is further noteworthy that the figures for the first and second years are higher than the figure for the year before guidance. The four abortion figures are: 592 (year before guidance); 861 (first year); 725 (second year); and 553 (third

year). Why this rise in abortions during the first and second years? The answer is now becoming more widely recognized. It relates to the immediate consequences of a vigorous guidance programme. Two things happen. The first is that women get it into their heads that
the number of their pregnancies is subject to
their own control and is not a matter of unalterable destiny; the second is that it takes time to get accustomed to any technique of birth control. Appliance methods make unfamiliar demands. Certain steps have to be taken before each act of coitus. Either the husband or the wife may find difficulties or raise objections. But these are commonly overcome as the new habits are acquired. If, however, you become convinced that you can and should control your pregnancies, you are more likely, if contraception fails, to turn to abortion than if you believe that your pregnancies are controlled by destiny. The more so as, in the area of your home, abortions are much discussed and easily obtainable. This situation is recognized by Dr. Koya who notes that the abortion rate "may increase at first in response to the family planning stimulus". He further declares later on in the article: "It has been our experience, in this as in other studies, that the launching of a planned childbirth programme often results in an initial increase in abortion until people acquire the necessary skill and experience for successful contraceptive practice. Based on our experience, induced abortion will decline markedly as the programme progresses."
I now return to the point from which I began, namely Dr. Koya's crusade to substitute family planning for abortion in Japan. The initial challenge, to which these surveys are responses, was the rejection in 1950 of the recommendations of the Population Problem Council (later dissolved) that a family planning policy should be adopted. The opposition largely came from Diet members representing rural parts. But was it true that the rural population "would not
welcome the idea of family planning"? Dr.
Koya's first task was to demonstrate by his
survey of the thtee village populations that it wasn't true. Was it then true of the industrial
population? Again no, at least of very fertile coal-miners. To clinch, as it were, the case

iS6

DR. YOSHIO KOYA: A MEMORABLE STORY

against the now diminishing cohort of objectors, acceptability (perhaps surprising to some) of

Dr. Koya demonstrated that it wasn't even true the condom; Japan's experience with the

of recipients of public relief in a Tokyo slum. rhythm method, including the problem of

But these were small surveys to which it might seasonal amenorrhoea during the busy farming

possibly be objected that the selected samples season and during land development in remote

were not representative. Could the general villages. This variety of themes suggests that,

acceptability of contraception be demonstrated with the hindsight of perhaps 1977 (by when

on a large scale?

there will have elapsed a period equal to that

How far this last challenge was responsible which has passed since Japan's post-war

for Dr. Koya's appointment as consultant in population problem was first recognized), the

family planning to the Japanese National "abortion years" may be seen as an episode of

Railways we are not told in these papers. How the past, as an interim period-ugly but neces-

far was he responsible for the railway's pro- sary-in a transition which no other country

gramme? It seems possible that the organization could accomplish so quickly or by other means.

of family planning services in nine regional A word of appreciation of their far-sighted

offices co-ordinated by the head office of National initiative is due to the (American) Population

Railways in Tokyo, the enlistment of a corps of Council whose Research Associate, Mrs.

midwife case-workers (by then trained in Dorothy Nortman, contributes a valuable intro-

family planning), the devising of progressively duction gratefully acknowledged by Dr. Koya.

more ambitious surveys as the regional organiza- The Council-Mr. John D. Rockefeller, Dr.

tions improved, and lastly the demonstration Dudley Kirk, Dr. Marshall C. Balfour are

that, in addition to benefits in health, his pro- specifically named-discerned the importance

gramme yielded economic dividends-it is for the world of what has been happening in

possible that these measures originated in Dr. Japan, and they perceived the significance of

Koya's plan-rich brain.

Dr. Koya's role in the drama. It has been

The book contains chapters dealing with other through the Council's praiseworthy initiative

themes: the damage to health done by repeated that these papers have been collected and

abortions; sterilization; the efficacy of foam tab- published in a convenient and attractive

lets and the design of new tablets; the general format.

,'I 57

