POPULATION TRENDS AND POLICIES

13

nations. Polish, Czech, Dutch, Belgian, French man-power is drafted into Germany for semi-forced labour. Jewish men in Poland are apparently herded into reservations away from their stranded womenfolk. Many thousands of French soldiers are retained as prisoners. Hitler's dream of a Europe repopulated by IOO million " racially superior" Germans is more than ever the

inspiration of Nazi policy. I feel nevertheless that all this will lead nowhere. One day,
when the nightmare is over and Europe faces
once more the problems of reconstruction,
the Swedish attempt to influence demographic trends by enhancing personal welfare and freedom will be found to have contained important hints for a British approach to the
problem.

FAMILY ALLOWANCES IN WAR TIME
By EVA M. HUBBACK
Vice-Chairman, Family Endowment Society

T HE fact that as many as I50 Members instance, Sir John Orr's estimate that at

of the HIouse of Commons drawn from least 25 per cent of our children come from

all parties have put their names to a homes in which the income is too low to

resolution asking the Govemment to fonnu- allow for adequate nourishment. But they

late a scheme for " a national State-paid may not be so familiar with the recent

scheme of allowances for dependent children, figures as to child-dependency drawn by

payable to their mothers or acting guardians, Mr. Seebohm Rowntree from a recent social

as a means of safe-guarding the health and survey of I5,577 men in York. In this group:

well-being of the rising generation," is a sure 57 *8 per cent. had no children; 2I per cent.

sign that the support for Family Allowances had one child; I2.3 per cent. had two

is growing every day. Women's organiza- children; 5 per cent. had three children;

tions, religious bodies, professional societies 2.3 per cent. had four children; and i 6 per

and economists of note are also increasingly cent. had five or more children. It is sig-

giving their support, not only to the principle nificant that the 3 9 per cent. with more

of Family Allowances, but also to a universal than three children accounted for over 23

state scheme.

per cent. of the total number.

It often happens in war that the national Since the beginning of the war it has been

social conscience is strengthened, and that estimated that the cost of living for working-

reforms which have been asked for is peace class families has risen by at least 30 per

time for many years are adopted and dreams cent. In some industries wages have risen as

become facts. It would not be surprising much, if not more, and overtime and the

should this happen in the case of Family employment of more members of the family

Allowances, for the need is so greatly have resulted in higher incomes. But in

strengthened as a result of war conditions. other cases it has not been so, and incomes

The main ground on which it is being put have risen much less than prices or even not

forward is the need for maintaining an at all. Often, moreover, when the man has

adequate standard of living for the children been called up his wife has to manage on a

of the nation.

greatly reduced weekly sum. The result is

Readers of the EUGENICS REVIEW will be that many families who were previously

familiar with the peace-time figures-for above the poverty line are now below, and

I4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

that others who had previously been below could be superimposed on a flat-rate scheme.

are in still more straitened circumstances. An interesting light should be shed on the

Rationing has been established in order to differential birth rate once the minimum of

spread reduced supplies of food fairly, but physical needs have been guaranteed to all

to give every child a ration card is of little children; present differences in mental and

use if there is no money with which to buy physical development between children in

his share.

different social classes may well be gradually

There is indeed no other way in which the reduced.

problem of child nutrition and care can be
satisfactorily dealt with. Food subsidies, it Cost of a Scheme

is true, reduce the cost of living for all The cost of a Government scheme at the

classes; but they do so in a wasteful manner rate of five shillings a week for all children has

for they help not only the poor but many been estimated at £132,000,000 a year. The

who could do without help. Increased money net cost would probably not be more than

wages all round only defeat their own ends half this, for a large proportion of children

by leading to inflation. Extended social (e.g. orphans, children of men serving in

services are valuable, but can offer little for the Forces, evacuated children, children of

children in their own home; they provide widows, and children of unemployed men)

school meals or milk but leave other needs are already receiving various forms of state

untouched.

allowances, none of which however are based

The population problem is of course one on any scientific estimate of the minimum

which must be emphasized in war time. Mr. cost of child nurture. Income tax rebates

Lafitte estimates that during the war of are in effect children's allowances, but their

1914 to I9I8 there were half a million fewer full benefit is confined to those whose income

births than there would otherwise have been. is large enough to secure the maximum

The separations and casualties of this war concession. An income of £350, for instance,

will necessarily lead to a reduction in the is required before a rebate of even 6s. 3d. for

birth rate-though how much only time can each of three children can be paid. If a

show. universal scheme of Family Allowances were

It is generally agreed that any scheme established these would replace all existing

introduced now must be of a simple riature. allowances except to the extent to which

A flat-rate scheme is therefore being ad- these exceed five shillings. If the resulting

vocated, to be financed by the state and to be net cost is considered still too high it can be

universal in scope. The sum usually suggested reduced 50 per cent. by starting the scheme

is five shillings a week for each dependent at the second child only.

child. Schemes to encourage births in those It is interesting to note that the Federal

economic sections of the community that Government of Australia has adopted a

spend more than this amount on their scheme which comes into force this July, in

children must needs wait. No doubt once which an allowance of five shillings a week

Family Allowances have become familiar will be paid to the mother on behalf of all

schemes such as the establishment of mutual children starting from the second in each

insurance pools for different economic grades family.

