The Possible Effects of Germinal Change upon
the Progress and Decay of Civilization.
By A. M. CARR-SAUNDF.RS.
The rise and fall of civilizations has long attracted attention and many theories have been put forward to account for the facts. But until recent years the nature of germinal change was not understood; therefore the possible importance of germinal change in this connection was not appreciated. Latterly, however, some authors have suggested that in germinal change we have the whole or nearly the whole explanation of the facts. It is these more recent theories that we arenow about to discuss.
Any thorough discussion would have to beoin with a detailed examination of the facts. There is space here, however, only for a very brief reference to two points. First the various forms of achievement by which we judge a civilization reach their highest expression at different times. Not only does the greatest scientific achievement not coincide with the greatest artistic achievement, but the various forms of artistic achievement touch their highest points at different periods. Nevertheless in spite of this there are very definite culminating points to civilizations taken as a whole-so definite that practicallv all authorities agree as to the approximate date when a civilization ceases to advance. Secondly, after a civilization has passed a culminating point, it may enter on a long period of decline; there are cases, of which Rome is the best example, where there is no recovery and civilization is practically submerged. On the other hand there may be but a relatively slight falling away from the high level previously reached; there is no profound decline and another high peak of civilization may be reached at a later period. A great authoritv has recentlv said, for instance, that the Elizabethean and the Victorian Ages marked two high peaks in English civilization. These two extremes may be connected by a number of intervening cases where the decline is less profound than in the former, but more marked than in the latter. The very fact that there are these intermediate cases suggests that we have to do with the same phenomenon throughout. Other facts support this view; the almost complete submergence of Roman civilization, for example, was in part at least due to the accident that the migrations of uncivilised tribes occurred just when they did. Had these attacks upon the Roman Empire not been made, the decline would probably not have ended in submergence and the whole phenomenon would have been comparable with, let us say, the decline of Spain after the end of the sixteenth century. I propose therefore to assume that we are in all cases dealing with the same phenomenon and I shall comment later on

THE POSSIBLE EFFECTS OF GERMINAL CHANGE.

247

-the fact that all the elements in a civilization do not reach their
highest expression at the same time. It is necessary to say something as to the meaning of the phrase
germinal change. Recent investigations lead us to believe that underlying the visible characters of organisms there are a large number of factors. That aggregation of factors that any individual possesses we call its germinal constitution and as the individual develops from the fertilised ovum to the adult, these factors under the influence of the environment give rise to the characters that we see. It is possible to adopt a strict interpretation of the term germinal change and to
confine it to those cases in which this aggregation of factors is itself
modified. We may imagine that factors might drop out from the germinal constitution, that new factors might be added to if or that existing factors might become changed. We do not know exactly in
what modification exists; we only know that it occurs. But we do not -know under what circumstances modification comes about and since
we are entirely ignorant as to the causes of modification, we have no
reason to think that modification has occurred to a greater extent at
certain periods in past history than at others. There is thus no reason to think that germinal change in the strict
sense of the term has had any influence upon the rise and fall of civilization. I propose, however, in what follows to adopt a wider interpreta-
tion of the phrase and to include the results both of selection and of -racial mixture. No direct change in the germinal constitution as has
been described above comes about as the result of either selection or of racial mixture. When selection occurs the average germinal constitution of any generation differs from that of the generation which produced it. When racial mixture occurs new combinations of factors arise. Therefore under either of these circumstances germinal change does occur in a certain sense though not by the direct modification of factors. It comes about, however, in a -very real sense; but before we ask whether germinal change of these kinds is connected with the
phenomena under consideration, it is desirable to say a few more words as to its exact nature.
Selection may be either lethal or reproductive; war and disease are examples of the first; the differential birth-rate of the second. The facts are familiar and there is no need to labour them. There is, however, one point of such importance that it must not be overlooked.
-Selection acts upon characters and is therefore effective only so far as the characters which lead to their possessors being favoured or eliminated
are representative of underlying factors. To make my meaning clear I will take an example of ineffective selection. In 1899 an experiment was begun at the Maine Agricultural Station which had as its object to improve the egg-laying capacity of Barred Plymouth Rock fowls. The method employed was as follows. Only pullets were used as breeding stock which had laid 150 or more eggs during their first laying year, and the cockerels were all sons of hens that had laid at least 200 eggs. No tests were made of the egg-producing capacity of the progeny of the -various matings. The type of selection practiced was therefore what
we may call mass selection, and it is precisely this type of selection that
toccurs among human beings. This type of selection was continued

2 [X EUGENICS REVIEW.
fromii 1899 to 1908, wheni it was discointii-itue(l. The effort to raise the egg-laying cal)acity was entirely withouit success; the average nutmber of eggs did in fact slightly declinie duriiig the period. The result of the
exp)eriment might be takeni as showing that fertilitv was Inot inherited..
That this is niot the explanation is shownn by the fact that, when the
nethod of selectioni wNas altered in 1909 anid inidividual, instead of
nass, selection- lpracticed, the average egg-production of the flock was
soon raised. The explaniation clearly is that fecundity is easily mnodifiable. Everv year a certain number of pullets of an inferior class. which owing to fortunate circumstanices, had exhibited their maxinmum laying power, got included among the selected pullets and thus held down the average vearly productioni of the flock.
Mlass selection in the human race will therefore onlv be effective in4resl)ect of characters that are not easily modifiable. For our purposes menital characters are the most important and there is reason to think that they are not markedly susceptible to such differences as normally occur. But there is this further important point that to some extent in
-nearly all cases in which mental characters are selected these characters are niot merely the expressions of factors acted upon by the environ-nent, in the sense in which we think of phvsical characters being acted upon bv the evnironment. They include in their expression a certain amiount of acquired menetal machinerv. Now if the members of a population do not all possess the same amount of acquired mental
-nachinlerv, the individuals selected may be selected on account of the special machinery theyr have acquired and not on accoulnt of any peculiar factors wilth which they are endowe(l. I do not propose to
Aiscuss this subject at length; I merely mention it as a possible source of error in estinmating the effect of selection among civilised races. It
is probable in my opinion that the neglect of this source of error does vitiate certain conclusions thlat have been drawn as to the result of selection. But for the sake of argument I will assume that mass selection of meni exhibiting certain mental characters is effective and (loes in other words lead to the selection of factors underlying the characters.
The second kind of change is that which results from the intermiiarriage of one race with another. Nothing can be laid down as holding good of all racial intermixture. On theoretical grounds we should expect crosses between races which differ widely, which are for instance different in colour, to be unfavourable; this applies not only to crosses between ain inferior and a superior race but also to crosses between such races as the white and the yellow which are probably not utiequal in intellectual capacity. We need not concern ourselves, 'however, with such crosses because they have not occurred at least in historical times among the races which we shall consider. Intermarriage between more closely related races, between varieties of the white race, for instance, are of greater interest to us. The first generationi may be expected to show a greater amount of vigour than that exhibited by either parent race. But this is a purely transitory phenomenon that will disappear in future generations. Interbreeding between members of the first generation will result in great variability, the extremes differing more widely than the original parent stocks.

THE POSSIBLE EFFECTS OF GERMINAL CHANGE.

24$9

differed between themselves. Some of the members of this generation may show a combination of characters of the original parent stocks that
is of a peculiarly favourable nature and there is thus the possibility of a
stock arising with a natural encdowment of inherited factors that is
superior to that of either of the parental stocks. But before such a
well endowed strain can form a considerable-part of the population. it
must be vigorously favoured by selection. Unfavourable combinations
may also arise and further the very fact of increased variabilitv is.
probably as a rule disadvantageous. 'A race,' says Nilsson, 'that is at least to a certain degree pure is physically and psvehically a fixed type,
which precisely through the firmness and fixedness of its dispositions is
able to create something to which its dispositions predispose it.
The result of bastardising will be a motley blend of the different hereditary dispositions of the races which are crossed. . . . The unity
and harmony of the race and the individual will be destroyed, the personality loses its balance. The individuals which are born out of the
crossing fail to achieve a firm and fixed type.'* All that we can sav
therefore on this subject is that, apart from the transitory effect of increased vigour, the results of racial intermixture are likely to be un-
favourable for a number of generations but that an unusuallv well endowed strain may arise and if favoured may be the foundation stock of a superior race.
The problem that we have to consider is to what extent, if at all,. the cyclical course that civilization follows is due to germinal changes.
of these kinds. As indicated above I am including not only the major but also the minor viscissitudes of history. Unfortunately, however, our knowledge of the facts regarding the amount and nature of racial crossing and of selection that took place is very meagre. Professori
Flinders Petrie has collected facts of the most extraordinary interest regarding the vicissitudes of Egyptian civilization, but of the germinal changes that may have taken place in Egypt we know nothing. The same is true of the empires of the Assyrians, Babylonians and Hittites. We are left with the cases of Greece and Rome and of the European nations since the beginning of the Christian era, and our knowledge in
respect of them is scanty enough.
The most obvious method of approaching the problem is to take those instances of progress and decay in respect of which we have any definite knowledge of sociological conditions and ask whether there is' evidence of germinal change either within or before the periods of advance and decline. Taking the periods of advance we meet at once with a very noteworthv fact. There is no evidence in any of these periods of a favouring of desirable characters either by reproductive selection or by the elimination of less desirable types. It is true that in primitive society, such as that which preceded the rise of Greece and Rome and among European nations previous to the great epochs of achievement, conditions probably rather favoured than otherwise the
superior types. But there is no evidence whatever that there was any unusual favouring of such types, that they were more favoured, for example, than was usual in primitive societv. It is especially note-

*Ilereditas, Vol. I, 1920.

:250 0ZGENICS REVIEW.
worthy that there is no evidence of any pecutliarly favourable reproductive selection in progress at these times because, as we shall see, there is sometimes evidence of unfavourable reproductive selection during periods of decline and it might be expected that the reverse process would lSe in operation during periods of advance. It would therefore appear that germinal change due to selection has no bearing upon the rise of civilizations.
It becomes therefore a matter of much interest to ask whether the other cause of germinal change, namely, racial intermixture, was in operation during or before the periods of advance. Unless it was so, we have no reason to connect germinal change with one side of the pro-cess. It is certainly true that some great civilizations have been preceded by racial crossings as in the cases of Greece and Rome. But we must bear in mind that such crossings have often occurred at other times without being followed by any marked results. Again it is apparent that germinal change of this kind has only a very distant
relation, if indeed it has any, with the vicissitudes of European civiliza-
tion. A consideration of the course of European civilization does in fact throw light upon what the connection probably is in all cases between racial crossing and subsequent advance. The racial intermixture that took place in these islands during the first eleven centuries of the Christian era gave rise to a population from which in the sixteenth century sprang the achievements of the Elizabethean age, and in the nineteenth century those of the Victorian age. It is clear in the first place that the nature of the achievements characteristic of
these two high peaks of English civilization was moulded by the
germinal constitution of the race and that this was influenced by racial crossing. In the second place it seems equally clear that these germinal changes were not the direct cause of these advances. Even if we were to adopt the view, against which there are in fact almost overwhelming arguments, that the effect of these changes continued until in the sixteenth they produced a type so superior that the achievements of the Elizabethean age were the inevitable outcome of its activity, such an explanation would not apply to the Victorian age. The most reasonable view would seem to be that racial intermixture made the achievements possible but did not determine when they should occur. I suggest that this is the conclusion that a study of all such changes leads us; the civilizations of Greece and Rome, for example, took the forms characteristic of them because racial intermixture had produced a certain germinal constitution in each case but the date of the upward movement was not predetermined by these germinal changes.
We must therefore conclude that germinal change is not the immediate cause of the rise of civilization. The conclusion is important because it affects our view not only of one aspect of the phenomenon but of the phenomenon as a whole. It appears probable that the same kind of cause is at work throughout the whole process. One side of the process is so much the reverse of the other that it would be somewhat remarkable if the chief cause of downward movement was wholly.different to the chief cause of the upward movement. It would be surprising therefore if we were to find that unfavourable germinal change was the main element in the downward process when it is not so

THE POSSIBLE EFFECTS OF GERMINAL CHANGE.

251

in the upward process. Looking at the matter from the same point of -view we may later ask what causes we can detect at work during periods .of advance and enquire whether, if their action is reversed, the same
kind of causes may not account for the downward movement. But
putting this aside for the moment let us take account merely of such facts as there are and ask what evidence there is of germinal change before or during periods of decline.
In a few cases of which the best known is that of Rome a consider-
able amount of racial mixture has taken place during the periods of decline. For the reasons given above, the immediate effects of inter-
marriage are probably unfavourable. The previously existing type from which the civilization sprang, becomes diversified and there is no longer the same likelihood of progress or even of the continued support of the existing civilization. There is, however, no general connection
between racial crossing and decline and the most we can say is that it may occasionally have played a part as a minor contributory factor in decline. There is little evidence that lethal selection in an un-
favourable direction ever played a part of any importance. The
unfavourable effects of war were probably but little if at all more marked during periods of decay than during periods of progress. In general lethal selection throughout the historical period has had little ,effect upon mental characters. It has been very largely concerned with the selection of disease resisting characteristics.
We can therefore put aside racial mixture and lethal selection and
we are left with reproductive selection as the only possible cause of
unfavourable germinal change during periods of decline. In the majority of cases of which we have accurate knowledge there is evidence of conditions somewhat similar to those prevailing at the present day. I assume (a) that these conditions result in effective selection and (b) that the characters which are not favoured are those which from the widest point of view are the most valuable. Under such circumstances there is germinal deterioration. These conditions existed in Greece and Rome, though there is a considerable measure of doubt as to how far the decline in the birth-rate did not also affect the lower classes and so diminish the disparity between the classes in this respect. There is evidence of the same conditions in Italy and in Spain about the end of the sixteenth century and other examples could be brought forward. There are, however, cases of decline, in England after the Elizabethean age for instance, where there is no evidence of these conditions. Nevertheless the evidence does seem to point to a connection between decline and reproductive selection of a kind that we assume to be unfavourable and the question arises as to how far decline is, in these cases, due to unfavourable germinal change brought about in this fashion.
There is no room here for a detailed examination of these cases. A consideration of them, however, does seem to me to show that reproductive selection first becomes apparent after the culminating point of the civilization has been reached. When in addition to this we remember that a certain period of time must elapse before the effects of this form of selection are felt, we seem to have an indication that whatever
importance germinal chan-ge may have it does not initiate decline. This conclusion is considerably strengthened when we enquire what

252 EUGENICS REVIEW.
motives have lead the upper social classes to reproduce less than the poorer classes. There is a very general agreement that the break up of family life and the prevalence of luxury and selfishness are typical of the social conditions under which the decline occurs. In other words there is a loss of old ideals and a substitution for them of false standards, of life and conduct. The conditions varv from case to case but it seems correct to say that the failure to reproduce is in general due to a decline in moral standards. But this decline in moral standards which precedes reproductive selection of an unfavourable kind is an indication of the fact that civilization has passed its culminating point. We are thus led to the conclusion that germinal deterioration due to reproductive selection is not the primary cause of the decay of civilization. Further, when we remember that there have been some cases of decline without any reproductive selection, the question arises whether the primary cause of the decline, whatever it may be, is not the chief cause of the whole phenomenon. It seenms certain that germinal decline is not the whole cause of the decline of civilization and it seems possible that the same kind of cause that brings about the rise of civilizations may also if its action is reversed be the main cause of decadence.
We may perhaps get a little nearer to a definite answer if we ask to what causes we must attribute the upward process. My suggestion is that during periods of advance we always find evidence that factors are present which stimulate mental activity. They are in my view the immediate cause of advance, though of course the nature and degree of the advance made will be moulded and limited by the germinal constitution. Perhaps I can make my meaning clear by quoting from the preface to Mr. A. E. Housman's recentlv published volume of 'Last Poems.' 'I publish these poems, few though they are, because it is not likely that I shall ever be impelled to write much more. I can no longer expect to be visited by the continuous excitement under which in the early months of 1895 I wrote the greater part of my other book. About a quarter of the matter belongs to the April of the present year, but most of it to dates between 1895 and 1910.' Thus Mr. Housman, according to his own account, has written under a stimulus that has
only occasionally visited him. We must suppose that under less stim-
ulating circumstances he might never have written at all and that under more fortunate circumstances he might have given more to the world. We must also remember that unless Mr. Housman had been innately endowed in so remarkable a manner, no stimulus, however favourable, would have evoked these works of genius. I suiggest that the same thing happens with regard to mental activity charactcristic of periods of advance. There must be a well endowed germinal constitution and this can only be the product of selection and perhaps of racial mixture at some time in the past. But the immediate cause of the advance is to be sought in the stimulus brought to bear upon the race.
It would be wearisome to examine the various periods of advance in detail, but I am of opinion that in respect of all the cases of which we have adequate knowledge there is evidence of the presence of stimulating factors in the mental environment. I will take one example, that of the Elizabethean age. Sir Sidney Lee writes as follows: 'English-
men of the sixteenth century breathed a inew atmosphere intellectually

THE POSSIBLE EFFECTS OF GERMINAL CHANGE.

258

and spiritually. They came under a new stimulus compounded of many elements each of them new and inspiring. To that stimulus
must be attributed the sudden upward growth of distinctive achievement among them, the increase of opportunities of famous exploits,
and the consequent preservation from oblivion of more names of Englishmen than in any other century before. The stimulus under which Englishmen came in the sixteenth centurv may be suimmed up in
the familiar word Renaissance. The nmain factor of the European Renaissance, of the New Birth of the intellect, was a passion for extending human knowledge, and for the emploving of men's capabilities to new and better advantages than of old. New curiosity was generated with regard to the dimensions of the material world. There was a boundless enthusiasm for the newly discovered art and literature of ancient Greece. Men were fired bv a new resol-e to make the best and not the worst of life upon earth. In other words Englishmen of the sixteenth century came under a continuous excitement and this evoked the expression of the genius latent among them. I would further point out that explanations on these lines account for the sudden upward trend because we can see how stimulating influences swim into the mental horizon somletimes within a decade that can be
definitely named. I now propose to examine the obvious suggestion that the opposite
circumstances, namely, the existence of depressing circumstances, may lead to decline. I would point out that in the first place the mental atmosphere may become depressing just as it may become stimulating. Enervating beliefs may gain ground just as invigorating beliefs may get a hold on the minds of men. Men may believe that the world is coming to an end just as they mav believe that it is full of promise and opportunity for adventure. In the second place there is an apparently inevitable tendenev for stimulating influences to lose their power and to be replaced by enervating influences. Expectations are not fuilfilled; the freshness of ouitlook fades away; men become disappointed, jaded and bewildered. The course of English civilization has iust passed its second hiah peak. We realise that the Victorian ideals no longer appeal to us, that we have not the same confident beliefs and (this is what is important) that nothing so stimulating has taken their place. The replacement of a stimulating by an enervating
atmosphere seems inevitable and we can, I think, see the process at work in the history of all civilizations about which we know anything
in detail.
1 would like to quote some remarks on this subject made by a very
eminent man who as a member of this society is not likely to underrate the importance of germinal qualities. Discussing the problem of decadence, Lord Balfour speaks as follows: 'The flexible element in any society, that which is susceptible of progress or decadence must be looked for rather in the physical and psychical conditions affecting the life of its component units, than in their inherited constitution.' In another place describing these conditions he speaks of 'a mood of deep discouragement, when the reaction against recurring ills grows

*Great Enolishmen of the Sixteenth Century, p. 28.

254 EUGENICS REVIEW.
feebler, and the ship rises less buoyantly to each succeeding wave,. when learning languishes, enterprise slackens, and vigour ebbs away.*
Lord Balfour would thus apparently attribute little or no import-ance to germinal change as a factor in decadence. As I will show later, I cannot altogether adopt this view, but before I discuss this point I would like to draw attention to an essay bv the late Dr. Rivers whose death was such a loss to anthropology and biology. Shortly before his death there was published a volume of Essays on the Depopulation of Melanesia. The essavs were all the work of men who were intimately acquainted with Melanesia; the concluding essay was written by Dr. Rivers. After discussing in a fairlv exhaustive manner all the various factors that may have plaved a part in bringing about the depopulation of Melanesia and the decay of Melanesian society, Dr. Rivers says definitely that in his view what he calls the psychological factor has been of greater importance than all the other factors put together. He shows that for various reasons all the interest in life for the average
MNelanesian has been taken away. Lack of interest in all that suirounds him, weariness and despondency characterise the Melanesian to-day. In other words Melanesian decay is due to an enervating mental atmosphere. Now I do not suiggest that enervating influences can have anything like the same power over civilised communities; a Melanesian for instance who has lost interest mav die without showing any apparent signs of disease simply because he no longer wishes to live.
But I do suggest that enervating influences have a greater influence upoIn civilised societies than is sometimes supposed and that they act in the same way though with less strength as in primitive societies.
Under such a sense of deep discouragement of which Lord B3alfour speaks a civilised man may not turn his face to the wall and give up the ghost as may a Melanesian but he mav fail to reach the same height of
achievement as did his forefathers. In this as in so manv other
sociological problems a study of primitive races is of great assistance and I think that anyonie interested in the problem under review cannot
fail to be impressed by the essay to which I have referred and to realise that practically no limit is set to the influence that the mental environ-i-nnt may have over the achievements of man.
Here I should like to allude to the interesting anid to my mind very significant fact that all the elements in a civilization do notireach their culminating points at the same time. Artistic achievemient precedes scientific achievement and the various forms of artistic achievement reach their highest points in what appears to be a regular sequence. Sculpture comes first, paintiing follows and literature comes last. The general effect, when the civilization is regarded as a whole, may be that of a rise and fall but it not infrequentlv happens that some of the greatest contributions to that, for which a civilization is chiefly famous, have been made after the highest peak has been definitely passed. This was the case with regard to the study of law in Rome for example. It seems to me verv difficult to explain this sequence on anyv theory of germinal change, because on such a theory one would be almost bound to suppose that the factors underlying the various
*Decadence, p. 34 and p. 46.

THE POSSIBLE EFFECTS OF GERMINAL CHANGE.

255

forms of abilitv would all improve or deteriorate more or less at the same time. There seems no reason to suppose that various innate
forms of ability would be favoured and discouraged in succession. On the other hand such a succession of achievements is not merely easily
compatible with the theory outlined above but is in fact just what one would expect.
Before attempting to sum up my conclusions regarding this problem, it may be worth while to refer for a moment to those cases in
which a civilization has endured for a long period without showing any obvious signs of progress or decadence. The best known case is that of China. It is true to say that the social structure of China has remained singularly stable for a couple of thousand years; it is not however true that as regards the achievement for which Chinese civilization is most famous there has been no progress and no decav. I understand
that Chinese painting shows fluctuations in the level of achievement
nearly as remarkable as those shown in the history of Egyptian art. Now attentioni has been drawn to the fact that there is no evidence of any germinal change in the history of the Chinese and it has been sulggested that the stability of their civilization is the consequence of the
absence of such change. But if there has been no such change, then
the fluctuations in the most notable contribution of Chinese civiliza-
tion to the world, namelvy painting, have occurred for reasons unconnected with germinal change. If it is suggested that other explanations meet with equal difficulties then I would reply that I do not
understand these difficulties. The chief features of Chinese civilization have always been devotion to the family system and an absence of any desire to dominate over men of their own race or over men of other races. Thus the Chinese have never been moved to build
up a complicated civilization in the search for power and place and material wealth and have thus never suffered under the reactions that come when such ambitions are thwarted. It is these reactions that are accompanied by the obvious symptoms that we call decadence and are so noticeable because the breaking down of the complicated structure of society usually implies violence or at least events that find a place in historical narratives. I thus think that the course of Chinese civilization is explicable if we realise that the onlv kind of influences that have stimulated them have been those that have urged them towards artistic production. Chinese civilization does not show the usual evidence of progress and decay because the Chinese have not been responsive to
influences such as cause other races to build up complicated social structures which, if they are not maintained, fall with a crash that cannot escape the notice of chroniclers.
I am only too well aware of the vague and unsatisfactory nature of this discussion. I have done little more than indicate the impressions that have formed themelves in my mind. But I do take credit for this very fact that I have reached no conclusions that I hold with any confidence. For in my opinion the relevant facts are not known to us in such detail as to enable us to arrive at anvthing more definite than impressions whatever those impressions mav be. Some very sweeping generalisations have been made within the last few years by authors who, having suddenly realised that there is such a phenomenon as

256 EUGENICS REVIEW.
germinnal change, have jumped to the conielusion that they have the key to all the outstanding facts of history.
On one aspect of the probJem I feel a certaini degree of confidence.
Attention has been drawn by numerous authors to many factors wholly
unconnected with germinal change which seem to have played a part in the progress and decay of civilization. It seemns clear that some importance at least must be attributed to many of these factors. None
of those circumstances that do contribute to create a sense of exhilaration or a sense of despondency can be without effect. Will anyone maintain, for instance, that those elements in the mental horizon of the Elizibethean Age described by Sir Sidney Lee in the words I have
qlloted were really without influence upon the achievement of the race?
Now since there is no evidence that these stimulating and depressing
factors are thenmselves the indirect result of germinal change, we must
at least give a place to factors other than germinal change among the
causes of the ups and downs of civilization. The problem therefore is not whether these factors are of any importance but whether germinal
change is of any importance.
Before trying to define my impressions on this point I shouild like
to hazard a suggestion. So far as the rise and fall of civilization is due to the appearance of stimulating and enervating factors, to that extent will there presumablv always be ups and downs. But these oscillations mav not perhaps be so marked in the future as in the past. Periods of decadence in the past have always been characterised by the growth of superstitions, which I should explain by saving that men in such periods lose confidence in their ability to solve the problems that eivilised life presents. The growth of superstition is thus one of the consequences of the spreading of a mood of despondency and, if superstition spreads far enough, all human artistic and intellectual capacities are more or less inhibited from expressing themselves. It would seem, however, that a situation new in the history of civilization has arisen in western Europe within the last hundred years. Science has become
so firmly established that it is very difficult to believe that it can ever
again lose ground. Now progress in scientific discovery which, since the discoveries to be made are apparently without limit, will this pre-
sumably always be a feature of civilised life in the future. Scientific discovery will thus form a perpetual demonstration of the successful application of human intellectual faculties to the problems around us and this demonstration will go far, it seems to me, to prevent civilization from slipping back in the future as it has in the past. To take an illustration from modern conditions. It is scarcely possible to believe that the attack on the teaching of evolution now being made in America, and the tendency towards the development of superstitious cults of various kinds now visible there, can long withstand the proof of the practical value of reasoning that daily emanates from the scientific laboratories in that country. The establishment of science is thus a stabilising factor in the history of civilization and, so far as the ups and downs of civilization have been in the past due to factors other than germinal changes, to that extent will the influence of these factors be less marked in future.

THE POSSIBLE EFFECTS OF GERMINAL CHANGE.

257

Coming now to a consideration of the importance of germinal ,change, the fact that most impresses me may be stated as follows. There is i1o evidence in regard to any example of progress leading us to believe that progress was the inevitable result of favourable germinal change. The evidence of the occurrence of racial mixture before *epochs of advance cannot in my opinion be interpreted in this manner.
This being so, it seems reasonable to suppose that equally great steps backward may take place in the absence of germinal change. This
does not tend to show that germinal change is of no account as a factor in decadence; it merely indicates that decadence might occur without it. This in fact I believe to have more than once been the case in the history of civilization. Further I cannot mvself attribute more than a secondary part to germinal change as a cause of decline. But I -think that it mav at times, and the present age is perhaps one of them, reach a considerable importance. In conclusion I should like to point
-out that such unfavourable change is probably not as irremediable as is sometimes suggested. Those who exhibit superior mental qualities
apparently do so in virtue of a very large number of factors which they
possess, and which in conjunction produce the characters we see. If
these individuals fail to reproduce, it is this conjunction of factors in a strain that is lost rather than the factors themselves. In other words, where desirable characters are dependent upon many factors,
reverse selection may be practicable. This does not mean that the ,effect of selection in the wrong direction is any the less unfortunate in its immediate consequences, but that the effects may be capable of remedy by selection in the right direction as they would not be if the desirable characters were dependent upon a few and not many factors.

