Second International Conference of Human Genetics

The Conference

descriptive phase of its evolution as a partic-

T HIS NOTABLE CONFERENCE, in the ularized science. That description is centred

spacious premises of the Food and upon living cells, personal traits, visible

Agriculture Organization of the United symptoms and so on. Many seethe with des-

Nations, opened in Rome with speeches and a criptive excitement based upon the modem

reception at the Campidoglio on the evening analysis of blood groupings, or the new tech-

of September 6th, 1961. The succeeding days, niques for making clearly visible human chromo-

up to and including September 12th, were fully somes and their anomalies which can then be

occupied with morning and afternoon sessions correlated with symptomatic phenomena in

held in three parallel series of invited and con- living persons. Twin studies, too, are still the

tributed papers. The evening entertainments and mode of dissecting and describing phenomena

receptions, and the Conference publications where genetic and environmental influences are

and printed ephemerata, were all of a lavishness tangled.

and style suitable to the eternal city. Rome, The obvious stress, among so many geneticists,

when climatically temperate as it was, can upon the abnormal is understandable. It is easier

scarcely be bettered anywhere for conferences at this stage of knowledge to describe and study

of a technical nature where yet the participants defined abnormalities, fairly discrete symptoms

are awake to beauty and culture in other fields. and appearances, than it is to analyse the back-

Professor Luigi Gedda, the Conference ground to those variations included in normality.

President and creative magician, must receive Genetics, not circumscribed by the adjective

the thanks of all for his magnificent success "human," is now in a very different state. The

in organization, and likewise the munificence greater ease of experiment and the sense of

of the City of Rome, the Italian Government purpose engendered by the controlled evolution

and theVatican must be promptly acknowledged. of domestic animals and plants, have led

The total membership of the Conference was standard geneticists towards both the normal

around 700, and many members were and the future. Non-human genetics is well

accompanied by a spouse whose interests lay advanced from the descriptive phase to the

outside genetics. Thirty-one nations were includ- practical and immediately advantageous.

ed, led by the U.S.A. with 184 representatives, In his opening address Professor F. J. Kallman

the U.K. with ninety and Italy with seventy- stressed that little sense of responsibility, except

three. in the realms of radiation hazards and personal

counselling, has yet overtaken human geneticists.

The Substance of the Conference

The exclusion of eugenics from the Conference

The originally proposed title of the Con- title is simply a facing of this unfortunate fact.

ference had included the words "and Eugenics," Perhaps a subsidiary factor is the emotion so

but this tailpiece had been dropped without often aroused by the discussion of the genetics

explanation during the months preceding. of mental traits, intellectual potentialities and

There was no antagonism to eugenic interests, their attempted measurement, and the passage

papers or ideals, but the emphasis lay elsewhere of abilities and abnormalities alike from the

because, in truth, interest as yet is mainly else- present into the fut-ure. Descriptive and anatom-

where.

ical human genetics escape such emotional

Human genetics, one was forced to recognize overtones.

more fully than ever, is still very largely in the The fact that moral issues, via radiation

209
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1962, 53,4.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

hazard, begin now to afflict human geneticists, of particular papers, included a table bearing

may perhaps encourage those among them who some of the Eugenics Society's post-war pub-

already see the moral issues which are insep- lications.

arable from population limitation among the

myriads of diverse humanity.

Radiation Hazards

On private initiative, an attempt was made to

Contributions

induce the Conference to pass a resolution that,

The Eugenics Society was well represented at in this time of peril by nuclear warfare, a sperm

the Conference and there were speakers in many bank be set up which should be protected from

varied sections and on many topics. Elder harmful radiation, and which should be ex-

Statesmen of the Society including Sir Ronald tended to include dedicated human volunteers

Fisher and Professor R. Ruggles-Gates; J. A. and animal specimens. A draft resolution to

Fraser Roberts, who was a Chairman of Sessions this effect was negatived, with many abstentions;

and other members of the Society's Council- but a continuing committee to investigate

J. M. Tanner, P. R. Cox, C. 0. Carter, A. E. possibilities in more considered detail was asked

Mourant, H. Lehmann, E. T. 0. Slater and to report later.

A. C. Stevenson-all made their contributions, The Conference did, however, pass unani-

the last as representative of W.H.O. Addi- mously a resolution on the hazards of ionizing

tionally there were papers from other Fellows radiation. A form of words was adopted which,

of the Society, from A. W. F. Edwards, a recent signed on behalf of the Conference by Penrose,

Darwin Research Fellow, R. F. J. Withers and Boyes, Kallman and Gedda, will be sent at

from the General Secretary.

once to all national governments.

The style of presentation of papers generally A convincing feat of oratory was also per-

was most varied and sometimes disappointing. formed by the Deputy-Director of Euratom at

Indeed the technique of presentation and the formal closing session of the Conference

delivery often fell short of what it ought to have when he drew attention to the special need for

been. Happily, however, it may be recorded people well versed in physics and biology

that this criticism did not apply to the British together and not one or the other discipline

contributions which were, almost all, models of alone.

suitable compression and brevity. There was

realization of the good sense-seemingly not Third Conference

understood by all too many others-of the rule The Conference agreed a plan for the organ-

that contributions should be limited to fifteen ization of its successor, probably in 1965. Plans

minutes spoken at not more than 100 words a are to be in the hands of the six-man Standing

minute. The simultaneous translators and those Committee with whom will be associated

born to non-European languages were most twelve others elected by the Conference on a

grateful to those who recognized these points. regional basis.

So were those Chairmen who remained

conscious of their duty to check the over-

SOME CONTRIBUTIONS

voluble.
All Conference members were provided with two bulky volumes of advance Abstracts in four languages.* All contributions to the Conference are later to be published in full.

The following summaries of a variety of papers are based on the printed abstracts of the Conference, and Dr. C. 0. Carter's report in The Lancet.*

The gallery of exhibits, mostly in illustration E. SILVERSTRONI (Rome) described the de-

* These volumes have now been separated by Excerpta Medica Foundation into single-language parts and are

velopment of the first large-scale attempt at negative eugenics through counselling. He

published as Excerpta Medica: International Congress Series, No. 32. The English version is obtainable from the

estimated that there were two million individuals

Secretary, Excerpta Medica Foundation, 67c New Bond Street, London, W.1 (Pp. 187, Price 40s.)

*23.6.61-by permission

2IO

SECOND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE OF HUMAN GENETICS

in Italy heterozygous for the gene responsible in Drosophila chromosome inversion might be

for Cooley's anaemia, resulting in the death of associated with super-fertility.

1,000 homozygotes a year. By "pre-matrimonial J. V. NEEL (Michigan) emphasized the impor-

prophylaxis"-that is, dissuading heterozygotes tance of polymorphic systems in which a number

from marrying each other-these deaths were of alleles at a gene locus were present in the

preventable. Centres now established in many population, at a frequency which could not be

areas in Italy were engaged in testing every attributed to mutation pressure, and therefore

child in the elementary schools for hetero- presumably had adaptive significance. At many

zygocity.

gene loci there mightbeancptimallevelof hetero-

R. B. CATTELL (Urbana) described the partition zygosity, and many malformations of ill-defined

of the variation observed in intelligence and genetic basis might be due to the patient's

other personality traits into genetic and environ- failing to reach a level of heterozygosity obliga-

mental variation, and the interaction of genes tory for normal development. Heterozygosity

and environment, by a "multiple abstract could lead to the production of hybrid mole-

variance analysis." Like other observers, he cules and not just to the mixture of two mole-

found about three-quarters of the variation in cules. Thinking along these lines, several

intelligence test score to be due to genetic authors had reported studies on the effect of

variation. Similarly hereditary factors were race-crossing, which might be expected to

more important for excitability, the cyclothy- increase heterozygosity, and of inbreeding,

mic-schizothymic scale, and super-ego strength. which might be expected to reduce it.

Tendermindedness versus toughmindedness, and With regard to the social problem of differ-

general inhibition, were largely environmentally ential fertility in civilized communities, J. v.

determined. Such assessment applied only to HIGGINS and his colleagues (Minneapolis),

the particular culture being studied.

in a large family study of the intelligence of

C. S. FORD (Harwell) noted that five years ago both parents and their children, found that there

Tjio and Levan had announced almost apolo- were more children per family for parents with

getically that man had 46 and not 48 chromo- I.Q.s of above 130 and below 70 than for those

somes. To-day we knew of seven forms of in between. But the large family size of parents

anomalies of the sex chromosomes, eleven types of low I.Q. was balanced by the finding that

of chromosome mosaicism, three types of many of the sibs of these parents were childless.

autosomal trisomy, and several examples of C. 0. CARTER (London) reported that a dis-

chromosome translocation. It was remarkable quieting feature of the social scene in north-

that whereas with trisomy 21 (Downs' syndrome) west European countries and north America

about half the offspring also had Downs' had been the negative correlation of social

syndrome, the ten known children of women class and educational status, with fertility.

with trisomy of the X chromosomes were all Because of the considerable degree of edu-

normal.

cational opportunity, and social mobility, in

K. PATAU and his colleagues (Wisconsin) these countries it was probable that this associ-

suggested that many patients with multiple ation resulted in the loss of gehes predisposing

anomalies might be instances of partial trisomy to the development of socially valuable qualities,

and that each main anomaly was due to the including intelligence. The Scottish surveys of

presence in triplicate of a specific "trisomy 1932 and 1947 showed that the. gains in height

locus."

and weight known to have occurred over this

Discussing natural selection and human period had not been paralleled by any appre-

chromosomal aberrations, L. S. PENROSE ciable gain in intelligence.

(London) noted that while those heterozygous The association might be attributed to the

for a translocation had reduced- fertility, those practice of deliberate- planninggof family size

homozygous for such translocations might being adopted first by the more intelligent and

have normal fertility. There were no clear capable parents, while those less gifted tended

instances of chromosome inversion in man, but still to have natural families. It might be expected

211

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to disappear as the practice of planning family size spread through the community.
Recently there had been encouraging signs that not only was the association disappearing, but it was tending to be reversed within the section of the community in which family size was planned. In the 1951 Census of England and Wales it might be seen that men in Social Class I had a higher fertility than men in any other nonmanual occupation. In the United States the 1951 Census showed a marked reduction in differential fertility by social class and educational status when compared with that seen in the 1941 Census. In Sweden an admirable follow-up of national service recruits of 1944 indicated that, except perhaps at the lowest level, there would be a positive correlation between ultimate fertility and intelligence test score at the time of recruitment to national service.
It was suggested that when family planning was complete in these countries there would be positive selection for genes predisposing to intelligence, and perhaps other socially valuable qualities, at least as intense as that obtained, with high natural fertility and high infant mortality, up till ten to fifteen generations ago.
P. R. cox (London) said that the main aim of his paper was to present some recent statistics, collected from a variety of sources, to illustrate the speed with which the composition of human populations was changing as they grew. Many of the more important changes were associated in some way with genetic differences. The most obvious and well-known divergencies were those occurring in the world as a whole, between races, continents and nations, but equally striking developments were occurring in some individual countries in which different races and other groups were becoming more or less dominant in number.
His paper concluded with a brief reference to the desirability or undesirability of the trends indicated and the extent to which it might be envisaged that agreement on a course of action to encourage the desirable and discourage the undesirable might be attained.
H. J. MULLER (Indiana), whose paper was read for him in his absence, described how modem medical and other techniques, by enabling

practically everyone to live and breed ad lib,
had abandoned man's genetic constitution to a
chaotic interplay of individual circumstances
and caprices, allowing a continued accumulation of diverse genetic impairments. How could this threat to our most precious heritage be met?
Authoritative control, with its debased values, class and race biases, and personal infringements, would institute consciously directed degradation. But in a democracy, measures intentionally encouraging or discouraging childbearing in given sectors of the population would not be tolerated. True, individual genetic counselling could somewhat reduce the production of definite abnormalities. Nevertheless, in the far larger matter of bringing about an overall positive correlation between size of family and the multiple-factor basis of better health, intellect, and character, genetic enlightenment and moral suasion were likely to defeat their own purposes. For the more capable and conscientious were the very persons who, recognizing their short-comings, would oftenest curtail their families, while the others reproduced relatively faster.
This dilemma was circumvented by the broadening of the possibilities of reproduction afforded by modem techniques of germcell storage and introduction. Thereby, couples actuated by more enlightened ethical standards and aided by genetic counselling, would be enabled to choose voluntarily when they so desired, the sources of germinal material for their family. Although those already better endowed would oftener utilize such opportunities, they could usually find still better genetic material. This procedure would provide a genetic leaven in the population. Moreover, the more poorly endowed, influenced by these examples, would increasingly elect to make similar privileges available for their own families. Herewith the proper psychological imperatives for determining marriage choice and family size, namely, compatibility and love of children, achieved still ampler scope yet the genetic constitution became increasingly influenced in the direction of man's higher values.
G. C. L. BERTRAM (Cambridge) said that population was increasing rapidly, primarily

2I2

SECOND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE OF HUMAN GENETICS

as a result of benevolent effort and the increase had to be content with a relatively small part of

was neither planned nor uniform.

what could be discovered under experimental

The world population to-day was not merely conditions. Even in achieving this much, how-

the past population multiplied. Growth had ever, the methods used were necessarily more

occurred at widely varying rates at different complicated both in the assembling of the data

periods. The same process continued to-day, and then in their analysis. A wide diversity of

though now individual control of reproduction techniques was needed, so varied indeed that it

was an added complication that was spreading was difficult to summarize or classify them.

fast, with the growth of a new personal freedom. In recent times consideration of the methods

Hence, although world population forty years used in the collection of data had perhaps been

from now was likely to double, it would not be somewhat neglected in comparison with the

merely doubling of the population of each area. elaboration of statistical techniques used in

There would be variations irrespective of any their analysis. This was not so in the field of

population policies developed by the nations. epidemiology, in which many analagous prob-

Similarly, within populations all would not lems arose.

contribute equally to the increase. There would Appropriate planning in the collection of

be no special significance in these observations data might simplify subsequent analysis, though

if all people were identical. But there were great usually at the cost of sacrificing the number

variations of inherited attributes within popu- of those subjects protentially available. This,

lations and between populations. Genetic variety however, might be well worth while with con-

was of course sharpened or modified by environ- ditions which were not unduly rare, and of

mental factors, educational, traditional, sociolo- course in the study of normal differences. For

gical and so on. So long as there was suitable example, it was sometimes better to confine

adjustment to environmental demands precise attention to close relatives and to those living

anatomical details-skin pigmentation, etc.- within some defined geographical radius, and

mattered little. Physiological superiority might to set other limits of exclusion, with the result

come to matter more, however, under pro- that for the same amount of effort more data

gressively crowded conditions.

were obtained and what was even more impor-

Yet diversities dependent upon those genetic tant, with a nearer approach to completeness

factors which determined intellectual ability, in sampling. Again, with conditions which were

vigour, pugnacity, etc. were far more important not too uncommon, empirical figures for risk

already, and likely to be more so in the future. of recurrence could be based simply on sub-

World problems were likely to get more and sequent children, ascertainment being through

not less difficult, and, within all populations it the affected child, or second affected child, as

became progressively more important to up- was appropriate.

grade human inherited capacities of the desired The ascertainment of the frequencies in the

kind. Such upgrading was scarcely assured if population of abnormal genetic or partly genetic

left to chance, though chance would long have conditions was fundamental. We could never

influence. The new freedom of personal planning have too much information on incidence in

in reproduction was spreading, but it must be relation to geography, sex, age and numbers of

spread universally and with speed. This was other variables. Breeding systems and the con-

because we had a regard for individual welfare sequences arising from their differences and

within the complex interrelationship of needs changes were of the greatest importance; and

and numbers. But would that lead to higher it might be that more than the simple co-

mean ability within populations? Or would an efficient of inbreeding was required. Twin

overall plan not come to be essential?

studies still held much promise for the future

J. A. FRASER ROBERTS (London), in introducing and in this field a variety of special methods had

from the Chair the Symposium on Methods in been evolved. The study of linkage had been

Human Genetics, said that in general, though greatly facilitated by the development of ade-

with some notable exceptions, human genetics quate statistical techniques and advances need

21 3

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
only await the assembling of suitable data. of common conditions in whose causation In the fitting of Mendelian ratios more remained heredity played some part that preoccupation to be done in improving the efficiency of statis- with improved methods could be most profitable tical methods. But it was probably in the study in the immediate future.
2I4

