A EUGENICS PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED STATES

Memorandum by the American Eugenics Society

THE NEED FOR A PROGRAMME other efforts at social progress in our urban-

FOR over two hundred years on this ized civilization. Further, we may well ask

continent the forces of nature and of whether in the process of replacement the

social custom made for rapid natural more isolated or the more ignorant groups

increase. To-day, these forces have ceased are not being forced to give up a large pro-

to be effective with large sections of the portion of their abler and more ambitious

population. Some groups are still increasing, members, with serious injury to the stock

but the majority of our people have now too which remains. It is not necessary to rely on

few children for permanent replacement. the existing, but meagre, evidence of bioThis change, as yet almost unrecognized, is logical differences between the upper and the rapidly and profoundly affecting our national lower economic groups in the cities, to feel

life. that the present situation needs correction.

A generation ago some relatively small As the full significance of the decline in

groups with an established educational and cultural tradition were dying out, but only

birth-rates comes to be realized, both the number and the quality of our people wil

to an extent which could be replaced by the become increasingly a matter of public con-

able or ambitious from other groups with a cern, and there may arise at any time a

large surplus of births. Recently the shortage demand for hastily conceived and ill-planned

of births has extended to almost all educated, measures. Fortunately, some years will pass urbanized people, and it is a serious question before the public realizes the extent of the

how long the old method of replacement can change which has set in, and the intervening

continue. The groups which are at present period can be devoted to scientific investiga-

failing to replace themselves by a fairly wide tion and the intelligent development of

margin include all the professions, clerical public opinion.

and skilled manual workers, small owners, The vital change from an increasing

business executives, and many partly skilled population to one tending toward decrease workers. Among our city people, only un- has accompanied the spread of birth control.

skilled labourers and certain marginal econ-
omic groups still show some natural increase. It is solely in the rural districts, particularly those in which incomes are lowest, that sub-
stantial groups are reproducing at a rate sufficient to provide a rapid increase in their

The idea that family limitation is proper,
sometimes even a duty, has already reached a large part of our population. Wherever this idea has become generally established, there, with few exceptions, the population has ceased to grow. The shift from involun-

own numbers. So long as present differentials tary to voluntary parenthood has enormous in birth-rates continue, a large proportion of possibilities for good, and also for evil. What the more highly trained urban elements of many consider a new freedom is in fact a new the population must be replaced in each responsibility.

generation by migrants from rural districts If our civilization is to reach its fullest

with an entirely different background. There possibilities, such new conditions and atti-

is a great inertia of educational and cultural tudes must be established that the families

tradition to be overcome in fitting to a new best able to contribute to American life will

and complex environment so many people tend to participate voluntarily and effec-

from a different order of activity. The diffi- tively in the renewal of the nation's children.

culties in such a change must go far to offset The American Eugenics Society has in the

321

322 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

past been concerned mainly with those aroused against the continuation of such a

aspects of the birth-rate which affect genetic condition, and, at the same time, the mental

inheritance. It is now consciously enlarging attitudes of the ordinary citizen must be

its interests to include not only the heredi- re-directed. It is a two-fold problem.

tary qualities, but also the environmental The leaders of American opinion can best

conditions which should influence size of be aroused by supplying them with factual

family in homes of various types.

scientific material bearing on population

The present is an opportune time for the trends in this country and on the social and

reformulation of many social policies. For biological effects of such trends. Much

better or worse, Western Civilization is material of this sort is already available;

in a period which is likely to result in pro- vastly more needs to be developed. The uni-

found changes. Whether these changes prove versities of this country, with chairs in psy-

beneficial in the perspective of history will chology, sociology, anthropology, genetics,

depend in large measure on the extent to and other' sciences which deal with man,

which our attempts at social planning take must soon recognize the importance of teach-

accurately into account the less obvious ing and research in the field of population,

underlying forces of our social life, not the from the point of view of the quality as well

least of which are our present differential as of the quantity, of our people. Studies on

rates of reproduction.

the interaction of heredity and environment

The following programme gives, in broad to produce human characteristics should be

outline, some of the practical proposals made in close relation to further studies in

advanced by the American Eugenics Society human genetics. Only in this way can we

in answer to this situation. It should be determine the biological foundations neces-

added that the Society is less concerned sary for the development of character and

with any particular set of proposals for social intelligence, and the method of their in-

reform than with a sense of the urgency of heritance.

the problem, and the necessity that public- The development of new attitudes towards

spirited citizens give this subject the inten- family life presents another and different

sive, prolonged, and constructive thought problem. It is nothing less than an attempt

that will eventually lead to effective social to reorient human desires among a sub-

action.

stantial proportion of our people. Such a

task calls for the highest effort on the part of

THE AIMS OF A EUGENICS

those responsible for education in the home,

PROGRAMME, AND SOME PRACTICAL the school, and the college. For the moment,

APPLICATIONS

it may be the popular habit to give immediate

1. PUBLIC OPINION AND SOCIAL ATTITUDES

material interests preference over the deeper values of life. The sense of survival through children, and of the continuity of generations,

The first aim of a eugenics programme while over-emphasized in Oriental countries,

must be to develop an intelligent and is much neglected in our Western civiliza-

aroused public opinion. The need for better tion. But one of the most fundamental

homes and a better home life is already urges of living things is that which makes for

recognized. What must now be learned is survival of the individual and of the race,

that a disproportionately low birth-rate in and it does not seem an impossible task to

socially adequate homes, and a dispropor- redirect popular thinking towards a more

tionately high birth-rate in inadequate balanced view than that now prevalent.

homes, is an adverse social force, working Determining the best means of modifying

against all other efforts to improve society; present social attitudes in regard to the

and that undoubtedly in many cases it is a family, and putting these means into effect,

force opposed to biological improvement as are among the most important aims of

well. Leaders of American thought must be eugenics.

A EUGENICS PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED STATES

323

In considering practical methods of re- four children, and an increase in families

directing social attitudes, we cannot neglect of one, two, and three children. Although at

the economic factors which may prevent present rates of death and marriage in this

emotional needs from finding expression. country an average of about three children

People may be brought to realize that ade- per surviving married couple would be a

quate economic means do not necessarily sufficient number for replacement, the use of

supply the best background for the proper such an average is misleading. In every

rearing of children, and that character, group some couples are sterile, others are

intelligence, and affection can provide a limited in fertility to one or two children, and

good home for children in the poorest cir- others, because of illness or for compelling

cumstances, where wealth without character economic or other reasons, will have few or

cannot. But at the same time, intelligent no children. To bring the average up to

parents will continue to desire for their three, and secure permanent replacement for

children certain proper things, such, for any population group, a fairly large propor-

example, as a higher education, in which tion, about 2o per cent., must have five or

money is usually a factor, and will of neces- more children. In rural areas, such a pro-

sity limit the size of their families in order to portion of large families is frequent. But in

obtain their desires for their existing children. the cities where the expense and the physical

It may seem a paradox that the poorest effort involved in the care of children are

people have the largest families, while less both very high, it is only among certain

poverty would make for larger families small and relatively well-off groups that a

among people of moderate means. But we number even approaching 20 per cent. of

must take into account, on the one hand, the the married couples have a sufficient income

lack of aspiration among many of those in to provide a secure living for so large a family

the lowest groups, and, on the other, the without seriously impairing their standard

financial handicaps which block the aspira- of living. Evidently the expense of children

tions of people in moderate circumstances is in proportion to the relative standard of

who have many children. If the desire for living of each different group, and the ex-

children among responsible parents is to find penses of those who send their children to

full expression, we should consider how it college are greater than are the expenses

may be possible to remove some of the econ- of those who are content with high school

omic handicaps which at present attach to alone. But at present, in none of the larger

rearing children among those large groups of city groups can 20 per cent. of the couples

our people whose aspirations for their chil- rear five children or more at even the most

dren exceed their means of fulfilment. moderate American standards.

It must, therefore, be our aim to provide

2. ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND LARGE conditions such that in every class of society,

FAMILIES

and in every occupational group, as many as

In the period of selective decline in popula- possible of the economic handicaps now

tion which we are now entering, the greatest attaching to large families shall be removed

effort of applied eugenics must be to increase for parents providing decent homes and

the proportion of large families among people desiring large families, so that it may be pos-

who provide homes fitted for the rearing of sible for a reasonable proportion of young

children. Birth control and the system of people to have families of five or more chil-

voluntary parenthood affect reproduction dren without serious change in their standard

mainly by reducing the proportion of large of living. This objective will not be fully

families. The present decline in population attained until we can increase the economic

is not the result of a change in the average well-being of very large groups of our people.

age at marriage, or of a large increase of Eugenic reform, however, need not wait on

actual sterility. It is the result of a decline the hope of an increased production and dis-

in the proportion of families of more than tribution of wealth. Even under present

324 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

economic conditions, there are many changes freedom from the constant care required by young

which might be expected to effect a substantial increase in the present rate of births among people with whom parenthood is

children. There would appear to be great possibilities in the organization of co-operative nurseries.
(e) The excellent work nwow being done by child
welfare agencies should be extended at the same

voluntary.

time that restriction of further births is urged in

Economic and environmental conditions are so interrelated with attitudes affecting family life, that further studies of the family

the case of inadequate families.
(f) In certain large groups comprising teachers
in schools and colleges, ministers, and possibly Government employees, it would appear practical

are necessary before final proposals can be to base salary payments on a scale proportionate

made. The following are among the sugges- to the number of children. Such an arrangement

tions most seriously considered at the present time:

has been in effect for some twenty years among the
American staffs of American educational institutions in foreign countries. The introduction of such

(a) Among all social groups more thought should a basis of pay appears to have been a factor in the

be given to strengthening the economic position of relatively high birth-rate among these groups.

young couples during their early married life. Ultimately, such a system might find its way into

There is no more vicious system than the so-called industry as well.

American ideal that young people should work up (g) In assigning school and college scholarships,

through a period of great self-denial in order to the primary factor must, of course, be individual

arrive at a complacent maturity-with a minimum merit, but special attention should be given to

of children. The expenses incident to the bearing qualified students from large families. Substantial

and rearing of children should be the concern of benefits might be derived from an increased num-

the whole family group, especially of the parents ber of scholarships specially designed to meet this

of the bride and groom. These expenses should be need. Instead of limiting higher fellowships to

prepared for, as far as possible, by savings in the unmarried students, many more graduate fellow-

form of dowry, special types of insurance, and all ships should be open to those who are married.

possible help from parents and relatives.

(h) Existing income and gift taxes already con-

(b) The conditions of farm life, especially in those tain provisions of some advantage to parents with

districts where farm incomes are lowest, should be several children. Such provisions should be so

improved as rapidly as possible in order to retain enlarged as to effect, in every income group, a

on the farm a full proportion of the best family reduction in tax somewhat more related to the

stocks. The birth-rate among married women in actual cost involved in rearing each child to

farming communities is at present about double maturity. Such a radical change in present exemp-

that of married women in the cities. While this tions would not seem unreasonable, in view of the

wide difference may diminish, it is probable that interest of the country as a whole in its future

for a long time to come the farm will continue to be citizens.

the source from which the otherwise diminishing population of our cities, will be replaced. We
cannot afford to continue, in any rural districts, those farm conditions which result in inadequate

We have cited above some of the changes which might be expected to increase birthrates by diminishing the economic handicaps

facilities for the training of children, and which now attaching to parents of large families.

may well tend to drive the abler and more ambi- It is possible that insurance for medical and

tious people off the land, leaving the less able to supply, of their own kind, the replacements necessary to make up the shortage in the cities. An

maternal care and many other changes would be desirable to the same end. Important as

important part of the farm programme consists in all these factors are, they will be effective

educating public opinion in the cities to the need only so long as there exists a strong conscious

for maintaining at a high cultural level the rural home from which will come, in each generation, so many of their citizens.
(c) City housing programmes should be planned

desire for children among a substantial proportion of our people. The study of factors affecting size of family has only just begun;

with a view to providing, to a far greater degree as it develops, further important changes

than at present, recreational and educational may appear possible.

facilities for the proper rearing of children. In our

cities as they are now constituted there should be 3. DECREASE IN SOCIALLY INADEQUATE

more adequate transportation to residential de- FAMILIES

velopments especially adapted to child nurture. (d) There should be a greater development of
nurseries and pre-schools where, for frequent short

It would seem a truism that as few children as possible should be brought up in homes

intervals, mothers may obtain brief periods of where there is a bad physical environment,

A EUGENICS PROGRAMME FOR THE UNITED STATES

325

improper parental care and interest, seriously perpetuation of a defective strain of human

retarded or handicapped parents, or other beings tends to thwart all future progress,

factors which make for an unhappy child- and cannot be defended by either reason or

hood and a poor development of the person- charity. In addition, defective parents can-

ality. The large families which often occur not under any circumstances provide a

in such homes consist usually, after the first proper home for the rearing of children.

two or three, of unwanted children, the pro- Secondary reasons are the need for reducing

duct of ignorance or of isolation, or of that the enormous public expense at present

hopelessness which is engendered by tene- involved in the care of defectives, and the

ments or slums, whether urban or rural. The fact that many subnormal people who might

very statement of these facts suggests the otherwise support themselves with little help,

remedies. If we can judge by the experience leading reasonably happy lives, require

of European cities, better housing, and the custodial care if involved with the strain and

improvement of economic conditions would responsibility of parenthood.

bring a new sense of responsibility to the Reproduction by defectives may be pre-

majority of these parents, and the extension vented by segregation, or by modem methods

of birth-control knowledge, with new and of sterilization which do not unsex the indi-

cheaper methods of contraception, would then vidual. All of our states provide for some

tend to reduce the proportion of very large degree of segregation of defectives in institu-

families, and bring these groups below the re- tions, and over half of the states provide for

placement level. Those who, because of sub- legal sterilization, with consent of the indi-

normal character or intelligence, are unable vidual concerned, or his guardian, in properly

to respond to an improved environment, certified cases. Neither of these methods is

will be considered in the section which follows. at present effectively carried out, segrega-

Along with these changes in physical con- tion being limited because of the enormous

ditions, public opinion must be aroused to de- cost involved, and sterilization because of

mand that there should not be large families criticism by various religious groups and the

in homes where the children cannot be given apathy of the general public. A combination

a fair chance to become good citizens.

of both methods, with competent administra-

The Eugenics Society strongly urges the tion and psychiatric and medical advice, is

spread of birth-control information through undoubtedly necessary for effective control.

clinics and doctors, and the removal of In California recent experience with steriliza-

restrictive laws. Social advance can con- tion indicates the possibilities of combining

tinue only with difficulty in a population in effective control with great savings in cost,

half of which parenthood is voluntary, with and a lessening of hardship among these

a shortage of births, and in half, involuntary, unfortunates.

with an excess of births. The change to The American Eugenics Society urges the

voluntary parenthood is already in progress. awakening of the public conscience to face

It can be hastened by improving the condi- the realities of this situation and to bring

tion of life in the poorest districts of our about in all states of the Union real measures

cities and on our most isolated farms, as well to prevent continued reproduction by known

as by the development of contraceptive defectives.

methods sufficiently inexpensive and simple to meet the needs of people unable to afford IN CONCLUSION

present methods.

There is nothing radical about these aims

and methods. They are in line with almost

4. PREVENTING REPRODUCTION BY DE- every other programme of social and human

FECTIVES AND SUBNORMALS

advance. They agree with those which might

There are two reasons for the efforts being be put forward by the economist in the

made in all the states to prevent reproduc- search for greater economic security, or by

tion among defectives. In the first place, the the educator looking for a greater cumulative

326 THE EUGENICS REVIEW effect in education. Nor does science at reform is perhaps not so difficult as it is the present time offer us any better general imagined to be by those who are untest of biological fitness for parenthood, acquainted with recent studies. applicable within the large groups with The present programme of eugenics seeks whom we must deal in a period of declining to attain a wisely balanced distribution of population, than the two-fold test here pro- births by methods which are practical under posed, namely, under a system of voluntary the conditions of to-day. It seeks a social parenthood, the fruitful desire for children morality so changed, that under the system rather than the satisfaction of other wants, of voluntary parenthood a larger majority and the ability to provide home conditions of our children will be born and reared in which will give every child a fair chance. those homes which can give them the fullest
Even a slight change in the present differ- and happiest preparation for life. It calls ential birth-rate could be of great social and for a public opinion which believes that the eugenic value. We have already noted that quality of the human beings who compose birth-control affects reproduction mainly by our nation is of more importance than are changing the proportion of couples with other problems which have received far large families. A relatively small increase greater attention. When these changes have in the proportion of families of five or more come, then the way will have been prepared children among certain groups, and a rela- for an enlarged eugenics programme with tively small decrease in others, would have all it may contain of hope for the future. a significant effect on present trends. Since With each new advance in knowledge, the desirable eugenic changes may thus be ideal of a better life on earth, to which all effected through conditions that will actually men aspire, points ever more clearly to alter the habits of a relatively small propor- this need, that the nation's children be well tion of all married couples, progress in eugenic born.
is Review, Vol. XXVII, No. 4

