Observations on Racial Characteristics in England.
By B. S. BRAMWELL.
How far in practice does racial crossing lead to the production of a uniform type in countries inhabited by more than one race? Is intercrossing common or exceptional? Do we have fusion or segregation? I do not intend to consider the subject generally. My sole purpose is to bring forward some observations which I have made with regard to the two main races to be found in our island, the Nordic and the Mediterranean.
If we go back to early historical times, the Nordic type was to be found in the main on the East coast from Aberdeen to the Thames estuary with settlements elsewhere on or near the coast, and the Mediterranean type was to be found more to the West but particularly in Wales and along the Welsh border. Are these distinctive types to be found at the present day in these localities, or has there been such intermingling during the past 1000 years as to produce uniformity of type ?
The first point which I wish to make is that until comparatively recently, indeed until the advent of railways, people moved little from their homes. It is even problematical at the present day whetherthere is any marked departure from this state of affairs. The Census reports for various counties in the east of Scotland have recently been published in the papers. These gave, amongst other figures,the country of birth. I noticed that in several of the more rural counties the percentage of Scottish births ran to about 95 to 96%, that of English
births to about 2j%, that of Irish births to less than 1% and that of
all other births to a trifling fraction. If one makes due deduction for such persons as are purely transitory but who happen to get caught up in the meshes of the Census, it is obvious that persons of non-Scottish birth domiciled in these counties can hardly exceed 1%. We may perhaps be justified in concluding therefore that even at the present day, unless there is some strong magnet to attract the members of a particular locality elsewhere, they remain largely in that locality and gain little by immigration.
The condition of local quiescence before the age of railways can be readily gathered from the study of genealogies. I have one constructed on the principle of a chart which enables all ancestors for ten generations back to be included if one can find them. It is at present very imperfectly filled but the tenth generation backward is cut in five separate places. This generation was born about 1600-1650. In each of these places one gets a group to which one can assign a quite definite geographical area of the size of a county or less and in these
areas one finds that a great fraction, nearly 75%, of the total number
of ancestors were born. I asked a friend of mine who had worked out a similar chart in much greater detail whether his experience was. similar to mine. He replied that after working back five generations.

OBSERVATIONS ON RACIAL CHARACTERISTICS IN ENGLAND. 481
or so, he found that the ancestors fell into similar large groups confined to small geographical areas. So I think that it would be not rash to assume until a hundred years ago people were in fact very largely stationary.
Now if this was so, several important results follow. If the population of the East coast was largely Nordic 1000 years ago, it remained largely Nordic until 100 years ago. So people whose ancestors came from that part must be of fairly pure Nordic extraction. But the
matter goes deeper than that; they are selected Nordiq, by the elimina-
tion of such strains as are unsuited to the east coast environment and by the intensification through intermarriage of such strains as are adapted to it. We have seen that large fractions of one's ancestry came from quite small areas. One of the groups which I have mentioned came from an area which only had a radius of 5 miles and yet they had lived in that confined space for at least five generations and one does not know for how many generations prior to that as my particulars do not go back further. The result is that there must have been a great amount of intermarriage between cousins of various degrees, though possibly the spouses did not know that they were related. One sees on reflection that this must have been so. If none of one's ancestors had ever married even a tenth cousin in the last ten generations, then one would have had 10 generations back 1024 ancestors in that generation. Suppose we go back 25 generations, that is about to 1200 A.D., and make the corresponding stipulation that no ancestor had married even a 25th cousin, then the number of ancestors in that generation would have been no less than 33,554,432. But at that time the population of England was probably about 4,000,000. So it seems obvious that the amount of intermarriage must always be very great, with a resulting diminution in the number of ancestors. Now suppose that one' s father and mother were first cousins, the effect is to reduce the number of one's great-grandparents and earlier ancestors by 25 %, as the result of this one marriage. The extreme case is found in certain parts of the world in what are known as cross-cousin marriages, in which a man marries his mother's brother's daughter. Amongst some peoples they are not only common but also the most proper marriage one can make. Further they continue from generation to generation, so that not only does the man marry his first cousin but his parents and his bride's parents are also first cousins; in fact sometimes the marriages are those of double cross cousins. The bride in addition to being the bridegroom's mother's brother's daughter is also his father's sister's daughter. The child of such a marriage would have four grandparents but it would also have only four greatgrandparents and if a system of pure double cross-cousin marriages could have persisted for 25 generations, it would only have four ancestors in the 25th generation backward as against a possible 33 million. An approximation to this state of affairs occurs in the pedigree of Cleopatra which is set out in Mr. Popenoe's Applied Eugenics. From these facts and considerations I think that we are justified in assuming that until comparatively recently, most-people were fairly pure racially and that as they married locally, racial and even family characteristics would become intensified by intermarriage.

482 EUGENICS REVIEW.
To summarise the conclusions at which we have arrived, we may
say that the Nordic and Mediterranean elements in our population occupied originally separate geographical areas in our island and that as people moved about very little until 100 years ago there was probably little racial intermixture and the two races remained comparatively pure in their separate areas. We can also say that it is highly
probable that a large measure of intermarriage occurred between cousins of varying degrees of affinity so that racial characteristics would tend to be preserved.
Can we go further and trace racial characteristics at the present day when means of locomotion are ever to hand and the magnetic influence of the big towns with their promise of high wages tend to draw all into a unifying reservoir? We should first have to consider what are these characteristics. The physical characteristics have often been described. The Nordic man is of great stature and is noted for his fairness.
Prof. McDougall has summarised the mental differences between the two races in "National Welfare and National Decay." "The
Nordic race is more curious and less sociable than the Mediterranean. The Mediterranean peoples are vivacious, quick, impetuous, impulsive; their emotions blaze out vividly and instantaneously into violent expression and violent action. The Northern peoples are slow, reserved, unexpressive; their emotions seem to escape in bodily expression and action with difficulty. Physicians assure me that the Northerners are much more commonly subject to the neurasthenic type of trouble, the Southerners to the hysteric type. The Nordic race is constitutionally introvert, it is strong in the instinct of curiosity, the root of wonder; weak in the herd instinct, the root of sociability. In the Mediterranean race these peculiarites are reversed; it is extrovert, weak in curiosity, strong in sociability. "
"E. Morselli has deduced the conclusion that the Nordic race is more apt at suicide than the other European races. The introvert and unsociable race is the one prone to suicide and divorce. The sociable and extrovert is prone to homicide, but not to divorce or suicide. The greater curiosity of the Nordic race contributes to give the Briton that restless wandering habit which has spread him all over the surface of the earth. It is this greater dose of self-assertiveness which has enabled him to subdue and govern the 300,000,000 of India. And it is this that has rendered him the successful colonist par excellence. Men of the Nordic race are by nature Protestants, essentially protesters and resisters against every form of domination and organization, whether by despot, church, or state. Though the Nordic race has no monopoly of genius, though it does not excel, and perhaps does not equal, other races in many forms of excellence, it yet has certain qualities which have played a great part in determining the history, the institutions, the customs and traditions and the geographical distribution of the peoples in whom its blood is strongly represented. "
Mr. Havelock Ellis has also described the differences between the two races in his book on British Genius. The following is a fairly full summary of his remarks and conclusions.
He states:-"It must be added that nearly the whole of the

OBSERVATIONS ON RACIAL CHARACTERISTICS IN ENGLAND. 483
northern part of England from Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire anid Derbyshire, through Yorkshire well oIn illto the Lowlands of Scotlanid, constitutes a large region which, although its intellectual elements are of no great density, presents its own peculiar anthropological characters. It is the predominantly Anglo-Danish l)art of England, containing the fairest population. Its intellectual fertility is greatest in its northerni portions, which now form part of Scotlanid and at its exact southern border, where it blends with East Anglia. Apart from exact science and from scholarship, the Anglo-Danish district, in proportioi to its size has not produced many mlen in purely intellectual fields. Its children have usually been more remarkable for force of character than for force of intellect. Their stubborn independent temper involves an aptitude for martyrdom; many religious martyrs come fromi this region. East Anglia is l)roductiN-e of great statesmeni and great ecclesiastics; it is also a land of great scholars. At the same timiie nearly half the British musical composers and morc than a third of the painters have come from this same region. It has no aptitude for abstract thinking, for metaphysics, bnot in concrete thinkinig, in the
art of treating science philosophically, it is easily supreme. Its
special characters seem to be its humanity, its patience, its grasp of detail, its deliberate flexibility combined with a profouiid love of liberty and independence. The characteristic English love of coillpromise is rooted in East Anglia.
"It is easy to define the nature of the genius of the Welsh border. It is artistic in the widest sense and notably poetic; there is a tendency to literary and oratorical eloquence, frequently tinged with religious or moral emotion, and among those who belong entirely to this district are no scientific men of the first order.
"Psychologically it is not difficult to detect a distinict character in English scientific genius, according as it springs from the AngloDanish district or the East Anglian focus or the south-western focus, although I am not aware that this has been pointed out before. The Anglo-Danish district may here be fairly put first, not only on accounit of the large number of scientific men it has wholly or in part produced, but also on account of the very high eminence of some among them. The Anglo-Dane appears to possess an aptitude for mathematics which is not shared by the native of any other English district as a whole, and it is in the exact sciences that the Anglo-Dane triumphs. The mathematical tendencies of Cambridge are due to the fact that Cambridge drains the ability of nearly the whole Anglo-Danish district. The combination of the Anglo-Dane and the East Anglian seems highly favourable to scientific aptitude the abstracting tendency of the AngloDane, and the exaggerated independence of his character, with the
difficulty he finds in taking any other poiInt of view than his own, are happily tempered by the more cautious and flexible mind of the East Anglian. The science of the Anglo-Danish district is not exclusively mathematical, and geology especially owes much to the Anglo-Dane. The East Anglian is in scientific matters drawn to the concrete and shows little or no mathematical aptitude. He is a natural historian in the widest sense. He delights in the patient collection of facts and seeks to sift, describe, co-ordinate and classify them. In his hand science
becomes an art."

484 EUGENICS REVIEW.

"It is not easy to see anything specific or definitely Brythonic in the scientific activities of the Welsh Border. At most it may be said that there is some tendency for science here to take on a technologicaL character and to become associated with the artistic crafts. "
It will be convenient to tabluate the distribution of certain classes of men of genius according to the three areas, Anglo-Danish, East Anglian and Welsh Border. The figures are those given by Mr. Have-lock Ellis. I have omitted as hitherto his South-Western focus.

Men ofgenius.
Soldiers .. Sailors .. Artists .. Actors ..

Anglo-Danish
7 10 18 2

East Anglian
6 4 12 3

JVelsh Border.
4 4 6 4

Havelock Ellis' table of pigmentation may be noted. He arranges various groups and occupations in order of decreasing fairness. He obtains the material for his observations from portraits in the National portrait gallery and relies primarily on eye-colour.

Group with number of

Individuals.

Political reformers and agitators (20)

Sailors (45) ..

Men of science (53)

Soldiers (42) ..

Artists (74) ..

Poets (56) ..

Royal family (66)

Lawyers (56) ..

Created peers and their sons (89)

Statesmen (53)

Men and women of letters (87)

Hereditary aristocracy (149)

Divines (57)

Men of low birth (12)

Explorers (8)

.. ..

Actors and actresses (16)

Index of pigmentation.
233 150 121 113 .. .. 111 107 107
107 102 89 85 82
58
50 33 33

Now if this is a fair summary of the differences in mental charac-teristics of Nordic and Mediterranean men of genius during, let us say, the last five centuries, is it true to-day of ordinary men?
The first problem is how can we sort people in bulk into the two categories? The following method occurred to me. It is well known that certain surnames are far commoner in some parts of the country than in others. Mr. H. B. Guppy has written a book called Homes of Family Names in which he has given a mass of information regarding the relative frequency of a'great number in various counties. He took the farming population as being the most stable for his basis of comparison. Using his tables, I have compiled two lists of common names, one list composed of names found principally in the Northern and Eastern counties and the other of those found principally in Wales, the Welsh border counties and in Cornwall. My method of procedure

OBSERVATIONS ON RACIAL CHARACTERISTICS IN ENGLAND. 485',

was only to include common names which were at least four times more
frequent in the one district than in the other. My list of what I shall hereafter call Northern names is as follows:S

BELL HALL JACKSON JOHNSON

ROBINSON THOMPSON
WALKER WILSON

and that for what I shall hereafter call Welsh names is,

DAVIES
EDWARDS EVANS HARRIS

HUGHES JONES LEWIS MORGAN

PHILLIPS ROBERTS THOMAS
WILLIAMS.

Looking then to our previous argument, I think it is not unfair

to assume that persons with surnames found in the first group, taken

in bulk will have a much greater percentage of Nordic blood than those

in the second group who in turn will have a much greater percentage

of Mediterranean blood. Now if this is so and we find in considering

lists of names in anfoccupation that one group predominates, we shall

then begin to think of racial characteristics and differences and to

consider whether any differences which we find among our common-

place people are in harmony with those described by Havelock Ellis in

men of higher calibre.

But before proceeding to examine the frequency of our two groups

in various occupations, we should submit our reasoning to some

definite tests. We have abstracted two lists of names from Mr.

Guppy's book and we have been arguing on the strength of his figures

with regard to the farming population that one list represents people

found far more frequently in the North of England than in our Welsh

area and vice-versa. Is this correct? We have also argued that our

list of Northern names may be taken as representing people having

more Nordic blood than people in our list of Welsh names. If this is

sound, then a group of persons from cur Northern list should exhibit

more of the physical features of the Nordics, namely greater stature and

greater fairness than a group composed of people having the Welsh

sumames. Can we test this? In the following paragraphs I have-

attempted to do so.

In order to test the soundness of my reasoning which is based on

Guppy's figures, it was necessary to find out whether the first list of-

names did in fact at the present day outweigh the second in the North

of England and whether the second list did outweigh the first in Wales.

I therefore had recourse to the Directory and extracted the frequency

with which each group occurred in two towns, Newcastle-on-Tyne, and

Cardiff. I think these towns are very suitable for this test; they are-

of similar size and the staple industries of each are also not unlike.

Frequency of Occurrence

Perceintage of

Northern

Welsh

Total Northern Group

Group

Group both in

Groups

Total

Newcastle .. 817

77 394 80%

Cardiff .. .. 79 1196 1275 6%

486 EUGENICS REVIEW.

I confirmed this result by taking out similar figures for York and Swansea. The figures are taken from that section of the Directory which is termed "Private Residents."

York .. .. 107

32 139 77%

Swansea .. .. 20 569 589 3%

I think therefore that my reasoning is sound and when we take
our two groups from neutral territory such as London, we are entitled
to assume that the first group contains a much greater percentage of
Northern and Eastern blood than the second group which in turn contains a much greater portion of Welsh blood than the first. It may be of interest to note that the percentage of the Northern group in the Finchley Directory which includes several middle class residential London suburbs is 38%. I would like to draw attention to the method applied in forming the tables as it is that generally used in this article. I extract the two groups from the list under examination, total them
and express the Northern group as a percentage of the total. I hope to publish fuller details later.
It may be argued if one hopes to trace definite mental characteris-
tics in these groups of names, one should be able to trace physical differences between the groups if anthropometrical material is available. The Cambridge Philosophical Society took measurements of over 8, 000
undergraduates. This material is now in the custody of the Ana-
tomical Department at Cambridge and through the kindness of Dr. Duckworth I was allowed to make use of it. I found in this mass of material 104 members of the Northern group and 151 members of the Welsh group of which I have extracted particulars. The actual numbers of observations on which the figures I give are based vary a point or two from these maxima. In the case of the head measurements my figures are based on 70 and 109 observations only.
The first physical characteristic which I analysed was eye-colour.
These are divided into three grades, dark, medium and light. The percentage distribution was as follows:

Welsh .. Northern ..

Dark
.. 37.5%
.. 19.7

Medium
57.25%1
73

Light 5.25 %
7. 3J

The percentage of dark eyes therefore in the Welsh group is nearly double -that in the northern group; on the other hand the northern group distinctly predominates in the medium and light grades. The light
grade however is based on a very small number of observations. In 42 cases where the stature was under 5ft. 6in. the percentage of Dark
and Medium in the two groups did not differ from those already given. There was however only one instance of a light eyed man of this stature.
I next took out particulars of three characteristics depending on
physical strength. These are Pull as an archer, Squeeze Right hand and Squeeze Left hand. I give the average for each in the two groups.
In each the Northern group has the higher average.

Pull as an Archer.

Average: Welsh group . . ..1. .. 82.10 lbs. Northern group ..6 .. 83.77 lbs.

OBSERVATIONS ON RACIAL CHARACTERISTICS IN ENGLAN D. 487

Squeeze Right Hand.
Average: WA'elsh group . .
Northerni group Squeeze Left IHand.
Average: W elsh group .. Northern group

. . 82.53 lbs. . . 86.30 lbs.
. . 78.07 lbs. . . 81.69 lbs.

The next two measurements can be considered together. They are height and span.
IEIGHT.

Welsh group average
Northern group average . .

. . 5ft. 8.45 inches. . . 5ft. 9.15 inches

S PAN .

Welsh groUp average
Northern groul) average . .

. . 5ft. 10.7 inches. . . 5ft. 11. 9 inches.

Here againi there is a slight but ap)preciable differenice in favour of the
Nortlhering1roup. The samiie is truie of Breatlhing Pow-er:

Welsh group average . .
Northern group average

.. 252.08 cubic inches. 5.2.5.83 cubic inches.

Whlile in weight the differeince is marked:-
Welsh group average .. .. .. .. 10st. 7. 9lbs. Northern groip average .. .. .. 10st. 12.9lbs.

Fromn these seven measuremenits we can say- that the av-erage man of the Northern grouP is appreciably taller. stronger ancd heav-ier than the average miani of the Wl'elsh group.
MIere avrerages, how,ever, are apt to be misleadinig and it is neces-
sar- to look at the distributioni of inldividuals if one w-ishes to grasp the true significanice of the differenlce between the two groups. One theni finids that the differenice betwAeen the tw\o groups arises from a greater percenitage of small nmen in the W1elsh group rather thani from a
uniform difference throughoutt the scale of distributioni. There is some
difference higher up the scale but it is niot so pronounced. To illus-
trte this poin1t I give percenitages fromii each group for measurements
distinctly below the average in each test.

PL-LI. AS AN\ ARCHER. P.C. below 80lbs. WVelsh group 43. 6 o. Northern Group 33 o

Ditto.

SQUEEZE RIGIIT HAN-D.
WVelsh group 41.20° O. Northern group 31%.

Ditto.

SQUEEZE LEFT HAND.
WVelsh group 55.10%O. Northern group 39.

HEIGHT.
P. C. below 5ft. 6in. WVelsh group .34. 4 ° /' Northern group 20 %.

488 EUGENICS REVIEW.

SPAN. P. C. below 5ft. lOin Welsh group 51.4%.
WEIGHT. P.C. below 10 stone. Welsh group 34%.

Northern group 30%
Northern group 21%

BREATHING POWER.
P. C. below 240c. in. Welsh group 34.7%. Northern group 29%

This suggests that our Welsh group contains a sub-group of small men who are absent from the Northern group. Further analysis of the figures lends some colour to this view. Take for example height. None of the Northern group are less than 5ft. 4in; six of the Welsh group are 5ft. 3in., one 5ft. 2in. and one 4ft. Ilin.
When one passes to head measurements, one cannot detect any -marked difference between the two groups. The following are the
averages for three measurements:-

Welsh.

Breadth .. 6. 08 in.

Length

.. 7.61 in.

Brow to Earhole 5.36 in.

Northern. 6.02 in.
7.59 in. 5.40 in.

I also worked out the cephalic indices. The average for the Welsh
group was 79.3 and for the Northern group 79.4. Adopting the division given by Deniker in his book "The Races of Man," I found the following percentage distribution:

Om ^Welsh group.
Dolicocephalic .. .. 24% Subdolicocephalic .. 37 Mesocephalic .. .. 21 Subbrachicephalic .. 13
Brachicephalic .. .. 5

Northern group. 31% 24
23 16 6

I attempted to estimate roughly the size of the heads by calling a

head where both length and breadth were below the average a small

head and where both were above the average a large head, all others

being classified as medium in size. The result is obviously at best a

very sketchy approximation. It was consistent with the view that

in the physical characteristics of their heads there is little difference

between the two groups.

Welsh group. Northern group.

Small heads .. .. 21%

19%

Medium heads..

56%

59%

Large heads .. .. 23%

23%

I give separately the average figures for such of the entries as were
light-eyed. The numbers are small so it is not possible to place much reliance on them, but if they are compared with the corresponding average figures already given, they offer some evidence of the greater strength and stature of light-eyed individuals.

OBSERVATIONS ON RACIAL CHARACTERISTICS IN ENGLAND. 489

AVERAGES FOR LIGHT-EYED.

Pull as archer (lbs.) .. .. Squeeze, right hand .. .. Squeeze, left hand (in.) .. .. Breathing power (cubic inches) . .
Height . ... Span .. .. . ..
Weight .. .. .. ..

Welsh. Northern. Combined.
74 85 80
86 89 87.5
85 85 85 256 265 263 5ft. 9.0 5 ft. 9.7 5ft. 9.33 6ft. 0.1 5ft. 11.8 6ft. 0.1 10st. 8.25 list. 5.7 10st. 13.87

These figures refer to Cambridge undergraduates bearing the surnames of our two groups but not necessarily coming from any particular geographical area. As a matter of fact many were London and Colonial born. The number are not very large; on the other hand they are not trifling. They confirm our argument that our two lists of names do represent groups having disparative quantities of Nordic and Mediterranean blood.
MENTAL CHARACTERISTICS.

FREQUENCY IN CAMBRIDGE CLASS LISTS.

We have seen that in different places the frequency of our Northern
and Welsh names varies. From a list of members of Cambridge University I found that the percentage of the Northern group is at the present time 42%. I made a comparison between the two groups of
names with the regard to their frequency in the six larger Tripos lists. I give it in the form of a table as previously described.

Frequency of occurrence.

Percentage of

Northern Welsh Total Northern group in

Group Group Both groups

Total

Mathematical Tripos 341 364

705

48%

Classical Tripos 154 200

354

43%

Cambridge members 411 576

987

42%

Nat. Sci. Tripos 82 122

204

40%

Law Tripos .. 37

58

95

39%

History Tripos .. 31

59

90

34%

Theology

.. 23

46

69

33%

Now the total number of names in these lists naturally vary

greatly as the tripos schools have been started at different times. It is

therefore useful for purposes of comparison to reduce them all to some

common standard. I have taken the relative frequency in 10,000

names. The Mathematical Tripos is the only one in which this number

of names actually occurs. _

Frequency of occurrence in 10,000 names.

Northern group Welsh group.

Mathematical Tripos . .

273

292

Classical Tripos

266 346

Natural Science Tripos

256

380

Law Tripos ..

250 394

History Tripos ..

250 476

Theology Tripos

252 505

490 EUGENICS REVIEW.

As regards the Northern group these are very steady results and do
not indicate a marked tendenicy to prefer one subject to others. It
must be kept in mind that the numbers in the Law, History and
Theological lists are small so that it is not fair to place the same reliance on them as on the other lists. It is worth while however just to notice in passing the exact order of preference. The relative frequency of this group in the Finchley Directory is about 232 which is distinctly below its frequency in the Cambridge Honours lists. If we
turn to the Welsh group the frequency is most unsteady. There is a
very distinct order of preference and it is very nearly in the reverseorder of the not verv well marked order of the Northern group. AMathe-
matics which was there the most popular study, is here easily the least
popular. The position of Classics is also exactly reversed. The rela-
tive frequency of this group in the Finchley Directorv is 348 which falls well within the extremes of the Cambridge lists.
Now we can look at this question from another point of view. So
far we have been considering nuumbers only. Let us now consider quality. We have seen that the Northern group exhibit a mild preference for Mathematics and that the Welsh group exhibit a distinct aversion to it. Are the Northern group better at this subject than the Welsh group? We can compare the relative number of first, second and third class distinctions which each group gets in each tripos. We shall thus get some idea whether quality is correlated to quantity.
In making these comparisons for the -arious triposes I have put at the top the relative percentages of first, second and third classes in each tripos when all candidates are taken into account. I have called
this the normal distribution.

1st class 2nd class 3rd class

lLathematical Tripos-

Normal distribution

Northern ,,

Welsh

,,

34%
41% 330

34.5% 31.5% 27% 320%
36% 31%o

Classical TriposNormal
Northern WWelsh

,, ,, ,,

27% 40% 33% 22% 38% 40% 26% 38% 36%

Law Tripos Normal Northern Welsh

,, ,, "

9% 34.5%o 56.5°/ 5% 40%o 55%/O
14% 36% 50%

History TriposNormal
Northern
Welsh

" "

100 41% 49% 14% 28% 58%
17% 26% 57%

Nat. Sci. TriposNormal
Northern Welsh

,, ,, ,,

34% 34% 32%o 41% 320% 27%
31% 39% 30%

OBSERVATIONS ON RACIAL CHARACTERISTICS IN ENGLAND. 491

Theological Tripos - ,

Normal

Northern ,,

Welsh

,,

17.5% 29%
22% 22%
9% 89%

53.5%
56% 52%

It is of interest to subdivide the Mathematical lists into three periods and to compare the Northern and Welsh groups in each.

1758-1823. Normal Northern Welsh
1828-1871. Normal Northern Welsh
1872-1910. Normal Northem Welsh

.. .. ..
.. .. ..
.. .. ..

Ist class 2nd class 3rd class
.. 33% 35% 32% .. 42% 38% 25%
.. 33% 86% 31%
.. 34% 32% 84%
.. 38% 26% 86% .. 34% 85% 31%
.. 86% 86% 28% .. 46% 22% 32% .. 30% 40% 80%

It appears from these figures that the superiority of the Northern group in mathematics is a matter of some constancy.
We get then the following first vintage to use Francis Bacon's expression. We find that the Northern group exhibit a slight tendency to prefer the pursuit of Mathematics, Classics and Natural Science. They appear to be distinctly above the average in Mathematics and Natural Science but below the average in Classics. They are perhaps slightly less inclined to study Law, History and Theology. In these branches of study they appear to be rather above the average in Theology and distinctly mediocre in Law. When we turn to the Welsh group we find a well marked tendency to take up the study of Theology and History. Law and Natural Science occupy an intermediate position. Classical studies are less frequently pursued, while Mathematics are distinctly unpopular. Individuals succeed best in Law and History. The records of the group in Mathematics and Natural Science are very similar and rather mediocre. Classics is rather better than in the Northern group. In Theology quantity does not appear to produce Quality.
The question arises whether these tendencies are merely confined to these groups of names in these class lists or whether they indicate something deeper, namely something of the nature of racial tendencies. To test this latter hypothesis, I put to myself the three following propositions for investigation:
(1) If the tendencies are due to race, then similar groups composed of other Northern and Welsh names should exhibit the same tendencies.
(2) Further the Class lists of other Universities should exhibit the same tendencies for the original groups of names.
(8) In professions allied to these branches of study the same tendencies should be observable for the original groups.
(To be continued).

