THE HEREDITY OF THE TUDORS

And the Common Characteristics of the Family By W. T. J. GUN, F.R.Hist.S., F.S.G.

B ELIEVERS in the importance of tain members of the sixteen, especially

heredity are always faced with the where there is a double descent.

difficulty of ascertaining from which It may be added that in the immediate

ancestors the traits of a given individual Tudor ancestry there is no case of doubtful

are probably derived. In the case of most paternity, so far as I am aware.

men and women, whether of note or other-

wise, little is known as a rule of the charac- KING HENRY VII

ters and attainments of most of the various ancestors for three or four generations; bare names are usually all that can be ascertained. For this reason the heredity of

PARENTS. Edmund Tudor, Earl of Richmond.
Margaret Beaufort.

monarchs presents, on the whole, the best field for investigation, as in their cases much more is known as to the character of ancestors. Among English monarchs the Tudors and Stewarts are the most favourable for this purpose. The personalities of

GRANDPARENTS. Sir Owen Tudor.
Katharine of Valois. John, Duke of Somerset.
Margaret Beauchamp.

the Plantagenets were quite as interesting, but the further we go back in time, the less we can ascertain of ancestral characteristics. The Guelphs, on the other hand, though later, are both in themselves and in their ancestors of far less interest than are the Tudors and the Stewarts.
I do not pretend in this study of the Tudors, or in the one which will follow of the Stewarts, to have altogether solved the

GREAT-GRANDPARENTS.
Meredyth Tudor. Margaret Vaughan.
Charles VI, King of France. Isabel of Bavaria.
John, Earl of Somerset. Margaret Holland.
Sir John Beauchamp.
Edith Stourton.

problem of their characters, but, as will be The character of the first of the Tudor

seen, most of the ten monarchs in question monarchs stands out distinct in history,

do appear to show quite clearly the influence cold, wary, sagacious, unlovable, avari-

of heredity.

cious, possessed, however, of a genuine love

In the case of each monarch, the names of learning. His hard and difficult early

of the parents, four grandparents, and eight life may account to a certain extent for his

great-grandparents are set out. I have not character, but what further can we learn

given the names of the sixteen great-great- from his ancestry? In the first place, it is

grandparents, partly for consideration of singularly unroyal; apart from the line of

space, but mainly because diffusion renders Katharine of Valois, and an ultimate Plan-

the tracing of characteristics from this gen- tagenet descent through the Beauforts,

eration a matter of great complexity. I Henry sprang from either the nobility or

propose at times, however, to refer to cer- quite ordinary gentry. In those turbulent

III

II2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

times most of his ancestors were forced to verse. On the doctrine of chances, Henry

struggle, and did in effect struggle very should therefore have proved able, and able

successfully. Owen Tudor must quite he proved to be.

clearly have been an exceptional person-

ality to have fascinated the Queen Dowager, KING HENRY VIII

while Margaret Beauchamp, whose origin

was not much more exalted than that of

PARENTS.

Owen, must have been possessed of con- King Henry VII.

siderable attractions to have won the affec-

Elizabeth of York.

tions of the head of the great house of

Beaufort.

GRANDPARENTS.

Of the earlier Tudors and Beauchamps Edmund Tudor.

little is known, but the former were promin-

Margaret Beaufort.

ent and energetic supporters of Owen Glen- King Edward IV.

dower who, it is interesting to note, was a

Elizabeth Woodville.

relative. Of Margaret Beauchamp it is said

that she carefully educated her excellent

GREAT-GRANDPARENTS.

daughter, from whom Henry certainly de- Sir Owen Tudor.

rived his love of learning and probably

Katharine of Valois.

most of his sagacity, though some of the John, Duke of Somerset.

latter may have come from the Tudors,

Margaret Beauchamp.

none at any rate from the foolish Katharine Richard, Duke of York.

of Valois, who sprang from an essentially

Cicily Nevill.

weak stock-this was fully brought out in Richard Woodville, Earl Rivers.

her son by her first marriage, Henry VI.

Jaquetta of Luxemburg.

From the earlier Beauforts Henry VII may

have derived some qualities; there were re- The character of the second of the Tudor

semblances between his character and that monarchs stands out even more clearly than

of Cardinal Beaufort, the famous brother of that of his father. With mental capacities

John, Earl of Somerset. If Henry had on well above the average and a superb

the one side a successful adventurer among physique till he ruined it by self-indulgence,

his ancestry in Owen Tudor, he had on the nature had bestowed many gifts on Henry,

other an equally successful adventuress in but not the capacity to use them wisely.

Catharine Swinford, the mistress of John His complete selfishness and ruthlessness

of Gaunt and progenitor of the Beauforts. are commonplaces of history; these charac-

To sum up, of the four immediate lines teristics were certainly derived in part

from which Henry VII derived descent, he from his father, who was, however, far

appears to have owed little to the Valois, more sagacious in his methods. The

though there were certainly resemblances Seventh Henry was wily and tortuous, while

between him and that strange character the Eighth went straight to the point; here

Louis XI of France, his first cousin once the great difference in early environment

removed. He probably took from the undoubtedly played some part, added to

Tudor, Beaufort, and Beauchamp descents which the position of the son was always

in perhaps equal degrees. From all these far more secure than that of the father.

he could well have derived worldly wisdom, Henry VIII's straightforward ruthless-

and from the Tudor and Beaufort ruthless- ness was certainly mainly derived from his

ness, though this latter trait was certainly maternal ancestors, but not from his mother

no part of the characteristics of his mother. herself, Elizabeth of York, who was a gentle

Assuming, as I think we may, some ability and lovable character. There were, how-

in the Beauchamps, three of the four lines ever, many resemblances between Henry

were distinctly able, one alone was the re- and his maternal grandfather, who equally

THE HERE,DITY OF THF, TUDORS

II3

ruined a fine physique by self-indulgence, Henry's characteristics may now be

and who also possessed decided mental traced from his ancestors in the following

abilities, though of a more sluggish dis- detail:

position than his grandson, and with far less love of learning and culture. These last

(i) General ability-

qualities Henry would seem to have derived Conspicuous in his father and in Mar-

from Margaret Beaufort, while Elizabeth garet Beaufort and to some extent in Ed-

Woodville, an ambitious, sensual woman ward IV and in Elizabeth Woodville among

with much feminine charm, certainly trans- his grandparents. Among the great-grand-

mitted characteristics to her grandson, who parents in various ways in both the Duke

thus derived something from at least three and Duchess of York, in Richard Wood-

of his grandparents. Of the disposition and ville, in Owen Tudor, probably in the

attainments of the fourth, Edmund Tudor, Duchess of Somerset, not so obviously in

who died at an early age, no record remains. the Duke, who came, however, of an able

Turning to the eight great-grandparents stock.

we find an exact counterpart to the hand-
some adventurer Owen Tudor, in the handsome adventurer Richard Woodville. The careers of these two were extraordinarily alike, each marrying widowed princesses far above themselves in degree. The earlier Woodville stock, of which, like the Tudor, very little is known, was almost certainly efficient. The character of Jaquetta of

(2) Pitiless determinationConspicuous in the father, in Edward IV and both his parents, probably in Owen Tudor and Richard Woodville, and certainly in various Beauforts. In this respect in particular, the double descent from John of Gaunt and Catharine Swinford must be taken into account.

Luxemburg bore obvious resemblance to that of Katharine of Valois; she came, however, of a somewhat abler stock, which showed no traces of the Valois degeneracy, though morally on an equally low plane. Henry's love of learning, though probably, as has been said, mainly derived from the Beauforts, may have also owed something

(3) Physical good looks-
Notable in the mother and in both her parents. Owen Tudor and Richard Woodville won their positions largely through this attribute, so probably did the Duchess of Somerset, and so almost certainly did the double ancestress, Catharine Swinford.

to the Woodvilles. Elizabeth's brother, (4) Love of learning and culture-

Anthony, Earl Rivers, a highly cultured Most decidedly through Henry VII from

man, was the great patron of Caxton. But Margaret Beaufort, and in that line ulti-

the ruthless determination of Henry's character, derived from several sources, came most conspicuously from Richard,

mately from John of Gaunt, possibly a further portion from the Woodvilles.

Duke of York and Cicily Nevill, the parents On the whole it will be seen that the

of Richard III, who himself exemplified this qualities of Henry VIII are very referable

trait to the highest possible degree. The to heredity, and that the chances were con-

Duke of York was remarkably like his siderable that a son of Henry VII and

great-grandson, while the Duchess, ' Proud Elizabeth of York would prove a strong

Cis,' was almost the latter's female counter- and intensely virile character. It has al-

part. This ruthlessness and determination ready been remarked, however, that Eliza-

were special characteristics of her family, beth herself shared good looks only with

the Nevills; her mother was a Beaufort, her son, otherwise her own gentle nature

thus givng Henry VIII a double descent was in the strongest contrast to his, though

from John of Gaunt, turbulent but cultured, a consideration of her ancestry shows

and from the latter's mistress, the success- clearly why qualities other than her own

ful adventuress, Catharine Swinford.

could be transmitted. But it must be ad-

I14 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

mitted that it is most difficult to explain

GRIEAT-GRANDPARENTS.

Elizabeth herself. Her paternal ancestry for some generations back showed essentially different qualities, nor does gentleness seem to have been any characteristic of the Luxemburg family. One can only refer her to some unknown Woodvilles. Of her children, Mary, Duchess of Suffolk, resembled her the most, as to a marked degree did the latter's granddaughter, Ladv

Edmund Tudor. Margaret Beaufort.
King Edward IV.
Elizabeth Woodville. John II, King of Aragon.
Johanna Henriquez. John II, King of Castile.
Isabella of Portugal.

Jane Grey. Henry's other sister, Margaret, The character of this unfortunate queen

Queen of Scotland, had, as an old Scottish is less clearly defined than that of her

writer remarked, "a great twang of her father or paternal grandfather, and in her

brother's temper." She had certainly case circumstances played a specially large

something of his robustness and ability, and part. She had unquestionably a strong will

a very great deal of his selfishness; she and high spirit and considerable mental

must on the whole have taken from the same capacity, coupled with the family love of

group of ancestors as did Henry. To her learning. Ruthlessness, too, was clearly a

gentler sister Mary fell a much greater feature of her character, but to a less marked

share of the good looks so widely spread extent than has often been stated. While

among their ancestors.

her father was on the whole with the flow-

ing tide, she was against it, and it was that

KING EDWARD VI

rather than any inherent weakness in her

I do not propose to take the case of this monarch in detail, as owing to his early death, his character was left undeveloped. Already, however, a love of learning was conspicuous, and some obvious resemblances to Margaret Beaufort. Possibly in him the gentle nature of Elizabeth of York might have become apparent. His maternal ancestry bore resemblance, in a general way, to the maternal ancestry of his half-sister

character which accounted for her failure
and his success. Her strong will she derived from both
sides. Her mother was far from being a meek and yielding woman; married to
many men she would have dominated, but no woman could have dominated Henry
VIII. Between Mary's four grandparents there was the most striking general resemblance. No two monarchs could well have been more alike than Henry VII and Fer-

Elizabeth, though there was no family in his quarterings to compare for ability with the Howards in hers. On the whole, Edward had a fine heredity, and might well have proved a great monarch.

dinand of Aragon, and the character of Henry, as stated above, applies almost word for word to Ferdinand. Elizabeth of York
and Isabella of Castile were not so exactly alike, for the latter was a more determined

and also a more bigoted woman; but still on

QUEEN MARY I

the whole they resembled each other in gen-

PARENTS.

eral excellence of character. The parents of Ferdinand, John, King of

King Henry VIII.

Aragon, and Johanna Henriquez, were

Katharine of Aragon.

alike able and domineering, the wife even

GRANDPARENTS.

more so than the husband, both utterly ruthless. John of Castile was, on the

King Henry VII.

other hand, amiable and weak, while his

Elizabeth of York.

wife was greatly his superior in ability, the

Ferdinand, King of Aragon.

Portuguese family from which she sprang

Isabella, Queen of Castile.

being by far the ablest of those that have

THE HEREDITY OF THE TUDORS

II5

ruled over that country. Coupling these one of special interest, and it is unfortunate

great-grandparents with those on the Tudor that the characters of several of her im-

side, we find a preponderance of strong, mediate ancestors on the maternal side re-

hard, domineering characters, and a very main unknown. The broad lines of her

decided amount of ability. But while Mary own character are familiar to all. As

derived something from her father's side, tyrannical and domineering by nature as

some part certainly of her strong will, she her father, and most inordinately vain, with

lacked the gift of realism so marked in a considerable, though perhaps over-esti-

that line, also conspicuous in her grand- mated, love of learning, her most marked

father Ferdinand. On the whole, she seems characteristic was undoubtedly her astute-

to have taken most from the direct female ness, which involved mental gifts of a high

line to Isabella of Portugal. The resem- order. A thorough realist, no one ever

blance to Isabella of Castile is specially steered a course more successfully through

noteworthy. Isabella was a successful ruler innumerable difficulties. In these respects

while Mary was not, but this was due al- it is obvious at first sight that her charac-

most wholly to the varying circumstances. ter was largely compounded of those of her

The grandmother suited the Spanish tem- father and paternal grandfather, the iron

perament, while the granddaughter did not will of the former with the astuteness of the

suit the English.

latter. But the astuteness was the more

prominent and the resemblance to the

QUEEN ELIZABETH

grandfather the greater. Keeping to the

PARENTS.
King Henry VIII.
Anne Boleyn.

paternal line, Elizabeth bore no resemblance at all to her grandmother on that side, but there were likenesses in her attainments to those of Margaret Beaufort and in

GRANDPARENTS. King Henry VII.

her character to that of Elizabeth Woodville, while the influence of the Plantagenet strain is evident.

Elizabeth of York. Thomas Boleyn, Earl of Wiltshire.
Elizabeth Howard.

How much was derived from her mother's side? Her extreme vanity is usually felt to have been inherited from the mother her-

GREAT-GRANDPARENTS.

self, and this was probably so; quite as certainly some of her astuteness is attributable

Edmund Tudor.

to this descent, not least to her Boleyn

Margaret Beaufort.

grandfather. Thomas Boleyn was in many

King Edward IV.

ways a most despicable character, though

Elizabeth Woodville.

great allowances must be made for those

Sir William Boleyn.

who lived under the tyranny of Henry VIII;

Margaret Butler.

but, like his granddaughter, he showed

Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk. great ability in steering his way through

Elizabeth Tilney.

difficulties. Nothing is known of the

character of his father, Sir William, but

The ability of this most remarkable the latter's father, Sir Geoffrey Boleyn, was

woman has no doubt at times been exagger- an able business man who became Lord

ated, but when all deductions have been Mavor of London. From this strain Eliza-

made, no question can remain as to her beth may have derived some of the avarice

greatness. In fact it is doubtful whether and general carefulness in money matters

in all history any woman, certainly any which distinguished her; qualities referable

woman of affairs, can definitely be said to also to Henry VII, her personal extrava-

have been her superior. This being so, the gance being as far as possible at the ex-

question of the influence of her heredity is pense of others.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Of her great-grandmother, Margaret Thomas Howard were much above the aver-

Butler, and her grandmother, Elizabeth age in ability; Edward IV and Thomas

Howard, no characteristics seem to have Boleyn somewhat above the average;

been preserved, but the former sprang from Elizabeth Woodville, Elizabeth of York,

a race of Anglo-Irish nobles above the Anne Boleyn, and, almost certainly, Eliza-

general average in capacity, while the latter beth Tilney well up to the average at least.

belonged to one of the most distinguished While the characters of the remaining four

families of the times. All her brothers were are practically unknown, there is no evi-

men of more or less mark, still more not- dence that any one of them was a weakling,

able was her nephew, the poet Earl of and we have in fact to go right back to the

Surrey. Thomas Howard, second Duke of remote Valois strain before we find any

Norfolk, the victor of Flodden, was in all ascertainable weakness in Elizabeth's an-

respects a striking figure, as was his father cestry. Among all the near ancestors we

the first Duke, the " Jockey of Norfolk " find, on the other hand, striking evidence

of Shakespeare's " Richard III." The last- of strength and virility, and the chances of

named was primarily an ambitious domin- ability in a child of Henry VIII and Anne

eering character, while the astuteness to Boleyn were great and were abundantly

which so frequent reference must be made fulfilled.

was predominant in his son. Unquestion- It will be seen that the influence of

ably, Queen Elizabeth owed something to heredity on the characters of the Tudor

the Howard strain. Elizabeth Tilney was monarchs was without doubt considerable,

probably responsible for some of the dis- more marked in the cases of Henry VIII

tinction of this family, for though her own and Elizabeth than in those of Henry VII

attainments are unknown, her son by a first and Mary, but sufficiently so in the latter.

marriage, John, Lord Berners, showed, like The patriarch of the male line, Owen Tu-

Lord Surrey, considerable literary ability, dor, raised his family from obscurity by his

and was specially distinguished for his marriage, which had, however, little or no

vigorous translation of Froissart.

eugenic value. Each of the subsequent

In view of Queen Elizabeth's marked marriages, however, to Margaret Beaufort,

ability a summary of the degree of mental to Elizabeth of York, and to Anne Boleyn,

attainments reached by her fourteen imme- connected the male line with sound and able

diate ancestors may now be added. Henry stocks, with results to which history bears

VII, Henry VIII, Margaret Beaufort, and witness.

i
Eugenics Reiv;ew, Vol. XXII, No. 2.

