SUCCESSFUL REFERTILIZATION OF A MAN

WHO HAD BEEN STERILIZED SEVEN

YEARS PREVIOUSLY

A C}ntribution to the Practice of the German Eugenic Courts
(Erbgesundheitsgerichte)
By HANS HARMSEN
Professor of Hygiene and Public -Health, Hamburg

ACRITICAL screening of cases to which Hans A. was normal; he was killed during

the German Sterilization Act of I933 the war at Stalingrad. His twin sister, Anna,

had been applied* revealed a most suffered from rickets as a child, apart from

interesting case from the files of the Health which she was never sick. In the elenmentary

Department in D. of a refertilization after school she was the best of her class. In

seven years of sterilization.

December I938 a mental disorder developed

and she was admitted to the University

Genetic Background

Hospital of Gottingen. As she was capable

The ancestors of Walter A., born in I9I3,
were undoubtedly afflicted with hereditary taint: Of his grandfather, born in I854, it was said that he was mentally ill and that he committed suicide in I932. The grandmother, who died in I937, was regarded in the village as aft odd person.
Of the three male children of this couple,
one was normal, another was regarded as
odd; the third brother, father of our Walter A., born in I884, was a patient in the mental hospital of Halle/S., because of schizophrenia. He had passed through the elementary school and received some elementary training as a chimney mason. At present, he lives on his disability pension. His first marriage was to a woman who had a " nervous " condition,
also evinced by her two brothers. A second marriage, contracted after the death of his
first wife, was childless.
During the first marriage of the chimney mason, four children were born:
i. Walter A. (our patient) 2. Nikolaus A., born in I919, and the twins
3. Anna and
4. Hans A., born in I922.

of bearing children, 'the Erbgesundheitsgericht of Gbttingen decided for sterilization
on March 2ISt, I939 because " there was no doubt about the endogenous origin of her condition." Sterilization was performed on October ioth, I939 because of manicdepressive insanity.
In the case of Nikolaus, born in i919, the
health officer had applied for sterilization on June 6th, I936 because of " congenital mental defect." From childhood Nikolaus
had been hard of hearing. He failed in two
classes at school. He did not finish voca-
tional training and worked in different places as a farm hand. The application for
sterilization was based on the hereditary taint in the family and on the hearing defect which, too, was stated to be hereditary. When he left school in I936 an intelligence test suggested a minor but definite degree of hereditarymentaldefect. On September ioth,
I936 a further test by the Erbgesundheitsgericht of Hildesheim showed retardation, and the court regarded Nikolaus as a borderline case. On October I3th, I936 the Erbgesundheitsgericht of Gottingen rejected the application for sterilization, because of

* EUGENICS REVIEW. 1955. 46,'227-32. "The German Sterilization Act of 1933 "-by Hans Harmsen.

the results of a third intelligence test, in which he acquitted himself well:

'55 THIE EUGENICS REVIEW, October, I956. 48, 3

I56 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

With respect to these findings, the court could not be convinced of the existence of congenital defect, as defined by law in §i, section II, point i in the German Sterilization Act of July I4th, I933. Thus, the application for sterilization was to be rejected.
Nikolaus is living in an industrial district. He is married and has a boy of two years, who is also hard of hearing but accessible.
Grounds for Sterilization
Sterilization of Walter A. (our patient) had been applied for by the Health Department in November I935 because of congenital defect and with regard to the fact that he had been brought up in the Vincent Convent, having been discharged from the second grade of a school for handicapped
children. On February I5th, I928 a certifi-
cate of a private school of the same kind as the St. Vincent House stated:
Walter A. is very hard of hearing, but endowed with normal abilities. He has been an inmate of our institution since April i9th, 1926 as a member of a class for handicapped children third grade (Hilfsschule) and will advance to the next grade at the end of the school year. He is well behaved and ambitious and will succeed well in school because of his intelligence. During the two years at our school he learned to read Gothic and Latin print with some fluency. He has been able to understand subjects dealt with during lecture hours. He has learned to calculate between one and a thousand. In painting he has special abilities as shown by some of his drawings from a model which he performed without help. The formed character of his handwriting shows his ability for the job which has been chosen for him. Furthermore, his manual skill and his practical understanding will be very helpful.
WVe can give our best recommendations for him.
In the decision of the Erbgesundheitsgericht of Hildesheim (December i9th, I935) the following was stated:
He is trained as a painter and works in this trade. The intelligence test shows defect, although of a minor degree. As A. comes from a family which is considerably afflicted with hereditary diseases, the diagnosis " congenital mental defect" cannot be doubted. Therefore, the Sterilization Act is applicable.
On February I2th, I936 sterilization was carried out in the Municipal Hospital of Hildesheim by resection of the spermatic

ducts. The patient was discharged from the hospital on February 20th, I936.
The Case Reopened
Seven years later, on March 2ISt, I943, A. applied for the reopening of his case.
He was now twenty-nine years old and asked
to undo the whole matttr, that I may be able to marry a healthy girl. I have felt unhappy and neglected since that time, and I do not have any chance of marrying.
In August I943 he presented himself for an intelligence test at the State Health Department at Hanover and showed a large number of mostly good certificates from former employers. In a medical statement of August i8th, I943 the health officer wrote:
Among other features, facial expression, attitude and handwriting do not suggest the presence of mental defect. Some of the tests showed an intelligence above the normal level. Mental defect, as defined by the law, cannot be diagnosed. Socially, he is well adjusted and he has received good reports from his employers. Knowing that he is not mentally defective, he is troubled by the fact that he has been sterilized. I refer to the report of the school in Cloppenburg of February 15th, 1928 which described him as a normally gifted, ambitious and diligent boy. The reports of Iiis master-tradesmen were quite similar, for instance: " A. was a very diligent, prudent, reliable fellow. I could put him in charge of any job. He was very well liked by his co-workers and by the customers."
In a session of December I4th, I943 the Erbgesundheitsgericht of G6ttingen decided
to quash the decision of December igth,
I935 which had ordered the sterilization. In the argument the court stated:
Walter A. is extremely hard of hearing, which makes communication very difficult and easily creates a wrong impression of his knowledge and abilities. His outward appearance does not
give the impression of a mentally defective person. On the contrary, A. looks normal, he is active and self-confident. The State Health Depart-
ment of Hanover has stated that A. does not show mental defect as defined by the law. In the examination A. made an impression of keenness and intelligence. In some fields his intelligence was found to be above normal. He answered promptly, was interested, attentive and able to think logically. In calculations his ability was average. Gaps in his formal knowledge could easily be caused by the fact that he attended, for a period of six years, a school for

SUCCESSFUL REFERTILIZATION

I57

children with normal hearing. Because of his he did on April 20th, I946. Of this second

poor hearing, this school was certainly of no use for him. Only during the last two years of his education did he go to a private school for handi-

marriage four children were born: A daughter, Minna, born in I947 and now eight years

capped children in Cloppenburg where he old, is a delicate but normal and attractive

received more specific help.... Altogether, it girl who already cares for her brothers and

cannot be said that A. is mentally defective, sister and shows domestic skill. At school she

even though the family background is unfavourable. Therefore the decision of the Erbgesundheitsgericht in Hildesheim of December igth,

had difficulties with learning and had to
repeat the first grade; the mother helps her

I935 must be quashed as no hereditary defect with lessons. The son, Hans, now five years

in fact existed.

old, was born in I950; he is healthy and has

After this decision, Walter A. asked for a good intelligence and will enter school at

certificate of his hereditary health. Before Easter. Manfred, born in I953, is delicate,

the quashing of the above-mentioned deci- but helps to take care of his eight months

sion, he had married a girl who was deaf and old sister. He seems to be quite normal,

dumb. As shown by several letters to the though he does not yet speak much. In

health department, this marriage was un- I955 Bernadette was born, a fragile and pale

happy: " My wife is deaf and dumb, her but lively girl.

conduct is unnatural. She does not care for All children hear well. The public health

me, which makes me suffer very much. She nurse reports that home conditions are good.

refuses sexual intercourse. In daily life she

is unfriendly to me; this started after our

marriage." The health department answered that Walter A. could not ask the government

Conclusions

and the ministry for permission to marry The case of Walter A. is of interest from

a healthy girl without first being divorced. two points of view. First, it shows that a

In July 1944 Walter A. sat for the diagnosis of " hereditary mental defect "

*masters examination of his guild and passed should be made with great caution in ado-

successfully.

lescents. It is specially noticeable that among

On December Ist, 1944, in the Chirurgische the cases of sterilized adolescents, re-

Poliklinik at Gottingen, this man's reproduc- examination of the decisions by Erbgesund-

tive capacity was restored by a suture of the heitsgerichte showed a considerable number

spermatic ducts on both sides. After primary of retardations in otherwise normal children.

healing of the wounds, the patient was A capacity later to make a good social adjust-

discharged and kept under observation for ment-as in our case-provided the motiva-

two weeks.

tion for seeking a quashing of the court order

for sterilization.

Marriage and a Family

Secondly, it seems remarkable that refertilization, even after a long time, is not as

On January 24th, I946 he was divorced hopeless as is commonly believed. In the

from his first wife. On March 30th of the case here described the operation, even after

same year he applied for a certificate per- a period of seven years, had the desired

mitting him to marry a healthy girl, which result and was successful in restoring fertility.

