WHAT IS EUGENICS?

By C. P. BLACKER

oadcast afer tansltion into Spanish to the Latin American cotrie on March l9th/20th, 1947, and published by kind permision of the B.B.C.

W HAT is Eugenics ?
Eugenics was described by Sir
Francis Galton, the founder of the
subject and the inventor of the word, as " the science which deals with all influences that improve the inborn qualities of a race; also with those that develop them to the utmost advantage."
Galton, a half first-cousin of Charles Darwin, was born in i822 and died, aged 89, in I9II. He lived through a prosperous and expanding epoch of European history, and died shortly before that continent's " Time of Troubles " began. His writings and views reflected his period.
The Evolution theory, as formulated by Charles Darwin in the Origin of Species
(published in i859 when Galton was thirty-
seven), profoundly influenced the development of his mind. Man, together with all other living things, he saw to be the product of natural laws. But Man was not doomed to be their victim; he might- apply his unique heritage to making himself their master. " Nature, red in tooth and claw," need not be imitated by men in their

when picking out the best specimens of his class. It would include health, energy, ability, manliness and courteous disposi-
tion." . . . "Let us for a moment suppose," wrote Galton again, " that the practice of Eugenics should hereafter raise the average quality of our nation to that of its better moiety at the present day and consider the gain. The general tone of domestic, social and political life would be higher. The race as a whole would be less foolish, frivolous, less excitable and politically more provident than now. Its demagogues who " played to the gallery" would play to a more sensible gallery than at present. . . . Men of an order of ability which is now very rare, would become more frequent, because the level out of which they rose would itself have risen."
These words of Galton are as true to-day as when they were written, despite the many changes we have witnessed since his death. Galton thought of eugenics as having three aspects-as science, as a component of, religion, and as social practice. These three aspects, at first sight incompatible, are

dealings with one another; it might be superseded.
Let us for a moment consider what Galton
taught. " Man," he wrote at the end of his long life, " is gifted with pity and other kindly feelings; he has the power of preventing many kinds of suffering. I conceive it to fall well within his province to replace Natural Selection by other processes that are more merciful and not less effective. This is precisely the aim of Eugenics." " The aim of eugenics," he wrote in another
context, " is to represent each class or sect by its best specimens; that done to leave them to work out their common civilization
in their own way. . . . A considerable list
of qualities can be easily compiled that nearly everyone would take into account

harmonized if we think of them as Sher-
rington analyzed the simple reflex and as
McDougall, following Sherrington, described the simple instinct. The simple reflex has an afferent, a central and an efferrent component; and we may regard the simple
instinct as having cognitive, affective or central, and conative elements corresponding to those of the simple reflex. A similar
classification can be made of sociology. Social science investigates and measures, thus corresponding to the afferent component of the reflex and the cognitive phase of the instinct; social action leading to change
corresponds to the efferent component of the reflex and the conative phase of the instinct.
What in the sphere of sociology corresponds to the central component of the reflex and

56

WHAT IS EUGENICS ?

57

to the affective phase of the instinct ? The community which provides good prospects

answer, clearly, is the movement of public for the future welfare of children, which

opinion which, if sound, must on the one encourages family life and inculcates a

hand be guided by knowledge,-and on the sense of its responsibilities, produces by

other must demand and support such social intention and design three or more children

changes as are to be permanent. Now the and rears them in a happy and healthy

bearing of public opinion on the processes home. Let us for a moment consider the

of birth, marriage and death is closely inter- qualities necessary for this achievement.

woven with religion, which consecrates these To plan the births of a well-spaced family

events with solemn rite and ceremony. demands intelligence, foresight and re-

Hence Galton felt that eugenics, concerned straint. To produce by design enough or

as it is with marriage and birth, should form more than enough children for replacement,

part of religion. Men revere their ancestors implies a love of children, a sense of duty

with religious fervour; why should not towards the community and an optimistic

similar feelings, once our powers and re- or positive attitude to life. To provide a

sponsibilities are understood, extend to good home calls for the power to make a

posterity whose number and quality we can success of marriage and of life outside the

-determine ?

home. All these are valuable qualities, and

Since Galton's death in I9II, many the emphasis is on the moral ones. But the

things have happened which would have choice here freely exercised of bringing into

influenced his views. Europe has been con- the world a large family should be made in

vulsed by two major wars; the principles of the full light of medical and genetic circum-

eugenics have been distorted to serve cruel stances. When these are seriously adverse,

racial doctrines which would have been children will not be wanted by morally

abhorrent to Galton; and many countries responsible parents; and when the desired

of the world are swarming with vast popu- qualities are seriously lacking, the birth of

lations while others have suffered declines in children should be discouraged by precept

their birth-rates which threaten them with and public opinion but never by compulsion.

slow depopulation.

The standard above suggested places a

Eugenics is concerned with the qualities high value upon the love of children-upon

of human beings rather than with their what Dr. Spencer Paterson of Scotland calls

numbers; values therefore enter its province genophilia-as a factor in the improvement

as well as facts and science. What are the of the race. Over wide spaces of the world

values which should guide the eugenist ? man is now consciously regulating his own

Galton suggested health, ability, energy, multiplication: his parental instincts are

manliness and a courteous disposition. But thus being dissociated from their sexual pre-

only one of these qualities can be accurately cursors which no longer solely determine the

measured-ability or intelligence. Health, course of his reproduction, as they mostly

energy, courage, courtesy, honesty, kindness, did among his ancestors. If a couple do not

loyalty, integrity, philoprogenitiveness can want children, it is now possible for them to

be assessed, sometimes with some accuracy; satisfy their sexual inclinations without

but they cannot be measured, and, like biological sequel. A new emphasis is thus

intelligence, expressed as a quotient.

laid upon the parental or genophilic in-

Is there, then a simple social index of the stincts as determinants of reproduction.

joint occurrence of eugenically valuable But the fonder they are of children, the less

traits which would make them easily recog- will responsible parents want to bring them

nizable to us ? I believe there is. The into the world if, through genetic or economic

essentially valuable qualities which we would handicaps, they are confronted with thwarted

like to see prevailing among our country's and stunted lives. Hence all social reforms

future citizens have, as their confluent and such as will benefit the family and improve

resultant expression, the couple who, in a the prospects of children are likely to have

58 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

valuable eugenic effects. I am not here children; and they should know when

arguing that acquired characteristics are genetic factors are adverse. . They should

inherited. I am saying that social changes have enlightenment-another" good." Here

that benefit the family will facilitate and we meet a~difficulty. Certain means of

encourage parenthood among just those regulating births are condemned by religion.

couples whom we would wish to contribute But it is no part of eugenics to prescribe

a maximum share to the next generation. such means. If there is agreement, as I

There is a natural confluence of goods believe there is, between all Christian re-

from actions which are themselves good. ligions about Ends, it is for each to deter-

The eugenic good which will follow from mine those Means which accord with its

encouraging innate genophilic impulses links teachings.

with the good nurture enjoyed by the According to the view here suggested, the

wanted and welcomed child. Or to put the conflict disappears between the eugenist and

argument the other way round, we can say the social reformer, between those who seek

that Lord Beveridge's five " giants " of to improve human nature and human

Disease, Ignorance, Squalor, Idleness and nurture. The principles of eugenics become

Want, sterilize parenthood among just those all the more acceptable. This standpoint

elements of the population which are was somewhat overlooked in the past but

eugenically best fitted to be parents; and is gaining ground in England to-day.

that they promote it among those which I will end as I began with Galton. He

are least fitted. We can also say that the was nurtured in the Evolution theory and

unwanted child reared in a home where the gave much thought to the principle of

five " giants " -hold sway too often grows up Natural Selection. In an equitable environ-

with its finest possibilities thwarted. The ment which favoured parenthood and liber-

child favoured by " Nurture " may well have ated the family from economic impediments,

been first smiled upon by " Nature."

he would have discerned a favourable

Essential features, then, of a community instrument of selection. But unlike the

wherein eugenic values prevail are that the agencies of Nature, the instrument would

family be valued, that the economic handi- here be man-made. It would favour the

caps of parenthood be minimized, that the perpetuation of those qualities which we

mother be honoured, and that social justice value not only in individuals but also in

prevail. But there is another feature. races and in nations, and which we would

Parents should have the knowledge and the like to see prevail among our country's

power of regulating the births of their future citizens.

.

MARRIAGE HYGIENE - QUARTERLY (S¶fECOE)

The International Journal of Sex and Sex Problems

CHIEF EDITORIAL AND PUBLISHING OFFICE-

WHITEAWAY BUILDING, BOMBAY 1, INDIA.

London Agents: H. K. Lewis & Co. Ltd., 136 Gower Street, W.C.I.

AUGUST

- CCONTENTS

1947

Frigidity in the Female-Facts and Misconceptions

EDMUND BERGLER

Huhner Test in the Investigation of Sterility

MAX HUHNER

The Martyrdom of Man in Sex

ANTHONY M. LuDovIcI

Premarital Sex Relations of Adolescents Sanctioned in Tribal India VERRIER ELWIN

Modern Insight Into Incest

MARC LANVAL

Lives of Great Men (Series)-Havelock Ellis

NORMAN HAIRE

Notes and Comments-World News-Book Reviews-Abstracts, current and from First Series of Marriage Hygiene. Subscription: 2h. a year.
Owing to severe paper restrictions, a limited number of copies are printed. Subscriptions must therefore be booked well in advance.

Eugenis Reviews VOL mX , No. 2

