SOME FURTHER RELATIONS BETWEEN INTELLIGENCE, FERTILITY AND SOCIO-
ECONOMIC FACTORS

By RAYMOND B. CATTELL, M.A., B.Sc., Ph.D.

T HE main finding in my previous contribution to this journal* that in two representative samples of our popula-
tion intelligence and fertility are negatively correlated-permits of being more fully understood in the light of further relation-
ships obtainable from the data. In the artide concerned and to a still
greater extent in the subsequent book,t I have ventured to sketch some social and
economic measures which might transform this dysgenic trend, as far as intelligence is concerned, into the desired movement towards the distribution of intelligence required by our complex civilization. The successful
designing of such measures must obviously depend on more detailed knowledge concerning the interaction of such factors as intelligence, social status, education, earning capacity, mode of life and residence in town
or country. For example, it is of crucial importance to
know whether the same dysgenic trend exists within any one occupation as in the community as a whole; i.e. whether fertility is primarily associated with the social status
or with the intelligence of the individual parent. Other relationships which may be extracted from the available material do not themselves provide answers to eugenic prob-
lems, but they are perhaps worthy of record from the sociological point of view and they offer information which, if dovetailed into
other new facts presented by research workers in different social sciences, may well lead to the construction of a real science of
eugenic mechanisms. These facts, which are difficult to set out in any order, because they

in themselves lead nowhere and cannot justly
be made the basis of comprehensive hypotheses until they have been confirmed, concern such matters as the intelligence levels of
occupations in the town and the country and the relation of intelligence of fathers in various occupations to that of the children of
fathers in those occupations.
To throw light on the first problem-that
of the variation of fertility within any one occupation-we divided the whole range of intelligence of the children of fathers in each occupation into four sections, such that they would cut off approximately equal portions of the population on the normal distribution curve. The mean size of family from which the children in each section came was then worked out, with the result shown in
Table I.
In this and subsequent tables the occupations are arranged in descending order of average fertility. Here the town and country populations are combined and the number of families on which each average is based is inserted in brackets.

TABLE I INTELLIGENCE AND FERTILITY IN EACH OCCUPATION

I.Q. Range
Occupation -. Below 85 85-99 100-II4 Over 114

Unemployed ... ... 4-78 (79) 3-82 (62) 400 (28) 3.55 (to) Farm Labourers ... 4-33 (48) 3-72 (31) 3 50 (2) 3o00 (2)

Unskilled Labourers ... 4-23 (258) 3.9I (222) 3 -26 (90) 3.44 (66)

Farmers

... ... 4-09 (22) 4- 39 (33) 3-87 (I6) 2-61 (23)

Skilled Labourers ... 4'32 (53) 3-36 (77) 3-39 (57) 2-97 (37)

Unskilled Factory ... 4-o8 (223) 3 43 (I75) 3-18 (125) 2-77 (69)

Transport ... ... 4-36 (50) 3-29 (83) 3-17 (47) 2-76 (42)

Skilled Factory ... 3-54 (35) 3*58 (8) 3-05 (62) 2-59 (42)

Sailors ... ... ... 2-64 (4) 2-92 (I2) 4-I7 (6) 3-57 (7)

Salesmen ... ... 3-54 (35) 2-93 (56) 4-36 (63) 2-53 (62)

Shopkeepers ... ... 3- 26 (27) 3-03 (54) 2-79 (28) 2-26 (38)

BusinessOwners ... 2-50 (6) 2-62 (6) 2.35(32 2 72 (43)

Clerks ... ... 2-70 (I0) 2*70 (30) 2 - 26 42 2- 33 (43)

Professional ... 2-57 (7) 2-3 (I6) 2-I6 (19) 2-35 (45)

* "Is National Intelligence Declining ? " EUGENICS

REVIEW, 1936, XXVIII, I8i.
t The Fight for Our National Intelligensce. P. S.
King & Co., 1937.

Although the number of cases in most occupational groups is not large enough to

'7I

172 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

give uniform and smooth trends, a glance
suffices to show that in most fertility is in fact inversely related to intelligence.* Apparently the effect is more marked in the less skilled occupations, but that is a conclusion
which we must test by exacter methods, for, if proved, it has corollaries in the field of
eugenic legislation.
For each occupation the end result of the differing quartile fertilities can be found by multiplying the approximate mean I.Q. in each quarter (taken as 75, 92, I07 and I30) by the increase or decrease of population in that quarter and by comparing the new mean for all four quarters together with the mean for
the parents, assuming the average I.Q. for the parents in each group to be the same as that
for the children, i.e. the procedure in calculation is the same as that described in the previous article for the whole population. In Table II the differences between the mean
parental and mean child I.Q., as a result of the differential birth-rate within each occu-
pation are shown.

TABLE II

EUGENIC AND DYSGENIC TRENDS IN SEPARATE

OCCUPATIONS

Difference

Occupations

Parents Children in

Mean I.Q.

Unemployed ... go*o 88*2 -I*8

Farm Labourers ... 83-4 82-5
Unskilled Labourers 94.2 93.4

-o-g -o-8

Farmers ... ... IooO

94*7 -5*3

Skilled Labourers ... 98*I 96*i -2*0

Unskilled Factory ... 97 * 2 95*4 -I*8

Transport ... ... 98-6 96 8 -I *8

Skilled Factory ... Ioo*8 98*8 -2*0

Sailors ... Salesmen ...
Shopkeepers

... 95*0
... I04*5
... I0o*6

97*7
IO2*9
I00*7

+2*7 -i*6 -o*9

Business Owners ... II2*7 II3*0

+0*3

Clerks .. ... Io8 '7 I07*9
Professional ... II3*5 II6.5

-o*8 + 3*0

* This fact, incidentally, would destroy the suspicion,
if technical psychological considerations had not already destroyed it, frequently found in exaggerated form among critics unversed in psychometrics, that the inverse relation of intelligence and size of family is due to children from homes of low social status being in some way at a disadvantage in an intelligence test. A clinical psychologist may perhaps be permitted to add that the sharp " gamin" of the streets is actually
at an advantage compared with the more suggestible child brought up in a protected home; also the larger family generally gives advantages in whatever environmental elements may persist in intelligence tests.

In a recent issue of this REVIEW* the editor commented on the accumulation of evidence that in certain restricted geographical and occupational groups a reversal of the usual manifestation of differential fertility exists. He referred to the work of Edin and Hutchinson, showing that in
Stockholm higher fertility is associated with higher income and higher education; to the finding of Tietz that in Prussia employers and owners have a higher birth-rate than wage earners; to Whitney and Huntington's well-known demonstration of a eugenic trend in a university population and concluded " these few instances of atypical differential fertility offer no grounds for excessive optimism, but they do at least show that there is not yet reason for despair."
The restriction of atypicability to so few and such numerically small groups as manifest it in Table II, above, certainly gives no grounds for " excessive optimism " in regard to our own population, but a glance at the distribution of these groups may be instructive. Apparently the dysgenic trend is not so
bad (within the group) in those groupst
which have a high birth-rate throughout and no social pretensions-the unskilled labourers and farm labourers-than in those in which a better standard of comfort and social position obtains - the skilled labourers, farmers, skilled factory and transport workers. Among the latter there are evidently many practising severe family restriction, and the result is an agreement with my earlier statement, contested by Dr. Tredgold, that the arrest of the spread of birth-control at its present level would be the most disastrous thing that could occur.
Omitting sailors, who constitute too small a group for the result to be significant, we find a eugenic trend only among business owners and professional men, a result which has some relation to the results in Stockholm,
* EUGENICS REVIEW, 1937, XXVIII, 260. t As stated elsewhere the unemployed in this survey were largely a " social problem group" and not comparable with unskilled labourers and farm labourers. Their greater dysgenic tendency here certainly suggests that they were not governed by the same outlook as these employed groups economically in no much better position.

INTELLIGENCE, FERTILITY AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC FACTORS I73

Prussia and at Yale. One might be inclined By the rank correlation formula the fol-

to generalize that where birth-control is lowing correlations result:

practised throughout a group to-day the end result is eugenic.
But clerks and shopkeepers have approximately the same birth-rate as professional

Fertility and Intelligence -o-84 (or -O-9I on Bravais-Pearson

Formula).

)-o0g*Fertility
Fertility

and and

Earnings Earnings

(Econom. ranking)-0-77.
(Soc. Work. ,,

8

ean-0

7

Intelligence Intelligence

and and

Earnings Earnings

((SEocco.nWoomr.kr.ank,ing))++0oo8929Me

-

men and business owners and managers, yet There is some suggestion therefore that

do not attain to a eugenic balance. It is fertility-or rather restriction of fertility-

noteworthy that these dysgenic groups are is more closely associated with intelligence

lower in average intelligence than the than with earnings, though a good part of

eugenic groups with the same birth-rate. the total association of intelligence with low

(See Table III.) Is the deciding factor fertility may be mediated by earnings, for

for eugenic or dysgenic trends among groups the correlation of intelligence with earnings

determined to practise restriction a higher is high.

economic level, a higher intelligence, a Any fuller discussion of the factors at work

higher education, a certain relation between here would not be realizable without looking

education and economic level, or a uniformity beyond the averages at the actual distribu-

of mental level demanded by examination tion of sizes of family in the various groups.

standards, as in the professions ?

For this purpose four representative groups

The problem may be approached from a have been set out in Figure I as illustrations.

fresh angle by comparing the mean size of The unemployed group has no distinct

family for the various occupational groups peak; the sizes of family are scattered as if

respectively with the mean intelligence there is no attempt to aim at any particular

quotient and the mean earning capacity. ideal but to leave the matter to the vagaries

This is done in Table III. Unfortunately of unchecked fertility. In the unskilled

our groups were not primarily arranged with group, however, there is already a marked

a view to assessing earning capacity and they peak at the two-child family. Among clerks

proved to be so wide that specialists could there is for the first time a complete absence

not agree on the rank order of earning. We of families above six in number, but the

have accordingly set out two rank orders, one planned family seems to fall at between two

by an economist and one by a skilled social and three children, for families of three are

worker operating in the area concerned. relatively common in comparison with the

These two orders, however, correlate to the group of unskilled workers. It seems reason-

extent of 0o93.

able to suppose that in the latter a certain

TABLE III
FERTILITY COMPARED WITH INTELLIGENCE AND EARNING CAPACITY, INTER-OCCUPATIONALLY

section is aiming at a very restricted family and that the high average family size results
from another section practising no more

Earning Power restriction than is found in the unemployed

Occupation

Mean Mean (Ranking) size of I.Q. of Econ Soc. family child esteismi.esWtoirmka.te

group.
In the professional group there are no longer any families of six and there is evident

Unemployed ... 4.25 (179)

Farm Labourers ... 4.05 (83)

UnskilledLabourers 3.84 (535)

Farmers ... *- 3-80 (94)

SkilledLabourers 3-53 (224)

Unskilled Factory 3 44 (492)

Transport

... 3-4I (222)

8I*7 82*2
93.6
98.8 98.8
97.8 98.7

14
13 12
4
IO
9 8

14 12
13 4 8 II
9

concentration on the ideal of a family of two, though, in comparison with the clerks, there
is also a distinct avoidance of the one-child
family. A possible conclusion from this analysis of these representative diagrams is

Skilled Factory ... 3.23 (220) IO2-2
Sailors ... ... 3 I3 (39) 88.7 Salesman ... ... 2*87 (2I6) 104*9
Shopkeepers ... 2*83 (I47) IOI7 Business Owners ... 2*57 (96) ii6.5
Clerks ... ... 2*43 (I25) I09 - 3 Professional ... 2 *29 (87) iI6*o

6
II 5 3
I
7 2

7
10
3 6
I
5 2

that if the size of family were a deliberate choice, as a result of the practice of birthcontrol, in all occupations, the differential birth-rate between occupations would become wholly eugenic.

174
NUMBER OF. CHILDREN IN FAMILY

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

M'S I 94-T

aq2 __

a64

UNMPLOYVD Sc*o I con t10o@0.s

9-6

aI II II
I 23456

4-04-5

1

7 8 9 IO II I2 13
UL3SKILLF F'A:TORy
5,le IcIn . 50 C...

NUMBER OF CHILDREN
IN FAMILY

5 6 7 8 9 10 Il I2
CL.ERKS SCi. IC n. 8cose

NUMBER OF CHILDREN IN FAMILY

I

345

PROF6SSIONAL
Scaic I cma 5 coOa

I 2 345 Fig. I.-NUMBER OF FAMILIES AT EACH SIZE, EXPRESSED AS PERCENTAGE OF
TOTAL NUMBER OF FAMILIES IN THAT OCCUPATION SAMPLE.

INTELLIGENCE, FERTILITY AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC FACTORS I75

Whilst discussing the relations of intellig-
ence and fertility, we must notice the effect upon our conclusions of the fact that the intelligence of children arranged according
to parental occupation may not be quite the same as that of the parents, for, as pointed
out elsewhere,* there are systematic factors at work other than general regression to the mean. Chief among these are, (a) the tendency for members of certain occupations to marry more intelligent wives than do members of other occupations on the same intelligence level, and (b) the tendency of some occupations to recruit more from families in which other members are not generally as intelligent as the one selected.
The latter will tend to occur when recruitment is possible through scholarship selection; the former will arise when the economic and social conditions of an occupation attract a mate from a better social class than do the conditions of another occupation demanding similar intelligence. The adverse conditions facing, for example, sailors' and farm labourers' wives, might be expected to restrict the field of choice and lower the intelligence average, and it is noteworthy that in these occupations the intelligence of the children is at any rate lower than one would expect from the fertility order (Table III).
Both the above factors affect the professional in comparison with the business owners group. More of the former are brighter members obtained by scholarship selection from the duller families, and, owing to the earnings being relatively low during the years of selection for marriage, the choice of a mate tends to run in a somewhat lower social class. The children of professional men are thus in our list actually slightly lower in intelligence than those of business owners; and in most other researches they are not so much above the children of business owners as the discrepancy in the intelligence of fathers would lead one to expect.
It might well be, therefore, that a still better correlation of fertility with intelligence would be found in the case of fathers than in
* " Occupational Norms of Intelligence and the Standardisation of an Adult Intelligence Test." R. B. Cattell. Brit. J. Psychol., 1934, XXV.

the case of children. In any case the sociological interest of the matter justifies our setting out results comparing intelligence of occupational groups respectively for the fathers and the children. Unfortunately the few measurements that have been made in this country directly on adults in occupational groups, being intended for vocational guidance purposes, have used narrower groupings than those of the present research. From my own previous tests on adults,* with the standards and groupings of which I am most familiar, I have attempted to reconstruct groups equivalent to those of the present research, in the manner indicated by footnotes to Table IV, in which table the final averages and approximate scatter for each group are set out.

TABLE IV

COMPARISON OF OCCUPATIONAL INTELLIGENCE LEVEL

OF FATHERS AND OF CHILDREN

Average I.Q. Average I.Q.

Occupation Professional

of Adults of Children ... ... I42t (233) II6 (87)

Business Managers and
Owners ... ... ... I37
Clerks ... ... ... 127

(I5) I I6* 5 (96) (54) 109.3 (125)

Salesmen ...

...

Skilled Factory ...

Skilled Labourers ...

Unskilled Workers

... I23 (24) 104.9 (2I6)
... II0o (86) 102*2 (220) ... 97 -63 (64) 98*8 (224) ... 88-94 (64) 93.3' (1027)

Comparison of Scatter (Semi-Interquartile Range) in
Points of I.Q.

Professional ... ...

Business Managers and

Owners ... ... ...

Clerks

...

...

...

Salesmen ...

...

Skilled Labourers...

...
...

Unskilled Labourers ...

Fathers
II.5
I2-O I4-6 I2.5 19.0
I7.0

Children I5
i6 I2 I3.5
12*0
10.5

I. Composed of secondary, central and elementary school teachers, civil engineers, physicians and surgeons.
2. Composed of precision fitters, coach builders and sheet-metal workers only.
3. Carpenters and cabinet makers only. 4. Packers and sorters, welders, machine opera-

tors.
5. Includes both categories of unskilled workers
from Table I.
(The number of cases on which each mean depends is shown in brackets.)

Apart from the discrepancy of fathers' and children's average rank order in the professional group, discussed above, the order for

* Loc. cit., Brit. J. Psychol. 1934, XXV. t Ibid.

I76 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the children is the same as that of the fathers, in those occupations and their actual levels

but in every case the children's average I.Q. of average intelligence in town and country.

shows a marked regression to the mean for The results are set out in Tables V and VI.

the population as a whole. Presumably the The relation of fertility to I.Q. is expressed

regression would not be so great on the by the ultimate effect upon the balance of

average of both parents; so that our method I.Q. between the present and the next

of calculating the intelligence of one genera- generation, calculated for town and country

tion from that of the next would not be separately by the same method as that used

fraught with large error.

in Table II for the whole population.

Though no great reliability can be ascribed

to the measurements of scatter, owing to the

TABLE V

composite character of the equivalent adult FERTILITIES AND EUGENIC TRENDS (IN REGARD TO

groupings used in the above table, there is yet a clear general trend for the scatter of the

INTELLIGENCE) FOR THE SAME OCCUPATIONS IN TOWN AND COUNTRY

children to be greater than that of the parents

Part I

Part II

in the higher intelligence groups and less in
the larger, lower intelligence groups. Differences in the intelligence tests used may
account for an actual reduction of the children's scatter upon that of the parents, but the effect of relatively great scatter in certain occupations must be a real observation. Greater and lesser regression through more and less selection of fathers relative to the fathers' families and through more and less assortative mating, working in the manner

Mean SizMe oaf nFanmily

~~~C~~h~a~Dnifgfeerentiinal IB.iQr.thf-raotme

Occupation

Urban Rural Urban Rural

Unemployed ......4-22 (I5S)

Farm Labourers

Unskilled Labourers 387 (427)

Farmers . .. 2-38 (3)

(67)Skilled Labourers ... 3-49

Unskilled Factory Transport .

... ..

344 (46)
3x32 (75

SkilledFactory ... 3*19 29

Sailors ... ... 4 s08)

Salesmen . .. 2*89 193)

Shopkeepers. ... 2.77 II5)

Busness Owners ... 2-58 92)

Clerks

... ... 2.47 II8)

Professional . .. 3-55 80)

452 (24)
405 (83)
3*74 (zo8) 4 02 (8I 36S (54) 337 (27) 3,72 (47
4*0oo III
288 34 2*69 (23) 306(32)
2-50 (4)
143 (7)
2-4 (7)

-o-58 -
-o06o -o*67 -o-6r -0-71x -o62 -.o70 +7'40
-020
-0172
-0.01
-0o35
+o0O4

+0-58
-084 -1_51 -0-82 -0-22 +o071 -o-96 _039 +o 48 -I*33 -0 39 +0170 -o-80 +0-17

discussed above, might well account for

all of this, but if the apparent restric- Neglecting in Table V those occupations

tion of scatter in the children of the labour- in which fewer than twenty-five cases are in-

ing groups is real we may also need to volved in either of the totals, we find that the

suppose that the birth-rate is less in these greater fertility of the rural population runs

groups when mating is not assortative or that through all dasses with the exception of

the largest birth-rate is associated with those unskilled labourers and unskilled factory

fathers who are most typical (in intelligence) workers. These are perhaps the principal

of the occupational group to which they contributors to the greater dysgenic trend in

belong. This last tendency would, of course, the city population as a whole. A glance at

be superposed on the morl pervasive ten- the second part of Table V shows that the

dency for the birth-rate to increase among dysgenic factor in the town is higher for

the less intelligent, and might be expected to unskilled factory workers than for any other

throw the highest birth-rate not in the lowest group except shopkeepers, and the latter is

quarter but in the second quarter from the numerically only a quarter of the size of the

bottom. According to Table I, this actually former.

occurs, with farmers and skilled factory If the occupations with very small samples

workers.

are considered, there are indications that the

Certain differences of the rural and urban " middle dass " groups-business owners

population, which might throw light on the and managers, salesmen, clerks and profes-

conditions of eugenic and dysgenic birth- sional men-are more fertile in the city than

rates, need next to be investigated. Here we in the country villages, possibly because they

shall inquire into the relative fertilities of are more likely to be among their own dass

the same occupations in town and country, in the former environment and so less subject the comparative decline of fertility with I.Q. to the dysgenic fertility restriction which is

INTELLIGENCE, FERTILITY AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC FACTORS 177

somehow associated with sharp awareness of class differences.
The second part of Table V shows that most occupations which are dysgenic in the country are also dysgenic in the town: the
variations in the actual figures are not large enough to be significant, and the same may perhaps be said of the two instances-the unemployed and unskilled factory workerswhich show a difference of sign, being dysgenic in the town and eugenic in the country.

TABLE VI

OCCUPATIONAL INTELLIGENCE LEVELS (CHILDREN) IN TOWN AND COUNTRY

Urban

Occupation

Mean I.Q.

Unemployed ... ... 86.9 (I55)

Farm Labourers ... ... -

Unskilled Labourers ... 94*4 (427)

Farmers ... ... ... 98-8 (I3)

Skilled Labourers ... ... IOO1 2 (170)
Unskilled Factory Workers 98.2 (465)

Transport Workers ... 99-4 (I75)

Postmen and Policemen*... 99-4 (26)

Skilled Factory Workers ... I02 2 (209)

Sailors ... ... ... I2I*6 (6)

Salesmen ... ... ... IO5-2 (I93)

Shopkeepers

...

Business Owners ...

Clerks ... ...

... IOI*2 (I I5)
... iI6-5 (9I)
... 109.3 (II8)

Professional

... ... Ii6-o (30)

Rural

Mean I.Q.

83 3 (24)

82'2 (83)

90g7 (IO8)

95*9 (8i)

94.8 (54)

9o-7 (27)

95.7 (47)

99-4 (I5)

98*2 (II)

88 . 7 (34)

IOO9 (23)

1I0336*.37

(32)
(4)

I22*6 (7)

I20-I (7)

It may be advisable to remind the reader
here that the dysgenic trend for the population as a whole cannot be found by adding these intra-occupational changes: the calculation must include in its scope also the greater effect arising from inter-occupational differences of fertility.
From Table VI it will be seen that the more selected intelligence characteristic of the town group as a wholet obtains also for
each occupation separately, except for a
group small in numbers, constituted by shopkeep!rs, business owners, clerks and professional men in which the rural intelligence
exceeds the urban. The sufficient magnitude of this difference and the fact that these groups are also alike in being at the bottom
of the fertility scale suggests that this

* An extra category not appearing in other lists and not inserted here in rank order of fertility.
t See" Is National Intelligence Declining ? " and the fuller discussion in " The Fight for Our National Intelligence," Note on Urban and Rural Intelligence, p. 14.
B

difference is a significant one. Perhaps in the country villages, this group constitutes a more class-conscious minority, marrying within itself and so maintaining a higher intelligence level in the children by more assortative mating. The remaining exception -the unemployed group-stands apart and is too small in numbers to justify much
dependence on the result. The city, as has been mentioned,* was very prosperous, employing practically all employables; the country, though also having a low unemployment figure, might have rejected somewhat abler men, making the group a more intelligent one. Again " unemployment " in the country, is sometimes a euphemism for other occupations such as poaching, which may also partially explain the suspicion of higher intelligence among children of country unemployed.
The group " Postmen and Policemen," too small to justify, its introduction in other tables, is brought into Table VI because of the special interest which arises from its presenting a group uniform in town and country. The intelligence quotient of the children likewise proves to be uniform. Are we to conclude that in all other occupations the standards of intelligence and efficiency are lower in the country than in the city in response to the lower wage rates in the country ? Such a conclusion seems inevitable, for we cannot account for these differences as differences in the parent-child regression as we do in the case of the " middle class" group, since the groups are too large to permit much assortative mating in relation to the main body of the population. Sociological researches comparing occupations must therefore beware of assuming that the same occupation is of comparable standard in town and country.
This attempt to analyze social factors connected with eugenic and dysgenic trends will be concluded by treating the results of Table III in a manner likely to bring out the causes of the exceptions to the relation of intelligence and fertility-namely by arranging the fourteen occupations as points on a
* EUGENICS REVIEW, 1936, XXVIII, I8g.

178 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

IMOE CHILOREC N THAN EXPECTEO
FROM INTELLIGE/CF

N/OrzFsOYLo

,/

/

' //

.1/e//GOK;T/4SLELXEPOECTED

IL1

'00,7/' ,@ WILe L*

TOMY

/000,~~7z 7, vAous ocuAr

,~~~~~~7G.uajm.cg/m

-/

/

7,
DIGA0 //EAIO
7,7 *1 7,5 .

PFmL

FEWeR CHIDREN
THN EXCPECTEO
m L~A~ON~D~~~N~T~TEFL~EL)L6GLEQHICEC

D1PTGRAM

RESIAZnr 0FAMILY

l EDINEL{E

11N VAiRIOUS OCUPATIONS

graph. The causes associated with excep- Table III or to the eugenic trend within the

tions may not, of course, throw light on the groups as worked out in Table II.

main cause of high status being associated If these matters are to be treated in an

with low intelligence.

empirical and scientific manner the building

It will be seen that the most aberrant of explanatory hypotheses must await the

points on one side of the best fitting line are accumulation of further data in this field:

farm labourers, sailors, shopkeepers and at present complete hypotheses would be un-

clerks; on the other side, business owners stable and premature. But certain generali-

and farmers. The former have more children zations become clear; notably that the

than we should expected from their intelli- abolition of social status differences, i.e. an

gence, the latter have fewer. The relation approach to the conditions we now get in

appears between this grouping and the rela- any one occupation, would not in itself

tion of intelligence to earning power given in produce a eugenic trend; for in any case

INTELLIGENCE, FERTILITY AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC FACTORS

the directions of the differential birthrate correlate more with intelligence and education than with economic level. The failure to get any further general relationship between eugenic tendency and some simple function of economic status and intelligence suggests that important factors must lie in detailed conditions specific to occupations. This is illustrated again by the fact that although the decline of family size with intelligence is on the whole distinctly steeper for the country than for the town,* the town is more dysgenic; because the curve happens to be slightly steeper at the middle section of the distribution curve where most cases occur, and this effect, Table V suggests, may be largely due to the unskilled factory workers alone.
MAIN CONCLUSIONS
I. Size of family is negatively related to intelligence within the majority of occupations studied.
2. The exceptions are occupations with good intelligence, earning capacity and, especially, high general standards of education.
3. The strongest dysgenic trend is found in occupations of intermediate social status.
4. Inter-occupationally, intelligence of children correlates -o*84 with size of family and
* Loc. cit. (EUGENICS REVIEW, 1936, XXVIII, i8i).

+0 *9I with earning power. The latter cor-
relates -0 78 with size of family. A possible conclusion is that fertility is a function of intelligence over and above socio-economic
status.
5. Inspection of family size distributions suggest
that there is already operative in this country a tendency to restrict to a size planned
appropriately to socio-economic conditions
and this size is smaller in occupations of lower
status. This tendency is completely expressed in the highest occupations but in lower
occupations acts side by side with, without being totally obscured by, a tendency to
completely haphazard reproduction, and this latter tendency dominates the lowest groups. 6. Children regress to the mean considerably in relation to their fathers' I.Q.'s. This regression is more marked in certain occupations, apparently where socio-economic conditions affect assortative mating, but with one exception the rank order of intelligence for the children is the same as that for the fathers, when arranged in occupational groups. 7. Most occupations that are dysgenic in the
town are also dysgenic in the country and viceversa.
8. The greater fertility and lower intelligence which characterizes the country group as a whole also characterizes rural occupations singly, but there is a suggestion that if earning conditions are equally good the occupation retains its I.Q. level (and probably its low fertility) in the country. The exception is a small
group of " middle class " occupations which has a higher intelligence and lower fertility than its equivalent group in the town.

Publishers: DAVID NUTT, London - G. E. STECHERT & Co., New York - NICOLA ZANICHELLI, Bologna - F1ELIX ALCAN, Paris

AKADEMISCHE VERLAGSGESELLSCHAFT m. b. H., Leipzig - RUIZ HERMANOS, Madrid - F. KILIAN'S NACHFOLGER, Budapest

F. ROUGE & CIE, Lausanne - F. MACHDO & C.ia, Porto - THE MARUZEN COMPANY, Tokyo.

C1957

81st Yeur

nINTERATIONAL RZVIEW OF SCIE ISC YNYT¢ IS

c P bished every mTonth (each number containsng Ioo to I20 pages)

SCIEITL

,Late Editor: EUGENIO RIGNANO

Editors : F. BOTTAZZI - G. BRUNI - F. ENRIQUES

IS THE ONLY REVIEW the contributors to which are really intemationaL

General Secretary: Paolo Bonett

IN THE ONLY REVIEW that has a really world-wide circulation.

18 THE ONLY RMVEW of synthesis and unification of science that deals in its articles with the newest and most fundamental problems of all branches of knowledge: scientific philosophy, history of science, scientific teaching and advancement, mathematics, astronomy, geology, physics, chemistry, biological sciences, physiology, psychology, sociology, law, economics, history of religions, anthropology, linguistics: articles sometimes constituting real and proper inquiries, such as those on the contribution given by the different nations to the advancement of science ; on determinism ; on the most fundamental physical and chemical questions, and particularly on relativity, on the physics of the atom and of radiations; on vitalism. 80enfta thus studies all the main problems interesting the intellectual circles of the whole world, and represents at the same time the first successful realization of an international organization of the philosophical and scientific movement.

18 THE ONLY REVIEW that among its contributors can boast of the most illustrious men of science in the whole world.

The articles are published in the language of their authors, and every number has a supplement containing the French tansation of all the atoles that ae not French. The review is thus oompletely acescble to those who know ouly Freneh. (Wris for a free copy to the General Secretary of Scientia, Mllan, sending sizXpee in on stamp of your country, merely to coer Packing and Postage.)

SUBSCRIPTION: 45 Shillhg

btantia
For

irendfuocrtmi aionaraeppglryanttoed" StCoItEhNoTs IAw.h"oVtiaaAb.upDemoToegnti,ha 19on-eNiyoleaanso

subsripon. (Italy)

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIX No. 8.

