  

STATISTICAL STUDIES. IN
GENETICS AND HUMAN
INHERITANCE

THE
ANNALS OF EUGENICS

Edited by R. A. Fisher, F.R.S.

 

  
  

   

will continue, until further notice,
to be published in quarterly parts,
without reduction in size or
increase in price.

 

 

Subscriptions, in advance, 50/- per volume. Four
quarterly parts obtainable separately at 15/- each
from the Galton Laboratory, c/o Rothamsted
Experimental Station, Harpenden, Herts.

  
 

@ ANATOMY

© ANTHROPOLOGY
@ MORPHOLOGY
@ NEUROLOGY

@ NUTRITION

@ PHYSIOLOGY

@ ZOOLOGY

@ Journals of The Wistar
Institute of Anatomy
and Biology merit your
careful examination.

@ Contributed fo and
edited by outstanding
scientists in the respective fields.

Informative !

Authoritative !

Invaluable to the scientist
and research worker.

For further information, address

The Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology

WoopLaND AVBNUE and THIRTY-SIXTH STREET
PHILADELPHIA, Pa.

 
  
 
  
 

ROYAL ECONOMIC SOCIETY

  

 

 

  
  

The Secretary, Royal Economic Society,

 
  

 

 

The Membership Subscription now covers the
receipt of the following :

 

  
 

THE ECONOMIC JOURNAL. Quarterly.

Economic History. Annual.

Statistical Bulletin on Economic Conditions in

Great Britain.

Reviews, Recent Periodicals and New Books.
By joining the Society, all these varied publications,

enabling the reader to keep abreast with the de
velopments of economic science, can be obtained for
£1.1.0 a year.

The privileges of membership also include the
right to subscribe at reduced prices to books published under the Society’s auspices.

Application for membership should be addressed to:

 

    
  

  
   

     
 

  
 

4 Portugal Street, Kingsway, London, W.C.2

Annual Subscription £1.1.0.
Life Composition £10.10.0.

  
 
 

  

  
 
 
 

  

JOURNAL OF THE
ROYAL STATISTICAL SOCIETY

First issued in 1838

  
   
    

Principal contents : papers read and discussed
before the Society dealing with such.
matters as population and vital statistics,
agriculture, economics, finance, trade,
industry, sociology. Also papers on statistical method, book reviews, notes on
matters of current interest and summaries
of some official statistics.

   
  

    
 
 
 

The annual volume is in 4 parts
at 10/- each.
Subscription, post free 41/-.

  

    

ROYAL STATISTICAL SOCIETY
4 Portugal Street, London, W.C.2

    
_ NOTES OF THE QUARTER eT, 35

an easy. introduction to.a very important
subject. The author has a shrewd sense of
the ordinary reader’s difficulties. His ex‘position is orderly and based throughout on
the assumption that the reader has no
previous knowledge of genetics; and for
those whose ignorance also extends to
cytology there is an appendix in which the
elements of this subject are set out in
sufficient detail. The matters dealt with
include Mendelian heredity, the genetics of
sex, the action of genes, polymorphism (with
particular reference to the taste test and the
inheritance of blood groups), and methods of
study in human genetics. The work is concerned in particular with the transmission of
hereditary diseases and with the interaction
of genetic factors with their environment,
including that part of it which is provided by
other genetic factors. The sections on
eugenics and on problems of race are particularly to be commended. For these alone the
work deserves a place on every eugenist’s
bookshelves. _

Race, Reason and Rubbish,* by Professor
Gunnar Dahlberg, is a more highly polemical
but, within the narrower limits of its subjectmatter, a not less valuable work. In the

SCIENTIFIC

sections on genetic principles the author’s
approach is a little more elementary than
Mr. Ford’s ; on the other hand he discusses
problems of race and racism in somewhat
greater detail and in more specific reference
to what, in a sub-title, are described as “ the
biological credentials of the Nazi creed.” The
fact that the work has been translated from
the Swedish original by Professor Lancelot
Hogben is both a testimony to its scientific
value and a sufficient clue to its general
outlook.

Mr. Kenneth Walker has followed his
excellent Pelican Book on the Physiology of
Sex by another on the wider theme of Human
Physiology. It is, as one would expect,
eminently readable, though the author's
characteristic signature is not so plainly
evident between the lines as it is in most of
his works. Mr. Walker is concerned with
material facts and spiritual values, but
though he respects the former he is: plainly
more at home with the latter. The work
would have been better with an index, but
perhaps that iS asking too much for one ’S
ninepence.

\

* Allen & Unwin, 8s. 6d. net.

BOOKS

in MEDICAL, CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL and PHYSICAL SCIENCE
- supplied from stock, or obtained to order.

FOREIGN BOOKS not in stock obtained under Licence.

A visit to this Department is respectfully suggested.
Please state interests when writing

‘A K. LEWIS & Co. Ltd.,

Phone : EUSton 4282 (5 lines)

 

”

136 GOWER STREET }
LONDON £OW.C.l 