REVIEWS OF BOOKS
THIS BOOK IS UNIQUE for it is a catalogue of all the autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive and X-lined phenotypes known in man. It is a formidable work for there are entries on 837 dominant, 531 recessive and 119 X-linked phenotypes. The mode of inheritance has not been firmly established in all these conditions but is well established, as the author clearly indicates, in 269 of the dominant, 237 of the recessive and 68 of the X-linked phenotypes. Each entry consists of the preferred designation for the condition, a brief description of the phenotype with a summary of the essential genetic information relevant to the condition, and one or more key up to date references. All the references are given in full with inclusive pages and titles. In the case of the recessive phenotypes, information on methods available for recognising carriers has also been included. There is an author index and an excellent subject index which gives cross references for the preferred and alternative designations for every condition listed.
Though some common phenotypes have been included, for example the ability to taste PTC and colour blindness, the majority are rare. In the section on autosomal dominant phenotypes certain co-dominant traits have been included such as the abnormal haemoglobins, red cell antigen types, leucocyte types and serum protein types.
In the Foreword Professor McKusick outlines the reasons for compiling such a monograph. Paramount among these is the inestimable value in genetic counselling and the importance of recognising heterogeneity of genetic diseases; an entity which at first appears to be phenotypically homogeneous but with further study is often found to be genotypically, and therefore fundamentally, a heterogeneous group of disorders:
In medical genetics there is little place for expressions such as "spectrum of disease", . . . Phenotypic overlap is not necessarily any basis for considering [two diseases] fundamentally the same or closely related.
The conception of this work is brilliant, and its execution outstanding. Because the information has been put on magnetic tape it is planned to keep the catalogue up to date and republish it whenever sufficient new material has been accumulated.
ALAN E. H. EMERY
Bartolos, MihAly, and Baramki, Theodore A. Medical Cytogenetics. Baltimore, 1967. Williams and Wilkins. (Edinburgh, Livingstone). Pp. xxiii + 419. Price £5.
THIS BOOK IS PRIMARILY directed at the student and the clinician, and one must try to assess how well if fulfils its purpose in relation to this. It consists of four parts, the first ofwhich deals with general genetic information, the human chromosomes and the techniques of their study, the generalities about chromosome anomalies and the study of sex chromatin. In the second part, devoted to sex-chromosome anomalies, there are four general chapters on genetic sex, embryology, origin of abnormalities of sex development and intersexuality, while the rest is devoted to clinical conditions with abnormal sex development, not only those resulting from chromosome abnormalities. The third part deals with the autosomal anomalies and includes a brief chapter (eight pages) on dermatoglyphics in general, while part four briefly reviews the effects on chromosomes of ionizing radiation, viruses and drugs, and deals with chromosomes in neoplastic disease and in radiation. The approach in Parts II and III is essentially clinical: specific syndromes are considered and the chromosomal findings are set out and discussed.
On the positive side of this book, the chapters that deal with the major autosomal anomalies (Down's, Edwards's and Patau's syndromes) are clear and accurate, as is the brief general discussion of dermatoglyphics, though, incidentally, while the dermatoglyphic findings in autosomal anomalies are given due consideration, nothing much is said about
271

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
dermal ridges in relation to sex-chromosome anomalies. The clinical chapters of Part II deal adequately with the conditions that are described, like gonadal dysgenesis and Klinefelter's syndrome. It is interesting that the authors class the chromosomal constitution as an anatomic criterion of sex (p. 129) and therefore consider all sex-chromosome anomalies to be a state of intersexuality (see Table 8.1). Is this really useful? And why do the authors disregard the evidence concerning the presence of germ cells in the gonads of XO foetuses (p. 146) when they discuss the streak gonads in gonadal dysgenesis?
One could also question the usefulness of the brief introductory chapter (basic principles) and of the description of the embryology of the urogenital system and regret the uninformative way in which the study of meiotic chromosomes is dealt with, the failure to discuss normal chromosome variation, age aneuploidy, etc., or the rather incomplete way in which the X-chromosome inactivation hypothesis is discussed. Perhaps this should have received fuller treatment because of its central importance in respect to chromosome and gene action, and the relevant literature could have been more extensively and accurately presented. There are a number of inaccuracies and contradictions scattered through the book: is interphase a stage of mitosis (p. 4)? Why is the statement made (p. 58) that "an individual possessing reciprocal translocation can give rise to four types of gametes in respect to their chromosome constitution" when the authors discuss this more accurately on page 273? The statement that balanced translocation is compatible with life (p. 58) may be taken to imply that unbalanced interchange is not. Could not the definition of linkage (p. 9) be improved on and stated more correctly? Is the phenotype only that which is "externally visible"? (p. 11). How does the statement about the secondary constriction on the long arm of number 9 (p. 28 and figure 2.4) tally with the statement about the identification of C8 (p. 34) by means of the same constriction, and can a statement about the comparative sizes of the two X's in women (p. 34) be made dogmatically and without amplification?
In viewing the book as a whole, although many parts of it are good and well presented, there are some deficiencies-fortunately generally minor-which make one hesitant unreservedly to recommend this book to the audience for which it is primarily intended.
PAUL E. POLANI
ANTHROPOLOGY
Coon, Carleton S. with Edward E. Hunt, Jr. The Living Races of Man. London, 1966. Cape. Pp. 344 + xx. Price 70s.
THIS WORK, the sequel to The Origin of Races*, is the second of Professor Coon's two volumes expounding his view of the origin and development of human diversity, which he chooses to consider in terms of race. His material is presented in eleven chapters, each divided into sub-chapters of two or three pages, or less. In the first two chapters he outlines his idea of the division of the human species into races, and the kinds of evidence upon -which this is based, and goes on to recapitulate his theory of the origin of the five basic
-populations in regions that were supposedly isolated by Pleistocene barrier-zones. A few
*cautionary paragraphs on the unreliability of language and other cultural features as -indicators of genetical relationship between peoples are followed by five chapters which reconstruct in summary the history of evolution and migrations of populations within each ,of five major regions-Europe and West Asia; Africa; East Asia and America; South-east Asia, Australasia and Madagascar; and Greater India. Chapters 8 and 9 examine the environmental influences supposedly responsible for the pattern of distribution of inherited
* See THE EUGENICS REVIEW. 1963-64. 50, 235.
272

