SECTION III.
INVESTIGATION INTO PAUPER FAMILY HISTORIES.
INTRODUCTION.
IN January, I9i0, at the instance of the Council of the Eugenics Education Society, a band of workers was organised for the purpose of dealing with some aspects of pauperism upon lines indicated by modern biological research. The object of this organisation is to investigate the question as to whether pauperism is not due to inherent civic defects; and whether therefore the tendency to become paupers is hereditarily transmitted through succeeding generations. In order to effectually achieve this end, it was necessary, and indeed imperative, that the direction of the investigation and the critical scrutiny of the data, should be in the hands of some person acquainted with the problems and methods of modern biological research. The investigation has, therefore, from its initial stages, been under scientific direction and supervision.
The method of investigation, in principle, is very simple. Through the kindness of various Boards of Guardians, the Pauper Investigation Committee has been able to obtain free access to workhouse records, and where necessary, personal interviews with paupers have also been obtained. The object of the Committee has been to ascertain the full nature of the pedigree of some individual paupers. It cannot be emphasised too particularly that the only reliable and scientific method of dealing with the grave problem of pauperism is to be as complete, as detailed and as personal as possible in every case dealt with. The circumstances of the life of every person in the pedigree of a pauper, both those directly and collaterally related, should be ascertained as fully as can be. In this way only may certainty be reached and the relative value of biological and economic factors in the causation of pauperism be truly ascer-

87INVESTIGATION INTO PAUPER FAMILY HIISTORKiS x
tained. Other methods may be easier of accomplishment but their results are necessarily inconclusive and uncertain.
The time and means at the disposal of the Committee have been limited, but nevertheless some interesting and suggestive results of a more or less tentative nature have been reached. The Committee has now in the course of construction three very extensive pedigrees, the material for which has been in each case obtained from the records and the examination of paupers at three workhouses in different parts of London. Of these three pedigrees the most complete is now published. But it is desirable to bear in mind that it is, nevertheless, very incomplete. Further inquiries will certainly show that many of the individuals indicated in it now as non-paupers, are really paupers. In no one case have the records of any workhouse yet been fully searched, owing to the lack of time. Neither have many clues yet been followed up. Great difficulty is often experienced in tracing individual members of the pedigree, because they leave one district or one Union and pass into another. Moreover, individuals pass after a while from the workhouse to lunatic asylums, or to prison, or to reformatory homes, and it is an extremely laborious task, involving much inquiry and time, to ascertain the migrations of such people.
Bearing in mind, then, that the results are incomplete, and that further inquiry will necessarily paint a darker picture than that now presented, several broad features are at once discernible standing out clearly from the mass of detail.
First among these is the fact that one pauper family has a tendency to marry into other pauper families. In this way half a dozen or more pauper families may be related to each other. Secondly, the evidence is clear that successive generations of the same family contain a due proportion of paupers. This points to the conclusion that pauperism is due to inherent defects which are hereditarily transmitted. Thirdly, the experience of the Committee is quite clear that the paupers whom they have seen and examined individually, are characterised by some obvious vice or defect such as drunkenness, theft, persistent laziness, a tubercular diathesis, mental deficiency, deliberate moral obliquity, or general weakness of character, manifested by want

iM8 INVESTIGATION INTO
of initiative, or energy, or stamina, and an inclination to attribute their misfortune to their own too great generosity or too great goodness, and generally to bad luck. Inquiry into the nature of the bad luck or too great generosity usually resolved the matter into one of stupidity or folly upon the part of the complaining victim. Fourthly, the experiences of the Committee suggest that so long as charitable institutions of any nature exist, whether they vie with one another in relieving distress or not, there will always exist a considerable amount of poverty brought about by the too ready expectation and acceptance of such relief. There is no doubt that there exists a hereditary class of persons who will not make any attempt to work or to continue in work so long as charitable funds, even of small amounts, are forthcoming. Fifthly, there is some reason to believe that illegitimacy may tend to run in families, and is due in some cases to inherent desires so strong that they resolve themselves into deliberate or unrestrained intent, in others to mental defect, and in yet other cases to general weakness of character.
We may at this point preface ouir further remarks by some indication of the meaning of the symbols represented in the pedigree. A full black symbol means an adult pauper. A symbol barred in one direction means that the individual for whom it stands was a pauper as a child. A doubly barred symbol indicates that the individual has been in a reformatory home or in prison, or both. The multiplication sign indicates marriage, and the cn loop means an illegitimate union. The symbol with the arrow above is indicative of a male person, and that with a cross below of a female person.
We may now approach the further consideration of the broad features which we have described above, and deal with them in the order in which they are mentioned. The most casual examination of the pedigree will show that a member of one pauper family marries a member of another pauper family. If we look at individual No. 6 in the C generation we find that his brother was a pauper. He himself was a pauper and also tuberculous. He married individual No. 7, of another family, who had three brothers and a sister-in-law, all paupers.
Turning next to individual No. 14 in the same C generation,

PAUPER FAMILY HISTORIES

I89

we note he was a pauper and he married No. I5, who was a member of another pauper family, having two brothers and a parent also paupers. Taking next one of the brothers (No. I9) of this woman who thus married a pauper, and was herself a pauper, we note he too married a woman who had a pauper sister, and she was tuberculous, and also contracted an illegitimate union with a man who was the uncle of her sister's husband.
Coming to the later or D generation we observe that the woman, No. 9, was a pauper and illegitimate in birth, and her mother and putative father were both paupers; she had also a sister-in-law and a brother who were paupers. She married the man, No. i6, of a notoriously pauper stock. He had two sisters, one sister-in-law, two brothers, both parents, two uncles, an aunt, an aunt-in-law, and one uncle by marriage and a brother of his, all paupers. In addition, two of his children are of the hooligan type, and have been sent to an Industrial School. One of them is illegitimate and was born in the workhouse, as is also one of his nephews (E. IO).
Thus two pauper families have intermarried. But this is not all. The second of these two families is connected again through the woman, No. 25, D generation, and the man, No.
26, with yet a third pauper family. We have just seen the nature of her (No. 25) family. Her husband's family is little better. He himself is a pauper, both his parents and one of his grandparents,
an uncle, two aunts, and the husband of one of them were also paupers. With regard to his five brothers and one sister they were all inmates of the workhouse as children. It is very possible they have been inmates also as adults, but so far we have not
been able to examine the records up to a sufficiently recent date,
to detect the fact if it is so. This third family, again, through the woman, No. 46, married
into a fourth, of which we know but little, except that her father-in-law was a pauper.
Returning for a moment to the second and most notorious of these four pauper families, we see that yet a fifth pauper family is introduced into the circle by the marriage of the man, No. 24, D generation to the woman, No. 5o. This woman has three children, all brought up at the expense of the community; she has

Igo INVESTIGATION INTO
a sister (No. 59) who has had eight illegitimate children by four different paramours. Her father and mother and one grandmother were all paupers. The grandmother was deserted by her husband. With regard to one of the four lovers (No. 58) of this sister, we know his parents were paupers, and that he is a thief and has cohabited with another woman, and that one of his brothers has received relief. There is also good reason to believe that the parents of two other of these lovers were also paupers.
The E generation is too young for marriage yet, but there can be little doubt that when it is, it will continue the exceedingly vicious process of the intermarrying of pauper families.
We come now to the fuller consideration of the second general feature, namely, the hereditary transmission of those civic defects which result in pauperism. When we find it possible to trace four generations of paupers there can be little doubt as to the hereditary transmission of these defects. More perhaps than anything else such a fact speaks forcibly as to the real nature of pauperism.
Starting with the two youths Nos. 6 and 8 in the E generation, both of whom as before stated are of the hooligan type and are in an Industrial School, and one of whom was illegitimate and was born in the workhouse, we find there is a third child, in a workhouse school. Coming to the parentage of these three children, we find the mother was illegitimate and is a pauper, the maternal grandmother was likewise illegitimate and was a pauper and the maternal grandfather was also a pauper. On the paternal side, the father was a pauper and the grandparents were paupers. Moreover, by the paternal grandfather's family we have every reason to believe that we shall reach yet another or fourth generation of paupers, through the parents of the great-aunt's husband. But our evidence on that point is not yet complete.
If we start now with the youth No. 22 and the girl No. 24 in generation E, both of whom were sent to an industrial school, we find they had three sisters and two brothers who apparently have kept out of the workhouse. But there is one brother now a pauper. In addition there are four children who are dead. The parents of this family were paupers, the four

PAUPER FAMILY HISTORIES

JTg

grandparents on both sides were also paupers, one of the greatgrand-parents on the grandparental side was also a pauper. In
addition, three uncles, one aunt, one aunt by marriage, three great-uncles and one of their wives, and two great-aunts were
paupers too.
Omitting, for the moment, the third and fourth broad features, which are of a less specific nature than the others, we may deal next with the fifth, namely, the apparent tendency for illegitimacy to run in families. Of course, we can only for the present, say our facts are suggestive and nothing more. We notice that the two brothers, Nos. i6 and i8 in the D generation, both had illegitimate children, Nos. E 6 and E io respectively. Then No. 3 in generation B, Nos. 2 and 3 in generation C, and Nos. 2 and 9 in generation D, and No. 6 in generation E, were all illegitimate. That is four generations of illegitimacy; and of illegitimacy accompanied with maintenance by the community.
Turning now to the third of the broad general features of our work, namely the existence of obvious defects in the physique or character of the paupers who came under our observation, it was clear from the appearance and general record of them that they were in most cases below the average in their powers of intelligence, continuity of work and endurance. Many were, by their own admission, clearly corroborated by their appearance, habitual drinkers, or even drunkards. None of them appear to make any really serious attempt to obtain fresh employment, when thrown out of work. The most frivolous excuses serve to justify them in their own minds for not accepting work available to them, or for not going farther afield in their search for it. Others never benefit by experience, however painful it may be. There is the case of No. 59 in the D generation. This woman, who was in domestic service, has had eight illegitimate children by four different men. Not only was the first experience not sufficient warning, but repeated experiences have failed to con-
vince her of the stupidity of her wa)'s. And why should they ?
So long as a generous community is willing to provide her with comfortable lying-in wards, with skilied medical attendance, with nurses, with every requisite accessory, and is also prepared to feed, clothe and educate both herself and her children, why should

192 INVESTIGATION INTO
she trouble to guide her footsteps aright in social life? We have been able to see this woman and it seems clear she feels no compunction for her course of life. Meanwhile, her four "lovers" are abroad, doubtless filling other workhouses with similar victims, and with small armies of illegitimate children. They are perfectly free. We have no reason to suppose this case is exceptional. Similar cases, outside our present pedigrees, came casually under our notice. In this way a vast class of potential paupers are being reared. Persons destitute of moral purpose, devoid of the power or will to render any social service of any kind, a source of permanent and hereditary weakness to the community, are being encouraged and preserved. We have not yet been able to deal with the ancestors of these four " lovers " of the woman. Our time has been too limited. But in one case No. 58, D generation, we have been able to ascertain that the parents of the man were paupers also. What else they were it is not possible, at present, to say. But it is clear that a large number of people of their surname-which is not a common one -occur in the workhouse records. Further investigation may enable us to place these people upon the pedigree.
We may turn next to the fourth broad feature of our work, namely, the fact that so long as charity is not based on eugenic principles, so long will poverty be increased by the encouragement to idleness which is offered to a certain type of person. So long as even a meagre living can be obtained there is a class of person quite content to lose work, to fail to obtain new employment and to exist on the bounties of charity. One case which came across our notice we may cite as illustrative of our statement. The man had been a soldier. His record from the army, which we obtained, was very bad. He was a deserter and a great trouble. After his discharge he worked during the winter months at a gas-works and earned from LI i8s. to £2 per week. During the summer he worked in an omnibus yard and earned (i 8s. per week. Nevertheless, although the work was constant he frequently took long spells off, sometimes for fourteen weeks at a stretch, while he went off for a drunken debauch or a period of loafing. Seldom did he ever give any money to his wife or seven children. He spent it on himself, largely in drink. His

PAUPER FAMILY HISTORIES

193

wife could and did earn about £i I4S. per week doing laundry work at home with the aid of a daughter. She has by her own account been known to earn from 8s. to ios. per day ironing men's shirts. There are three sons capable of earning respectively I2S., lOs. and 8s. per week according to their age, as van boys on the vans
of some of the great railway companies. But all three of these boys deliberately lost their jobs by their behaviour. One was taken back to work three times.
Here, then, is a family which on the average was capable, at one time or another, of earning among its members a weekly wage of from £4 to £5. And yet the members of that family, on and off, have been and are still upon the rates. The three elder boys are of the hooligan type. They have been sent to reformatory schools and two ran away. Two were set to learn a trade by people interested in them, and have also run away from that. Two of them have been imprisoned, more than once, for refusing to do workhouse tasks and one for theft. All were truants at school. And all look, what their deeds indicate them to be, chips of their father's block, hereditary hooligans and potential criminals. Two of the younger boys, still at school, manifest a tendency in the same direction. Both have a furtive glance and a low forehead. The youngest has been caned at school for rowdyism and the other one has already been sent, like the three elder ones, to a reformatory school.
Here is a family that could, if it would, support itself in the greatest respectability, which could have an income greater than many middle-class families receive, and yet it is idle, reprobate, hooligan and pauperised. Further comment is needless. Private and State charitable organisations, on account of failure to appreciate the bearing of biological principles upon these problems, create and encourage this kind of poverty. There exists this hereditary race of persons, capable of work, but
refusinig to do it, either continuously or at intervals; and when they woik, spend the money earned in drink or debauchery. Again we have no reason to believe that this is an exceptional case.
The circumstances of this family are those of hundreds of others.
Were the members to work and combine, a very respectable and comfortable living is open to them, with easy hours and a wide
3

194 INVESTIGATION INTO PAUPER FAMILY HISTORIES
enough margin to accumulate savings for the future. It is futile to contend that the father's example is to blame. We have seen every member of this family and we know such contention is invalid. For while the elder sons are bad and the younger ones show indications of potential badness, the mother and eldest daughter appear to be quite respectable persons. The bad example of the father has not influenced them. The sons are what they are, because it is clear to anyone with a knowledge of hooligans who has seen them, that they are born loafers. They are, in every sense, their father's descendants.

