HUMAN STERILITY

A Study of an Unusual Pedigree

By Professor F. A. E. CREW and Wm. C. MILLER

(From the Institute of Animal Genetics, University of Edinburgh.)

IN the pedigree now presented, male III.2, The sister did not marry and the brothers

who has been married eleven years and is did. The first had two sons who married

still without an heir, sought advice as to and left no offspring. The third had a son

the nature of the sterility which charac- and a daughter who did not marry. The

terized his marriage. An examination of his second had five sons, all of whom married

family history revealed the fact that every and left no issue, and two daughters, both

one of the seven males of the preceding gene- of whom married and had offspring. Of

ration (II), though married, had left no off- these, both males and females are fertile in

spring. The females of this generation had mating, but the marriage of one son, III.2,

had issue, however. There was no obvious proves to be fertile only after eleven years.

cause for the sterility of the marriage of These facts, though well worthy of record,

III.2, and no treatment was exhibited. His cannot sustain a lengthy and speculative

wife is now pregnant.

discussion concerning the nature of the cause

The fact that every one of the seven mar- of sterility in human matings. In the

ried males of Generation 1I was without off- absence of greater and more intimate know-

spring cannot reasonably be explained save ledge of the individuals concerned, it is im-

by reference to some common cause. The possible to point directly to the cause of this

women they married were unrelated, and sterility. It is reasonable, however, to

though these themselves produced no off- postulate that the seven males of Generation

spring, their married sisters did. For II were sterile in mating owing to the fact

example, the sister of female 11.2 (i.e. that they possessed in common, being re-

female II.3) was twice married and had lated, some hereditary factor or factors,

families of three and of two by her respec- leading to the development of sterility,

tive husbands. Female II.i had three which they received from the related males

sisters, all with families. Three of the of Generation I. These factors apparently

other introductions by marriage into this operate so as to produce a sex-limited con-

generation had brothers or sisters, but dition, for the females of Generation II were

these all were unmarried at the time of not sterile in mating, but apparently trans-

death, or else, if still living, are still un- mitted some or all of the factors correspond-

married. There is no record of any sterility ing to this condition, since their sons,

in marriage in this pedigree beyond Genera- though fertile, exhibit a fertility that is

tion II, and as is shown, the males of Gene- relatively poor. It should be stated that the

ration III, as well as the females, are fertile, males of Generation If are socially success-

though their reproductive rate is low.

ful through their own efforts, and exhibit no

The evidence, as is always the case in signs of any obvious kind of physical defect

human pedigrees, is incomplete. A large or of physiological disharmony.

number of the individuals of Generations III For the expression of sterility in a

and IV are still living, many of them being sexually-reproducing species two indivi-

still below the marriage age. The facts, duals are required: it is not the individual

such as they are, are clear. In Generation I but the mating that is sterile. Since the

there were three brothers and one sister. females of Generation II and the males of

127

i28 T8E EUGENICS REVIEW

Generation III of this pedigree are fertile in mating, it is reasonlable to assume that infecundity of the males of Generation II was responsible for the sterility of their mar-
riages. The facts relating to artificial par-
thenogenesis permit us to assume that probably lack of fertilizing ability on the part of
the spermatozoon is a more common cause of sterility than is an absence of response
on the part of the ovum. It would seem that in this family the ovum is readily fertilized, but that the spermatozoon is deficient in fertilizing ability. This deficiency

was complete in Generation II but somewhat repaired in Generation III. We may assume, therefore, that the males of Genera-
tion III received from their mothers factors
which improved the fertilizing ability of their gametes.
if, in this way, there can pass from the female to her sons, factors affecting the fertilizing ability of the spermatozoa, there
can be a quantitative interpretation of fertility, and an explanation of similarities and dissimilarities in reproductive rates of the different generations in pedigree is provided.

x~ 5x cqx~d &dixy g'x ExyIxy
gxjdx Q x g Q x C 4xQ 4rx axXXx(Y.

hIl

5Q9rQ5xY99

o00

IV yyo

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 2.

