ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION (DONOR)*

MARGARET HADLEY JACKSON, M.B., B.S., D.Obst.R.C.O.G., J.P.:

~speaking,AS I have the doubtful privilege of 2. Where there have been one or more
~~that first-for no other reason Rhesus tragedies in a family, then a RhesusI can think of than that it is a negative donor is indicated.

matter of " ladies first," I take it that one of my functions is to deliver a kind of introduction to this subject of artificial insemination.
It is no new idea, and A.I. has been used in animal husbandry probably for centuries, but the idea behind it in this field is more to make full use of and to conserve a valuable sire rather than to overcome barrenness. In
the human field we have no definite knowledge when A.I. was first attempted or
considered. One of the earliest, if not the earliest, publications on the matter was by Marion Sims in T866 when he described the successful insemination of a woman with the husband's semen in a case of impotence. This roused considerable interest and a

3. Where the husband is a carrier of some severe hereditary disability.
4. Finally, and somewhat theoretically, A.I.D. can be considered as a means of improving the stock by using donors with outstanding mental and physical attributes.
The husband may express a wish that his semen be used with the donor's; this request can be granted in the first group but not, of course, in the other three. It is worth explaining to the couple that normal coitus does not interfere in any way with the insemination, it helps if anything; in the first group it can be unprotected, in the last three contraceptives must be used.

storm of criticism, even though it was the It is of interest to inquire what the

husband's semen that was used. It should magnitude of the problem is, and it will be

be clearly understood that what we are found that it can never be large and, at

discussing is not this form of insemination present, in this country, is very small indeed.

(A.I.H. or homologous insemination) but the Speaking from my own experience over the

other (A.I.D. or heterologous insemination). last twenty-five years with some 2,500

The two forms have different moral and infertile couples, I can say that, out of that

legal implications, which will be fully number, about 200 have asked for A.I.D. but

discussed by other speakers. Clinically they not all have proved suitable. Thus, less than

also have quite different uses: A.I.H. is i per cent of my cases have needed and

primarily of value in certain cases of asked for A.I.D. and since fewer than I0 per

impotence, vaginismus, or of deformity of cent of all married couples can be reckoned

the genital organs and in cases where the as infertile the contribution, so far as the

husband's semen is lacking in density or general population figures are concerned, is a

motility and where he produces an adequate drop in the ocean, but in terms of human

volume so that he can fractionate when happiness the score is much higher.

collecting.

You will also want to know what kind of

A.I.D. is asked for and is suitable:

people ask for A.I.D. and why they choose

I. Where the husband is irremediably A.I.D. rather than adoption, and, again

sterile according to present knowledge or speaking from my own experience, I can tell

totally impotent (i.e. unable to copulate or to you that they come from a surprisingly wide

produce an ejaculate).

range of occupation and income levels: I have

among my cases carpenters, surveyors,

* A symposium held at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics Society on October 17th, 1I956.

groundsmen, Civil Servants, miners, policemen, farmers, schoolmasters, university

203
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January, I957. 48, 4

204 i

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

lecturers, business men, doctors, grocers;
transport workers,, butchers clergymen, but only one lawyer, and I would say of them as a
whole that they are outstandingly decent and childworthy people. It has been my
custom to ask my A.I.D. patients to write down in their own words why they have
decided on insemination as the correct solution to their problem, and a very interesting collection of documents it is. The general theme that runs through all of them is: " We want children very much, we feel that marriage is only half fulfilled without them.; my wife is barred from having a child through me (her husband); she greatly desires to bear a child; I have chosen her as my wife not only because I love her but
because I wanted her to be the mother of my children. We would much rather have her child by an accredited donor than adopt a child whose parents are unknown to us."
The request for A.I.D. usually comes from the couple themselves, quite often helped
by the family doctor or, more rarelv, by a consultant. The final decision as to whether
a couple should be helped in this way must
rest with the doctor carrying out the insemination, and arriving at this decision is
an onerous and sometimes difficult task. A personal interview with both husband and wife and a careful history and examina-
tions are essential; much help can be derived from the family doctor; complete agreement on the part of both husband and wife as to the desirability of A.I.D. is a sine qua non. Much more could be said on this subject but time does not allow.
Similarly I will only briefly mention the donor problem, as the next speaker will be dealing with it more fully. The building up of a panel of donors -is indeed one of the serious difficulties encountered in this work and carries with it a great responsibility. I am largely dependent on personal friends and on husbands whom I have got to know during the treatment of their wives, and both I and the patients are deeply indebted to them. I do not offer my donors any payment, though this is the custom in some places. They must remain anonvmous and completely unknown to the recipients. I

have a list of some thirty regular donors and the problem of limiting their progeny has not
yet arisen since the highest individual score of pregnancies produced by any one donor is twenty-three (seventeen live births, one stillbirth, five miscarriages) and the next highest score is fourteen pregnancies (eleven live births, one stillbirth and two miscarriages).
A donor needs to be medically, physically and mentally sound, and of course it is a help if he is highly fertile. It is very seldom possible to match the colouring and build of donor and sterile husband at all precisely; it is more important to attempt to match their capabilities and aptitudes.
You will not,- I think, want to hear much about practical details. First let me say that without the technical skill and knowledge of Mrs. Clare Harvey, who has been responsible for all the semen analyses, preparation and sterilization of collecting outfits, diluting fluid and so forth, it would have been impossible to do this sort of work. The semen is collected direct into sterile, perfectly dry, polyethylene tubes. We have found no satisfactory method of storing human semen for long periods such as those used with bull semen; our most successful method is dilution with Walton's buffered glucose, if the semen is dense, and storage at about 40 C. or at cool room temperature. The oldest semen sample stored in this way which has achieved success was I5, hours old. We have, however, one freak specimen, kept undiluted at outdoor summer temperature for 28 hours which produced a conception which went to full term with a live birth. We have had no success with deep-freeze methods but I have no doubt we have not yet perfected the technique. You will be hearing more of this from Dr. Parkes. Nearly
always I use semen collected one to five hours before I see the patient, and after visualizing the cervix and collecting a sample of vaginal content and of cervical mucus for examination about i ml. of semen is introduced, part into the cervical canal and part near the external os, with a special syringe. I do not employ intra-uterine insemination. The patient rests for half an hour and then goes on her way. Since

AR.TIF~I~CIA~L I~NSE~MIN~ATI~ON (DONOR)

205

long-distance cases ban usually manage only one visit a month the real difficulty is hitting on the correct day in the wife's cycles; this is done by combining all the information that can be gleaned from basal temperature chart readings, vaginal smears, cervial mucus characteristics, average length of cycles over many months, and so forth. (85 per cent of the successful inseminations were done between cycle days ten and
fourteen inclusive, the outside extremes being days eight and twenty-two.) If the wife's.pelvic and general examinations are normal I usually try for three cycles before carrying out a more detailed investigation.

TABLE I

A.I.D. A.I.D. + H. Totals

No. of cases

I27 37 I64

Gave up soon

13 5 i8

Went abroad

I0 I I I

Failed to conceive

(Wife barren or ?

cause)

36 I4

50

Trying now

i6 4 20

Conceived

52 13

65

Pregnancies

Preg. now

4 (in 4w)

L.B. 52 (in 4w) I3 (in iiw) 86(in65w)

S.B.

4 (in 4w)

~ nw

Misc. 9 (in 8w) 4 (in 4w)

Preg. more than

once

14 X 2 preg. I x 4 preg.

2X IX

2 3

pregs., pregs.

39

(in

I

8w)

Finally, a few words on results and follow-up (see Table i), which is sadly lacking in this type of work. This being so,
I am convinced that it is the duty of those

who carry out A.I.D. to do all they can to follow the families, if possible until the children have reached independence. So far I have only lost touch completely with one
family; one patient refuses to communicate with me direct but her doctor sends most valuable reports; two others express their reluctance but nevertheless do keep in' touch; the rest co-operate to the full, some
even to the extent of sending school reports. Eighteen couples have asked for encores; sixteen have had two pregnancies, one has had three and one four. I do my utmost to
arrange for the same donor if there has been a previous live birth, but it is not invariably possible. The results on the whole are extremely encouraging, the children are rather above the average mentally and physically and, with one exception, the marriages have been consolidated and im-
proved. I have met many of the " fathers'" since the birth of their A.I.D. children and I have not encountered the psychiatric tangles we were told would probably ensue. The exception I mentioned was one of my earlycases where I knew the marriage was in danger of breaking and was persuaded against my better judgment to carry out: A.I.D., the wife being convinced that the cure for their difficulties was for her to have' a baby. In fact the husband was psychotic
and had to be certified. The infant, a girl,
was too young to be troubled and she and
her mother are now a very happy pair-but it was an error on my part.

PHILIP BLOOM, M.B., Ch.B.:

At a recent conference on fertility attended by 500 physicians in the United States, one of the resolutions adopted was that if artificial insemination was in harmony with the beliefs of the couple and the doctor, it then became a completely ethical, moral and desirable form of medical therapy.
This resolution implies the great responsibility that rests with the doctor. A.I.D. is a
comparatively recent innovation and though it may be accepted logically and intellectually by a large portion of the community, it is subject to old traditions, prejudices and

taboos which may lead to intense emotionaI problems. Individuals or couples may be
completely unaware of their deep-ingrained attitudes and fears and it is up to the doctor to assess to what degree they exist and how great an influence they are likely to have. This will depend to a great extent upon the stability of the marriage itself.
There is always the danger of a sense of
guilt due to a fear of having somehow committed adultery. Logically it can be argued that adultery is frowned upon because it indicates subservience to lust, or endangers.

;206 THE EUGENICS REVIEW ,.

family life and thereby society as a whole; In cases of adoption there are certain rules

the transfer of a sperm through a glass and regulations, some covered by law, others

container by a third person, from man to by the policies of adoption societies, which

woman unknown to each other, can certainly must be observed for the welfare of all

satisfy no sensuous, unbridled lust; since the concerned. In A.I.D. it is the doctor alone

very object of A.J.D. is to enhance a marriage who must decide whether the relationship

by the creation of a family, the further between husband and wife is right, whether

objection to adultery is ruled out. This is a the child will find a loving and secure home

reasonable argument and may be the and whether its presence will add to the

intellectual conviction of many couples value of the marriage or endanger it.

considering A.I.D. Unfortunately, intellec- Is the mother likely to transfer all her

tual convictions are not all-important in emotions to the child? Will she suffocate it

establishing emotional reactions, and it is with protectiveness and possessiveness? Is

the emotional reactions that set the tone of Father going to be left out in the cold? Is

marriage and family relationships.

there a likelihood that he may become

In my own practice I rarely, if ever, jealous or hostile to the child, particularly a

suggest A.I.D. but leave it to the couple to boy, not his own? Such problems and others

broach the subject. We may then talk are not unknown in many marriages where

generally about the various aspects of children are conceived normally. Their

insemination but come to no decision at the time. It is preferable for them to consider

possibility exists even more where there. is
the added emotional strain inherent in

the matter at leisure and to work out their deciding on A.I.D.

own pros and cons. This also allows me more One might easily expect a feeling of

time to make my own estimation of their inadequacy in the husband, especially if the

feelings towards A. I.D. and of their emotional wife is the more dominating personality, and

make-up.

this may have serious repercussions either

It is important to estimate the true directly or indirectly, e.g. by overcompensat-

quality of the marriage, and here I must ing, or becoming aloof and retiring into an

emphasize that A.I.D. is no answer to an ivory tower.

unstable marriage or to a romantic idea that Occasional relief of emotional tension is

the presence of the child will save the obtained when a marked oligozoospermia is

marriage from going on the rocks. It is present rather than a complete azoospermia.

obviously not the right procedure for the In these cases one may mix the semen of the

woman who says that she cannot go on with husband with that of the donor. There is

the marriage unless she has a child.

then the possibility, though, of diluting the

The opinion is often voiced that many a total specimen unless the quantity is regula-

woman desiring to undergo A.I.D. must ted.

ipso facto be suffering from an obsessional On only two occasions have I instituted

neurosis. Occasionally such an obsessional A.I.D. when both impotence and infertility'

neurosis, or a condition bordering on it, may were present in the male. In these cases the

be present. At exactly what point do strong maturity and personalities of both men were

maternal feelings frustrated by a lack of sound enough to disregard the impotence as

maternity become an obsession? Surely the being symptomatic of a major neurosis, and

same situation exists when a woman is in both cases the wives had completely

herself subfertile and attends a gynaecologist accepted the probability that they would

for investigation and treatment. On that never have a normal sex life yet were

level of reasoning one might easily suggest satisfied. In one there was complete sexual

that it is more " normal " for a couple to try harmony outside normal coital relationship.

A.I.D. rather than adopt a perfectly strange I was convinced of the stability of these

child in the manner that has become marriages and went ahead. Years have

commonly accepted practice.

brought no reason to regret the decision.

ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION (DONOR)

207

Needless to say a marriage that is held but it is my practice never to tell the donors

together for purely practical reasons-social, whether the insemination is successful or not.

economic or religious-is not necessarily a Even I do not know which of the two donors

good one for A.I.D. Yet these factors are not was responsible, and as I keep no records of

to be excluded in assessing the overall which donors come for which patients I am

picture. One must, however; be fairly usually in the position of not knowing which

certain that the personal relationship between of quite a number of donors was responsible.

husband and wife is mature, that there is I believe it is better that way.

mutual understanding and give.

I would like to end with a last word about

Donors are not all that easy to find. They the child. It is getting an inheritance which,

must have the right ethics and not be liable being calculated, has every chance of being

to suffer from any guilty or obsessional as good as, if not better than, those in the

feelings. It would be ridiculous to sacrifice majority of children conceived normally.

the donor's personal adjustment forthe sake Furthermore, before performing A.I.D. I am

of the patients. And again it is up to the reasonably certain that the environment in

doctor to make certain of the complete and which the child will be reared is good. Not

deep understanding of the donors.

all children have that advantage.

Obviously they must be physically and For the child's sake particularly I prefer

mentally fit, and I usually prefer those who that absolutely nobody but the parents

are happily married with families of their themselves and myself should know of the

own. They are found mainly by personal insemination therapy. My last advice to the

approach to acquaintances, friends or even parents is that under no circumstances

colleagues.

should they, or need they, ever tell the child

Complete histories are taken and thorough the method of conception-in fact they

examination carried out before they are used. should forget about it themselves.

Men of average height and coloration are the This last advice is not as difficult to

most suitable choice unless there is need to follow as might be thought. It is generally

match some particular characteristic genetic- known how quickly adopting parents feel

ally indicated and common to both husband that the adopted child is their own.. How

and wife.

much stronger, therefore, is that feeling

There is less strain on donors if each is used likely to be when husband and wife have

not more than three or four times a year and, gone through the full period of pregnancy

generally speaking, not more than three or and the birth itself. An infant is infinitely

four years in succession.

lovable and this love is rarely affected to any

Two separate donors are used on alternate extent by recollections of the actual moment

days at each estimated ovulatory period. of conception whether it occurs normally or

Not only does the donor not know the patient through A.I.D.

A. S. PARKES, C.B.E., M.A., Sc.D., F.R.S.:

Preservation of Human Semen
The technical problems of artificial insemination in man would be much simplified if
some method were available of preserving human semen for long periods without impairing its fertilizing power or running the
risk of genetic damage to the spermatozoa. According to present knowledge such longterm preservation will almost certainly depend on the use of temperatures far below freezing point, and the possibility has been

brought much nearer by recent work on maintaining the viability of cells and tissues in the " deep freeze."
The idea of preserving living cells at very low temperatures is, of course, far from new, and experiments on the freezing of living cells have been going on for the better part of two centuries. The idea behind much of this work was quite simple, namely that the biochemical processes of life would be arrested at low temperatures so that if the

2o8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

cell could be frozen and thawed without
damage, then indefinite storage should be
possible at the low temperature. Most of the living cells of mammals, however, are
destroyed by freezing and thawing, and until recently little progress had been made in giving practical expression to the idea. A
few years ago, however, it, was observed by Polge, Smith and Parkes (I949) that the use
'of suspending media containing glycerol
;enabled certain living cells to be frozen and
stored in solid carbon dioxide at -79 deg. C. or in liquid air at -I90 deg. C. without losing
viability. The most spectacular application
of this discovery so far has been the preservation of bull semen for use in cattle insemina-
-tion centres, and it is now known that bull
.spermatozoa suspended in a medium con-
taining egg-yolk and io per cent. glycerol and frozen slowly to -79 deg. C. will retain fertilizing power for several years if not indefinitely. By this method at least one bull has begotten calves long after his death.
The principle has also been applied to the preservation of human red blood cells for transfusion, and in long-term experiments cells have behaved normally when reintroduced into the circulation after being preserved for two years- at -79 deg. C. In
this case, however, the practical use of the technique is hindered by the fact that it is necessary to remove the glycerol before the cells are transfused, and the overall process is therefore too complicated to be worth while for routine blood banks. The method has, however, been found to be of value for the preservation of rare types of blood which cannot necessarily be obtained quickly. Application of the method to other types of single cells, to tissues, and even to whole organs is rapidly being made (Smith, I954).
It so happens that human spermatozoa are one of the few types of normal mammalian cell which will survive freezing to some extent without the use of special methods, as observed as long ago as I897 by Davenport who recorded that human spermatozoa would survive cooling to -I7 deg. C. This observation received little attention for many years, but in I938 Jahnel, apparently in the course of experiments on spirochoetes

observed that a proportion of human
spermatozoa could be revived after freezing for forty days at -79 deg. C. or for shorter periods at -I96 deg. C. Jahnel does not
appear to have taken any special precautions
to control the rate of freezing, nor,does he appear to have used diluents. Shettles, in I940, reported less promising results follow-
ing the freezing of human semen in thin glass
capillary tubes, at the temperature of solid carbon dioxide or in one of the liquid gases. Shettles obtained only a very low revival rate, though he found a few motile spermatozoa in semen thawed after seventy days at -79 deg. C. Soon afterwards, Hoagland and
Pincus, in I942, based a series of experiments on the theory put forward mainly by Luyet and his co-workers* that (a) the essential cause
of freezing damage was the formation of ice crystals which crushed and distorted the cells and perhaps even punctured their membranes, and consequently that (b) the way to avoid freezing damage was to freeze to a very low temperature ultra-rapidly so that the water vitrified rather than formed ice crystals. Hoagland and Pincus therefore used an elaborate series of devices to facilitate the instantaneous cooling of minute amounts of human semen. Their results, however, were even less satisfactory than those of Shettles. In trying to resolve the apparent discrepancies in the literature, I was able to show (Parkes, I945) that the recovery of human spermatozoa after the freezing of the semen was much affected by the volume of material used and that, contrary to the premise of Hoagland and Pincus, better survival was obtained when larger amounts were frozen. This result implied that rate of freezing was important, but that ultra-rapid freezing should not be aimed at. Work with
human semen seems to have stopped at this point for some years until interest was aroused again by the discovery of the protective effect of glycerol. From the fact
that human spermatozoa, unlike all other
mammalian spermatozoa so far investigated, show some revival after freezing even by crude methods, it seemed very likely that the use of the glycerol technique would permit
* (1933-I940.)

ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATIGN (DONOR)

209

rapid progress with human material. Unfortunately, this expectation has not been fulfilled, and little progress has been made. The dilution of human semen with media containing glycerol does little or nothing to promote the survival of spermatozoa during
freezing and thawing and their storage at low temperature. Some success was however reported by Sherman and Bunge (I953) who added up to IO per cent of neat glycerol to undiluted semen before freezing. These authors record a recovery of the order of 67 per cent following this treatment. In our hands, however, this method, although better than those involving diluents, has not proved satisfactory. Nevertheless, this work must be taken seriously, because of the subsequent report by Bunge, Keettel and Sherman (I954) of the birth of three children following the insemination of frozen and thawed semen. The children are said to have been perfectly normal as would be expected from general principles and from the fact that many tens of thousands of normal calves have been born following the use of frozen bull semen.
It cannot be doubted that further work, when it is carried out, will improve enormously on present methods of preserving human semen at low temperatures, and that results as successful as those now obtained in cattle breeding will be possible.
Apart from more spectacular possibilities, this achievement may assist subfertile men

and will certainly mean that the unavoidable separation of husband and wife need not necessarily debar the couple from having children. These, surely, are applications to which few would object. Whether a general relaxation of the limitations normally set by time and space on human reproduction
would be desirable is, of course, debatable,
but at present we should concentrate on obtaining sufficient facts to permit a permanent decision on technical grounds as tothe feasibility and safety of the use of long preserved human semen. Decisions as to the desirability of telegenesis, built on the shifting sands of emotional, religious, ethical, moral, sociological, aesthetic, and legal considerations can only be impermanent.
REFERENCES
Bunge, R. G., Keettel, W. C. and Sherman, J. K. 1954. Fertility and Sterility, 5, 520.
Davenport, C. B. (I897). Experimental Morphology I. New York. Macmillan. p. 244.
Hoagland, H. and Pincus, G. I942. J. gen. Physiol., 25,
337. Jahnel, F. 1938. Klin. Wschr., 17, 1273. Luyet, B. J. and Gehenio, P. M. I938-1940. Life and
death at low temperatures. Biodynamica, Nos. 33, 48 and 6o.
Parkes, A. S. I945. Brit med. J. August i8, ii, 212. Polge, C., Smith, A. U. and Parkes, A. S. 1949.
Natture, Lond., 164, 666. Sherman, J. K. and Bunge, R. G. 1953. Proc. Soc. Exp.
Biol., N.Y., 82, 686. Shettles, L. B. 1940. Amer. J. Physiol., 128, 408. Smith, A. U. 1954. Effects of low temperature on
living cells and tissues. Chapter i in Biological Applications of Freezing and Drying. Ed. R. J. C. Harris. New York. Academic Press.

C. P. BLACKER, M.A., M.D.:

Dr. C. P. Blacker said that, in the course of the twenty-one years that he had been the Society's General Secretary, he -had several times been approached by women who wanted A.I.D. The possible use of artificial insemination in man had, during the inter-war years, been outlined in the U.S.A. by Dr. H. J. Muller, and in this country by Mr. Herbert Brewer, among whose many gifts were those of imaginativeness, enthusiasm and persuasiveness both in speech and writing. The term " eutelegenesis " had been invented by Mr. Brewer to denote the use of artificial

insemination by man on himself with a
eugenic end. Our late president, Lord Horder, had been
-interested in Mr. Brewer's ideas and had given him encouragement; so had our late Treasurer, Mr. Clinton Chance.
The people who, in the decade before the
war, had turned to the Eugenics Society for guidance on A.I.D. had mostly been those belonging to the third category described by Dr. Margaret Jackson, namely those who had misgivings about hereditary abnormalities in the husband or in his family. Rather than

210 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

adopt a child, they preferred that the wife help. He wished to set up an organisation

should have one by A.I.D. The husband's which was to be in part philanthropic and in

relation to the child would essentially be that part commercial which might be called a

of a step-father, though in fact the bond was Seminological Institute or Bureau. Its

psychologically closer because the child object would be to collect seminal specimens

would, during its early years at least, treat from as many contemporary celebrities as

him as its real father. There were, in the possible. These specimens would be

inter-war period, several gynecologists in refrigerated according to a technique which

London and the provinces willing to do he described, and stored in a seminal bank.

artificial inseminations and the speaker had The longer the lapse of time, and the higher

given to the inquirer's doctor the names of the posthumous reputation of the donors,

two or three of these. Dr. Blacker had also the more valuable would' the collection

been sometimes concerned with the selection become. Indeed, the value of the treasures

of donors and had nearly always followed in the proposed bank, like that of wine in a

Dr. Jackson's practice of withholding his cellar, would augment with time. It was

identity. In one case the woman 'and her essential that this project should be

husband named a man, a cousin of the conducted under auspices which were above

husband's, whom they wished to be the donor suspicion, for there were many openings for

and who had expressed willingness. In none fraud. This man had asked if the Eugenics

of the cases with which the speaker had been Society could offer any suggestions as to how

concerned had there been recriminations or to solve a most awkward problem. How

difficulties.

could one guarantee the authenticity of a

Three unmarried women, whom he had not seminal specimen? Supplies would be in a

felt he could advise, had approached him high degree exhaustible; how could anyone

asking for A.I.D. These women declared that be sure that an unscrupulous competitor in

they wanted children but disliked the idea the field of the projected institute would not

of marriage and the prospect of being tied mislead the public by fraudulently substitut-

for life to a particular man. One of these ing the semen of a contemporary mediocrity

women, now dead, gave detailed specifica- for that of a long-dead celebrity? It would

tions of the man whom she wished to act as certainly not be long before the institute

donor. His physique, appearance, intelligence would incur fierce competition; for nothing

and character had to be such and such. She could stop the project from being

knew of a man who met her requirements, commercialised in a big way. Rival firms

but his wife objected to his acting as donor. would enter the field, each with its list of

Could the Eugenics Society find another man celebrities arranged according to a scale of

of the same type? A second woman had charges. These rival firms would bid against

broached the proposal in an exalted religious each other in obtaining specimens from living

spirit. She had felt a call to become a mother, contemporaries who would find opened to

and had talked about -the baby she was going them a new way of making big money.

to have as if he were a future Messiah.

There was an even further possibility. The

In 1937 Dr. Blacker had had a cautionary art of tissue culture was making strides.

experience which he felt at the time might The projected institute would promote

foreshadow the future. A-most eloquent man research designed to preserve in a state of

came to see him who had been referred to the suspended animation, but capable of activa-

Society by a then well-known gymecologist, tion when required, specimens of testicular

now dead. This man was a central European tissue. If an appropriate technique were

who had recently arrived in this country discovered, the bank's treasures would cease

from America and who spoke with a strong to be expendible; they would become self-

American accent. He had a proposition over replacing and the great men of our age would,

which (his gynaecologist friend had assured in the most real sense, be immortalized. Dr.

him) the Eugenics Society could be of much Blacker had expressed doubt as to the

ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION (DONOR)

possibility of inducing contemporary geniuses and celebrities to consent to being partially castrated. But his interlocutor had replied that he had learned from experience that nothing was impossible provided you were willing to pay enough.
That was why the Institute should have ample funds. By judiciously outlaying its resources today, incalculable dividends could be harvested tomorrow. Not only dollar dividends, but also dividends in the form of the most priceless collection of

concrete objects that had ever been gathered together since the dawn of history. He felt sure that Lord Horder (then our president) and the Council of the Eugenics Society, who were doubtless imaginative people of the highest integrity, would quickly grasp the unprecedent importance of his proposal and recognize their indubitable obligation to assist in bringing it to fruition.
Dr. Blacker said that he had often wondered what had become of this man, whom he had never seen again.

CECIL BINNEY. M.A.:

Mr. Cecil Binney said he would confine himself to legal aspects of the subject and his
speech would therefore be short since
artificial insemination, unlike sterilization
which the Society had often discussed, raised
few legal problems. He had been interested to hear from Dr. Jackson how long ago artificial insemination' had been first achieved; there was nothing in the Law
Reports to show it was known before the time the Society first considered it about twenty years ago. Parliament had not thought fit to pass any Act on the subject and the law had to be deduced from general principles. The only reported cases concerned artificial insemination by the husband and its effect where one party was otherwise entitled to a decree of nullity on the ground of the other's incapacity-which was outside the subject before the meeting.
Artificial insemination could obviously not constitute a crime, since it was no crime
for a man to have sexual connection with a woman to whom he was not married and even to have an illegitimate child by her, though that might land him in the police court as defendant to a bastardy summons. It had been suggested, however, that for a married woman to be artificially inseminated by someone other than her husband constituted adultery. Though this opinion had been expressed on behalf of the Church

of England by no less persons than Mr.
Justice Vaisey and Mr. Henry Willink it was mistaken, for adultery involved " carnal
concupiscence " to use the ecclesiastical phrase, which could not be improved upon.
For practical purposes it did not greatly matter whether artificial insemination constituted adultery since the Court would certainly hold that a woman who had this done without her husband's consent was guilty of cruelty entitling him to a divorce, whereas, if he did consent, this would amount to connivance disentitling him to a decree even if it did constitute adultery.
Artificial insemination by a donor raised no question of the law of inheritance since a child so conceived was neither in law nor in fact the child of the husband, but it might give rise to cases of a sensational character. If, for example, a person was entitled to a. settled estate worth a hundred thousand pounds on the death without children of his elder brother and the brother's wife gave birth to a baby though the brother had suffered injuries in the war which made it impossible for him to conceive a child, there might well be legal proceedings; but such a case would raise only questions of fact not of, law and would be similar to earlier cases in which suppositious children conceived in a more conventional manner have been put forward as heirs to property.

