THE FATE OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE: TEST OF A THIRTEEN-YEAR PREDICTION

By RAYMOND B. CATTELL
Research Professor, University of Illinois

1. Historical Background of the Present advanced civilization of a proper eugenic

Research

regard for resources of innate capacities has

I T is a commonplace of genetics that under perhaps been responsible for this more deter-

conditions of differential survival the mean characteristics of a population are likely to show a continuous trend in a certain direction, which may be evaluated as eugenic or dysgenic according to conditions and
standards. Twenty years ago there was considerable discussion as to whether the wellknown differential birth-rate by social status, which had been strongly in evidence and well

mined attempt at understanding these particular social processes. However, it is to be hoped that data of a comparable degree of completeness will soon become available in several other countries in order that the methods of comparative cultural anthropology8a may throw still more light on the culture pattern causes and consequences of eugenic or dysgenic trends in average innate mental capacity.

documented by Heron and others since the The present paper is the first of a trilogy

beginning of this century, might be producing reporting new evidence on the question and

some dysgenic trends, notably in regard to suggesting some methodological advances.

the mean level of general intelligence. For The first two deal with an attempt to measure

whatever questions of value may arise to directly the change of intelligence in a com-

complicate the question of the eugenic or munity over a thirteen-year interval, and

dysgenic direction of such characteristics as with an examination of the present birth-

increased stature or capacity for material rate differential in relation to other influ-

productivity, there can be no question that ences,10 while the third is a summary and

our culture is one in which greater intelli- discussion in relation to method"' and future

gence of the population is a boon to all and in research.

which deteriorations of the distribution can Although the present paper discusses and

lead to misery or catastrophe in ways integrates with the recent observations of

predictable even from our present grasp of Burt,' Roberts,20 and Thomson,22 it is most

principles in social psychology.5

organically connected with, and should be

Since the attempts to infer changes in considered an extension of, the research

intelligence from the social status differential carried out by the present writer in I936-7.

were fraught with excessive speculation a That study, made possible by the generosity

number of investigators-notably Burt,1 of the Eugenics Society, through the medium

Cattell2,' 4, Roberts,20 and Sutherland and of a Leonard Darwin Research Fellowship,

Thomson2' in England, and Lentz,"" and set out to test the ten-year-old child popula-

Conrad and Jones12 in the U.S.A.-set out tion of (a) a typical industrial area-the

to determine directly the relation between city of Leicester-and (b) a typical rural

intelligence and size of family. Incidentally area-the more remote parts of Devonshire

this theme of investigation seems to have -using a non-verbal intelligence test based

been pursued more vigorously and to more on the best psychological theory then avail-

definitive conclusions in Britain than else- able. The results, published in two articles

where, despite comparative lack of research in the EUGENICS REVIEW2, 3 and in a book,4

funds for social science. An earlier and less showed that size of family was negatively

obstructed recognition of the importance, for related to child intelligence throughout the

I36

FATE OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

whole range of size and intelligence, and that the differential was perhaps a shade steeper in rural than urban areas.
A prediction was made from these results to the effect that the mean intelligence in these areas would decline by very nearly one point of I.Q. in ten years. Incidentally this figure was very close to that worked out about the same time by Lentz upon the data of his American study. It necessarily made several assumptions, which cannot be discussed here but which are available to the reader in publications referred to.2, 3, 4 Essentially, the histogram of intelligence distribution for one generation hence was calculated by multiplying the number of people at each intelligence level by the reproduction-rate at that level, though it was recognized that regression to the mean and differential death-rates might reduce the change so calculated.
Naturally the opportunity to test this prediction was'awaited with keen interest. The unsettled conditions after the war suggested the desirability of extending the time of re-test beyond the ten-year period, and it was in 1949, again by the generosity of the Eugenics Society and with the continued co-operation of the Leicester Education Committee, through the director, Mr. Elfed Thomas, that the second survey became possible.
2. Description of Test and Population
When a difference of only i point of I.Q. is in question the psychologist has to carry out his measurements with close attention to many technical considerations of testing and sampling. As far as the writer knows no studies exist which pay sufficient attention to these considerations to be regarded as reasonably valid inter-generation comparisons, with the exception of the present study, that of Thomson with the Population Investigation Committee23 and probably that of Burt.1 But, even in these, certain weaknesses exist needing careful examination later in this article.
In the present study the following conditions of constancy were maintained: (i) The same intelligence test was used-the

Cattell Scale i, Form A (G. G. Harrap and Company), a non-verbal scale designed for the age range 8-II years; (2) An assistantMrs. Diana Meadows-who participated in the previous study, was responsible for the administration and scoring of the present test. Although it is normally sufficient to use a test with precisely defined conditions of administration and with a scoring system which leaves nothing to the individual judgment of the psychometrist, we were fortunate in this case in being able also to get the ultimate constancy of having the same examiner; (3) The children were the same age as in the previous study-centred upon IO years-so that in the event of any distortion in the standardization of the test it could not communicate itself to the figure obtained for the difference between the two groups; (4) In both cases the " sampling " was guided by the directive to test every io-year-old child in the city, i.e. to make a complete cross-section of the population. This involved preserving a correct balance, in so far as any subsection should unavoidably remain incomplete, among the numbers known to be in primary schools, private schools, preparatory schools, and special schools (physical or mental defectives, delinquents, etc.).* The only element of doubt here concerns the number of children of families in the city who are away in boarding schools. This problem was met here as in the previous survey by taking the estimated number from nearby Uppingham School (a public school) even if it involved overshooting slightly the io-year-old limit.
For exactness of future comparisons it seems desirable to list in detail, in Appendix I, the schools included and the number taken from each. (Though in future comparisons geographical migrations and changes of educational practice may dictate a somewhat different choice to get all the io-year-olds
* The ratio of " elementary " to " private " school population was 3-9 to I in the 1936 sample and 10.7 to I in the 1949 sample. Since an attempt was made to get all ten-year-olds in both cases we can assume either that post-war conditions and the reforms in the State school system have caused some movement out of private into State schools, at least at this age level, or that the earlier survey missed some of the elementary schools.

i38 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and near io-year-olds as then distributed.) Although the central tendency in our
sample is IO years (mean at io-i years to be exact) for the convenience of a large sample and for uniformity with the previous survey, we included also the 9 and II-year olds who happened to be in the same classes-standard
III (and in some cases IV) in the junior modem school and their equivalent in private schools. That is to say, we made sure

the magnitude of any error introduced by the trivial difference of mean age between this and the previous io-year-old group, as a result of faults in the norms or of some natural, systematic inconstancy of I.Q. with age, would be negligible.
The description of the " sample " and its comparison with the previous one requires also that we note an absolute increase in size of the io-year-old group-3,832 as against

DIAGRAM i AGE DISTRIBUTION IN MAIN SAMPLE

< - AGE IN MObJTHS - +

of getting all the io-year-olds, but got some others, too. The main sample, upon the data from which the figures given in this article are based, consists of the children aged 9 years zero months through io years ii months, plus the group from Uppingham School who were somewhat older (I3 years I month through
I4 years 5 months, mean: I3, years
8-6 months). The actual age distribution of the main sample by months is shown in
Diagram i. Since the I.Q. (for the mean of any group)
is substantially constant over several years

2,873 in the I936 population. This increase is somewhat greater than would be expected from the normal population increase for the whole country. The increase may be due to the net reproduction-rate being somewhat higher here than for the nation as a whole, or to a somewhat more practised search for io-year-olds in this second survey,* or to
* A more complete sampling in I949 probably accounts for most of the difference. The I936 survey covered 25 State schools and 5 private schools, while in 1949 the completeness of the survey, plus some actual multiplication of schools, resulted in 42 State schools and ii private schools (see Appendix I).

FATE OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

I39

the migration into the city in the course of
its expansion. There is no particular reason to believe that the last would be productive of any change in I.Q. in itself. And since the dysgenic trend with which we are con-
cerned has been demonstrated to operate throughout the country, i.e. to be characteristic of our culture and therefore to have worked in the interval as much upon the migrants as the residents, no error should

evidence of any difference in the two samples likely to influence the mean I.Q. significantly in either direction. Furthermore, as indicated
above, the test was administered and scored in exactly the same way and the results
converted to I.Q.s by the same standardization table, namely that of the I935 standardization table as published in the present writer's Guide to Mental Testing
(I937 and I948 editions).

DIAGRAM 2 I.Q. DISTRIBUTIONS: 1936 AND 1949

4il.'

76% ILES MEAN I.Q. FALLS SELOW
1949 - 110,9J 1936 - 111.22

(i¶.aS)
3452. r - --

-1349
~~~---1036

PERCENTAES IN EACH CATE1hY

1940, THUS
31936. THUS

.20
(2X

(063s)

33.13117AN X4
1.27~1.0

30 °03SD

0 TO so go go fo ao13 10ISO I < INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENTS

1

arise from that source either. Besides, this 3. The Observed Change and the Hypotheses

British study has the advantage that geo-

that May Fit It

graphical mobility is in Britain relatively The populations of I936 and I949 may

slight. No comparison has been made of the now be compared for I.Q. distribution by

sex ratios in I936 and I949, since the dif- inspecting the results as shown in the

ferences therein must be very small (see histogram in Diagram 2, in which the

Appendix i) and, moreover, no significant distributions are superimposed, both having

difference of test scores is normally found their parts expressed as percentages of the

between the sexes. All in all there is little total distribution.

140 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

It will be seen that the difference between

them is very slight. The chief constants of

the curves (worked out from the grouped

data of the histograms) are as shown in

Table i.

TABLE I

MEANS AND SCATTER OF I.Q. OF TEN-YEAR-OLD GROUP

IN 1936 AND 1949

Restricted

Popula- Popula- Population,

tion of tion of 1949

1936 1949 Ages 9: 6

to Io: 5

Mean I.Q.*

... 100-487 101-764 IOO,O23

Standard deviation 21-94 20'22 I8-69

Median I.Q. ... 97g6i 9980o 98-70

The actual fate of the mean intelligence,

as measured by tests, is clearly not in accord

with that predicted in I937.3 The average

measured intelligence for the whole group

has, indeed, undergone a significant increase,

for the difference of means, namely, I*28

points of I.Q., exceeds the standard error of

the difference, namely '5249, sufficiently to

be significant at the i per cent level (C.R.=

2-43 ; p='0075, for an undirectional change).

On the other hand, if we restrict the

population to those who are between 9 years

6 months and IO years 5 months, inclusive,

as shown in the last column of Table 2, there

is a slight fall of I.Q. Records are not avail-

able as to what extent the I936 sample over-

flowed the ten-year interval, but on the

evidence of those who scored the tests it

seems that the better comparison is with the

larger group. In the larger group, on closer

inspection of the actual distribution, we

notice that above an I.Q. of I30 a decline of

intelligence has occurred at about the rate

predicted. The overall gain is produced by a

shift to higher test score among those of average

and sub-average intelligence. If we break down

the distribution at the middle person, i.e.

the median, and calculate the means of the

upper and lower halves of the population

separately, we see at once that they have

behaved very differently, and that even the

* The mean for the 1949 survey was calculated from grouped data, despite its being possible to calculate it from ungrouped, in order to make the results entirely uniform with those of I936, where the calculation was on groups, counting the mid point of each group ranging over io points of I.Q. at 4.5 points; thus, e.g. the 9o-ioo range actually includes I.Qs of go through 99, with the mid point of 94.5.

whole of the upper half has suffered A

slight loss.

TABLE 2

COMPARISON OF I.Q. CHANGE 1936-49 in UPPER AND LOWER HALVES OF THE POPULATION Population Population of 1936 of 1949
Mean I.Q. of lower half of popu-

lation

84*25...

...

Mean I.Q. of upper half of

population ... ... ... iI6*73

86.83
I z6*70

What hypotheses are capable of reconciling the above two principal findings with the undeniable fact that there is a differential birth-rate in favour of lower intelligence ? As to the main finding of a slight actual increase in mean score there are broadly three kinds of appropriate hypotheses as
follows:

i. That the predicted fall in intelligence has actually occurred, but that it has been opposed by an advance in education and test sophistication sufficient to produce an upward change in test score of about twice the magnitude of the downward genetic change. Thus on this basis we should argue that wherever test performance is no better in this generation than the last there has actually been a decline in innate capacity, because innate capacity now enjoys greater educational opportunity than then. This we may call (i) the hypothesis of masking of loss through the indicator being vulnerable to extraneous
influences;
2. That the indicated scores represent the facts and that there has been no real decline in intelligence, because the differential birth-rate has been offset by differential death, celibacy, barren marriage, etc., and by genetic masking effects as discussed below. This hypothesis is one of (2) discrepancy between gross birth-rate and survival-rate;
3. That the original data on intelligence and family size, not only in the main studies here, 1, 4, 12, 16, 20, 21, but incidentally occurring in many others, merely represents an association between educational level and birth-rate.

FATE OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

I4I

This hypothesis could be called one of
(3) confusion of education with in-
telligence.
4. Evaluation of the Hypotheses
The third hypothesis is mentioned in fairness to some earnest advocates, but cannot longer be seriously entertained. Psychologists have ample factor analytic proof that their tests-though doubtless somewhat contaminated with education-are nevertheless substantially measuring innate mental capacity. Moreover, it has been shown3' 23 that in families at the same level of social status, including education, the more intelligent tend to have smaller families. The whole trend cannot possibly be explained in educational
terms.
Without prejudicing our later discussion of the second hypothesis (discrepancy of birthand survival-rate) let us say at once that there is much evidence for the first hypothesis, as follows. About I0 to 20 per cent of the interfamilial variance in intelligence test scores on such conventional tests as the Binet is due to environment in all its aspects (education, family background, accidents of disease). While we cannot enter here upon an attempt to estimate from this fact how much of the inter-community variance can be traced to similar causes, undoubtedly an amount sufficient to account for the present result could be so traced. Finch'3 has shown in some remoter American communities, in which the inter-generational increase in educationalfacilities has beenfar greater than in comparatively settled British cities (which exist in a later, more flattened, part of the curve of cultural maturity) that inter-generational increases of the order of I0 to I5 points of I.Q. occur. A second piece of evidence, beyond that relating test change to rate of community education change, is found in sex differences. In our own times, or a generation earlier, the education of women has accelerated more than that of men, toward catching up to the latter, and it is significant that the recently published Scottish Survey23 shows that the 2-28 gain of mean intelligence for the entire II-year-old population between I932 and I947 was made up of a gain of I-38

for the boys and 3-2i for the girls. Thomson also reports that for eight years the norms on the Moray House tests increased each year more for girls than for boys. In the absence of even a suggestion of evidence of sexlinked genetic factors in intelligence there is positively no chance of accounting for such a difference of trend in boys and girls as part of a genetic change in the general population. We seem justified, therefore, in concluding that general educational levels have improved in this generation and that this trend is capable of producing significant upward shifts in the scores on conventional intelligence tests.
Incidentally, when researchers are able to examine this influence more closely, it would be worthwhile to look for a generation's lag in certain effects. In intelligence test performance, as in many other psychological performances, it is the unconsciously imbibed influences of the early years that are most pervasive, and it may well be found that the curve of increase of intelligence test performance correlates better with the gradient of education at the time the child's parents were in school than in his own generation. Closer inspection of the above-mentioned data suggests this.
The above discussion has been careful to refer to score on the conventional intelligence test, usually largely verbal, because although educational advance is capable of explaining the Scottish finding of a 2 point score gain, or of emphasizing that the slight genetic losses found by Burt' must actually be much larger,* it cannot be considered a substantial cause of error in the Leicester results which operated from the beginning upon a nonverbal intelligence test.
As Vernon26 has pointed out, environmental influence works upon intelligence test results by affecting (a) the general level of information and skills, and (b) test sophistica-
* Burt made the best of circumstances by basing his estimate solely upon those Binet items which might be expected to be relatively free of educational influences, and it is striking that he obtained a decline of I.Q. on this basis, whereas the Scottish Survey testing yielded a significant increase. But this choice of a few test items by inspection cannot be as satisfactory as the use of a completely non-verbal and culture-free test.
D

I42 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tion, i.e. a familiarity and skill specifically in dealing with the operations and timing arrangements in intelligence tests. Although non-verbal and perceptual intelligence tests escape much of the contamination of their results by education they do not escape test sophistication. In fact they may be more liable to it. Improvement with practice on intelligence tests occurs over the first four or five repetitions, but the bulk of this total gain occurs between the first and second testing. Vernon and Parry27 (p. i8i) state:
Investigation of civilians (adults and children) and of recruits show an average rise, on taking a psychological test a second time, equivalent to about 5 I.Q. points, apparently regardless of the proximity of the retesting.
It is commonly assumed by educatorsand the sales of intelligence tests could be quoted in support-that in Britain between I936 and I949 the use of intelligence tests has increased considerably. But this would be less true of Leicester than most places, for Leicester, between I928 and I938 pioneered in all kinds of school psychological services. The Director of Education has kindly consulted with teachers of long standing, and reports on present and past test sophistica-
tion as follows:
All children take an Otis test at the age of 8. Some schools habitually give English attainment tests, which include objective type questions. Similar objective tests are given in other subjects in some schools.
In addition, some schools use text-books which give practice in objective-test answering. Such books have become more popular in recent years.
Generally speaking, however, conditions are much the same as in 1936 and our people do not feel that there should be any appreciable difference between the children now tested and those tested in your earlier researches.
The conditions suggest some, but comparatively slight, increase in test sophistication. It would, therefore, be a matter for debate whether this change could account for a I-28 points of I.Q. increase in mean performance were it not that a peculiarity of the distribution-our second main finding-also would fit into a test sophistication explanation. Let us digress into this possibility. The argument is that the increase between 1936 and I949 occurs almost wholely in the lower

part of the distribution, and that test sophistication also tends to show its greatest gains in the lower levels. For the sheer mechanics of the novel intelligence test and
its instructions offer obstacles chiefly to the
less intelligent while the more intelligent are held up only by the most difficult items themselves. The recent results of Heim and Wallace14 on sophistication with tests of the very form used here, though based on far too few cases for clear conclusions, nevertheless show a tendency for the less intelligent to go on improving longer. Vernon and Parry27 (p. I83) conclude on this matter: " All our evidence, cited below, shows the
greatest rise among those scoring least...."
and in this they refer to an effect beyond the usual " regression to the mean " effect.
On the other hand some recent findings of the writer9 with a culture-free intelligence test show that test sophistication increases are greater for those of lesser actual age (8 versus I4-year-olds), but slightly less for those of lower I.Q. in groups of the same age. This conflicting evidence must leave the issue unsolved. It is a complex matter; for everywhere except in intelligence tests themselves we expect the more intelligent to show
greater learning.* Unquestionably our results show that the
I936-49 increase fails to show only in the
upper levels. In the uppermost quartile we find the I949 population to be I-76 points
* When the results on the culture-free test, described later, were divided, for ten-year-olds, into three thirds, according to increasing I.Q., the gain between A and B forms was O-5I (i86I - i8-io) for the dull, o-86
(24.64 - 23.78) for the medium group and ii9 (29.24 28.05) for the bright. WVhile this agrees with the
general rule that the more intelligent learn more quickly it disagrees with the expectation in the present peculiar circumstances, with the more extensive results of Vernon and Parry, and with our own findings that the younger (and lower in mental age) improve more. The last might be reinterpreted as meaning that age and experience, rather than mental age, increase initial test sophistication. On the other hand it could be that the culture-free, perceptual test is so radical a novelty for these children that our experiment is dealing with the very first part of the learning curve, in which the intelligent leap forward, whereas the result of repeated exposure to such tests would result in a great overall advance on the part of the below than the above average intelligences. This last hypothesis-that the sophistication gain is greater but slower with the less intelligent-seems most likely, and in that case the 1936-49 comparison should show most gain for the dull.

FATE OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

of I.Q. below the mean of the I936 upper quartile. Whether this is due to the higher incidence of private schools in the I936 population, as already discussed, or to a lesser test sophistication remains to be seen.
5. The Unknowns Needing Investigation
Our position so far is that we accept the probability of a slight test sophistication increase since I936 and the certainty of an educational increase, the latter, however, not to be expected in the test used here to the extent found with the test used in the Scottish Survey. Accordingly we doubt whether allowance for these influences would do more than wash out the apparent gain, leaving the
conclusion that the I949 population is not significantly lower than the I936 population. If this is so the whole emphasis falls on the second hypothesis above, namely, that there is some influence at work creating a difference between the gross birth-rate and the survivalrate. Indeed the present results suggest that we must look for something operating most powerfully to reduce the survival of the less intelligent largely within the sub-average intelligence range.
The present writer has already set out, in discussions of the I936 study,6 the differentials which need to be investigated in making a more accurate prediction from family size differentials than he was then able to make, and in view of the discrepancy here reported between prediction and results it becomes more important than ever that some social researcher should be endowed to investigate these influences. In this space they can merely be listed as follows:
i. A differential death-rate (before reproduction);
2. A differential celibacy-rate; 3. A differential barren, i.e. completely
childless, marriage-rate; 4. A differential length of generation; 5. Differences in completeness of families
in data here gathered; 6. Genetic influences which might exag-
gerate and temporarily mask the effect, such as the degree of assortative mating, degree of epistacy through Mendelian dominants, etc.

As discussed elsewhere,6 as far as our general information on these matters goes, they might be expected collectively just about to balance,* and they have seemed unlikely to be the sources of the discovered discrepancy. But it is also quite possible that our " general information " is wrong and that the barren marriage- and celibacyrates are significantly higher in the subaverage intelligence ranges, thus accounting for our discovered reduction in the population in those ranges.
Until these powerful influences are investigated there is not much point in seeking for more subtle or obscure possibilities, as some earnest investigators have done. One may question, for example, the strategic aptness of the Scottish Research Council's debate on the possible influence of birth order within the family, though Burt1 also seems to consider this a substantial possible factor. To the present writer it seems that in the many intelligence surveys that have accumulated, none worked out with proper statistical checks on family size, test standardization, etc., has ever yielded a significant birth-order difference, nor would one be expected on genetic grounds, save for the minute effect of the greater incidence of Mongolian imbecile and injury births respectively in later and earlier births.
Penrose has suggested18 that the differential birth-rate is likely to be unimportant because the gene loss can be masked by dominants. This argument depends on an unrealistic population structure and an oversimplified gene determination quite out of keeping with the obviously multi-gene determination of intelligence. But no serious student can doubt that it would be much more to the point in this important eugenic problem to contribute data of good statistical character on the more major influences that are as yet completely uninvestigated-namely celibacy and childless
* If anything, a slightly better case can be made out for their accelerating slightly the downward trend. Burt, indeed, evidently takes it to be a " sufficiently established item " of common information that " unmarried and childless adults ... include a disproportionate number of persons whose intelligence is above the average level "I (p. z6).

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

marriage-rates in relation to intelligence, as this is not very satisfactory. It is better to

listed in factors (2) and (3) above.

minimize the role to be assigned to such

correction by using the new " perceptual"

6. A Foundation for Further Research

or " culture-free " intelligence tests.

While the evidence is being tightened on The Cattell Scale I non-verbal test used in

the side of these survival factors-it can this study is not so culture-free a test as that

simultaneously be tightened in regard to used in laying down the foundation for future

exact determination of the real change in comparisons in Leicester. For some of the

intelligence levels over a period of time. In non-verbal subtests are pictorial, i.e. having

regard to further work in this area the follow- reference to learning beyond the immediate

ing points of technique should be emphasized, situation. But it is perhaps more so than

which have as far as possible been followed in tests used by Burt,' certainly more so than

the present writer's attempt to lay down in those used by Roberts20 or the Scottish

I949 a foundation in the Leicester area for a Survey23, and decidedly more so than those

re-test by some researcher ten to fifteen years used by Finch.13 It is relevant to point out

hence.

that the Scottish Survey shows more gain

i. Since the difference of means to be than the Leicester Survey or Burt's results,

expected in a decade is quite small-i point and the Finch studies more than the Scottish

of I.Q.-in relation to the known typical Survey.

reliability of the instrument, great care is 4. A large size in the sample is not neces-

necessary with the test itself. Not only sary. It is good for other purposes to have

should the testing be done by an experienced samples of the size of the Scottish Survey-

and conscientious person, but the following 70,000 to go,ooo-but a smaller sample,

should be put on record for later researchers: observing the conditions here stated, is

(a) a copy of the exact test material used; better for the present purpose than a larger

(b) the exact instructions followed; (c) a copy one which neglects them. An observed dif-

of the standardization table at that time; ference of I point of I.Q., such as the hypo-

(d) a note on general conditions, especially thesis anticipates, is significant at the 5 per

season of year-relative to climate, examina- cent level for a sample of 4,822 cases and at

tions, and vacations. This is the essence of the I per cent level for a sample of 8,263

Burt's recommendation' that "inquiries cases, if we suppose a very large standard

should be repeated with the same tests." deviation of 25 points of I.Q., as occurs with

Copies, in duplicate, of these materials for the culture-free test. On the other hand,

the new test foundation laid down in I949 with a standard deviation of I7 points, such

as described in (3) have been deposited by as has commonly been assumed with the

the present writer with the Eugenics Society. Binet and its derivatives, a population of

2. Similarly the population must be defined 2,230 cases could give significance at the

exactly as to its distribution according to 5 per cent level and 3,844 at the i per cent

schools and geographical regions, while an level ;* 3,000 to Io,ooo cases would therefore

area free from strong migration currents be an ideal to aim at in such research.

should be chosen for the experiment.

5. Test sophistication and motivation as

This information has been set out for the well as general educational level ((3) above)

research just concluded in Appendix I, and need to be controlled. Within the range of

for the research directed to the future in morale in ordinary schools differences in

Appendix 2.

motivation do not seem responsible for sig-

3. General educational influence upon the nificant differences in intelligence test per-

test score must be controlled. This can be
done partly by " allowing" in the test for

* If the hypothesis considers only a uni-directional change, these population sizes would be for a standard

changes in educational efficiency, through deviation of 25 poinits of I.Q. at the 5 per cent level,

obtaining simultaneous measures of general educational level on the two occasions, but

3,383 ; at the i per cent level, 6,763 ; and for a standard deviation of I7 points of I.Q. at the 5 per cent level, 1,564; and at the I per cent level, 3,127.

FATE OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

I45

formance. Test sophistication, itself, can
be effectively controlled by giving one or two tests before the main test, the results of which are thrown away, the penultimate test being of the same type as the ultimate test.
Although the present writer is not likely to be able personally to continue these
studies by a retest ten to fifteen years

standard tests while being significantly freer of educational effects,7 was given to about I,OOO children already tested by the other test (Cattell, Scale i, non-verbal). The sample is defined in Table 2. To ensure full measure of test sophistication the future researcher should compare results only for the B form. The age distribution of the

DIAGRAM 3 AGE DISTRIBUTION IN CULTURE-FREE SAMPLE

58s 54

I 38

25

4

10 US 110 11-1 112 113 114 U5 116 117 11M1819 O12N1T1 2231 2526 MXO 13013
< AGE IN MONTHS

hence, it seemed desirable to carry out a
testing in conformity with the above canons of method on the same children as are in-
volved in the study he is concluding, to provide historical and scientific continuity and to set down a firm reference point for those social scientists who are likely to take
up this question. For this purpose a new culture-free intelligence test (scale 2)8, 9 which has been shown to involve as much general ability as the Binet and other

sample and the I.Q. distribution are shown in Diagrams 3 and 4.
The only respect in which this basis for
future comparison departs from the above ideal conditions is that it is too small (as a result of coming to the end of our research
endowment). However, it is to be hoped that a social scientist in Britain will be able to extend the testing in the next year or two over the rest of the sample defined in Appendix i, perhaps making a three-year

146 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

sampling to be compared with a three-year sampling beginning a decade hence.
7. Conclusions and Acknowledgments
i. A slight but significant increase of mean I.Q. was found between I936 and I949,
though the upperm6st levels fell very slightly. Increases in educational and test sophistication levels are of an order which might account for this, but at least the predicted decline has not occurred in the magnitude expected. This conclusion seems to be midway between that of Thomson24 and of Burt.' The emphasis in research, therefore, needs to be directed to, (a) more precise measurement of the differences, and (b) investigation of factors in differential survival by intelligence levels.
2. An analysis of these factors needing

quantitative evaluation in further definitive research has been set out, together with the beginning of new survey data employing a special test and mode of administration which should permit, when followed up, an unequivocal answer to the question of what change in mean mental capacity is actually occurring, regardless of the mechanisms at
work. The writer wishes to express his great
indebtedness ta Mrs. Diana Meadows, whose skill and thoroughness in carrying out the testing and whose genius for obtaining co-operation have been the main factors in the success of this study. It is a pleasure to
express warm thanks also to Dr. C. P. Blacker, who represented the enlightened
support of the Eugenics Society and trans-
lated it into effective action. Finally the

DIAGRAM 4 I.Q. DISTRIBUTION (FoRM B) IN CULTURE-FREE SAMPLE
56

AL.~~~~~5

30

4040 ~T501 60 61-70

71- is
so 90

911-00 1011-10

III-
Ito

1211-30 1131 -

141m

1151

-
16

INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENTS

FATE OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

I47

gratitude of all concerned must be expressed
toward Mr. Elfed Thomas, the Director of Education, and his teachers in the city of Leicester, who upset their time-tables to
help in a research which they felt to be of social value and thus made the whole inquiry possible. To my research assistant, Edgar Haverland, I am indebted for his painstaking care in making and checking the statistical analyses.

Private and Preparatory

Schools

Scale IA

Boys Girls Total

Uvedale High ... ... 6

4 Io

Stoneygate Girls' College o 29 29

Aylestone High ... ... 2 3 5

Convent of Nativity ... o 49 49

Lyndhurst ... ... I 10 II

Woodbank Boys' School 23

0 23

Clarke's College ... ... I8

7 25

Mill Hill Boys' ... ... 38

0 38

Fosse High ... ... 0 30 30

Portland House ... 7 45 52

TOTALS ... ... 95 177 272

APPENDIX I LOCATION OF THE POPULATION TESTED

Public School Uppingham ... ... 59

0 59

Junior Modern Schools

Boys

Shaftesbury Road ... 79

Ingle Street ... ... 104

Slater Street ... ... 29

Taylor Street ... ... 55

St. Matthew's-Chester

Street ... ... 24

Bridge Road ... ... 30

Humberstone ... ... 79

Desford Boys' (Approved) io

Manor Road (Experi-

mental) ... ... 30

Western Park (Open Air) i9

Charnwood Street ... 5I

St. Peter's ... ... I9

Coleman Road ... ... 46

Avenue Road ... ... 30

Hazel Street ... ... 40

Hinckley Road

... 36

Marriott Road ... ... 36

Catherine Street ... 34

Sacred Heart (R.C.) ... 8

St. Barnabas' ... ... 13

Belgrave C. of G. ... 22

St. George's ... ... 12

St. Saviour's ... ... i6

All Saint's ... ... 15

Holy Cross (R.C.) ... I6

St. Andrew's (Deacon

Street) ... ... I I

St. Mark's ... ... 8

St. Patrick's (R.C.) ... 9

Collegiate Girls' (Junior) o

Granby Road ... ... 53

Mellor Street ... ... 96

Northfields House ... ii6

Overton Road ... ... 69

St. John's (Clarendon

Park) ... ... 40

Wyggeston Girls (Junior) o

Belgrave Road ... ... 40

Alderman Richard Hallam 72

Braunstone Hall ... 86

Caldecote Road ... ... 52

Knighton Fields ... 35

Medway Street ... ... 122

Cort Crescent ... ... 88

Scale IA Girls 8o I03 28 55
15 52
64
O
2 12 5I 23 34 34 43 43 44 59 IO
I7
25
I5
10
13 9
13
II g9
I9 49 98 11O 55
45
I37
32 67 74 58 47 I21
85

Total
I59 207
57 IIO
39 82
143
10
32 31 I02 42 8o 64 83 79 8o 93 i8 30 47 27 26 28 25
24 19 I8 I9 I02
194 226 I24
85
I7 72 139 i6o Iio 82 243 173

TOTALS ... .. 1,750 1,751 3,501 t_

TOTAL POPULATION ... I,904 3,928 3,832

APPENDIX 2

Junior Modern Schools

Culture-free

Boys Girls Total

Mellor Street ... ... 65

64 I29

Alderman Richard Hallam 69 64 I33

Braunstone Hall

... 79

71 I50

Caldecote Road ... ... 36 32 68

Knighton Fields ... 30 39 69

Medway Street ... ... 41 36 77

Cort Crescent ... ... 86

84 170

TOTALS ... ... 406 390 796

Private and Preparatory

Schools

Uvedale High ... ... 6

4 IO

Stoneygate Girls' College o 29 29

Convent of Nativity ... o 49 49

Lyndhurst ... ... I

9 IO

Woodbank Boys' School 23

0 23

Clarke's College ... ... 17

7 24

Mill Hill Boys' ... ... 32

0 32

Fosse High ... ... 0 30 30

TOTALS ... ... 79 128 207

GRAND TOTALS ... 485 518 1,O03

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1 Burt, C. L. Intelligence and Fertility. London:
Hamilton, 1946. 2 Cattell, R. B. " Is National Intelligence declin-
ing ?" EUGENICS REviEW, 1936, 28, I8I-203. 8 " Some Further Relations Between Intelli-
gence, Fertility, and Socio-economic Factors," EVGENICS
REVIEW, 1937, 29, 17I-9. 4 The Fight for Our National InteUigence.
London: P. S. King, I937. 6 "C Some Changes in Social Life in a Com-
munity with a Falling Intelligence Quotient," Brit. J. Psychol., I938, 28, 430-50.
6.. " Effects of Human Fertility Trends Upon the Distribution of Intelligence and Culture," Thirty-ninth Yearbook, National Soc. Stud. Educ., Bloomington, Illinois: Public School Publishing Co., 1940, 221-33.
7- Feingold, N., and Sarason, S. " A Culturefree Intelligence Test. II. Evaluation of Cultural

I48 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Influence on Test Performance," J. Educ. Psychol., 1941, 82, 8i-ioo.
S - A Culture-free Test of " g " Scales, I, II, and III, Institute for Personality and Ability Testing. British agent, N. Barnes, The Grammar School, Henley-on-Thames.
sa -" The Dimensions of Culture Patterns by the
Factorization of National Characters." J. Abn. and Soc. Psychol., 1949, 44, 443-69.
* - Classical and Standard Score I.Q. Standardization of the I.P.A.T. Culture-free Intelligence Test. {In press: J. of Consulting Psychol, 195I.)
10 The Trend Over 1936-49 in Britain in the Differential Birth-rate According to Intelligence Level. (To be published.)
11 - An Attempt to Estimate the Neglected Factors in Calculating Survival Rates for Different Intelligence Levels. (To be published.)
"2 Conrad, H. S., and Jones, H. E. " A Field Study of the Differential Birth-rate," J. Amer. Statis. Assoc.,
I932, 27, I53-9.
18 Finch, T. H. " Enrolment Increases and changes in the Mental Level of the High School Population," Appl.
Psychol. Monogr., 1946, 10, 75. 24 Heim, A. W., and Wallace, J. G. " The Effects of
Repeatedly Re-testing the Same Group on the Same Intelligence Test. II," Quart. J. Exper. Psychol.,
1950, 2, I9-32.
16 Kohler, F. J. " Cultural Differentials in Intelligence," J. Soc. Psychol., I943, 18, 279-303.

16 Lentz, T. F. " Relatioxn of I.Q. to Size of Family,"
J. Educ. Psychol., 1927, 18, 486-96. 17 Muntijan, M. " A Study of the Re-test Factor in
the Illinois Statewide High School Testing Program," J. Educ. Research, I947, 41, I83-92.
18 Penrose, L. S. " The Supposed Threat of Declining Intelligence," Amer. J. Ment. Def., 1948, 58, 114-I8.
19 Pickford, R. W. " The Genetics of Intelligence,"
J. of Psychol., I949, 28, 129-48.
20 Roberts, J. A. F., Norman, R. M., and Griffiths, R. "Studies on a Child Population, III. Intelligence and Family Size," Annals of Eugen., 1938, 8, 175-215.
21 Sutherland, H. E. G., and Thomson, G. H. " The
Correlation Between Intelligence and Size of Family," Brit. J. Psychol., 1927, 17, 81-92.
22 Thomson, G. H. " The Trend of National Inteffi-
gence," EUGENICS REVIEW, 1946, 38, 9-I8.
23 , et al. The Trend of Scottish Intelligence.
London: Univ. of London Press, 1949. 24 " Intelligence and Fertility," EUGENICS RE-
VIEW, 1950, 41, I63-70. 25 Thorndike, E. L. " The Resemblance of Siblings in
Intelligence-test Scores," J. of Gen. Psychol., 1944, 64,
265-7.
26 Vernon, P. E. " Intelligence Test Sophistication,"
Brit. J. Educ. Psychol., 1938, 8, 237-44. 27 , and Parry, J. B. Personnel Selection in the
British Forces. London: Univ. of London Press,
I949.

THE ECONOMIC JOURNAL

The Quarterly Journal of the Royal Economic Society

JUNE 1950

SOME PROBLEMS IN THE PURE THEORY OF INTERNATIONAL

TRADE

G. HABERLER

UNREQUITED IMPORTS

A. C. PIGOU

THE THEORY OF INCREASING UNDER-EMPLOYMENT

B. HIGGINS

THE SPRINGS OF TECHNICAL PROGRESS IN BRITAIN, 1919-39 R. S. SAYERS

THEORIES OF THE I937-38 CRISIS AND DEPRESSION

M. D. BROCK1

THE IRON AND STEEL ACT, I949

S. J. LANGLEY

THE UNITED NATIONS' REPORT ON FULL EMPLOYMENT W. W. ROSTOW

REVIEWS: NOTES AND MEMORANDA: NEW BOOKS

Application for Fellowship to
ROYAL ECONOMIC SOCIETY, 4 Portugal Street, London, W.C.2

Annual Subscription1i ios.

Life Composition,22 IOS.

|

Eugnicn lReview, VoL XLI MIe. 8

