A.I.D. Investigation Council

Evidence submitted to the Departmental Committee on Artificial Insemination

T HIS COUNCIL iS concerned with A.I.D. studies, are concordant. Moreover, the effects if

in its global aspects and has necessarily to any of A.I. as such should manifest themselves

take a broad view of the social, personal, not only with A.I.D., but also with A.I.H.,

legal, eugenic, moral and religious considera- against which little is urged except that it is

tions involved in the use of the technique.

relatively ineffective. On the biological side

Further, it is intended that the Council shall there is clear evidence that the use of the

be a continuing body, which will collect, collate technique, per se, does not lead to adverse

and disseminate information about the practice effects; 10 million calves have now been born

of A.I.D. Up to date the Council has taken in Great Britain as a result of A.I.

evidence from most of the doctors in Great Britain who have had experience in the technique.

(D) On the eugenic side, it should be pointed out that A.I. donors, unlike most fathers, have

General Considerations
(A) Evidence given to the Council over the last six months confirms the impression that in Great Britain A.I.D. is practised on a very small scale. It seems from the evidence heard by the Council

been selected for their mental and physical quality. In the experience of the only one of our witnesses who has made a systematic follow-up of cases, the quality of A.I.D. children is equal to or above the average of their kind.

that over the last fifteen years there has been only a slight increase in demand and that at the present time less than 100 children are born each year as the result of A.I.D. The Council is unaware
of any factual basis for the much higher figures often quoted.

Answers on Note A*
1. In the light of the evidence it has accumulated from witnesses, the Council is of the opinion that
(a) No adverse effect on the religious, social or ethical well-being of society as a whole is to be anticipated from A.I.D. on the scale it is at

(B) The Council, therefore, is of the opinion present practised in Great Britain, provided that

that quantitatively the social problem involved is the practitioner acts with a high sense of medical

negligible, and owes its present publicity to and social responsibility. If the practice of A.I.D.

qualititative legal and moral considerations, and became widespread, however, the large increase

above all to the emotions likely to be en- in the number of individuals making declarations

countered in a largely androcentric (male- which they believed to be false might involve a

centred) society.

lowering of social morale unless legal steps were

The Council deplores the fact that a few taken to obviate the difficulty.

hundred healthy, normal and wanted children (b) A.I.D. has no ill effect on the institution

born since the war as the result of A.I.D. appear of marriage or on family relationships, provided

to give more concern to the public conscience that certain precautions are observed, especially than do the tens of thousands of mentally that

defective or unwanted ones born over the same (i) patients are carefully chosen and the

period as the result of coitus.

practice restricted to well-adjusted

(C) The Council wishes to emphasize that

married couples with a stable background,

biological theory gives no support whatever to

of which the man is deemed in the light

the suggestion that A.I.D. children are in some

of present knowledge to be infertile and

way different from other children because the

the woman fertile;

insemination was carried out artificially rather than naturally. Practical results, so far as they
can be assessed from the inadequate follow-up

* Note A was circulated by the Departmental Committee; it sought the views of public and professional bodies on various aspects of artificial insemination.

22S
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1960, 51, 4.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(ii) the possibility of adoption and the alter- therefore is highly desirable; especially, a child

native of wider humanitarian service are should not be told that his "father" is infertile.

explained to the couple;

Given the selection of cases referred to above, it

(iii) both husband and wife sincerely want is realistic to expect secrecy to be maintained by

A.I.D. and that both ask for it in writing; both husband and wife.

(iv) in addition to positive qualities donors 4. The Council is of the opinion that, at pre-

are chosen to avoid any prominent sent, only the doctor can and should keep

physical characteristic which might dis- records. In English law, a child is presumed to be

sociate the child from the husband.

the child of the marriage unless the husband can

Given these qualifications, the Council is of prove otherwise, and the law should be extended

the opinion that a childless marriage, provided to include the A.I.D. child once the husband has it is stable, can be enriched by the fulfilment of agreed to the use of the technique.

the parental urge in the possession of children. A donor should always be asked whether he

By contrast, the Council deplores any attempt has acted as a donor for other doctors, so as

to make a child, however conceived, a means of to avoid the concentration of half-sibs in one consolidating an unstable marriage, and urge district and the consequent possibility of con-

that in A.I.D., as in normal propagation, the sanguineous marriages. This problem has not ultimate deciding factor should always be a yet arisen; so far as the Council has been able

reasonable probability that the child will be to find out the oldest A.I.D. child in Great

glad to have been born.

Britain is now only seventeen years of age. In

(c) Given the precautions mentioned above this connection it should be remembered that A.I.D. should have a favourable rather than an adoption, where the identity of the parents is

adverse effect upon the relation between withheld, or unknown, opens up the possibility

husband and wife. The Council deprecates any of marriage between full brother and sister.

suggestion that the acceptance of A.I.D. by In any event, the evidence available does not

husband and wife is necessarily a sign of suggest that one generation of consanguineous

psychiatric disturbance.

marriage is biologically catastrophic.

2. The Council is of the opinion that 5. The Council is opposed to new legislation anonymity of the donor is essential; that given of a restrictive nature.

this condition and the full approval of his wife, there need be no adverse effects on the donor or on his family life. With many donors the motive is similar to that of blood donors. (In Bombay, male blood donors are now invited to become semen donors to help with the large-scale testing of chemical spermicides in progress there.) Payment to the donor, where it is made, should be considered not as an inducement, but as a method of putting the transaction on an objective basis. Semen donors, like blood donors, are normally paid in the U.S.A.
3. The Council is of the opinion that the decision to employ A.I. is a personal and private matter and should be kept so. Secrecy

6. The Council deplores the suggestion that
A.I.D. amounts to adultery and considers that
such an interpretation is theologically and etymologically untenable, though it recognises that theological objection has also been urged on other grounds. A.I.D. without the husband's
consent should, however, be made a ground for divorce. The Council is opposed to any alteration of the existing marriage law with the exception of the amendment referred to in
paragraph 4 above. It considers that with A.I.D.
on its present negligible scale, the problems of inheritance and succession occasioned thereby have been greatly exaggerated for polemical purposes.

226

