CORRESPONDENCE

Family Allowances

after the first or second, paid whether the family

To the Editor, Eugenics Review
SIR,-The scheme for an indiscriminating State payment of five shillings a week for every child seems to overlook the experience of the similar Spenhamland system described in Waters's Econo-

needs it or not-and probably the majority of

families do not-appears wasteful and demoraliz-

ing. Careful dealing with each case on its own

merits seems soundest.

London.

J. P. BRANDER.

mic History of England. Each birth added Is. 6d.
to the weekly allowance, the illegitimate birthrate
rose rapidly, and the rural population lost every incentive to good work, thrift, or temperate living. The employer-farmers were, in effect, subsidized from the rates, which became crushing. A greatly
over-populated countryside resulted, most inhabitants drawing poor relief.
Human nature changes little. So similar results from the scheme of Mrs. Hubback and Miss Rathbone (vide her recent book The Case for Family Allowances) seem probable, viz., a rapid increase of the poorest classes. These do not go in for family limitation. They would be largely maintained by taxation of the self-supporting classes. This would increase the tendency of the latter to avoid having children, though such children are the kind the nation most requires. Employers not unlikely would reduce wages or withhold legitimate increases, especially for unskilled workers not protected by strong trade unions. Many wage-earners would reduce by the amount of the family allowances the sum they give for house expenses, and spend on themselves the money saved.

To the Editor, Eugenics Review SIR,-The movement for family allowances is
really a mixture of two different movements which
have nothing in common except their name.
Fifty years ago Jane Hume Clapperton (Scientific Meliorism) and G. A. Gaskell demanded what they
called " Endowment of Mothers." They held that
motherhood was a public service and should be paid for directly, instead of leaving the mother to beg from her husband. They had no desire, however, to stimulate the birthrate; on the contrary they were fervent neomalthusians.
This original aim has been overlaid by another, viz., a desire to stimulate the birthrate. Just before
the war the Fabian Society published Parenthood and Poverty by Louis Ginsburg, who says " Protagonists of the family allowance almost invariably consider allowances paid only to children after the third " (p. 43). On the same page he says: " An
allowance should be granted of 7s. per week for every dependent child in excess of three."
We have thus two distinct programmes masquerading under the same name. One set of people would give an allowance to every mother. The
other set would endow only a small minority of

One reason adduced for family allowances is a mothers, those who have more than three children.

need to increase the birthrate, at present below The great majority of mothers, instead of getting

replacement level. As the population of this anything, would probably have to pay heavier

densely crowded country has increased by several taxes on their tea and sugar.

millions since the last war, and millions are normally Finally I would point out the extraordinary folly

unemployed, a reduction in population would seem of trying to stimulate the birthrate before we know

an advantage.

how many people we shall be able to support after

The Charity Organization Society handles the war. Mr. Colin Clark has shown that Britain

poverty from expert knowledge, and its opinion has a much higher standard of life than any other

(vide How to Help Cases of Distress) is as follows: densely populated country. That standard is

" Large families of young children may readily fall wholly due to our immense export trade of manu-

into distress. But a system of family allowances factured goods which we send all over the world,

will not meet the perennial difficulty of assisting obtaining food and raw materials in exchange.

the man who is a low wage-earner and who has a Destroy that export trade and we sink to the level

large family without making assistance more attrac- of Italy or Japan. WVho can possibly say what

tive to him than employment. Nor will family export trade we shall have after the war ?

allowances adequately and suitably relieve cases of

R. B. KERR.

distress; this for the reason that they are to be 335 Sydenham Road,

automatic. . . An automatic scale will not settle Croydon

the problem of poverty; that can only be settled by

careful case-work, by taking each case on its own To the Editor, Eugenics Review

merits."

SIR,-Mr. Brander's and Mr. Kerr's letters deal

It is certainly essential that every child be between them with so many points that they

adequately fed. But on the above-quoted experi- require an article in reply. I will, however, try to

ence and opinions an indiscriminate family deal with at least some of the points, and refer the

allowance for each child, or even for each child correspondents to Miss Rathbone's Penguin on

94

