PROBLEMS OF PENAL REFORM

A T a luncheon held on April 29th under emotionally this punishment was regarded

the chairmanship of Mr. B. S. Bram- as retribution; by rationalists it was upheld

well, Mr. George Benson, M.P., spoke as a deterrent. But were such savage

on the work of the Howard League for Penal punishments as the death penalty and flog-

Reform, of which he is president.

ging deterrents ? The belief that the severer

It was doubtful, Mr. Benson said, whether there was any direct relation between eugenics and crime. Lombroso had put
forward his theory of a criminal type, but thirty years ago Dr. Goring had made an extensive anthropometrical study of criminals in Strangeways Prison, Manchester, and had
found that their cranial measurements were half-way between those of an Oxford fellow and a Cambridge don! As to the well-known Jukes heredity, he believed that this was far more likely to be a case of the inheritance of
emotional instability and of maladjustment than of criminal instincts; he admitted that a small proportion of the members of this family were probably incapable of adjusting themselves, suggesting that in such cases segregation was the only satisfactory measure to adopt. But, he maintained, most of the

the punishment the greater the deterrent had been proved to be the great illusion of penology. At the beginning of the last century there were no less than i8o crimes which incurred the death penalty; yet the saying " one might as well be hanged for a sheep as a lamb" showed how lightly this particular penalty was regarded, and in fact as soon as it was revoked there was a great increase in law-abidingness. Similarly, statistics showed that crime and recidivism had been more effectively deterred by the reform of the prisons than by the horrible conditions prevailing before the Gladstone Committee was set up at the end of the nineteenth century; and in I938 a Parliamentary Sub-Committee found that flogging was not more of a deterrent than ordinary imprisonment.

individuals could have become useful mem- It was interesting to note that even the

bers of the community under the influence of small measure of prison reform which had

psychiatric treatment and a good environ- already taken place had originated with the

ment. prison authorities and was against public

One of the main obstacles in the way of penal reform was the muddled attitude of public opinion towards sin, an offence against the moral code and, in this country, against
the Christian ethic, and crime, an infringe-

opinion. In this connection the speaker instanced an allegation in the Press that prisoners were being pampered and the opposition to the latest reform, the payment for work done by prisoners.

ment of the criminal law. There was a deep- An essential to further reform was the

rooted instinct which called for retribution classification of prisoners and the abolition

on the sinner, though the speaker doubted of the local prison to which all offenders

whether this operated against the criminal; were sent. At present one might find, side

he could not imagine public opinion demand- by side, a neurotic sexual offender, a clever

ing the punishment of a man who failed to lawyer in for embezzlement and a low-grade

obtain his dog licence. But where crime and mental defective charged with vagrancy,

sin overlapped the offence was punishable prison work and routine being all geared

by law and thus the instinct for retaliation down to the capabilities of the low-grade

on the offender was satisfied although it was mentality. An intelligent penal system was

against Christian and indeed the Biblical impossible without classification; its real

teaching " Vengeance is mine, saith the aim should be the psychological readjust-

Lord, I will repay." The State maintained ment of offenders; punishment and retri-

the law and punished the law-breaker; bution were irrelevant.

15

i6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Dicunion

Mr. Knaggs suggested that the problem

Mr. Benson's talk was followed by a short should be approached from the point of view

discussion. Replying to a question as to the of the prisoner; many crimes were com-

proportion of successes among Borstal boys, mitted because of financial expediency. If

he said that correct statistics were very we altered the economic system of the

difficult to obtain, for the longer a boy was country these crimes would disappear. Mr.

out, the longer he had to get into trouble, Benson replied that he was a member of the

and as the boys grew older it was increasingly Howard League because he believed the

difficult to keep in touch with them. It was penal system should be reformed, and a

thought that 70 to 75 per cent. of the cases member of the Labour Party because he

were successful, but it must be remembered wanted a change in the economic system of

that Borstal was a last resort, as only boys the country. But as things were at present

with criminal associations were sent there. he felt he could reply tu quoque-the need for

As regards first offenders, Mr. Marindin eugenic policies would disappear if social

stated that there had been three Training opinion were so altered that no defective

Ships, one for each age-group, but the one could find a mate.

for senior boys had been unsatisfactory; To the question whether there was not a those for junior and intermediate boys had long time-lag in dealing with juvenile

been most successful.

delinquents, he replied that most juveniles

Referring to the heredity of crime, Mr. came before summary courts after a delay of Gun differentiated between the intelligent three or four days. There might be longer

and the unintelligent criminal. In any good
stock there might be a few bad individuals, but however bad they were usually intelligent; the unintelligent criminals usually came from a thoroughly bad stock and became criminals because they had a bad heredity.
Mrs. Tyssen Gee asked to what extent children from bad homes were sent to
approved schools. Mr. Benson replied that such children could be committed for care
and maintenance to such schools, but where
possible local authorities tried to find private
homes for them. Replying to a question by
Mr. Bramwell, he said that there was an enormous difference in the attitudes of local

delays in the case of adolescents who were committed with an adult. Mr. Bramwell
asked if the recent increase in juvenile delinquency was thought to be serious and Mr. Benson said that he believed that most of the crimes were those of small boys getting into mischief, which could be expected in the present times of emotional
stress. Fourteen was the age at which most
of these delinquencies occurred, after which there was a decrease; the fact that this was the age of puberty should be taken into consideration.
Mr. Bramwell thanked the speaker most

authorities and benches, those in big towns warmly for his address and assured him that

being far in advance of country districts his views had been of the greatest interest

which on the whole were reactionary.

to the Fellows and Members present.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXMI No. 1.

