CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF THE OLPAR CONTRACEPTIVE PRODUCTS
Part 2. Vehicles for Phenyl Mercuric Acetate
JOHN R. BAKER, D.Sc., R. M. RANSON and J. TYNEN
(From the Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, Oxford)

.on
HE first part of this paper was concremed with the properties of phenyl mercuric acetate as a spermicide and
Ithe use of gelatine as the main com-
of a solid vehicle for it. This second als with the remaining components
gels, and with the composition of paste.
olamine
eyl mercurc acetate is dissolved at per cent. in an acid gelatine gel, a tte begins to form in less than a day.
*tate is only clearly visible in the of glyceryl monoricinoleate, which, present in emulsion, renders the gel This substance is therefore always when studies of precipitation are lade. us attempts were made to dissolve yl mercuric acetate by the use of ubleand emulsified solvents. Among tances tried were Turkey Red oil 'we found, in collaboration with Dr. Carleton, to be damaging to the of bitches), oleic acid, ethyl lactate, and carbitol. These experiments t so successful, however, as others in ye slightly alkalinized the gelatine obtained products which remained clear for considerable periods. For
se we used small quantities of hydroxide, carbonate, bicarbonate, arate. about three weeks at room tempera-
ever, a scarcely discernible opalto appear in our alkaline gels,
gradually thickened and became
into a definite precipitate, whose

composition is not known to us. When this occurred, not only was the spermicidal power reduced, but pathological changes were observed in the vaginae of bitches into which the gel was inserted.
At the suggestion of The British Drug Houses Ltd. we tried triethanolamine as an
alkalinizer. This substance, (C2H4OH)3N, is
a weak base, admirably suited to the purpose. We made experiments to find how much was necessary to keep phenyl mercuric acetate stable at o -o6 per cent. in gelatine gels, and
found that 0 35 per cent. sufficed when the gelatine was at 7 5 per cent. We have a specimen of P.338 (made up without glyceryl monoricinoleate) which is seventeen months
old and is as transparent and free from precipitate as on the day of its preparation.
There has been a feeling, almost amounting to a dogma, that chemical contraceptives should be acid, and we are striking a new line in introducing an intentionally, though weakly, alkaline product. Volpar gels have a pH of about 8o, which is approximately that of human semen. They require for their neutralization about half as much acid as the same volume of human semen. Although the vagina is ordinarily acid, it is adapted to receive the cervical secretion and semen, both of which are alkaline.
Glyceryl monoricinoleate
The speed at which the spermicide diffuses out of the vehicle into semen is as important as the total spermicidal power, and for this reason we perform a special diffusion test, in which mechanical mixing of the contraceptive with the semen is avoided. The test has been minutely described in an earlier paper (Baker, Ranson and Tynen, I937). It

23

24

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

I

is performed at S concentration and at the
temperature of the body. The suppository is given time to melt before the semen is
added, since the test is not designed to take the place of the rate-of-disintegration test,
but only to measure the rate of diffusion of
the spermicide out of the already-disin-
tegrated vehicle. Observations on the activity of the sperms
are made at 2, 5, I5, 30 minutes, I hour,
2 hours, and 3 hours. The activity of the sperms is recorded by means of the usual
symbols. When a " o " is obtained (no activity whatever), a drop of the sperm suspension is diluted with alkaline diluting fluid, and a second observation shows
whether the sperms have only been temporarily immobilized (e.g., o/I) or actually killed (o/o).
Gelatine gels alkalinized with triethanolamine and containing sufficient phenyl mercuric acetate to give very high total spermicidal power give poor results in the diffusion test, nor does the addition of soluble agents reducing surface tension (e.g., sodium oleate, hexylresorcinol and saponin) greatly improve them. At the suggestion of The British Drug Houses Ltd. we therefore made experiments with spermicidal gels containing dispersive agents, namely, diglycol stearate, diglycol laurate and glyceryl monoricinoleate. The two former substances, at 2 *5 and 5 per cent., gave poor results, sperm

activity being still shown at thirty Gels containing the same amounts of gi monoricinoleate showed, on the con
very quick action. Glyceryl monoricinoleate is a thick,
fluid, of approximately the same s
gravity as water. Its chemical structure
be evident from the recollection that] triricinoleate is the main constituen
castor oil.
A series of diffusion tests was made to
the best concentration at which to use
glyceryl monoricinoleate. The results shown in Table V. The spermicide in tests was phenyl mercuric nitrate ignel' gels alkalinized with triethanolamine. will be seen that when the amount of
dispersive agent exceeds I - 5 per cent., q
diffusion of the spermicide results. emulsified particles rapidly disperse th selves among the semen, carrying with the spermicide. The latter is slightly sol in the monoricinoleate, and there must
partition between the continuous pi (water) and the disperse.
Increase in the amount of gly monoricinoleate above 2*5 per cent. little effect on the rate of diffusion, and is even some evidence that large am may slightly reduce spermicidal power making part of the spermicide not ava in the aqueous phase for the killing of s We have therefore chosen 2 *5 per cent. (

TABLE V THE RESULTS OF THE DIPFUSION TEST WITH PRODUCTS CONTAINING VARIOUS AMOUNTS OF GLYCERYL
RICINOLEATE (WITH HUMAN SPERMS)
Activity of experimental sperms

Number of gel

Percentage
of glyceryl monoricino-
leate in the gel

2 mins.

5 mins.

15 mins. 30 mins.

I hr.

Activit 2 hrs. con
spe

P.214 P.331 P-326 P-332
P-335 P-336
P.328

0
0'75 I*0 1| 5 1-5 2*0 2-5 2-5
5-o

3 1+ I

2+ I

1* 0/0,0/0

3 2 I+ 0/0,0/0

2

0/0,1*

I* 0/0,0/0

1* I o/o,o/o

2 I o/o,o/O

0 0/0,I 0 0/0,0/0

0 I |/o,|/0

I o/o,o/o

I3I 3
3 3 3
3 3, 3 3
3

VOLPAR CONTRACEPTIVE PRODUCTS

25

lo in Volpar gels. The size (identified by Dr. R. L. Vollum as Pseudo-

imonorcinoleate in an emulsion monas fluorescens liquifaciens) gradually

cIal power, presumably liquefies the gel.

yl mercuric acetate in large It was thought worth while to include a

less readily given up to the substance which would prevent the possibility

Small particles also give of infection by moulds and bacteria in prac-

in the diffusion test. For these tice. Among the substances tried were

ime emulsion, produced by an borax, sodium ethyl mercuri-thiosalicylate,

machine, is used. Glyceryl quinine bisulphate, chinosol, eugenol and

leate at 2*5 per cent. is harmless eucalyptol. The substance, however, which

of the bitch.

best fulfilled our requirements by acting as

n of the rate of diffusion of a fungicide and germicide without reacting

'with those of various supposito- with any of the other constituents was

market is shown in Table VI.

COO.CH3

oxybenzoate

methyl p.-hydroxybenzoate, 0

mwxunic acetate is not strongly t the concentration at which it

OH

olpar gels, nor does it protect A series of experiments at various con-

infections with bacteria attack- centrations showed that at o0o5 per cent.

* Nevertheless P.338, which this substance gave a large measure of

other fungicide or germicide, has protection to the gels against experimental

ioUr knowledge) in practical use infection with both moulds and bacteria,

by bacteria and has very while at o-i per cent. the protection was

attacked by moulds, although noticeably greater and at o *2 per cent.

used on a large scale by birth- complete. Although it was found to be

l s. In the laboratory, however, harmless to the vagina of the bitch at O-I

y attacked if deliberately and per cent., we decided to use it slightly weaker,

ected with the moulds and in order to be sure that it would be imper-

bich -grow on and in gelatine. ceptible in the vagina. The chosen concen-

circumstances moulds grow tration is 0o07 per cent. This has proved

.the surface, and a bacterium satisfactory in practice. Care is taken to

TABLE VI owrT DIFFUSION TEST (WITH HUMAN SPERMS) WITH THOSE CONTRACEPTIVE SUPPOSITORIES WHICH NAVE TEE HIGHEST TOTAL SPERMICIDAL POWER, AS SHOWN IN TABLIE III

Activity of sperms at:

2 mi.

5 minS. I5 mins. 30 minS.

I hour

2 hrs.

3 hrs.

(s X
o

3

*

3 3

3 3

o/o,o/o~ o/,o/
1 0/1
I o/o/o,o/
I 0/I 33
33
33 33

0/I o/o,o/o
O/I o/o,o/o
3I 33 3 2+ 33

I 3
2
I+

26

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

I

exclude infection during the course of the cooling may in itself affect the

manufacture and packing.

We allow four suppositories to disint

In making the gels, the methyl p.-hydroxy- in iooc.c. of warm o09 per cent.

benzoate is dissolved with the phenyl chloride solution and measure the depr

mercuric acetate and some of the triethano- of the freezing point below that of the

lamine in part of the water.

Four suppositories are used so as to

for any variation which may occur with

Glycerol

kinds of suppositories in which the subs

It has been customary, when gelatine gels or substances affecting osmotic pressure

have been used in chemical contraception, suspended in fat and are thus liable to

to include a high percentage of glycerol, in slightly in amount from specimen to S

order to prevent evaporation and consequent men. Considerable dilution (in the pro

shrinkage. We ourselves made experiments tion of one suppository to 25 c.c.) is n

with both sorbitol and glycerol with this end sitated by the fact that with gel supposit

in view. There are disadvantages, however, the gelatine must be in the sol conditio

in using a high percentage of glycerol. It the freezing point. The symbol Ac is tends to increase the time of disintegration to denote the depression of the freezing p of the gel, unless the concentration of due to the contraceptive (in degrees C

gelatine is so reduced as to produce a sup- grade), i.e., the extent to which the fr
pository which can scarcely be handled at point is depressed below that of o*9 per

room temperature. Further, glycerol in sodium chloride solution by the present

large amounts may in itself cause undue the saline of four suppositories per IOO lubrication, and, by the osmotic pressure The value of Ac for vanrous gel and f

which it raises, draw water into the vagina suppositories is shown in Table VII.

from the body fluids. Such water would not third place of decimals is not reliable.

only still further increase lubrication, but the pastes, the dose is regarded as 2

also dilute the spermicide. The passage of and 8 gm. are therefore allowed to IOO

water through the walls of the vagina and of saline.

cervix in response to osmotic pressure has The amount of glycerol necessary to

not, to our knowledge, been investigated, Volpar gels minutely hypertonic (Ac

but we have preferred to make our product o oog) is 2 0 c.c. per cent. (v/v). In gen

approximately isotonic with blood. Since gel suppositories have usually been mark

the constituents so far discussed in turn give hypertonic.

a hypotonic gel, we have added a small The low amount of glycerol in Volpar

amount of glycerol. It has appeared best to makes them liable to shrink by evaporati us to add enough to put the product just on and they are therefore sold in glass tu

the hypertonic side of isotonicity, to prevent with air-tight screw caps.

any rapid absorption. We have thought it most convenient to
use the freezing-point method of determining

General remarks on the chemical compo of Volpar gels

osmotic pressures, despite the drawback that The amounts of several of the constitu

TABLE VII THE VALUE OF AC FOR VARIOUS CHEMICAL CONTRACEPTIVES, IN DEGREES CENTIGRADE

Gel suppositories

Fatty suppositories

Pastes

AC Ac

Ac

Volpar gels (P.383) o*oog A. o*oI8 Volpar Paste (P.403) 0.003

J. o-66o F. o-oI8 M. 0. I13

C. i-683

L. 0055

VOLPAR CONTRACEPTIVE PRODUCTS

27

p1. depend on the amounts of The paste (or ointment) should be reasonably

tuent; and if one be varied, spermicidal; the spermicidal principle

which will affect a third. should not be inextricably bound up in the

leis thus set up.

vehicle; the texture should be such as to

statement may be illustrated allow ready and smooth smearing on rubber,

If one decides, for example, to which should not be caused to deteriorate;

o pH by reducing the triethano- there should be no damage nor irritation to

will not only affect the solubility vagina or cervix, and there should be an

yl mercuric acetate but also the approximation to isotonicity with blood;

if the gel and therefore the rate of there should be no esthetic drawback, such

tion. If one changes the amount of as an undesirable smell, feel, or appearance,

to allow for this, the amount of nor any tendency to liquefy completely and

e must again be changed to run out of the vagina; and the product

,the change in the gelatine. Any should be reasonably cheap.

in the amount of triethanolamine We found that the starch from the

bnly affect the solubility of the rhizomes of Maranta arundinacea (Scita-

c acetate, but also the osmotic minex), which is sold under the trade name

If one allows for the change in of St. Vincent arrowroot, provides a con-

e by changing the amount of venient vehicle for a product which is to be

then that very change may affect smeared on rubber. (It may be mentioned

disintegration of the gel and hence that the starch from other unrelated species

;n alteration in the amount of is sometimes called arrowroot.) It was

necessary to find the concentration which

it is possible to overstress the would provide the viscosity and adhesive-

of breaking the vicious circle, yet ness required, without preventing the diffu-

cclaimed that the formula for the sion of the spermicide into semen. This is

a carefully balanced one, giving a achieved by a 6 per cent. solution. Gelatine

iarmless, highly spermicidal and is added at o 6 per cent. to improve the

y unobjectionable product. If, consistency at room temperature. At this

clinical workers were to desire an concentration it has little effect on the con-

highly spermicidal gel, their sistency at body temperature, which depends

be met.

on the arrowroot. In general, pastes and

ointments have tended to be unduly viscous,

with the result that their spermicidal power

VOLPAR PASTE

is largely wasted owing to the inability of

the spermicide to diffuse out.

blems confronting anyone wishing A spermicidal paste smeared on both sides

.a smearable contraceptive paste of a rubber occlusive pessary has two separate

easier to solve than those presented functions, namely, (i) to kill any sperms

The narrow range between the which may get past the rim of the pessary

er temperatures and that of the before they have had time to reach the os,

es no difficulty. No question of and (2) to kill all the sperms in the vagina

arnses in a product which is not before the pessary is removed. Sperms

.a'so Neither very high spermicidal cannot swim through a paste, but only

very quick diffusion is necessary, through crevices filled with vaginal fluid and

be barrier will stand between the not occluded by the paste. Crevices large

semen and the cervical os. There enough to admit such excessively minute

on of a sperm finding its way bodies as sperms will no doubt exist under

ediately out of reach of the actual conditions, and some diffusibility of

by entering the cervical canal. the spermicide out of the paste is necessary

requirements are the following: to kill them; but the sperms which get past

28

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

U

the rim of the pessary have such a long way
to go before they reach the os that there is a considerable time in which to do so. The sperms which do not get past the rim only
become a potential danger when the pessary is removed; and if this is not done unduly
soon after coition, there is again no great
hurry for them to be killed. These arguments show that a paste may
without detriment be both less spermicidal and less quick in action than a gel, which may be used without an occlusive device. We apply our standard tests to pastes and ointments, regarding the dose as 2 gm. This figure was fixed in consultation with the Medical Sub-committee of the National Birth Control Association. The S concentration is 2 g1n. to 6 c.c. of sperm suspension.
We have thought it best to use the standard technique in order to avoid undue multiplication of tests, although in practice the whole dose will not come into contact with

the whole of the semen unless the becomes dislodged.
The results of the test of total spe power of Volpar paste and other sm products are shown in Table VIII, Table IX gives the results of the
test. In these tables the various pr other than Volpar paste, are distin by alphabetical letters. A short desc of them is given in Table X. The k their identification is in the possession National Birth Control Association.
Sufficient phenyl mercuric acetate been allowed in the paste to give a
concentration of - in both alkaline and 4
media. This is achieved by a 0 *045 per solution. Despite the lessened amo gelatine, as compared with the gel, we found it best to keep the triethanol o*35 per cent. The glyceryl monorcinc is also kept at 2 5 per cent., in ord

TABLE VIII THE SPERMICIDAL POWERS OF CONTRACEPTIVE PASTES AND OINTMENTS (WITH HUMAN SPERMS). FOR THE PU
OF THE TEST, THE STANDARD (S) DOSE IS REGARDED AS 2 GM. IN EACH CASE

Concentrations

Volpar Paste, P-385 (acid test)
Volpar Paste, P.385
(alkaline test) K (acid test)
K (alkaline test) ... |.
L ... ... ...
N ... ... ...

O/0/0 O/o/o
0/0/0
/
0/0/2 0/0/2+

|S/2
o/o/o
o/o/
2/0/0 2/0/0
I/I */2+/3/II0 /012

S/4 o/o/o o/o/o 0/0/0
0/0/0
o/o/o 0/0/0 I/O/I
2/0/0
3/2/-
2/2/3/3/-
31I/I- II

S/8 0/0/0 1*/0/1*
0/0/0
3/2/-
3/3/-

S/I6
o/o1/*
3/3/-

5/
2/1

M

... ...

...

3/3/-
3/3/-
3131-

VOLPAR CONTRACEPTIVE PRODUCTS

29

TABLE IX DmusION TEST OF CONTRACEPTIVE PASTES AND OINTMENTS (WITH HUMAN SPERMS)

Activity of sperms at:

5 mins. 15 mnns. 30 mins.

I hour

2 hours

33 hours

3 2+ I* 0/0,0/0

3

2+ 0/0, I

0/0,0/0

3

I+ I

0/1* 0/0,0/0

33
3+ 3 3 ~~2+

I
3

I o/o,o/o
I 0/0,0/0 1* 0/0,0/0

*3 3

I 0/1* 0/0,0/0

3 3 2 I 0/0,0/0

33 3 2

0/0,0/1* o/o,o/o

1+ | I

2+ 0/3

0/2+ O/I

O/I

tets, the "S" dose of K was taken as being the full amount (5-6 gm.) intended by the With the other products (Volpar Paste, 0, and L), the " S " dose was taken to be 2 gln.

tendency of the stickiness of toe interfere with the results of tiest. The methyl p.-hydroxyIightly reduced in amount (to
.), partly because a paste in a
be is less exposed to infection bacteria than a gel surrounded
yto prevent any possibility being irnrtated by the paste cncontact by the pessary. In
tage of glycerol (2 '2 per r*Wade very slightly greater than as to keep the whole product F.omc.
e (P.385 and P.403) is not e used in the absence of an
The dose of 2gm. is a ribbon about three inches long
ible tube. Paste should be
TABLE X
OF THE PROPRIETARY CONTRA-
AI OINTMENT WHICH HAVE BEEN VoL.Aat PASTE: IN LABORATORY TESTS
ab,oyqa2suepepcaisatle,apipnltiecnadteodr.to be inserted
t, colourless, smearable paste contain*nol; made by the same manu-
th suppositories, C and D. colourless, smearable paste, gradupale brown; made by the same as J and 0. g several acids and intended to La glass syringe. made by the same manufacturers

squeezed out on to the pessary and smeared over both sides of the rim immediately before insertion in the vagina. The paste is intentionally made to be dispersive and not very tenacious or sticky, and it is not meant to be inserted in the vagina a very long time before coition. Thus, if an occlusive pessary smeared with the paste be inserted in the vagina in the evening and coition does not take place until the following morning, it would be advisable to insert a Volpar gel a few minutes before ejaculation (or just after, in the case of those who strongly dislike taking contraceptive measures immediately before).
Volpar paste is suitable for use in the tropics.
GENERAL REMARKS ON CONTRACEPTIVE PASTES AND OINTMENTS
When a paste or ointment has sufficient dispersive power to mix fairly readily with semen and thus allow the spermicide to kill the sperms, it will not remain permanently in position on the occlusive pessary. Those smearable preparations which remain in situ for long periods are shown by our diffusion test to be very slow in action upon sperms, and any spermicidal power that they may possess is almost wasted. Some clinical workers prefer to use a preparation which will stay on the rubber pessary and be

30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

visible there when the latter is removed the It is a pleasure to acknowledge the

next day. This may be a good method of received from Mr. R. R. Bennett an

contraception, provided that something is done research staff of The British Drug H

to kill the sperms. A tenacious paste or Ltd. The Volpar products could not

ointment will be unlikely to do so by itself, been devised without the help of the

and the sperms might pass into the cervix suggestions of Dr. F. H. Carr and Mr.

after the removal of the pessary. The inser- Allport.

tion of a Volpar gel would of course kill the The clinical trials of our various pr

sperms, and in the circumstances under have mostly been carried out by Dr. M

discussion it would be allowable to insert the Hadley Jackson, Mrs. C. Harvey, Dr.

gel after coition, if there were any dislike of Griffith, Dr. Helena Wright and Dr. Iso

doing so before. (When, however, a gel is Sloan, to all of whom we are much inde

used in the absence of any occlusive device, It is hoped that Dr. Jackson will publ

it must always be inserted before the account of the extensive and car

ejaculation of semen, and given a few minutes recorded trials to which she has subj

in which to melt.)

our products.

Two of us are engaged in formulating an We have always had at our dispos

occlusive paste intended to remain in situ on valuable advice of the Medical Sub-co

rubber for considerable periods and to be of the National Birth Control Associ

especially suited for use in conjunction with and many others have helped us in v

Volpar gels. The intention is to fulfil the ways by making suggestions or

wishes of those clinical workers who desire a practical assistance (as, for instance

tenacious physical barrier.

exposing and reading maximum the

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

meters). We wish to record our obliga to Dr. A. Cooke, Professor A. D. Gar

The brief acknowledgements usual in a Mr. J. R. Groome, Miss Beatrice Hill

scientific paper would be inadequate in a F. G. Hobson, D.S.O., Mr. B. Moss, D

description of an investigation which has Newfield, Mrs. Margaret Pyke, Mr.

been so corporate as this. The whole Trotman and Dr. R. L. Vollum.

research on chemical contraception was first The expenses of our research have

suggested to one of us (J. R. B.) by Dr. C. P. met throughout by the Birth Co

Blacker, who has continually given valuable Investigation Committee, through who

advice over a period of ten years. Dr. Julian have also recently received a grant fron

Huxley and Lord Horder most kindly visited Committee on Maternal Health (New Y

us during the course of our work on phenyl which we much appreciate. We tender

mercuric acetate and made suggestions which best thanks to the Birth Control Inves

materially helped us.

tion Committee for their support, contv

Dr. H. M. Carleton, who has collaborated through years many of which must

with us throughout, will contribute a special seemed to them unproductive. The pr

paper on the testing of Volpar gels and paste Chairman of the Committee, Prof

for harmful effects. The vagina of every A. W. M. Ellis, has repeatedly given us

bitch into which we have injected our various benefit of his judgment in decision

preparations has been microscopically exam- critical importance.

ined and reported upon by Dr. Carleton,

whose contribution to the research has been

SUMMARY

essential to its success.

Volpar gels are of gelatine, sli

We owe a special debt of gratitude to alkanized with triethanolamine and con

Professor H. W. Florey for allowing the ing phenyl mercuric acetate in aqu

research to be carried out in the Sir William solution. This compound and the nitrat

Dunn School of Pathology at Oxford, and the most spermicidal substances kn

for his encouragement.

The gels contain a dispersive agent, gly

VOLPAR CONTRACEPTIVE PRODUCTS

31

te, to give rapid diffusion of
e into semen, and a germicide
methyl p.-hydroxybenzoate,
mposition of the gelatine by moulds. A little glycerol is
e the whole product approxi'c with blood. The gels are cidal and harmless. is intended to be smeared on ye pessaries. The formula t of the gels, but St. Vincent

arrowroot is the main vehicle, the amount of gelatine being much less than in the gels. The spermicidal power and diffusibility of the paste are adjusted to the less rapid action required of a smearable product, which is not intended to be used in the absence of an occlusive pessary. Volpar paste is harmless.
REFERENCE3
Baker, J. R., Ranson, R. M., and Tynen, J. (I937), Journ. Hyg., 37, 474.

ONSTRUCTIVE BIRTH CONTROL
crY ANMD CLNC FOUNDED BY DR. MARIE STOPES IN 1921
oldest Birth Control Clinic, the first to establish Birth Control 'Sheets and collect scientific data; C.B.C. Clinics are still the
6 clinics: the only birth control clinics dealing from the first 411 aspcts of birth control, i.e. prevention of detrimental births,
ofhealthy births and inducing potentially desirable pregnancy c women, and general marital help.
THE PIONEERS OF THE CLINIC MOVEMENT
\Libraty, Museum and Clinics open daily, IO-6 (except Sats.)
Books and Racial supplies may be obtained direct. CAL DEMONS7riTIONS for MEMBERS of the MEDICAL PROFESSION
First Thursday each month to The Hon. Secretary, Headquarters Clinic,
I o6 Whitfield Street, W. I
Eugenics view, VoL X No.1.

