PAUL BLOOMFIELD
Number Fourteen

SINCE the Prime Minister has said he thinks we have heard the last of the 14th
Earl and the 14th Mr. Wilson, it must be
explained at once that although the "Fourteen" in the title alludes to him (Sir Alec Douglas-
Home) it is in another context. Some listeners to Sir Charles Harman, the new Lord Mayor of London speaking at the Guildhall Banquet wondered whether he had hit on this other fourteen. Sir Charles said that as the Blackpool drama began to unfold anyone might have guessed who the new Prime Minister was going to be. However, he followed up with"when the English are divided among themselves
the blue bonnets come over the Border". A good crack; but he did not say (what I had half expected)-that it seemed inevitable that yet another, a fourteenth, descendant of Sir George Villiers of Brooksby, Leicestershire, should head a British Government.
This is the number fourteen meant here: and of this more presently.
The first party-political exchanges on Sir Alec's appointment to succeed Mr. Macmillan (including the "fourteenth Mr. Wilson" rejoinder) must have been instructive to an immense number of people. The mass media impose a strain but can be turned to some good uses-not only, where politics are concerned, to "projecting" this or that "image". What they have seen on television and heard on radio in the autumn of 1963 could almost have persuaded our jacobins that aristocrats, with or without titles, are not all of them transmitters of foolish faces or "plain" men the only ones "with the future in their bones". It may have helped when that able Labour peer Lord Longfordnot indeed a fourteenth but a seventh Earlalluded humorously to his predicament during one of his discussions with Mr. Anthony Nutting and Mr. Mark Bonham-Carter.
The "future in their bones" quotation is from

Sir Charles Snow's controversial "Two Cultures" Rede Lecture of 1959. Sir Charles claimed that the people with the future in their bones are
the scientists. He added: "this is as true of the
conservatives, J. J. Thomson and Lindemann as of the radicals Einstein or Blackett; as true of the Christian A. H. Compton as of the materialist Bernal: of the aristocrats Broglie or Russell as of the proletarian Faraday; of those born rich, like Thomas Merton or Victor Rothschild,
as of Rutherford, who was the son of an odd-job handyman." Men being born unequal, this is a useful illustration of one of the ways in which
they are born unequal. The nature-nurture problem is so complex that the right questions about it have not yet all been asked.
A great set-back to clear thinking about both
hereditary ability and "equality" was Thomas Jefferson's "proposition", written into the American Declaration of Independence, that
"all men are created equal". He did not believe anything of the kind. "There is," he assured John Adams, "a natural aristocracy among men. The grounds of this are virtue and talents." He had a very modern plan for selecting "Igrammar school graduates" for higher education and co-option into the ruling class. Although he, an American revolutionist, was against hereditary titles, he had nothing against hereditary ability. In one of his letters to John Adams he actually said: "The selecting of the best male for a Harem of well chosen females ... which Theognis seems to recommend from the example of our sheep and asses, would doubtless improve the human, as it does the brute animal, and produce a race of veritable aristoi. For experience proves that the moral and physical qualities of man, whether good or evil, are transmissible in a certain degree from father to son. But I suspect that the equal rights of men will rise up against this privileged Solomon and his Harem, and oblige us . . . to content

203

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1964, 55, 4.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ourselves with the accidental aristoi produced by the nipping north, the growth of the seed

the fortuitous concourse of breeders."

originally sown in our constitution-than give

Jefferson himself belonged to that interrelated a more or less decided expression to that

Virginian social Elite to which the new nation's personal character, the outlines of which

debt was so obviously great. He and John nothing can alter". And again: "We often dis-

Marshall, Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, tinctly notice the same features, the same bodily

and Edmund Randolph, first Attorney General peculiarities, the same look and gestures, in

of the U.S.A. were cousins, all three descended different persons of the same family: and find

from William Randolph, butler to Edward, this resemblance extending to collateral branches

Lord Zouche in the reign of Elizabeth I. It and through several generations, showing how

could hardly have been hidden from these strongly nature must have been warped and

people that the sort of endogamous group or biased in that particular direction at first".

class of which they were members combined the One more quotation, but meanwhile it seems

advantages of good nature and good nurture. worth recalling in parenthesis a cartoon of the

Then why did Jefferson proclaim that men "are Blackpool crisis by the left-wing artist Vicky.

created equal?" "His task," says the American In the foreground Mr. Butler and Lord Hail-

historian Nathaniel Weyl, "was to wage psycho- sham; in the background, coronet on head,

logical warfare, an area in which veracity standing upright with arms on hips, Lord Home

notoriously plays a subordinate part". Just so. -and Vicky, not for the moment concerned to

Jefferson was still alive at a ripe age in 1822, guy him, was inspired to give us a portrait

when Galton and Mendel were born. The year amazingly like a Dighton of Sir Alec's ancestor

before, in the March number of the London Lord Grey of the Reform Bill. Lord Grey was

Magazine, there appeared an article by Hazlitt not in the Villiers connection, but his daughter

with the title "On Personal Character". This is Louisa married Lord Durham, who was, and

one of his most splendid, deep, imaginative and from whom Sir Alec is descended. Grey himself

eloquent essays. Hazlitt was a radical of perfect stemmed from Edmund Dudley, one of Henry

intellectual honesty whose love for mankind VII's notorious-and efficient-hammers of the

never blinded him to the faults of his fellow old baronage. That ghostly, impressive figure in

creatures-or made him persuade himself (or the Vicky cartoon put it into my head that a

try to persuade others) that men were "created composite portrait in the Galton style of our

equal". It seems to me that the virile poetry of Prime Ministers since Walpole, including of

his prose offers, besides much else, intimations course the thirteen there had been till the other

of some of the subtler questions which would day in the Villiers connection, would give us

arise if one were seriously trying to decide how not at all a bad likeness of the fourteenth.

much Sir Alec Douglas-Home, fourteenth As Hazlitt expressed it: "Where the pictures

Prime Minister in line of descent from Sir of the heirs and successors to a title or estate

George Villiers, owed respectively to nature and have been preserved . . . the prevailing outline

to nurture. (In the last resort two computers and character does not wear out, but may be

might find themselves in violent disagreement traced through its numerous inflections and

over the figures.)

descents, like the winding of a river through an

"No one ever changes his character," Hazlitt expanse of country, for centuries. The ancestor

begins, "from the time he is two years old; nay, of many a noble house has sat for the portraits

I might say, from the time he is two hours of his youthful descendants; and still 'the soul of

old . . . but the internal, original bias remains Fairfax and the starry Vere' consecrated in

always the same, true to itself to the very last." Marvel's verse, may be seen mantling in the

A little further: "The accession of knowledge, suffused features of some young court beauty of

the pressure of circumstances, favourable or the present day." (Hazlitt is not suggesting that

unfavourable, does little more than minister the only function of the women of those houses

occasion to the first predisposing bias-than is to be beautiful.)

assist, like the dews of heaven, or retard, like To turn to the statesmen of the Villiers

204

NUMBER FOURTEEN

connection again. "The true blood-royal of England" Keynes said of the line, and Sir Winston Churchill, himself the twelfth of their .Prime Ministers, has alluded to their numbering
among them "some of the greatest and wickedest men in our history." In point of character and abilities the fourteen had not all got a family likeness. Their stars have been Chatham -who claimed what Churchill was spared the need to say for himself, that he was the man to save England-his son, the Younger Pitt . . . and Churchill. The witty, trimming Melbourne was one of them (through being an illegitimate son of Lord Egremont), so were the overbearing Stanley (Disraeli's Derby), the mild Aberdeen, Salisbury who believed in "splendid isolation" and his more philosophical nephew Balfour. Bertrand Russell's grandfather, the honest Lord John Russell, a shy man, was all the same one of the most forceful of them. Grafton, Portland, Rosebery and Lord Avon complete the tale.
The fact that it would be rash to make any confident predictions about Sir Alec's future career, on the basis of his kinsmen's performance in the past, does not take away from the significance of either the traditions and ethos that go with "class", or of class considered as a natural mechanism of social progress through its being an expression of the rise, and assimilation with the Establishment, of endogamous groups. According to popular wisdom it is better to marry "across the midden than across the moor". But before railways the inbreeding thus prescribed was the rural population's almost inevitable lot. Before, roughly, A.D. 1500, the ruling class was near-incestuous for reasons that it would be anachronistic to call snobbish. After that-from the Tudor Revolution onwardsthe marriage of "new" men and women with aristocrats whom natural selection had carried safely through the dangers of repeated cousin marriage, must have been genetically very salutary. England's wonderful Elizabethan renaissance was to a considerable extent an effect of those processes. Later again the emergence of new endogamous groups contributed to the nation's strength: such people as the Quakers, the immigrant Huguenots and in the early
nineteenth century the remarkable families asso-
ciated with the humanitarian "Clapham Sect".

Sir Alec Home's ancestor the first Earl was raised to the peerage in 1604. The Homes were
therefore well placed in the Establishment about two hundred years before the Younger Pitt
diluted the House of Lords with the blood of nabobs, bankers, lawyers, etc., in a big way.
The usual intermarriages of what Disraeli liked to call "race" with practical talents broadened the base of the top endogamous group. At the
same time a certain elite on the whole kept
itself to itself. At the end of the lately published memoirs of
Lady Ottoline Morrell (born Bentinck) is a
record of an interesting dialogue between the writer as a young woman and her friend Bertrand Russell on the steps of Bolsover Castle. Lady
Ottoline makes out a case for its being more than a material advantage to come of "a long line of men and women who . . . have sunned themselves in the sunshine of art and culture and who, too, have taken part in weaving the tangle of history, have become conscious of what civilization and subtlety of thought and quickness of action mean . . ." Russell begins by saying that those traditions of hers would just have cramped her freedom and spontaneity; but then he goes on: "Yes, I suppose coming from a good stock gives one a certain standard and balance, an unconscious assurance and courage.... I have certainly inherited the instinct of responsibility to my country, and it is undoubtedly an advantage to have had a first class education. But show me what all these privileged people do now with their inherited sensibility and culture."
Still, the philistinism with which Russell goes on to indict the Edwardian aristocracy was not anything that affected the stirp.
The times are not propitious for defending a sense of piety for the past-a word often on the lips of the ex-fourteenth Earl is "modernization". It would not be very judicious to say much in public just now about tempo of change, unless speeding up was meant, and people are too busy to praise famous men and the fathers which begat us; it would be a disservice to the
Prime Minister to harp much on his thirteen
predecessors in the Villiers connection. Remains
the stirp: a fine ugly word. With its help it may
become possible to put across that to play down

205

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
heredity is to proclaim oneself out of date. already beginning to underline inequalities in "Wherever material environment improves, genetic endowment." hereditary differences become more and more These words from the blurb of Dr. Cedric important. Better education and more efficient Carter's admirable Pelican Book, Hnuman health services, by eliminating wastage, are Heredity, would do very well for our text.
2o6

