VERA HOUGHTON
International Planned Parenthood Federation (I.P.P.F.)

ITS HISTORY AND INFLUENCE*

RE-APPRAISAL
T OWARDS THE END of the 1930s it became
clear that the provision of a contraceptive
service alone was not enough. The over-
fertile over-burdened parents of the 1920s still
needed help but so did their sub-fertile neighbours who had failed to achieve the wanted child, and the newly-married daughters who came to the voluntary clinics for child-spacing. Birth control began to have a new and wider meaning which was expressed in the terms "family planning" and "planned parenthood." Also reflected in this change was the de-population scare of the mid-1930s brought about by the dramatic decline in the birth rates of several European countries and which in France had already led, in 1920, to legislation aimed at preventing the practice of birth control and to Government measures in favour of large families.
By 1934 the medical facilities for abortion in the U.S.S.R. provided under the Soviet law of 1920 had become so widely used that in Moscow for every 100 pregnancies ending in live births, 270 ended in abortion. Counter-measures were taken in 1936 which restricted the grounds for abortion and increased family benefits. The restrictions remained in force until 1955 when concern about the growing number of illegal operations and their harmful effects on the health of women once again prompted the Soviet Government to legalize abortion.
In Sweden and in Britain fears of de-population resulted in the appointment of Royal Commissions on Population which, while fully recognizing the need for population replace-
* The first part of this article appeared it THE EUGENICS
REVIEW, October 1961, 53, 149.

ment, firmly upheld the principle of voluntary parenthood and, in the case of Britain, recommended that "the giving of advice on contraception to married persons who want it should be accepted as a duty of the National Health Service."
Comprehensive Clinics The British Royal Commission envisaged the development of "a clinic . . . as the needs emerged, to include pre-marital examinations and other services of direct relevance to family welfare." It went on to suggest that "this branch of the National Health Service might play an important part in family welfare in future." In the absence of any official action the voluntary agency, the Family Planning Association, has itself developed the idea of comprehensive clinics and named them "marriage welfare centres."
At the Third International Conference on Planned Parenthood (Bombay, 1952) it was recommended that such centres be established in India. The following year, in July 1953, the Government of India Family Planning Research and Programmes Committee held its first meeting. It adopted the five-purposes principle and defined them as including "sex education, marriage counselling, marriage hygiene, the spacing of children (which for the immediate future has priority), and advice on such other measures (among them infertility) as may be necessary to promote the welfare of families."
Abortion in Sweden The question of abortion figured prominently in the Report of Sweden's first Royal Commission on Population (1935-38) and again in the Report of the second Royal Commission (1941-46).

20I
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1962, 53, 4.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Among the suggested measures to deter women foundations for a new international organization.

from seeking abortion were the following: better Under the auspices of the Swedish League the

sex instruction and improved distribution of first of a new series of international conferences

contraceptives; facilities for the earlydiagnosis of was held in Stockholm in August 1946. It

pregnancy and the simplification of the proce- brought together again representatives from the

dure for obtaining a legal abortion; maternity United States, headed by Margaret Sanger,

grants and the provision of accommodation for and from\rBritain, Denmark, Finland, Holland,

unmarried mothers.

Norway and Sweden. Two important decisions

were taken at Stockholm: the first was to set up

Scandinavian Pioneer

an interim committee to work for the forma-

In 1933 Norwegian-born Mrs. Elise Ottesen- tion of a permanent international organization

Jensen founded in Sweden a voluntary organiza- and the second was to hold another, more

tion to spread sex education, Riksfdrbundet fYr representative, conference in 1948 in England.

Sexuell Upplysning (National League for Sex Mrs. Sanger persuaded the Family Planning

Education), and opened, in Stockholm, the first Association to undertake the organization of

consultation centre at which advice on all what came to be known as the Cheltenham

sexual matters, including birth control, was Congress, and promised it financial help.

available. Previously the one or two birth

control clinics which had been started earlier Cheltenham Congress, 1948 had failed to attract the public but the new Delegates from twenty-three countries met at

centre quickly became popular.

Cheltenham in August 1948, under the presi-

Through the efforts of the League the recom- dency of Lord Horder, to discuss the theme

mendations of the Swedish Royal Commissions "Population and World Resources in relation to

on Population were put into effect. For many the Family." The proceedings of the Chelten-

years Elise Ottesen-Jensen herself travelled all ham Congress produced much useful informaover Sweden giving lectures to children and to tion, which had not been collected before at

adults. As part of the campaign against illegal one spot, on population trends, the social and

abortions the League established its own labora- economic aspects of family life, migration and

tory for pregnancy diagnosis and opened a birth control as factors in the adjustment of

home for unmarried mothers to which the late populations to resources, and the psychological,

King of Sweden contributed 1,000 Swedish religious and political implications of family

kronor from his private purse. On her sixty-fifth limitation as well as current and future research

birthday Mrs. Ottesen-Jensen received from on fertility, infertility, sex and marriage. Subse-

His Majesty the award "Illis Quorum", and quent conferences have both added to this pool

more recently Uppsala University has conferred of information and increased understanding of

on her the Honorary Doctorate of Medicine in the essential part that family planning can play

recognition of her work in the field of sex in the economic and social development of a

education, which is now an accepted part of country.

the curriculum of all Swedish schools. In 1959

she succeeded Margaret Sanger as President of Interim Committee and the London Centre the International Planned Parenthood Federa- At Cheltenham the interim committee, known tion. as the International Committee on Planned

PART II: 1946-1961

Parenthood (I.C.P.P.), was formed. It consisted of two representatives each from the national

Rebuilding in Europe

organizations of Britain, Holland and Sweden,

After the Second World War Mrs. Ottesen- and three from the United States. The Brush

Jensen rallied the scattered forces of Europe Foundation for Race Betterment, U.S.A.,

to help rebuild the pre-war movement which the made an initial grant of $5,000 for the establish-

Nazi regime had destroyed in the "occupied ment of a headquarters office in London and

countries" and in Germany itself, and to lay the the Eugenics Society provided it with rent-free

202

INTERNATIONAL PLANNED PARENTHOOD FEDERATION (I.P.P.F.)

accommodation at 69 Eccleston Square. The until by 1955 there were more than a-million

London centre was at first in the charge of a operations a year and a further million which

part-time secretary, Mrs. Helen (now Lady) were outside the provisions of the law. Although

Cohen. In November 1949 I was engaged on a official sanction was given in 1949 for the produc-

full-time basis and became in August 1953 the tion of chemical contraceptives, and the Japanese

first Executive Secretary of the I.P.P.F. which Cabinet in 1951 advocated the practice of contra-

post I held until my resignation in May 1959. ception, it was not until 1954 following Mrs.

The present Executive Secretary is Mrs. Patricia Sanger's visit that the Minister of Welfare's

Gasparro.

Advisory Council on Population issued a state-

During the three years 1949 to 1951 the ment that "it is necessary for the [Japanese]

I.C.P.P. met annually in London. Contact was Government to adopt policies to curb the popu-

re-established with family planning groups lation increase" and that the practice of con-.

and supporters in some twenty countries. In ception control "should be conducted not only

several places, particularly in Eastern Europe, from the standpoint of protection of mother's

there was no one left who was in a position to health, but also ... as a part of overall population

help and we had to await the emergence of new policies." The measures recommended to the

forces and new ideas. In others, like Holland, Japanese Government included the provision of

the pre-war movement was being rebuilt along "means of conception control ... through the

somewhat different lines, involving a change in health insurance or other social insurance

emphasis from birth control to sex education systems" and without charge or at low prices to

and marital harmony. But in Asia the malthusian indigent people; "the co-operation of welfare

spectre stalked again.

agencies of factories, mining companies, or

other establishments to promote the practice of

Death Control and Counter-measures

family planning," and the avoidance of benefits

Famine, pestilence and disease were fast "in relation to wage payments as well as the

disappearing not only from the continent of taxation system . . . which may be interpreted

Asia but from other areas of the world. In a as encouraging large families."

single year the death rate of Ceylon dropped six By 1951 all Indian States and Unions were

points, from twenty to fourteen per thousand, as being urged to encourage birth control to check

a result of the use of D.D.T. against the malarial the rapid growth of population. The Prime

mosquito. Death rates comparable with the Minister, Pandit Nehru, in his speeches fre-

lowest in Europe are now to be found in Ceylon quently referred to the need for family limitation
(9.8), Taiwan (8 0), Hong Kong (7.5), Japan and the National Planning Commission, of (7.4) and Singapore (7.3). In Latin America, which he was chairman, recommended that

control of malaria, smallpox and yellow fever "the State should provide facilities for steriliza-

has cut the death rate by half in Chile and Costa tion or giving advice on contraception on

Rica and by nearly two-thirds in Puerto Rico. medical grounds," and that "such help and

To-day Latin America has the most rapid popu- advice should not be withheld from others who

lation growth (an annual rate of 2-5 per cent) seek and need it on social and economic

of any major region in the world.

grounds." The Registrar-General in his report

Economic conditions in Japan after her defeat on the 1951 Census warned that policies of

were such that the women took matters into economic development and reduction of births

their own hands. In the absence of reliable must be simultaneously pursued and defined

contraceptives and trained instructors they "'improvident maternity" as "a childbirth to a

resorted to abortion, a method which, together mother who has already given birth to three or

with infanticide, had kept the population more children of whom at least one is alive."

stationary for about 250 years during the latter The Indian Government applied to the World

half of the Tokugawa Shogunate (1603-1867). Health Organization for advice and assistance

With the introduction of the Eugenics Protec- in carrying out a survey of the rhythm, or safe

tion Law of 1948 abortion became widespread period, method and in October 1951 Dr.

203

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Abraham Stone, Director of the Margaret full, and a sum of Rs. 65 lakhs (£540,000) was

Sanger Research Bureau, New York, and a allocated to the Ministry of Health for a family

m[mber of the I.C.P.P., visited India as W.H.O. planning programme. The provision made

consultant on family planning. As a result of his under the second Five-Year Plan was Rs. 497

recommendations two study-projects were set lakhs (031 million) and in the third Five-Year

up in May 1952, one in Lodi Colony, New Plan (1961-65) Rs. 25 crores (£18; million).

Delhi, and the other at Ramanagaram in

Mysore, which continued until March 1955.* International Bulletin and Directory

When the I.C.P.P. met in London in 1951, The first issue of the international bulletin

the Bombay Family Planning Association, which Around the World News of Population and Birth

was soon to b2come the F.P.A. of India, was Control appeared in January 1952. Edited by

making preparations for the first All India Dorothy Brush and generously subsidized by

Conference on Family Planning in November the Brush Foundation for Race Betterment the

1951. Margaret Sanger immediately cabled the bulletin quickly became an important link

President, Lady Rama Rau, asking her to between the older established family planning

invite the I.C.P.P. to hold the next international organizations and the newly emerging pioneer

conference in India.

groups. The circulation figure of 5,000 doubled

in a year and by September 1953 had reached

Bombay Conference, 1952

a peak of 12,000 copies. Altogether the bulletin

At the invitation of the F.P.A. of India the has been published in eight languages. When

Third International Conference on Planned Mrs. Brush resigned for health reasons at the

Parenthood took place in Bombay in November end of 1956 the publication was transferred

1952. It was inaugurated by India's Vice- from New York to London and Dr. L. N.

President, Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan and Jackson became the editor.

was attended by 487 delegates and observers; In April 1952 the international directory

fourteen countries participated. In his opening previously issued by the British F.P.A. was re-

address Dr. Radhakrishnan discussed Gandhi's vived as an annual publication. The 1961 edition

teaching and pointed out that in matters of gives information about family planning agencies

social conduct and policy Gandhi had estab- in fifty-seven countries.

lished, in conformity with ancient texts, an

important moral distinction between what was Stockholm Conference, 1953 ideal and, if the ideal were unattainable, what The Fourth International Conference on Planned

was permissible.t

Parenthood met at Stockholm in August 1953.

By a resolution of the Bombay Conference, Attended by 158 delegates and observers from

the I.C.P.P. became the International Planned twenty countries it was a very different gathering Parenthood Federation and Mrs. Sanger and from that of the first post-war conference which

Lady Rama Rau were appointed the first Joint the Swedish League invited to Stockholm in

Honorary Presidents. The four original member- 1946. In the intervening years the I.P.P.F. had

organizations, from Britain, Holland, Sweden grown up and at the 1953 conference a constitu-

and the United States, were joined by the tion was adopted which put as the first aim "to

family planning associations of India, Hong advance through education and scientific re-

Kong, Singapore and Western Germany.

search the universal acceptance of family

Immediately following the Bombay Confer- planning and responsible parenthood in the

ence, the Prime Minister of India, on interests of family welfare, community wellDecember 8th 1952, presented to the Indian being, and international goodwill." Membership

Parliament the National Planning Commission's was made conditional upon the observance of

fisrt Five-Year Plan. The recommendations the two following principles: that commercial concerning family planning were adopted in interests take no part in the control of the body

* THE EUGENICS REvnEw 1955, 47, 93 and 163.
t THE EUGENICS REvIEw 1953, 44, 187.

applying for membership and that its work is carried on irrespective of race, creed or colour.

204

INTERNATIONAL PLANNED PARENTHOOD FEDERATION (I.P.P.F.)

At first open only to voluntary organizations Denmark and New Zealand the I.P.P.F.'s

membership was extended in 1957 to government membership numbered eighteen in 1955.

agencies; the Medical and Health Department

of Bermuda was the first to apply followed by the Present Membership

Service de la Sante Publique of the Canton de New member-organizations were elected from

Vaud, Switzerland. Other associations admitted Barbados and Jamaica in 1957 as well as the

in 1952 were from Australia and South Africa. first two government agencies already referred

to, Bermuda and Canton de Vaud, Switzerland;

United Nations World Population Conference
The U.N. World Population Conference which met in Rome at the end of August 1954 was attended by 500 specialists from seventy States and territories. The I.P.P.F. was allowed

from Finland, France, Mauritius and Poland
in 1959; from Nepal and Thailand in 1960, and in 1961 from Burma, Korea, Malaya and Trinidad and Tobago, bringing the total membership up to thirty-two.

observer status and was represented by Elise Ottesen-Jensen and Dorothy Brush. Eight members of the Governing Body were amongst those who contributed papers or participated in discussion. As described in the first part of this
article, the object of the conference was not to discuss policies or to make recommendations: it was to seek information on population trends and relevant matters. At the I.P.P.F. Governing Body meeting held immediately after the conference the national associations of Ceylon, Italy, Japan, Pakistan and Puerto Rico were admitted as members.

Regional Conferences and Seminars
The constitution of the I.P.P.F. provides for a
regional system of organization under which
countries have so far been grouped in four regions: the Western Hemisphere, based on New
York; Europe, Near East and Africa, on London, the Indian Ocean, successively on Bombay and Colombo, and the Far East and Australasian Region on Singapore. In May 1955 the first of a series of regional conferences was held in Puerto Rico. Subsequent conferences have been at West Berlin in October 1957; Jamaica in April 1958; The Hague in May 1960;

and Barbados in April 1961. The next regional

Tokyo Conference, 1955

conference will be held at Dacca, East Pakistan,

The Family Planning Federation of Japan was in January 1962.

the host-organization for the Fifth International A number of seminars have also been organ-

Conference on Planned Parenthood held in ized in recent years: two, of a scientific nature,

November 1955 under the presidency of the were held at Bombay in November 1955 and

Japanese Minister of Health and Welfare, Mr. Hyderabad in January 1961, while the theme

Hideji Kawasaki. Some 500 delegates and selected for a seminar in Lahore in February

observers from all over Japan and from twenty 1959 was social: "The Ideal Family." Seminars

other countries participated. The importance of on the medical and sociological aspects of

the Tokyo Conference was the bringing together sterilization will take place in Bombay and in

for the first time in a meeting of this kind, of Singapore in January 1962.

anatomists, biologists, biochemists and other

research workers for the discovery of a biologi- Delhi Conference, 1959

cal method of conception control. Ten leading The latest, the Sixth International Conference on

scientists from Britain, India, Israel, Japan, Planned Parenthood, held in February 1959,

Sweden and the United States contributed was noteworthy for the support and co-opera-

papers.

tion it received from the Government of India:

At the end of the conference the Japanese particularly, for the keen personal interest

Minister of Health and Welfare presented the shown by the President and Vice-President of

I.P.P.F.'s President, Mrs. Sanger, with a scroll India, by the Prime Minister, Pandit Nehru,

of appreciation from the Japanese people. who inaugurated the conference, the Deputy

With the admittance of organizations in Belgium, Chairman of the Planning Commission and

205 ER-D

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

by the Health "Minister and officials of his Malaya and Thailand. Reference is also made to

department, includingthe Secretary, the Director- the family planning programme launched in

General of Health Services and the Director of China in 1955.

Family Planning. Present were 783 delegates

and observers from twenty-eight countries. The China's Change of Policy

F.P.A. of India was the host-organization.

At the height of the campaign, in June 1956,

During the proceedings the representatives of Madame Li Teh-chuan, the Chinese Minister of

the fifteen Asian countries tabled a resolution Health, told the People's Congress that wider

directing the attention of their respective govern- birth control instruction was "necessary for the

ments to the efforts iiow being made by the health of mothers and the better upbringing of

countries of Asia to raise the level of living of children." Shortly afterwards she exhorted the

their peoples, and the extreme difficulty of people of China to break down the traditional

achieving this aim in view of, the high and opposition to birth control for "without planned

rapidly increasing rates of population growth. child-birth China cannot free itself from poverty

The resolution urged the governments concerned and become prosperous, rich and strong." The

to take full advantage of the March 1959 session E.C.A.F.E. report states that "the programme,

of the U.N. Economic Commission for Asia first on a modest scale but considerably intensi-

and the Far East (E.C.A.F.E.), which had on fied recently, is making guidance in family

its agenda the item "Population Growth in planning an important part of the activities of

relation to Economic Development."

hospitals, child and maternity centres." But this

information had already become out of date by

E.C.A.F.E. Report In June 1959 E.C.A.F.E. published its report "Population Trends and Related Problems of Economic Development in the E.C.A.F.E. Region." The region covered by E.C.A.F.E. stretches from Iran to Japan and now comprises twenty-two countries containing about

the time the report was published. Although no restrictions have been put on the practice of birth control it is no longer publicly encouraged. But now it is suggested in some quarters that a further reversal of policy may be imminent because of the recent disastrous crop failures in China.

half (1,700 million) the world's population and

only a seventh of the land area, with few The New Awakening

developed resources. The report states a general- In the past, governments have more often

ization which it considers "valid for all but a few pursued expansionist policies than restrictive

sparsely populated countries, and unfortunately policies of population control. Only in the last

applieswith special force to thosewitharelatively decade has there been any real awakening to

dense population: it is that, other things being the need to reduce the rate of increase in the

equal, a country with a higher rate of population interests of the general health and strength of

growth must make a larger development effort the nation, for economic advance and for social

(which includes investing more and abstaining stability. Sir Julian Huxley has expressed the

more from consumption) in order to obtain a ultimate motivation for family planning as the

given rate of increase in per capita income." It desire to secure an improvement in the quality of

goes on to warn that "there is even a danger that life, to realize more possibilities of fulfilment

the development effort will not be large enough for more people; while the immediate motivation

to offset the effect of a rapid population growth is the necessity to secure a reasonable future to

and that per capita income will decrease." the human species before it is too late.

The report reviews in some detail how the need Without the pioneering work of Margaret

for family limitation has gained acceptance in Sanger and of the countless followers whom she

some of the E.C.A.F.E. countries, notably inspired, there would have been no organized

Ceylon, Hong Kong, India, Japan, Pakistan, groups ready to exert an influence at the right

Singapore and Taiwan, and refers to the activities moment on the governments of countries such as

of private organizations in the Federation of India and Japan. As family planning becomes

206

INTERNATIONAL PLANNED PARENTHOOD FEDERATION (I.P.P.F.)

an accepted part of the health services, the role they considered could best be given by its

of the voluntary society will change but its acceptance in the World Health Organization.

function as a pioneer body will remain: its Several, but so far unsuccessful, attempts have

energies will be directed more towards educa- been made to get W.H.O. to examine the health

tional research programmes and to liaison with aspect of family planning; the latest occasion

governments.

was the resolution presented by Ceylon and

Norway at the Fourteenth World Health

W.H.O. Recognition

Assembly in Delhi in February 1961, discussion

In May 1960 after nearly ten years as a Director of which was denied on a procedural point.

of the Technical Assistance Administration of Efforts are now being made to get the resolution

the United Nations, Mr. George W. Cadbury re-presented next year at Geneva and for it to

joined the I.P.P.F. staff as Field Director, and be supported by twenty countries.

the title of Special Representative to the Presi- Until W.H.O. becomes the proper inter-

dent was created for use as occasion arose national body to co-ordinate and stimulate

by both Mr. Cadbury and his wife, Barbara. family planning action the I.P.P.F. will have to

In November 1960 George and Barbara Cadbury do it. This means that through our member-

undertook on behalf of the I.P.P.F. a tour of associations in each country we have to develop

Asia which lasted five months and covered relationships with governments and give them

eleven countries. Their overwhelming impression our services. The influence we must now exert

was the need to get family planning recognized is greater than at any time in the past fifty years.

as a normal part of the maternal and child If we succeed the early pioneers will have no

health services of the world, which recognition greater tribute to their work.

207

