POPULATION CONTROL IN INDIA
By CEDRIC DOVER

T HE need for population control in to the fact that the older women returned to

India hasi been often emphasized.
Within the country itself, large sections of the public, both professional and lay,

their homes permanently incapacitated by illness. That this condition could not be
wholly ascribed to environmental factors is

favour the widespread use of contraceptive measures, but pronounced personal views

partly shown from the information that mothers belonging to the age-groups 9-I3 and

against birth-control are also prevalent. The opponents belong to the so-called educated

I4-I8 years contributed 4-9 and 513 respectively of the births. Even on the basis of

classes, and base their attitude on religious prejudices so familiar to birth-control workers

this inquiry it must be concluded, therefore, that restriction of the birth-rate is necessary

that they need not be considered here.

in India. Wider studies emphasize this need further. *

OPPOSITION TO BIRTH-CONTROL

According to Dr. C. V. Natarajan (in litt.) of the Mysore Health Department, and other

Apart from religious and private objections, workers, the masses, to whom primitive

certain economists feel that birth-control is methods are already known, take readily to

neither necessary nor feasible in India. Thus, suggestions for restricting parenthood. The

G. S. Ghurye and S. R. Deshpande, who average labourer is certainly capable of

made an economic survey* of 2,053 immi- assimilating and using simple instruction in

grant labourers from Konkan to Bombay a the vernacular, and in this connection it is

few years ago, felt that their inquiry did not interesting to note that the members of the

support the need for restricting the birth-rate Statutory Commission (I930) commented on

in India. They found that female reproduc- " the shrewdness which often resides in the

tivity ceased at twenty-eight years, the illiterate peasantry." There is no basis,

average age of mothers at the first birth therefore, for the popular belief that the

being I8 * 5 years. The interval between Indian masses are too ignorant to understand

births averaged 2*8 years, and the number simple contraceptive technique, nor is there

of children per marriage was 4.4. These any reason to suppose that unsurmountable

figures may be accepted as more or less repre- difficulties prevent wide distribution of this

sentative for the labouring classes through- knowledge. It is said that almost every

out the country, and provide an apparent village has its health visitor, and the cost of

case against the practice of contraception. effective methods can be so greatly reduced as

But it does not stand close analysis. For one to place them within universal reach, par-

thing, the incidence of abortions was not ticularly if modest State aid is given. This

considered; nor was adequate importance has been partly proved in Mysore.

given to the relief which contraception gives

to the family. And Ghurye and Deshpande's THE OFFICIAL ATTITUDE

survey itself shows how urgent is the need for Neither the Indian Government nor wel-

such amelioration. The sample studied lived fare and other ameliorative agencies have

almost entirely in one-room tenements under given serious consideration to the problem of

conditions which can be readily imagined. population control. Apathetic officialdom in

Among the women, 23 *8 per cent. belonged

to the age-group 2I-25 years, the proportion
falling to II .3 per cent. after 30 years, owing

* See, e.g. Wattal, P. K.: The Population Problem of India. Bennett Coleman, Bombay, 1934. Das, R. K.:
The Industrial Efficiency of India. P. S. King, London,

* Indian Journal Economics, 193I.

1930. Hutton, J. H.: Census of India, X93I. Govern-
ment of India, Delhi, I933.

283

284 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

India has yet to learn that " it is incom- Pittapur and Jaipur, the rulers are also

patible with sound public health administra- interested in the birth-control movement, but

tion that any Government worthy of the little has been done, except in Travancore,

name should allow itself to be deterred against outside the sphere of avowed sympathy.

its better judgment from including in the

national health services clinics for advice on UNOFFICIAL ENDEAVOUR

birth-control."* In some Provinces, however, evidence of
interest in the problem is not wanting among those theoretically concerned with the ad-
ministration. In the Madras Legislative Council, Mr. Shetty's effortst during the last five years have resulted in the inclusion, against a storm of opposition in which
Roman Catholics played a dominant part, of birth-control in the maternal welfare activities of the Presidency. It may also be stated that a few years ago the Government of
Bombay made a noteworthy decision in repealing the ban imposed by the Board of
Censors on a film, issued by the National Baby and Health Week Committee of Bombay, entitled If She Only Knew, which was a propaganda film for birth-control, inasmuch as it illustrated the relationship between
frequent pregnancies and tuberculosis." In certain Indian States the position is
more advanced than it is in British India. The Government of Mysore State was, I
believe, the first in the world to open (in I930) official birth-control clinics at its prin-
cipal hospitals, but between the recognition of the principle and the fruition of its objects there has unfortunately been a wide gap. Visiting one of these clinics in I932, I was informed by the doctor in charge that she had only had about ten cases, and that conditions were not much better at the other clinics in
the State. This was not surprising, since she was opposed to the widespread practice of contraception, relating with pride her discouragement of " women with only three or four children" who had approached her for advice. In other Indian States such as Baroda, Travancore, Cooch Behar, Rajkote,

Private activity has resulted in the forma-
tion of a few propagandist societies and birth-
control centres. The former, however, live on the verge of extinction, and the latter are
largely associated with the sale of literature and proprietary goods of very doubtful
value. The only organization deserving notice is the Madras Neo-Malthusian League,
of which Sir Vepa Ramesam, a judge of the
Presidency High Court, is the moving spirit,
with the Maharajahs of Pittapur and Jaipur
as patrons. It has done valuable propagandic
work, and publishes authoritative pamphlets in addition to a useful journal.
To such activities the medical profession has made practically no contribution, though recognizing their need.* The Indian Medical
Association, however, showed some interest
in the subject by requesting a survey of
contraceptive technique,t and Dr. A. P. Pillay, who has frequently emphasized the
bearing of contraceptive knowledge on welfare work,+ conducts " The Eugenic Clinic" at Bombay, where advice is given without restrictive conditions. This clinic is largely confined to the more prosperous classes, but Dr. Pillay hopes to expand his services if he has sufficient support.
Propaganda alone, based on Western
experience and a few economic generalizations, will not establish the birth-control movement in a country where contraceptive practice requires a special approach. Methods for the masses require particular attention, the investigation of indigenous products offering a rich field for the combined efforts of laboratory and social workers. One of the main problems of population control in India is of finding a really cheap contracep-

* Macassey, Sir Lynden: Journal State Medicine, tive which will ensure a high degree of safety,

XL, 399-405, I932.
t See Madras Birth Control Bulletin, I, 2-7, I93I; * See editorials in Indian Medical Gazette, I929,
II, 13-14, I932; and later issues. Also the Madras 1931-2.

Mail and Hindu in the third quarter of 1933.

t Dover, C.: Indian Medical World, I, I930.

$ Phadke, N. S.: Birth Control Review, XII, I74-5, t See, e.g. Welfare Problems in Rural India. Tara-

1927. porevala and Sons, Bombay, I93I.

POPULATION CONTROL IN INDIA

285

even if it does not furnish the complete birth-control on the programme of all depart-

security which combined methods offer to ments and associations concerned with

more fortunate persons.

public health; (3) instituting short courses

on contraception in medical and health

INDIAN LITERATURE ON

schools, and (4) enforcing legislation against

CONTRACEPTION

quackery and profiteering in connection with

Like most countries, India produces a the sale of contraceptive literature and

large volume of contraceptive literature of products.* The formation of an All-India

poor quality. I know of no work published in Birth-Control League, which is being stimu-

India that attains the standard of a thorough lated by the efforts of the Birth-Control

modern study, but several " popular " works International Information Centret in co-

are at least earnest in purpose. In this cate- operation with local groups, supported by

gory are those by N. S. Phadke* and Mercia provincial branches, would help to secure

Heynes-Wood,t and the publications of the official action which it would support and

Madras Neo-Malthusian League.+ Vernacu- extend. With co-operative organization of

lar pamphlets are also numerous, but there is this nature, information on birth-control

much scope for brief and reliable information could be made available to the most rural

in the vernaculars, such as that supplied in populations, since it is said that every village

Prof. R. D. Karve's Marathi monthly, has its health visitor, whose services can be

Samajaswathya.§ Meanwhile, there are utilized for this purpose.

moderately useful works in Hindi, Bengali, Finally, it must be emphasized that con-

Gujarati, Marathi, Tamil, Telegu and Urdu. traception alone will not suffice for productive

population control in India. The need for

ORGANIZATION

sterilization and legalized abortion+ is im-

Research and propaganda need to be perative in a country where the increasing

supplemented by adequate organization, if incidence of such diseases as leprosy and

the birth-control movement in India is to be insanity has not proved susceptible to treat-

productive. Broadly speaking, the existing ment and research, and where abortion is

machinery of medical administration should already prevalent and the failures of con-

be utilized by (i) making contraceptive in- traceptive technique are likely to be rela-

formation available, without restrictive con- tively higher than they are in the West.

siderations, at all general and maternity The sponsors of the birth-control movement

hospitals and welfare centres; (2) including must realize that the success of their efforts

* The Sex Problem in India. Taraporevala and Sons, Bombay, I927.

is charged with danger if concession to illiberal sentiment excludes sterilization,

t Eugenics and Birth-Control: A Contribution to segregation and abortion from the public

Social Reconstruction in the East. Times Publishing Co. Lahore, 193I.

health programme.

t Including a book on Population and Birth-Control
in India (People's Publishing House, Madras, I930), by * Dover, C.: Eugenic Legislation in India. Quarterly

its Secretary, Dr. M. S. Krishnamurti Ayyar.

Review, January, I935.

§ Prof. Karve's labours in the cause of Indian t Particulars may be obtained on application to the eugenics were recently rewarded by a fine for the ex- Honorary Director, Parliament Mansions, London,

pression of opinions which are a common feature of S.W.I.

Western life. See Reason, Bombay, Nos. 5 and 8, I932.

Dover, C. Op. cit.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 4.

