pOPULATION INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE
First Annual Report
(January 1st, 1937-December 31st. 1937)

ORIGINS OF COMMITTEE

found at the end of this report. From the

PT' HE Committee had its origin in the
Annual Galton Lecture entitled , 't Eugenics in the Light of Population
Trends" given on February i6th, I935, to
the $7ugenics Society by Professor A. M.
Carr-Saunders. Acting upon a suggestion contained in this lecture, the Council of the Eugenics Society took the initiative in calling the Population Investigation Committee
together. The Committee, while made up of repre-
sentatives of various organizations, and of certain individuals elected in a private
capacity, is an autonomous body. It is in no
way subordinate to any of the organizations represented upon it. The Committee has power to add to its numbers as it thinks fit.

former it will be seen that the Committee has schemes for research which require the services of six research workers and would cost approximately £4,000 a year. At present, the Committee has two research workers and its expenses come to approximately £I,ooo a year. It has, at the moment, a balance of
only £762 I2s. 2d.
The Committee has its headquarters at the offices of the Eugenics Society, which has placed its staff at the Committee's disposal. The Committee, therefore, has practically no overhead expenses and all its available funds are devoted to the direct furtherance
of its aims.
The Committee wishes to express its indebtedness to the organizations and persons named at the end of this report, for generous

AIMS OF COMMITTEE

contributions; also to Miss Marion Crichton

The Committee has been formed to for much valuable assistance.

examine the trends of population in Great Britain and the Colonies and to investigate

THE FIRST YEAR

the causes of these trends, with special In the autumn of I936 three books*

reference to the fall of the birth-rate. It is published by members of the Committee

not a propagandist Committee and is not attracted widespread interest. With remark-

concerned with advocating any social able suddenness, the press of the country

measures with the object of influencing the took notice of the fact that, if recent trends

movement of populations. It will be im- in fertility continued, a decline of the popu-

possible to adopt social measures without lation of Great Britain would, without

fuller information than we possess at present, immigration, be inevitable. Two articles

and it can be taken as certain that any policy under the general heading "The Dwindling
which, at a later date, the GoveLrment may Family" appeared in The Times of Septem-

see fit to adopt, will be influenced by the ber 28th and 29th, I936, the last being

findings of the new inquiries of the General supported by a leading article. These were Register Office, and by the findings of the widely' quoted, and from this moment 'the

Committee.

population problem became alive. Little

FINANCE
The Committee receives no subsidies from Government sources. It depends entirely upon donations from interested individuals

notice, however, was taken of the Committee until Mr. Ronald Cartland, Member for Birmingham, King's Norton, introduced into the House of Commons, on February

and organizations.

* World Population. By A. -M. Carr-.Saunders ;

A- statement of its financial needs and an
income and expenditure account will be

Population Movements. By R. R. Kuczynski; The
Struggle for Population. By D. V. Glass. AUl published
by the Oxford UIiiversity Press.

239

240

THE EUGENICS REVIEWV

-

ioth, 1937, a motion to the effect that the tries. Indeed, on the existing system it is

threatened decline of the population might impossible to calculate fertility rates;- these

constitute a danger and asking for an have to be surnised by rather unsafe

inquiry and report by the Government. analogies from other countries.

There took place on this occasion an instruc- The Registrar - General, Sir Sylvanus

tive and well-informed debate which occupies Vivian, accorded to the Committee's sugges.

fifty-five columns of IHansard (Vol. 320, No. tions a very friendly reception and pointed

52). Mr. Cartland made an appreciative out that as long ago as I9II, and in more

reference to the Commmittee's work, and it recent discussions with the Eugenics Society,

was noteworthy that not one of the eleven his Department had been concerned with

speakers who followed Mr. Cartland dis- problems of fertility. On June i8th, I937,

puted his plea that the subject was important the Minister of Health, Sir Kingsley Wood,

and required further investigation. In reply- announced in the House of Commons

ing for the Government, Mr. R. S. Hudson (Hansard, Vol. 325, No. I26, page 794) that

said that it was not proposed to set on foot he was giving consideration to the means by

a new and independent inquiry; it was which additional questions could be asked in

intended rather to intensify the inquiries the process of birth registration while, at the

which were continuously carried out by the same time, respecting the confidential nature

Registrar-General. The matter, he said, was of the information there furnished. The

primarily one for the Government, but out- recently debated Population (Statistics) Bill

side assistance would be welcomed.

will enable the desired information to be

Shortly after this -debate the Committee obtained. The Government's amendment to

received a request from the Minister of this Bill embodies nearly all the additional

Health to get into touch with the General questions which the Committee regards as

Register Office. This communication was in important.

response to an earlier request from the The Committee has also established satis.

Chairman of the Committee for the co- factory contact with the Registrar-General

operation of the Minister and the General of Scotland.

Register Office. The Minister's request was immediately acted upon and three confer-

A Royal Commission

ences have been held (on March 3rd, April During the first few months of I937, a

23rd and October i3th, I937), at Somerset lively controversy was held in the columns

House, between the Registrar-General and of the press as to the desirability of a Royal

representatives of the Committee. At the Commission being appointed. It was urged

second of these conferences, a memorandum that the problem was too big and too impor-

was submitted by the Committee outlining tant for a voluntary committee with limited

two groups of researches which it regarded funds. But the proposal was finally aban-

as desirable. The first group could be carried doned. The following passage is quoted

out on the data already available; the from a leading article which appeared in

second and more importanat group could only The Times on April 17th:

be undertaken if the existing system of " It is only too clear that eccentricity,

obtaining vital statistics were amplified by irrelevance, and party fanaticism are ready

the addition of certain new questions. The to dangle their red herrings before any public

most essential of these related to the age of body which will receive them. This alone

the mother at the birth of each child, the would be an excellent reason for disputing

birth order of each child, and the duration the claim that a Royal Commission is the

of marriage at each birth. The Committee proper body to investigate the population

was prompted to suggest these changes by problem at this stage. But it may be urged

the fact that the sco)pe of the Registration in addition that a Commission is more fitted

Statistics in England and Wales is rather to discuss policy and hear evidence than to

more limited than in most European c.oun- conduct research. Professor Carr-Saunders

POPULATION INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE

24

an.d his colleagues are not satisfied that there
is yet sufficient information on which to base future policy. When that information has been collected and studied, then it will be timely to raise the question of appointing a

pattroroeapmtuislaoeaknltefia-ougcntoohvpnoertrroainbctiitlneegswminsotafothfitotthnhhesee.DDcooeBmmniuisntnuiisoiontansnsp.,drowprheogisiceshs-

Royal Commission. If research should pre- Research Secretary

cede action, then the Population Investiga-
tion Committee, witlh its expert personnel,
seems well fitted for the task. Its fate lies
now in the hands of the public, and there
should be no lack of support for a venture of
such importance."
Demographic Problems in the Crown Colonies and Dominions
The Committee is desirous of promoting a

iBoPttpa1tfo.oua9sf.vSpTb3kicui6lcehR.l,eieneeaswbhtshbeyCMieteyorooadctn.mrcorh,cmeaenihGirinwdltsftuhaiaatcSinicsteetcgtnshceehetrfCdieheoihsratsbantataiotws,frlsioeiyounkilta,rrneyl,lt.vnruteMteenhryTaHaqae.lhidtuoeysyeifcepDobfatip.uiSerhnenntseetddrhnVrium1a.ingef9rveggoa3eisslrGfs5neleuwwgartareisfrhnertasioedshe,ssrd

special investigation of these problems, and
last July three of its representatives discussed the matter with officials of the Colonial Office. The Committee would like
to prepare a demographic handbook of the
Colonial Empire. This would throw much light on the conditions prevailing in a large
area of the world; and it might extend our
knowledge of the historical problems of population. The handbook might also lead towards an improvement in the methods of census-taking and of collecting vital statis-
tics. The Committee would also like to make an analysis of Colonial figures where these exist in sufficient detail and accuracy. The
most profitable region for this purpose is the West Indies, for which there are reliable records of very mixed populations dating from more than a century ago. These records may well present favourable oppor-
tunities for comparing the history of diverse social and cultural stocks and for the investigation of other important problems.

iomhttwhcbwEtoptLMso"iinhefniaooufeharntoolMcelomsIa.purignnlhaltnpptnpbed.cleidchurbueirryoshaoGetdaorebhaofeIunlheininbllawnhinsnafeeDpddsiaoldisseetsxueolafogsart"rnttsSlbatpwkhtehiuspehcloino.eaaeeanritlehipifddsraFspisesvbosurcttnrpilSeeohihetmyoWpvdeemicuelnhepuaneecrmaaqnepderaldtohnirduvrnsrooi"eidhvnaieeoetfCfetnsieCaascinrndoid,tnisordotghauocmohtanEnyfaeeanfciympe4ectIksdssnrndaeivtaio8oieSereigdtanirfwy5nwnchoptaxneteeInoogiocehontfun-eam.sitdintroutnIreasrihhdtfycta9dlie,cpEeobMuls3ioacteuTsaauorcrnBIeshnrnrn.pchaeo.o,ieie,tdeokeaftn"vortiFGrus.uhnnoeilomhenlsnTelideuwoerecmautiscshrMtaghoswinivr.coireyaifsvmnecaylnv.hueicenpflimdswsoonwtdIholtlutGFafmpdhliinhyaraeilliiadtotiutwgimbtautnclienitaacrmalcscegheeiollie,dhe-eess-hledndsl-nr

But the Committee regards the handbook as the most urgent need.
The Committee's proposals were received in a friendly spirit by the representatives of the Colonial Office. Facilities were offered
to the Committee in the Colonial Offce
Library and support has been given for
an application to thev Carnegie Corporation
for a grant to be devoted to this special
purpose.'
The Commttee does not regard it as part
of its function to intitiate research into the

Educational Problems
gbrUSiCLtcoaenioenhosfgqmTuyiemteeuebrthmridionoeeseo-rfuaednwynsricCeeiswnnelosdSobeelmutccyv,aacimtaqataoaluirrehttaMrttsieeli.y,thotrioiAuhefrnn.seiweegp,FeihsrdpunoehepeouBnraatrvtp.terosdihouS,ciobcaclhsaula.anFps,raectepwsrimoiloonyeusoPlrivxnnthooknepthw.ueosteesrDstfrterhty.i.diuti,ghewhdtpaoMiinhi,tlMseaicetidissseiho.esssnnfrshstaiaeGpornmefirLoifccfaeuttleailycyhhntal.-ea-eeel-

242 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Committee's Pamphlet

they marry, the existence of obstacles to

In April of this year, the Committee published under the title The Future of Our
Population ? a short pamphlet explaining its aims and needs. This has met with a favour-
able reception, and approximately I,700 copies have been sold. A second edition is now being prepared.

marriage in particular occupations such as the fighting services, and the extent to which marriage is postponed by those who have
advancement in view.
(b) Child-bearing. This demands an in. quiry into the position of an employed woman who is pregnant in regard to leave of absence, of the relation of the medical and

Questionnaire

midwifery fees to income, and of the extent

The Committee is confronted with a large group of problems which may be called medical. It is not known, for example, what proportion of married couples are childless
through no wish of their own, nor what proportion limit the size of their families on
account of the health of the wife and for
other medical reasons. Very little is known
about the extent and the consequences of the practice of abortion. Much the same may be said of birth-control practices. The Committee is well represented on the medical side and a strong medical sub-committee has been formed which has drawn up a question-
naire. This will throw light on many of these
problems. But the Committee would have to subsidize research workers to help in the
collection of the data, and also to analyse the material when collected.

of the provision for child-bearing made through the public social services.
(c) Child-rearing. Here come a large nuna. ber of very important questions. We may first take housing. To what extent does the proportion of income going in rent rise with an increase in the size of the family ? WVhat provision is made in subsidized housing schemes for large families? How do the overcrowding provisions in the Housing Act of I934 bear upon the size of family, e.g. if the Act were applied to the houses built since the war, could the inhabitants of those
houses have enough children to replace them-. selves? Do flats discourage large families ? Next there is education. In regard to education up to the university stage there are such questions as the influence upon family size of the maximum income at which it is permissible to take up^free places, and

Financial Needs of the Committee

the rise in the cost of education, as a propor-

The Committee has comprehensive plans for further research which it would like to put into operation if the necessary funds were available. A brief outline will be given of these plans.
The most extensive field of investigation
may be called social. For the purpose of
carrying out research under this head use
can often be made of existing material,- but
it would be necessary in many cases to collect
a large amount of additional information. The Committee has prepared a scheme of
social research which may be summarized as follows:

tion of total expenditure, with increasing size of family. As to professional and university education, there is the question of cost and of scholarships and the length of time before earnings can be assured.
(d) Taxation. A study is required of the incidence of taxation, direct and indirect,
upon families of different sizes.
(e) State Assistance. A converse study is
required of the assistance given by the State
to families of different sizes in different social classes.
The above are only illustrations of the
numerous important problems which urgently
await investigation. The procedure which

(a) The approach to marriage. Here come the Committee wishes to adopt is as follows.

such matters as the lengthw anrd cost of the It desires to obtain the services of qualified

training required to take up particular kinds research workers. These workers would,

of work, the extent to which women are with the permission of the authorities con-

obliged to give up gainful employment when cerned, carry out their investigations in

I S ^ i 0POPULATION INVESTIGATION COMMITEE

A

universities or other. similar institutions. The Committee does not propose to acquire
ay bilding or to spend money upon any staff other than these research workers.
The salary of a. research worker would vary with qualifications and experience, but would not be less than £300 a year. The Committee would like to have immnediately at its disposal at least six such persons, one for statistical investigations, one for medical
inquiries and four for social inquiries,
though it could well employ more. This would require at least £2,ooo a year. There
would also be the cost of obtaining the
information in connection with certain
investigations. This is less easy to estimate.

piswauffwogtafemBsisiofeeorihsopuullsrttearrtroltmlittttfitmstnheehhhmaosthboeenetaacsariefe'rhmonttovknmsseech£ueumpeeofnee4duigsdcoi.oedm,tirnhttrconaeo0pfsgcetcelead0obofotbsii0sIloenooirselencienrrlnifaea,dpnaicsyvnmfrcleal,aeeslotsyyieicstsiutuedlldaustnonfqraof,anisuanipdusgorfrcglrre.eeroegleasylesrioienee,teyttdmnfrctTai.sdisothocouaosltaencmlhaincpltnshlrsIaanannehktaeetnlacgodsaawtfeeneitfhitTordorislarmshituonetl£otse.ianghe,uf2h,olldaam,ebfealICwdns0iesstdanioeti0oesoehtehsnvfmf0loenaipqciemcadr,etentu£asbiaedchhafaIoCntsiieenpotoy,rwsacorrtoerueeoalithmemnlnbaottlaoioe-edayrodeelyos

INCOME
from

AND EXPENDITURE
January ist, I937, to

DAeCceCmObeUrNT31s(t,SuIm9m3aQr7ised)

'937
Jan. Ist : Balance from I936 ***

; '-- 336 so.

Grant from Eugenics Society *.. ...

Anonymous *.* ... ... ...

Mr. J. Berington r. E. Berthoud

... ...

...

... ... ...

Mr. C. J. Bond ...00... *0 .

Mr. R. P. Byers ...

.. ...

Mr. L. J. Cadbury (for 2 yelrs) ...

Mr. Calderara 000 .SOS a ...

Lord Camrose G

...

Mr. Holroyd Chambers

Mr. T. R. Cubitt

*00

... ...
... ...
... .0.

500
I00
10 5
200
10 I I

0
0
Io
0
0
5
0
10 10 I I

Mr. St. John Ervine ...
Dri. J. L. Gilks *.. ... Hon. Mrs. Grant Duff *.0

...
...

*3
*...

Mr. P. H. Gregory . ..
Mr. W. E. Hedley-Dent Mr. W. Kirtland Hinton Impenral Chemical Industries
Mr. T. R. Innes... ... Lt.-Col. R. H. Johnson

..0
.. ..*
*.. ... .oo.g.e .50
... ... 3 ... ... I

Mr. G. D. A. MacDougall Mr. DavidMcKail ...

a..
...

... I ...

Mr. D. McLachlan ... ... ...

Mr. T. Maxwell .... ... ...

Mr. R. Meiklle .in. Mr. E. R. P. Moon Mr. S. Vere Pearson

... .0
.... ..
... ...

Mr. R. Pilkington .g.

Mr. Seebohm Rowntree e.g

SirErnestSimon ... ...

Mr. G. R. S. Snow ... ...

Mrs. Snow

..... ... ...

R. W. Sturgeon ... ...

... 10
I .. I
1.. e.g. I
... 50 ... 100 ... 2
..l 6o
.I

A
5
10
5 5 10
0
0
I I
I0
10 0 I 0 I0 0
0
0 0
0
I

Sale of pamphlets ... ... oee 28 0

d.
9
0
0
0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0
0
0
0
0
0 0
0
0
0
0 6 6 0 0 0 0 0
0
0 0
0
0 5

QBPSEBFutaaoixearmlopsts7pkaetrithsnnioil,cYsenoeeeseenRtasrnoesryfap,'.o.irs.RfriPenerWRstioeesnasrat,n..eirk..d.na.ec. tgrhIc,c.nWhesottcWrr..........ouk..cretkri2esorn...-s...sa....l.s...o

..
...

3 s6 6

97 II

4 10 7 II

..
. ... ...

2 17 9
4 980 26 0 0
20 13 0

... 762 12 2

j1,479 10 2

/;I,479 I0 2

t_ t;

.

