58 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
general tends to tame the spirits and to make overshadowed, to be profoundly insignificant, the play of the faculties less secure and has on the whole a depressing and benumbing active ? ,Can it be denied, that to be heavily effect on the character ? '

EUGENICS SOCIETY
Annual Meeting and Election of Officers and Council

T HE ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING The adoption of the Accounts and Balance

was held at the Rooms of the Royal Sheet, proposed by Mr. Chance and seconded

Society, Burlington House, Piccadilly, by Mr. Martin, was carried unanimously.

W.i, on Tuesday, May 23rd, I944, at 4.30 HONORARY OFFICERS AND COUNCIL FOR

p.m., with the President, Lord Horder, in THE YEAR I944-5. The Honorary Secretary

the Chair. The Honorary Secretary read reported that no replies had b-een received to

the notice convening the Meeting.

the notice inserted in the October-January

MINUTES. The Minutes of the Annual issue of the EUGENICS REVIEW, inviting

General Meeting, held on July I3th, I943, additional names for nomination to the

which were contained in the Annual Report, Council.

copies of which had been circulated to Presidency. The Honorary Secretary said

Fellows and Members before the Meeting, that he regretted to inform the Fellows and

were taken as read and signed as correct. Members that Lord Horder's tenure of office

ANNUAL REPORT. The Chairman presented as President had, under Article 27, now

the Annual Report, and moved its adoption. expired, and he paid a cordial tribute to the

This was carried unanimously.

invaluable services to the Society of the

STATEMENT OF ACCOUNTS AND BALANCE retiring President. He was glad to say, how-

SHEET. These were presented by the ever, that Lord Horder had consented to

Honorary Treasurer.

become an Honorary President of theSociey.

Mr. J. P. Brander raised the question of A new President had not yet been appointed.

the legality, under Section 3 (9) of the Retirements. UnderArticle 28, thefollowing

Society's Memorandum, of the Grant of £250, were due to retire: Vice-presidents: -Dr.
made in I943, to the Family Endowment Julian Huxley and Lord Keynes. Council:

Society; and he further proposed the Under Article 30, the following were due to

following Resolution: THAT in view of the retire: Lady Denman, Mr. Graham Hutton,

doubt felt by certain Fellows and Members Mr. Lloyd and Mrs. Potton.

as to whether the policy of the Family En- Honorary Officers, and Council for the year

dowment Society in promoting the granting I944-5 were appointed as follows:

by the State of universal children's allowances is eugenic, it is recommended that no
future grants be made to the Family Endowment Society.
The matter was discussed at some length, and the Resolution was put to the meeting;

President: Post not yet filled. Chairman of Council: B. S. Bramwell, M.A., LL.B., F.R.S.E. Hon. Treasurer: C. F. Chance, M.A.
Hon. Librarian: Miss E. Corry.

but no seconder being forthcoming, a vote Hon. Secretary: C. P. Blacker, M.A.,

was not taken. The President undertook M.D.

that the legality of the grant already made Vice-Presidents: Sir Charles- Darwin,

would be examined.

K.B.E., M.C., M.A., Sc.D., F.R.S.,

THE ANNUAL MEETING

59

*Eardley Holland, M.D., F.R.C.S., F.R.C.P., and Gynecologists, as a Vice-president of the

P.R.C.O.G., Mrs. E. M. Hubback, M.A., Society. Obstetrics and gyneecology, often

Aubrey J. Lewis, M.D., F.R.C.P., Prof. regarded as comprising little beyond mid-

R. Ruggles Gates, M.A., Ph.D., D.Sc., LL.D., wifery and the causes, manifestations and

F.R.S.

treatment of gynaecological disorders, may,

Members of Council: Cecil Binney, B.A., in a wider sense, be held, as it is by Mr.

L. J. Cadbury, O.B.E., A. M. Carr- Holland, to include all aspects, qualitative

Saunders, M.A., Dr. Stella Churchill, and quantitative, of the reproductive pro-

M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.P.H., *D. V. Glass, cesses of the nation. On this view, these

B.Sc., Ph.D., Hon. Mrs. Grant Duff, W. T. J. subjects have much ground in common with

Gun, F.R.Hist.S., F.S.G., Julian Huxley, eugenics and demography. We may feel sure

M.A., D.Sc., F.R.S., The Lord Keynes, C.B., that Mr. Eardley Holland's appointment

M.A., R. Langdon-Down, M.B., R. Martin, will open up new fields of activity for the

*Mrs. Montagu-Pollock, *Captain Richard Society.

Pilkington, M.C., M.P., *Surg.-Cmdr. J. A. Dr. Aubrey Lewis, who also becomes a

Fraser Roberts, M.D., D.Sc., M.R.C.P., Vice-president, is well known to Fellows and

F.R.S.E., *Eliot Slater, M.D., M.R.C.P., Members for his numerous contributions to

Hon. John Strutt, R. M. Titmuss.

the REVIEW. Likewise known is Dr. Eliot

ELECTION OF AUDITORS FOR THE YEAR Slater, who joins the Council for the first

I944-5. It was proposed by Mr. Martin, time. Both Dr. Lewis and Dr. Eliot Slater

seconded by Mr. Chance and carried unani- have given special attention to the genetic

mously, that Messrs. West & Drake be re- aspect of psychiatry, and the Society is for-

elected for the year I944-5.

tunate to have the guidance of two such

At the close of the formal proceedings,
Mr. Bramwell, on behalf of the Society, pre-
sented to Lord Horder and to Miss E. Corry silver mementoes as tokens of the Society's
appreciation of the valued services which
each had rendered to the Society, asking them to accept the gifts with the good wishes of all. He was happy to think that Lord
Horder would still be associated with the Society as an Honorary President, and that although an assistant librarian had been appointed, Miss Corry would still remain the Honorary Librarian, a post which she had filled so efficiently for over twenty years.
The meeting closed with hearty votes of thanks to both recipients.

distinguished exponents of this speciality.
Surgeon-Commander J. A. Fraser Roberts, who is now consultant in Medical Statistics to the Navy, rejoins the Council. Neither he,
nor Dr. D. V. Glass, who before the war was
research secretary of the Population Investi-
gation Committee, needs any introduction to
readers of the REVIEW. Dr. Glass is now one of the country's leading authorities on
demography. Captain Richard Pilkington has been a
Member of the House of Commons since 1935, and is now Civil Lord of the Admiralty. He has always shown an interest in problems of population and took a notable part in the pre-war debates on the subject in the House of Commons. " Family Allowances " has

The New Council

always been one of his special concerns. We are fortunate in retaining, as Members

We welcome Mr. Eardley Holland, Presi- of the Council, Dr. Julian Huxley and Lord

dent of the Royal College of Obstetricians Keynes, whose periods of vice-presidency

* New Members.

came to an end this year.

