12 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
discussion, under proper authority and by human heredity has been neglected. Invescompetent persons-if they can be found- tigation on the lines I have endeavoured to effectively supported and properly financed. suggest would not only indicate the dimenWhilst ameliorative and palliative social sions of the problem, but would also afford measures have been widely and fully some indication of the possible lines of developed, this great field of research into remedial measures.

THE SOCIETY'S FURTHER PROJECTS

IN introducing Mr. Lidbetter at the and to assist, any Fellows or Members who

Galton Dinner, the President, Sir might feel inclined to set up investigations

Bernard Mallet, said there was a special of a similar kind in the neighbourhood in

appropriateness in his subject to a piece of which they lived. It seemed that a diagnosis

work to which the Society was now turning of this kind, which would, as it were, focus

its attention-namely, an attempt to inves- or localize all this social inefficiency, should

tigate, so far as a private, unofficial body make the treatment to be applied to the evil

could do so, the existence of'a sub-normal easier than it was at present. The connec-

class (or social problem group) in the com- tion of this investigation with the researches

munity, supposed to comprise about one- on which Mr. Lidbetter had been engaged

tenth of the population, or some four for many years into the relation of heredity

million persons, as was suggested by the and social inadequacy in an East-end of

Mental Deficiency Committee in I929, fol- London area would become very apparent

lowing on the investigations of Dr. E. 0. from his address.

Lewis. It had been suggested in their In remarking generally on the work of

report that, " if we could segregate as a the Society, Sir Bernard said it was some-

separate community all the families in this times reproached with a neglect of positive

country containing mental defectives of the eugenics in its propaganda. If that meant

primary amentia type, it would be found to that they ought to advocate something like

include a much larger proportion of insane the breeding up of a race of super-men, he

persons, epileptics, paupers, criminals must say that he shared the doubts ex-

(especially recidivists), unemployables, pressed the other day as to positive eugenics

habitual slum dwellers, prostitutes, in- by Sir Oliver Lodge. There was no

ebriates, and other social inefficients, than " mould into which we can or ought to

would a group of families not containing attempt to fit human beings," and variety

mental defectives."

was of the essence of growth.

Sir Bernard did not wish to go into He feared that there was not much to be

details of the Society's scheme, but said done in these days by advocating further

that among the results expected were those relief from taxation of the classes the limi-

from local investigations, such as had been tation of whose families they deplored; but

instituted by Mr. Caradog Jones of Liver- he did not see any reason to despair of the

pool. It was suggested in an article, which influence which the spread of eugenic

he had signed, in the October number of knowledge, and of the real danger arising

the EUGENICS REVIEW, that the Society from the differential fertility of the social

would be very glad to get into touch with, classes, might have, in time, in encouraging

THE SOCIETY'S FURTHER PROJECTS

and increasing reproduction from sound As instances of this, Sir Bernard quoted

stocks in all classes. He thought there was the strong eugenic opinions broadcast on

room for experiments like that of the the wireless last autumn by Lord

eugenic settlement at Les Jardins Unge- D'Abernon and Mr. Amery (reported in the

mach, near Strasbourg (of which an account January number of this REviEw), and said

by M. Dachert was given in the REvIEw that they were typical of the general feeling

last April) which gave a practical demon- on the subject-a feeling very different from

stration of a most valuable kind of what that of a few years ago. It would be absurd,

could be done to preserve and increase the he added, to claim that such a change in

birth rate among the better types. If there public opinion was due entirely to the work

were any millionaires left, he would like of the Eugenics Society which, he was well

to appeal to one of them to start such a aware, had many severe critics. It was

settlement in this country as an example. only one of various scientific agencies and

Meanwhile, there was enough work in the tendencies which had brought about that

direction of negative eugenics to keep us result. But he thought that their advance

busy for many years to come.

had been due, more than to any other cause,

The Society could congratulate itself on to the teaching and influence of our

the very noticeable increase of interest in honorary President, Major Leonard

eugenics among the general public in quite Darwin, who had developed the Society from

recent years. It was difficult to open a very small beginnings and so long guided

newspaper or magazine without coming its activities. And he claimed that the

across intelligent comment on the subject, recent campaign in favour of voluntary

and no discourse on national or social pro- sterilization had done much to draw atten-

gress or improvement was now complete tion to the whole field of eugenic reform

without at least some reference to eugenics. advocated by the Society.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 1.

