CRIME AND EUGENICS IN AMERICA
By ARTHUR ST. JOHN, Honi. Secretary, Penal Reformt League
NEITHER by scientific knowledge nor by the extent of my investigation in America can I pretend to be competent to write an article under the above heading, as requested. I can therefore only trust that my readers will be indulgent, and will manage to draw the proper eugenic moral, or morals, from this article.
There are many matters of common interest to the eugenist and the criminologist, amongst which may be mentioned insanity, feeble-mindedness (including imbecility, idiocy, etc.), moral deficiency, arrested development, epilepsy, alcoholism and drug habits, various diseases and racial poisoning, as well as any inherent susceptibility to any of these evils. Both eugenists and criminologists may reasonably ask that at all events those convicted of crime should be carefully examined to see if they are subject to any of these defects, so that if they be found to be so, they may be dealt with accordingly. If this precaution be not taken, many convicted persons may be improperly dealt with, in which case injustice and injury will be done, not only to the individuals thus treated, but also to the whole community to which they belong. All will agree that the inherent defects of these persons should have been discovered before they had committed a crime. But even if no study be made till after the crime has been committed, it is difficult to exaggerate the risk which is incurred by the neglect to examine and understand the nature and condition of those who are convicted.
In this matter we have something to learn from several places in America. The probation system, in which several States are showing us a lead, when well developed, lends itself to a better system of investigation and study. Homes are visited, conditions are examined, questions are asked in various quarters; and a careful and conscientious officer, even if without special

CRIME AND EUGENICS IN AMERICA

irg

scientific attainments, is thus able to go some way towards forming, an opinion, or furnishing the data on which an opinion might be formed, as to how far a probationer has suffered from the evils of his environment, or how far from inherited defect or susceptibility. Some courts have special investigation officers, and though their work is perhaps chiefly concerned with the finding out of facts in connection with the charges made, yet it is often more extended in scope. In connection with the Children's Court at Columbus, Ohio, for instance, one of the investigating officers is a trained nurse, who often gives advice, telling parents when she thinks a surgeon should be consulted and so on. With a maturer development of the probation system, including a larger staff of officers, with higher scientific and all-round qualifications, a more comprehensive and scientific system of enquiry might become the rule.
It is, however, doubtful whether it is, or ever will be, the function of a probation officer, or even of an investigating officer, to carry out such a detailed scientific enquiry, or examination, as would in many cases be demanded both by the eugenist and the criminologist. Rarely do we find this attempted to-day; though in some places in America there are already satisfactory beginninigs. At Louisville, Kentucky, they have a clinic room attached to the Juvenile Court, where the children are examined before going into court. A special doctor, with four assistants, gives his services for this purpose. Here is an example for juvenile courts, and perhaps for other courts, all the world over.
Particularly interesting is the work of the Juvenile Psychopathic Institute of Chicago, founded by a group of publicspirited ladies in that city for a five years' experiment in the examination of children. It is located in the Juvenile Court Building, though not officially connected with that Court. In consultation with a large number of American authorities, experts of various kinds, Dr. William Healy, the Director, has evolved a system of enquiries and tests, borrowed from the Binet and other systems. The following extract from the Report of its Committee A, dated December, I909, is quoted from Bulletin Number Two of the American Institute of Criminal Law and Criminology:

120 A. St. John .
"If the observer will bring to the examination the attention which a medical expert gives to one of his cases-surely a more than justifiable procedure-and gets the co-operation of the delinquent's family and friends, he will, in the majority of instances, be astonished at the explanatory light which he is able to throw on the offender's actions. Experience proves that families and friends show rational willingness, for the most part, to consult with a physician and psychologist and to leave no point unturned in an effort to get at the bottom of a situation which often has been their problem and sorrow for years. Such work as this system represents is no mere gathering of statistics, but aims directly at diagnosis, prognosis and remedy-whether for a single individual, as when done in connection with a trial court, or for the general criminal situation, as when some investigation of many individuals is undertaken at a custodial institution.
"The main divisions of the system are: " I. FAMILY HIsTORY-especially all aspects of
heredity. " II. DEVELOPMENTAL HISTORY-including ante-natal
conditions. "III. ENVIRONMENT. "IV. CHARACTER. " V. ANTH ROPOMETRY-including photography. "VI. MEDICAL EXAMINATION-particularly from a
neurologic and psychiatric standpoint.
"VII. PSYCHOLOGICAL EXAMINATION. " VIII. PSYCHO-ANALYSIS-especially offender's own narrative."
With reference to V., according to Dr. Healy, anthropometry,
photographic or otherwise, amounted to very little in America.
After a lengthy and detailed description of the system, the
pamphlet quoted from above concludes as follows:
" The time and labour necessary for working up a case in such a method as that outlined above, which at first sight appears to be rather extensive, is by no means prohibitive if a well-trained person can have his whole time to devote to the work. Only by investigation, at least as thorough as this, can we hope to make permanent contributions to knowledge of causation of criminality and to the development of methods of prevention and reformation. Only by such thorough work can we bring about the ideal conditions when the bench will adjudicate criminal cases in accord with the social and physical needs of the offender, which, in the long run, is directly equivalent to the best financial and moral protection of society.
" We therefore recommend that the above system for recording data concerning criminals be utilised wherever practic-

CRIME AND EUGENICS IN AMERICA

I21

able, and especially do we urge its adaptation in large cities where numerous courts and cases exist and the co-operation of scientific experts can be secured."

According to a memorandum attached to this pamphlet, this report had been considered by the judges of the Municipal Court of Chicago, and the system described therein had been recommended by them for adoption in their court. In Dr. Healy's opinion, these methods can be learned by a physician in a week. During last year he and his colleagues had also been developing a system for testing the abilities of individuals by means of which it had been found possible, as one might expect, to sort out those examined into distinct groups. He insisted that this work was only tentative.
Although the Psychopathic Institute is supposed only to be consulted by the Chicago Juvenile Court, as a fact it receives enquiries from other courts, and is often consulted about children who do not go through any court. Their aim being to do intensive work, or to concentrate their energies on a limited number of cases, they do not take more than they want. It is plain, therefore, that the general adoption of such a system of investigation for every case in every court, would require a large psychopathic staff in all large towns, and would entail an expenditure which our communities are not at present prepared to face.
The information on which the Reports of the Institute are based are obtained from parents, friends, school teachers, probation officers, police, teachers and attendants in the Detention Home, and the child himself. The child is placed in the Detention Home and kept under observation for half a day, or even for several days. Great stress is laid on arousing the interest
of boys and girls, and for this purpose they are taken into a quiet room where an effort is made to find out what they think or feel about various things. Dr. Healy prefers to see the child before he goes into court, and never examines him after he has been found guilty. Before conviction the child is full of hope and trust, whilst afterwards he is a changed individual, not approachable and probably surly and recalcitrant. They thus obtain, he told me, a far greater record of delinquencies than

I22 A. St. John :
is obtained in the court itself; for the children are thus induced to confess to all sorts of bad things about themselves. No doubt there is the prospect of difficulties in this matter being raised by jurists, as well as by parents and others. Many would say that we have no right to subject unconvicted persons to any such examination, or to induce them to incriminate themselves. And in truth it is hard to see how this objection is to be met so long as a trial is regarded as a battle royal between Rex, or " the People," and the defendant, in which legal considerations require that the accused shall have a certain measure of " fair play." But when it comes to be generally recognised that all are interested in getting at the truth-that is, on the one hand, in protecting the accused person from injustice, and, on the other hand, in safeguarding the community from the continuance of crime-then perhaps it will be recognised that the interests of all are best served by the best method of finding out the real nature and conditions of an accused person, even if it entails his self-incrimination.
One is reminded of a resolution of the International Prison Congress at Washington last year, in which it was recommended that " it should be the tendency in the trial of juveniles to proceed as far as practicable by way of conference for the good of the child instead of contest about and over the child." Personally I cannot see why we should not entertain the same pious aspiration with regard to the trial of adults. The same Congress also passed a resolution to this effect: "There should be made in connection with the cases of young delinquents, such examinations as will contribute to the fund of information on juvenile delinquency, and the results should be used wherever practicable to help in the disposal of the case. Medical examinations should be made only by physicians who have some special knowledge of the social and psychological sciences. The personal information obtained in these examinations should not be made public." The psychopathic examination of children brought to court, therefore, has high sanction; and I know of no reason why such an examination of those brought to adult courts is not equally to be recommended.
Certain questions still remain to be decided, namely, (i)

CRIME AND EUGENICS IN AMERICA

123

whether the examination should be before or after the conviction; (2) whether all should be so examined, or only certain persons designated by the court, and, if the latter, how selected. With regard to (i) it must be remembered that the examination must be a friendly affair as far as the questioning and testing of the individual is concerned, or it cannot be successful; and that the results of the examination need not be communicated to the court until after it has reached a decision as to the truth of the charge, unless facts which point to innocence have been brought to light. Regarding the question as to who should be examined, this is partly a matter of expense. There are, it should be noted, two ways in which the number of those coming up for trial might be kept down. Courts with well-organised probation systems, or similar arrangements for dealing with lesF serious cases without bringing them to court, have the power to set up a series of screens, as it were, with different sized meshes. Thus, in connection with the Chicago Juvenile Court, some cases are dealt with by the police probation officers, others by the regular probation officers. More serious cases are brought to the Chief Probation Officer's office. More serious cases still may be dealt with by the Chief Probation Officer in informal consultation with the Judge. The Court itself is thus made a matter of final resort. In this way fewer cases actually come to the Court than would come if there were not this set of "screens." But there can be no doubt that far fewer people would come to the courts if any system existed ensuring that all persons physically, mentally or morally defective were recognised before they committed crimes, and were properly trained and cared for from the beginning. This would be the most economical plan. Less economical would it be to put off the endeavour to ascertain what was the matter with criminals until after some crime had been committed; worst of all is our existing practice of allowing the child to fall into crime, of neglecting to study and find out why he did so, of punishing the adult criminal blindly, with little rational effort to prevent things drifting from bad to worse.
But it is not of much use examining people, studying their conditions and ailments, and classifying them, unless we are prepared to deal with them accordingly. At present we send

I24 A. St. John :
convicted persons by the cartload to prison, where they are all treated much alike, without regard to their different natures and antecedents. A large proportion of them are inebriates and probably a considerable proportion are mentally defective, whilst everyone of any experience knows that prison is not the place for either of these classes.
In no country are the whole of the feeble-minded adequately dealt with, though in Massachusetts a good beginning has been made, and a lead has been given. The authorities of the Lancaster Industrial School for girls are still, it is true, perplexed about some of their higher grade feeble-minded girls; and more accommodation and more varied institutions for the higher grades, the very low grades and the more violent criminal imbeciles seem to be called for. But Dr. Fernald, backed by the Commonwealth legislature and government, has built up a truly pioneer institution for the feeble-minded. He has some I,450 inmates from 6 years old and upwards; 1,200 or over in, I think, about eleven separate houses at Waverley and the rest at a farm at Templeton. In this way he has the advantage of numbers, large plant, etc., and is able to classify the inmates and keep the different grades apart in small groups. Doubtful cases are sent to this Institution for observation. Patients are also sent by their parents or guardians, and they have some custodial cases sent straight from the courts, especially from Probate or Juvenile Courts, as well as a few from the Lyman School for boys, the Lancaster Industrial School for girls, and the Tewkesbury Tnfirmary.
The life in this school is a round of instruction, work and play. ' With the eager classes following each other all day long, the building is a veritable hive of happy industry," says the i9i0 report. The manual training work is applied to things "which the children afterwards see in use." Again, according to the same report (p. 33), the daily life of the institution " is based upon and closely resembles the ordinary daily routine of any other village of thirteen hundred inhabitants. As far as possible we try to illustrate the various phases of life in any other community, with its cares, duties, privileges and responsibilities, its little joys and pleasures."

CRIME AND EUGENICS IN AMERICA

I25

" Playthings are provided not as luxuries, but as necessities." "Every boy and girl of suitable physical health is supposed to own a sled " for coasting on the neighbouring hills. And " the most effectual means of discipline or correction for misdemeanor
or waywardness is to send a child early to bed while his fellows are enjoying, one of the entertainments." The current expenditure for the year ending November 3oth, i909, worked out at about I5S. 4jd. per week per patient, calculated on the average of the actual number present each day.
The trustees in their report for the same year say (p. io) "A more thorough investigation of the history and early life of those who turn out to be criminal imbeciles is bringing to the school cases that once went directly to jail, without a thought being given to their mental condition." Some of the patients are allowed to visit their homes during the summer vacation.
But the great advantage this institution has is that it is by law allowed to keep its patients permanently, if thought necessary; a privilege not without its difficulties, especially as regards certain high-grade and possibly criminal imbeciles, because, as Dr. Fernald says, " these lesser types of deficiency have neither been adequately formulated medically nor recognised
legally."' Yet some of these are the most dangerous and undesirable persons to have at large. As regards management, the Superintendent selects his own assistants " subject to the approval of the Executive Committee." The governing body
consists of a Board of Trustees, appointed by the Governor of the State, the institution being also subject to the supervision of the State Board of Insanity.
Another Institution worthy of note is the New Jersey Training School for Feeble-minded Girls and Boys at Vineland, New Jersey, which has about 400 inmates of ages ranging from 5 to 6o, " of all grades from the profound idiot to the merely backward; of all pathological types from the cretin to the microcephalic; and of all social conditions from the child of the feeble-minded pauper to the child of the wealthy man of intelligence."2 It is organised on the cottage system, and is
1 The Imbecile with Criminal Instincts, WV. E. Fernald, M.D, American journal of
Insanity, April, I909. 2 Twenty-second Annual Report, igio, p. 20.

JI26 A. St. John :
managed by a Board of Directors and with the assistance of a number of Lady Visitors. In his I910 report the Superintendent of this school says: " We are about the right size numerically to have good classification, to handle our vwards with the least trouble, and we have enough of each type to make every study possible. No private institution is more than one-sixth as large as ours; no State institution can hope to stay as small. Ours is the great opportunity." (pp. 27-8).
At this school they make a special feature of research work and of the training of teachers for special classes. They have also incidentally been carrying out experimental farming and have apparently won the confidence of farmers by their demonstration work. They also publish a monthly paper called The Training School, a most interesting and instructive journal, of which the annual subscription has just been raised to one dollar. For the training of teachers they have a Summer School with a six weeks' course. As an experiment, a three months' normal course was announced last year to be held in February, March
and April of this year, whilst a course lasting one or two years is under consideration.
The following account of the research work at the New Jersey Training School is taken from a paper by Dr. Henry H. Goddard, its Director of Research, which was read by him at the International Conference on Home Education at Brussels, August, i9io, and published in The Training School for last December:
" Three assistants are devoting their entire time to making the observations, tests and examinations for the case histories. Two others are working in the field, studying at first hand the family histories of the children. An extensive study is being made, looking to the prognostical classification of mentally defective children. For this purpose, the records of the observations made by all of the hundred people who work with the children, together with the scientific tests that are made upon them in the laboratory, are being put together and correlated, so that we shall be able eventually to know the relation between what the child can do in response to tests and what experience has proved that he can be trained to do in the general work of the institution. In this way it will ultimately be possible to examine any child and tell to a nicety the degree of his mental defect, the probable training that he will be capable of receiving,

CRIME AND EUGENICS IN AMERICA

I27

and the direction and kind of instruction that he should receive. This may point the way for something analogous for normal children. . . . We are using systems of testing devised by Prof. de Sanctis, of Rome, Italy; Prof. Binet, of Paris; those used by Dr. Norsworthy, of Columbia; some individual tests by Prof. de Moor, of Brussels and others; also tests of motor control adapted from the psychological laboratory, or devised by ourselves. Altogether we have over one hundred tests that we are trying."
Plans for the future are also discussed, such as result from the " broad view the management has taken, whereby the real work of the institution becomes scientific investigation, and the care of the children, though no wise neglected, a mere incident of the larger plan." I cannot refrain from quoting the requirements advocated by Dr. Goddard. "To carry on this work there will be a director of research; a psychologist with one or two assistants; a bio-chemist with probably two assistants; an anthropometer with an assistant; a neurologist; a pathologist with an assistant; a chief of medical research with an assistant; three field workers' in heredity; a chief of the case history work, with three assistants; an editor with an assistant ; a chief of the department of experimental pedagogy with teachers and trainers; a food specialist; a librarian; stenographers and clerks. Apparatus and a library well supplied with journals must be added. With such an equipment it will be possible to utilise the material here available." And he adds: " This work will be permanent and yield results for years to come."
Do not the foregoing afford some ideals for legislators and those interested in these problems in our land ? If it is asked, What would be the use of it all ? and if it is objected that it would be too expensive, I would answer that the results to be expected are at least threefold. We may hope thus to learn much that we do not now know as to the hereditary and nurtural causes of feeble-mindedness and as to how the feeble-minded can best be treated so as to make them useful and happy. In the second place well-conducted schools for the feeble-minded must have a great effect on our prisons. Even with our present knowledge we know that a considerable proportion of the prison
1 It ought perhaps to be explained that " field workers" are home or district visitors, who make enquiries of parents, etc.

128 A. St. John:
population should certainly be placed in such schools, and further research may show that more than we now think might with
advantage thus be transferred. But, besides relieving the prisons of their inmates, these schools certainly would afford a more excellent way-a more scientific, common sense and religious way-of organising the work and of training these unfortunates. And thirdly, these trainers of feeble-minded children constantly remind us that their pupils differ from the normal only in degree.
and not in kind, "so that," according to the Superintendent at Vineland, " every discovery we make has direct bearing on the education of normal children, particularly in the primary grades." In this sense these schools for defectives are pioneers in education, and explorers in practical psychology. Money spent in this way will be money spent for education, spent for finding out how we can do more in cultivating and economising human capacity, in developing human character and in raising a better generation of men and women. But perhaps the greatest lesson of all, which might be worth pondering for educators in schools, in homes, and even in prisons, is the great lesson of these feeble-minded schools expressed in the advertisement motto of the Vineland Training School: " We believe in happiness first-all else follows."
A few words may here be added concerning what is being done for inebriates in Massachusetts. The Foxborough State Hospital takes in free and " custodial" patients and treats them all alike-as patients in hospitals. They are required to sign a petition to this effect: " In consideration of good conduct, and upon the approval of the Superintendent of the Hospital, I now respectfully petition that I be granted my personal freedom within such defined limits of the hospital grounds as may be prescribed for me by the Superintendent, and furthermore I promise faithfully to adhere to the following rules:
" I. That under all circumstances 1 will remain at the Hospital until such time as I may be allowed to go from it with the approval and consent of the officers thereof.
" 2. That at no time will I go beyond the limits of parole, excepting when in the custody or care of some officer of the hospital, or by the permission of the Superintendent.

CRIME AND EUGENICS IN AMERICA

I29

"3. That at no time will I obtain any intoxicant or narcotic
for my own use, or that of any other person, or use it if obtained by any other person." This petition is signed by the patient, and approved by the Superintendent.
The maximum period of detention is two years, during which period concrete brick making, agricultural and other industries are carried on. At the end of their time some are occasionally given employment in the hospital for a month or so. But perhaps the most interesting feature is the after care or parole department, for which there is a special superintendent, who looks after those who have been discharged and occasionally advises others to come into the hospital. Discharged patients are encouraged to return to the hospital if they need it. All this seems to be an advance on some of our inebriate homes or reformatories, and the after-care system might well be studied with a view to adoption or adaptation.
If the patience of the reader is not exhausted. I should like to point the moral, although it seems only too obvious. There are many people in our prisons or workhouses, and loafing at street-corners or in worse places, who might have been saved for better things-for happiness and some degree of usefulness. These should have been found out early in life and trained, though in many cases even now it is not too late to greatly improve their lot. But how about the children who are being born and growing up to the same fate ? Are we not going to step in and do our duty concerning them ?
Careful preliminary study and investigation of every individual case of need or delinquency; proper training and care for as long as is required-permanent where necessary; prolonged and diligent enquiry and research regarding the whole subject, this is our threefold moral. For all this work great expenditure, thought and care will be needed-perhaps as much as for a small war. Here is an opportunity for rich men of intelligent good will. Here is an opportunity for legislation and for the useful application of public funds. Legislation is no doubt called for to enable certain persons to be detained, or rather to prevent their being inadvisedly removed from proper care and suitable surroundings. But, for the funds, how much better it would

130 A. st. j'Ohn .-
be if the people at large could be made to see where the need lies and were thus by conviction impelled to give their pennies and their shillings and their pounds. A utopian aspiration no doubt; and yet, if those who do know the facts were to go forth and make them known amongst people of all sorts and conditions, telling them how these evils could be met, I have a notion that there would be a large response, and that we should cease to say, as we do say now, to these heirs of ill-conditions and defective nature:
" We know you are unequal to the struggle of life; we know that only the most precarious livelihood is for you; we know that the discipline of the shop and of the street will be too much for you; we know that in a very few years you will return diseased and broken, a wreck seeking a home in the aimshouse, or you will be locked up in a jail or be confined as a dangerous lunaticall this we know, yet we launch you forth."'
1 The Training School, June, ig9o, p. 227.

