G. H. LATHE
M.Sc., M.D., C.M., Ph.D., Professor of Chemical Pathology at the University of Leeds
Defective Molecules as a Cause of Disease*

NO TWO OF US are entirely alike. Many of I have chosen to discuss "defective molecules

the features on which we make this as a cause of disease" because I am convinced

J everyday observation are chemical in that recent work in this field is preparing the way

nature-the pigments of the eye and skin, the for a solution of many problems in medicine in

structural peculiarities of the hair which make it which constitution and predisposition play an

curled or straight, as well as the shape of the important part. This includes diseases of the new-

head, and size of the body. I emphasize this born infant, in which the pattern is often simple,

chemical individuality because in studying the because it is more extreme, but more important

development of disease the central element is are the many conditions of middle and old age,

often the individuality of the ill person. We all which assume greater importance as nutritional

know of the extreme variation in response to an and infective diseases come under our control.

infective agent. Infection by the poliomyelitis

virus paralyses a few persons, produces a minor Archibald Garrod and Chemical Pathology

illness, perhaps comparable to a cold in a much Fifty years ago the development of disease was

larger number, and many are quite unaware that discussed largely in terms of structural changes in

they have been infected with the virus. Clearly the tissues and organs. However, in 1908 Archibald

presence of the organism is not the only major Garrod, then a London physician and lecturer in

factor determining the extent or type of illness. chemical pathology at St. Bartholomew's Hospi-

The same variation in response follows a stan- tal Medical School, pointed out, with prophetic

dard dose of toxin, or even inorganic poison, foresight, that there were four diseases which had

like lead. It is also true of diseases of uncertain unusual features marking them off from all other

origin. Thus perhaps one in twenty of us who are disease. Each was present from birth, lasted

exposed to "England's green and pleasant land" throughout life without improvement or worsen-

become arthritic. And of those who breathe the ing, produced no great threat to health, and was

atmosphere of Leeds, or of any of our large in- present in other members of the family. The four

dustrial cities, perhaps five in a thousand develop conditions were albinism, alkaptonuria (charac-

cancer of the lung. In none of these cases are we terized by the production of urine which turns

able to define the decisive factors which deter- black on standing), cystinuria (the urine contains

mine that some persons develop the disease and excess cystine, an amino acid which may produce

others are free of it. To determine these is un- stones), and pentosuria (the occurrence of an

doubtedly one of the central problems of unusual sugar in the urine). At the time Garrod

medicine.

spoke biochemistry was just beginning to reveal

that chemical changes in the body take place in

* An inaugural lecture delivered in the University many stages, each of which is facilitated by a

of Leeds on February 16th, 1959, and published in protein catalyst, an enzyme. He interpreted these

March, 1960, by the Leeds University Press. Price 2s. 6d. It is reprinted by permission of the author and of the University of Leeds.

diseases as the result of a block in single stages of metabolism. He saw then as "metabolic sports,

205 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1961, 52, 4.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the chemical analogues of structural malforma- but much less soluble than A when oxygen was

tions." Later he suggested that in each disease removed. And even when freed from the red

the metabolic block was due to the absence of an blood cell envelopes haemoglobin S would form

enzyme.

crystal-like structures under conditions similar to

The conception which Garrod formulated those of venous blood.

underwent little change during the following In the meantime it had been shown that the

forty years, although additional inborn errors of sickle cell condition is inherited in a Mendelian

metabolism were noted. It would have beenlogical fashion. The homozygous individuals are anae-

for Garrod's clinical prophecy to have been mic, while the heterozygous ones are not. The

developed by enzyme chemists, but theywere pre- latter have approximately equal amounts of

occupied in working out the pathways of normal haemoglobin S and A. In their blood, sickling

metabolism and were probably discouraged by does not occur, probably because the haemo-

the rarity of suitable clinical material. It so globin A interferes with the "crystallization" of

happens that the next decisive step in the evolu- haemoglobin S.

tion of this concept concerned the pigment of Here then was an important extension of

blood.

Garrod's work. The inherited disease was not a

mild one, however, and while Garrod spoke of

Sickle Cell Anaemia

inborn errors of metabolism being due to the

In 1945 Dr. Linus Pauling, the American chemist, absence of an enzyme, in sicklaemia there was

became interested in a peculiar kind of anaemia- something abnormal-haemoglobin S where

sickle cell anaemia. It had been discovered in haemoglobin A should occur. This raises the

1910 and was so named because in the venous question whether other, perhaps all, congenital

blood, but not arterial blood, the red blood cells metabolic errors are associated with the substitu-

are transformed from flexible discs to irregular, tion of defective molecules for normal ones. In

sickle shaped, rigid bodies. These are destroyed, the case of sickle cell anaemia there is no doubt of

and affected individuals suffer from a marked this, but where an enzyme is in question, we are

anaemia. This disease is present in about 1 in 500 unable to say. Enzymes usually occur at tissue

American negroes. When sickle cell anaemia concentrations of less than one part in a thou-

was described to Pauling, he formed the hypo- sand, in contrast to haemoglobin which forms

thesis that the unusual behaviour ofthe red blood 30 per cent of the red blood cells. While the bio-

cells was due to the presence of an abnormal type chemist can prepare enzymes as crystalline, often

of haemoglobin. He reasoned that when it was pure, proteins, in a tissue extract these proteins

deprived of its oxygen by the peripheral tissues, are recognized primarily by their activity. Should

the molecules aggregated into long rigid rods they lose this key property by malconstruction

which twisted the red cells out of shape. He and they would appear, by usual tests, to be absent.

Itano prepared some of the sickle cell haemo- Up to the present time only in some micro-

globin and at first could find no difference from organisms has it been possible to obtain indirect

normal haemoglobin. However, in 1949 they evidence of the existence of enzyme protein

announced that sickle cell haemoglobin behaved which is not biochemically active. This has been

differently from normal haemoglobin when done by immunological techniques.

examined by the electrophoretic technique, in

which the dissolved haemoglobins are allowed to Amino Acids

migrate in an electric field. Examination of the Proteins are composed of twenty different

new haemoglobin revealed that it was almost kinds of amino acids joined together in chains.

identical with the old, except for a less negative In size they vary from a few dozen amino acids to

charge-amounting to 2-4 charges per molecule. several thousands. The possible number of

A year later Dr. M. F. Perutz, at Cambridge, variations is legion. A recent statement by the

showed that sickle haemoglobin, or haemoglobin Swedish Academy of Sciences refers to them as

S as it is now called, was as soluble as the normal "the most complicated things in the world."

haemoglobin, haemoglobin A, when oxygenated, In considering the structure of proteins, it may

206

DEFECTIVE MOLECULES AS A CAUSE OF DISEASE

GNH2

NH

3 GIN IL2

Ls
S G_uN2

Oxytocin

Vasopressin

FIGURE 1
The amino acid structure of the posterior pituitary hormones, oxytocin and vasopressin, of cattle. Individual amino acid residues are shown as circles about the
abbreviated name of the amino acid.

be well to examine first some simpler materials. There are some useful lessons to be learned from studies of the polypeptide hormones produced by the posterior pituitary gland. This gland is situated at the base of the brain and produces two hormones-vasopressin, named after its capacity to raise the blood pressure, and oxytocin, which causes the uterus to contract. These two hormones, known for half a century, have recently been prepared in a pure form by Dr.
V. du Vigneaud of Cornell University, and he
G®(3 Pig, whale

synthesized them. Oxytocin was first prepared from beef pituitaries. It consists of a ring of six amino acids to which is attached a side chain of three amino acids. Vasopressin, from the same animal, also has nine amino acids, like oxytocin, but two of them are different, one in the ring, and one in the side chain. The diagram (Fig. 1) shows the structure of oxytocin, and the amino acid substitutions which change it into vasopressin. This transformation does not involve a
complete loss of oxytocin characteristics-they are reduced to 5-20 per cent of that of oxytocinbut the effect on blood pressure is increased 100 times by this change. Thus amino acid structure is the basis of physiological specificity-it determines the organ which will respond to the hormone.
But an even more interesting aspect of amino acid substitution appeared. Du Vigneaud's first extracts of oxytocin were from beef glands. Pig glands gave an identical product. When pig vasopressin was examined, however, a new product was found, for the lysine in the side chain (of beef vasopressin) is substituted by arginine. Thus amino acid sequence is also the basis of species specificity.
Oxytocin and vasopressin are small molecules compared with proteins. Insulin is a small pro-

)6 a Sheep

G)6i Horse

NH2
S
S

NH2 NH2
S
S

NH2 NF6

Beef insulin

FIGURE 2
The amino acid structure of beef insulin. The substitution of the Ala, Ser, Val sequence of the small ring, which
occurs in four other species, is shown above.

207

ER-D

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tein. The amino acid sequence of insulin was of chromatography and electrophoresis. A dif-

defined in 1956 by Dr. F. Sanger and his group at ference was then noted, for peptide no. 4 of

Cambridge. This molecule is about six times as haemoglobin A was missing from the fragments

large as oxytocin and vasopressin. While the of haemoglobin S. Instead a new peptide was

posterior pituitary hormones have been taken observed. The sequence of amino acids which

apart and reassembled insulin has so far only Ingram found in the two peptides is shown in

gone through the dismantling phase. Like the Fig. 3. Each has nine amino acids and the dif-

posterior pituitary hormones it involves a small ference between the two peptides, and therefore

ring of six amino acids, but it has in addition a between the two haemoglobins, is a single

large ring of twenty-seven amino acids. Sanger's amino acid. A glutamic acid residue in haemo-

group has examined the sequence of amino acids globin A is replaced by valine in haemoglobin S.

in five species of insulin. Two, pig and whale, are The loss of the acid group of glutamic acid

identical, and beef, sheep and horse differ from explained Pauling's observation of a different

them and from each other, as shown in Fig. 2. It charge on haemoglobin S.

is particularly interesting that these differences Pauling separated haemoglobins A and S by

all involve three amino acid loci, which are side the classical form of electrophoresis devised by

by side in the small ring. It seems probable then Tiselius. The success that attended this venture,

that the ring is necessary for the action of the its importance for medicine, and the invention of

insulin molecule, but that its constituents are the much simpler method of "paper electro-

immaterial (within limits, no doubt). Certain phoresis" resulted in a great deal of attention

parts of the molecule are more closely involved being given to haemoglobin. In addition, the fact

in the biological action of insulin than others. A that haemoglobin can be seen makes it doubly

pentapeptide may be removed from the phenyla- easy to examine. In the ten years since haemo-

lanine chain and some activity still remains. The globin S was described there have been found

available information regarding insulin streng- more than twenty other forms of haemoglobin.

thens the idea that substitution of individual Moreover it has been known for many years that

amino acids is important for biological function, at birth a large proportion of haemoglobin is

and also plays a part in evolutionary specializa- different from that of the adult. This foetal type,

tion. A vast amount of work is being carried out haemoglobin F, which has quite distinct charac-

at present on a number of small proteins and teristics, gradually disappears from circulation

polypeptides of biological importance. Our during the first weeks of extra-uterine life. Two

knowledge in this field should soon be much more embryonic forms are also known. Several other

extensive.

mammals also have foetal haemoglobins differ-

The insulin molecule is six times larger than ing from the adult forms. The reason is unknown.

that of oxytocin, and rather more complicated. Thus there are at least twenty-five haemoglobin

The protein haemoglobin is about twelve times types in the human species. Their analysis is a

the size of insulin, and the fact that the haemo-

globin molecule consists of two identical halves

still leaves us with units differing by a factor ofsix.

The Haemoglobins
Dr. V. M. Ingram at Cambridge, who is the foremost worker in this field, has been able to locate the difference between haemoglobin A
and S, even though the entire sequence of 300 amino acids in the half molecule is not known. He established the difference between the two
haemoglobin molecules by dissecting them enzymatically and comparing the fragments. These were spread out on paper by a combination

Haemoglobin A
(His(vauXLeuX rXroXVaIXGuX
Haemoglobin S
FIGURE 3
The amino acid structure of peptide no. 4 of normal haemoglobin (A), and of the corresponding peptide of
sickle cell haemoglobin (S).

208

DEFECTIVE MOLECULES AS A CAUSE OF DISEASE

particularly urgent task because of the information that will be obtained regarding the biochemical links between the genetic constitution of the individual and the structure of the body. The mode of inheritance of the main types of haemoglobin is understood. They are inherited as Mendelian factors, and each haemoglobin, apart from F and A, is interpreted as a mutation arising from an alteration to the chromosome
structure.
The haemoglobin half-molecule consists of two polypeptide chains, alpha and beta. The mutation producing haemoglobin S results in a change of a single glutamic acid residue, out of about 150 amino acids in the alpha polypeptide chain. Glutamic acid is substituted by valine. In haemoglobin C the same residue is altered, but this substitution is by a lysine. Haemoglobin E represents the change of a different glutamic acid residue in the same alpha chain, to lysine. D1 probably involves alteration of the same amino acid locus but the substituent has not yet been identified. Two alterations to the beta chain have been observed in haemoglobins Do and I. It had already been predicted by Neel that there were two genes determining the inheritance of haemoglobin. Ingram now suggests that one controls the alpha chain and the second the beta chain. The ultimate aim, of course, is to demonstrate a relation between the structure of the genes and that of the polypeptide chains.
The remarkable array of human haemoglobins that have been described in the past decade raises a number of important questions. It is quite evident that there is much variety in our human material. Any study of eye colour, or hair colour, will testify to that, but usually this has been explicable on the basis of varying proportions of two or three constituents. The pigments involved are generally relatively small molecules and not many varieties are possible, as compared with a large molecule like haemoglobin. Nevertheless it comes as a surprise that there are so many forms of haemoglobin. This protein is an exceptional one, and its properties combine to make it possible to demonstrate this variety. But there would seem to be no intrinsic reason why its variability should be greater than that of other proteins. Certainly one would not expect less variation if it were colourless, like most proteins.

Lacking more information one must assume that other proteins are also extremely variable.
It is notable too that, while the first abnormal haemoglobins were found because they produce disease, many of those described later are not known to do so. A number only contribute to illness when they are combined with some other haemoglobin abnormality, as in patients who have both haemoglobin S and C. At the present time less than halfofthe known forms are diseaseproducing, or disease-aggravating. Moreover, the defect in the abnormal molecules of haemoglobin S does not affect the main function of haemoglobin, which is oxygen transport. The affinity for carbon dioxide does not appear to have been examined. The failure of haemoglobin S lies entirely in its insolubility when freed of oxygen. The tendency of the molecules to aggregate is much greater than that of haemoglobin A or of a mixture of the two. On the other hand haemoglobin C will aggregate with S, forming "mixing crystals." It is interesting to note that haemoglobin F, which is present in large amounts at birth, protects the infant which is affected with sicklaemia, because it will not form mixed crystals in this way. Thus our knowledge of haemoglobin S emphasizes that a biological structure must be adjusted to all of the circumstances of its cellular environment, and not merely serve the function which we may regard as of prime importance.
The frequency with which abnormal human haemoglobins appear in a population never exceeds 2 or 3 per cent. The position is different in other animals, for cattle and sheep each have two haemoglobin "strains" and individual animals may have either or both. Mice appear to exhibit some haemoglobin heterogeneity too. So far as is known none of these protein variants are associated with disease.
Human Proteins Few human proteins have been studied very fully. Electrophoretic analysis of plasma proteins indicates that there is more than one haptoglobin. Two types of ,B-isoagglutinins have also been noted. The types are inherited. Scarcely any nonhaemoglobin proteins have been examined systematically among other species than our own,
but fl-lactoglobulin in the milk of cows is an

209

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

example. There are two variants of this protein, fact that in most organisms about half the

and one or the other, or both, are produced by genetic influence is contributed by each parent.

lactating cows.

Supporting evidence has come from studies of

This survey of the uniformity and variation virus structures, for these half-living things have

among individual proteins has touched on a few disposed of many of the attributes of life, but

hormones, and one protein, haemoglobin, which retain in a highly developed form the capacity to

is specialized for carrying the respiratory gases. transmit their characteristics to succeeding

One ought logically to move on to discuss generations of viruses. A large part of the

enzymes, since most of the proteins of the body viruses which infect animals is deoxyribonucleic

are of this type. As mentioned previously, the acid.

subject of structural variation in enzymes is Deoxyribonucleic acid takes its name from the

largely unexplored, however. It is in much the sugar, deoxyribose, which with alternating

same undeveloped condition as the molecular phosphate linkages forms the "backbone" of the

basis of heredity and protein synthesis was ten nucleic acid. Attached to each sugar residue is a

years ago. Then one could scarcely have at- base. These bases are of two general types-

tempted to describe genetic and hereditary factors characterized by a keto or an amino group. The

in chemical terms, and knowledge of the syn- ratio of these is approximately 1.

thesis of- proteins was very rudimentary. Re- Earlier we have seen that the differences be-

cently progress has been particularly rapid in tween the vasopressins and insulins of different

these fields and in- a short time we should know species, and the difference between the normal

as much about these subjects as we do about and mutant forms of haemoglobin, depend on the

sugar and fat metabolism, and a great deal more substitution of one amino acid for another. Ac-

than we do about calcium metabolism and the cordingly, genetic change must be at least as

mode of action of hormones.

detailed as this. The chemical structure of the

Evidence from many sources indicates that an genetic material must provide for the sequence

important part in the inheritance of character- of twenty amino acids commonly found in the

*istics is 'played by the chromosomes and the proteins. There may of course be some interven-

nucleic acids which they contain. A sharp break ing steps between the genetic material and the

in the inheritance of body characteristics may in body proteins. But a satisfactory hereditary

'the most satisfactory conditions actually be structure must satisfy other needs. Biological

visible as a break or defect in the chromosomes. observations necessitate that the molecules be

More frequently mutations are not associated reproducible, as happens at each mitotic division

with a visible' alteration, but one is inferred from of body cells. In the production of gametes the

indirect evidence. This concept received very genetic material is halved. It must also be capable

strong support from experiments on the trans- of resuming the double structure with fertiliza-

'formation of bacterial types by exposure to tion.

extracts (non-living, since they had been heated) In 1953 J. D. Watson and F. H. C. Crick sug-

from other types of bacteria. Moreover, the new gested a structure for DNA which, with a few

type which had been produced in this way was modifications, satisfies several of the above speci-

perpetuated in succeeding generations. This fications. X-ray studies, on extracted DNA and

observation was made by Griffiths in this on the material in the heads of fish sperms, have

country in 1928. It was extended by American suggested a helical structure for it. Watson and

workers who showed that the essential agent was Crick consider that there are two corkscrew

deoxyribonucleic acid, which biochemists usually nucleic acid chains coiled about each other so

cell DNA. The importance of DNA in more that the keto and amino groups of the attached

differentiated organisms is shown by the rela- bases become linked by hydrogen bonds.

tively. constant amounts of DNA in individual Perutz has likened it to a spiral staircase in which

body cells of each species, and by the occurrence the bases form the steps and the phosphate and

of about half the amount in germ cells. Thus we sugar chains form the banisters.

have a chemical parallel to the alleged biological The part of the DNA structure which deter-

210

DEFECTIVE MOLECULES AS A CAUSE OF DISEASE

mines (directly or indirectly) the amino acid se- different mutations along a DNA chain. Benzer

quence is considered to be the bases. These are has used this technique on a strain of viruses

paired, one being amino, and the other keto. It affecting certain bacteria. According to him the

has been suggested that a particular arrangement minimal size of a hereditary unit is about two'

of two or three base pairs forms the unique code base pairs. The same study also showed:that

for each of the twenty amino acids in the body some sections of the DNA are ten to twenty

proteins. Since it is assumed that each base in a times more susceptible to mutation than other

keto-amino pair has only one "opposite" type, it areas. The reason for this is not clear.

will be understood that if one nucleic acid spiral Should future work confirm these suggestions

were separated from its partner it would have the and observations, then genetic material is con-

structure (base sequence) which could form the structed on a very fine scale indeed. The physician

basis for replication of a new partner identical who diagnoses sickle cell anaemia is, in fact,

with the old. It has been suggested that separa- making a qualitative analysis of 10/20g of matter

tion takes place by unwinding. Moreover, this -a sensitivity which compares well with the

motion, which separates the two chains, could most refined measures ofthe chemical laboratory.

become the motion of uniting with new chains. The way DNA determines the amino acid se-

DNA molecules are variable in size, but a quence of proteins cannot be very simple,' how-

molecular weight of 6 million is not exceptional. ever. This becomes evident when it is seen in

Such a molecule would be about 25 A across the relation to the mechanisms synthesizing protein

helix, and about 30,000 A long for a molecular in the cell, for the DNA is confined to the nucleus

weight of 6 million. It would contain about and as far as is known little protein synthesis

10,000 base pairs. Assuming that three base pairs takes place there. The modem conception of the

are the signal or code for each amino acid, the cell is much more detailed than a few years ago,

corresponding protein would have 3,000 amino thanks to the electron microscope and the separa-

acids and a molecular weight of about 300,000. tion of cell fragments by high speed centrifuga-

Many proteins are of this size.

tion. In thinking of cell structure it may'be well

The mutations revealed by the variations of the to view it in relation to everyday objects. Let us

haemoglobin molecule each involve substitution consider a single mammalian cell, say from the

of one amino acid for another. Accordingly the liver, and suppose that we could increase the

corresponding change in the DNA molecule diameter by about 2 million times. The single

would consist of changes to two or three base cell would then have a diameter equal to this

pairs. Larger structural defects, involving loss of lecture room, about 100 ft. At about the centre

many base pairs or fragmentation of the DNA would be another spherical body, the nucleug;

molecule, would produce much larger mutations. which would comfortably enclose the black-

Much attention has been given to estimating board and bench top. Within this central nucleus

the size of the gene. This term was originally used is almost all of the DNA of the cell. On this scale

for the genetic material determining a body these corkscrew-shaped molecules would be

character, such as height or colour. As more about a sixth of an inch in diameter, while the

became known of the factors determining a length would be rather variable-probably longer

character, it was realized that they could be very than twenty feet. This size presents no problem

complex. The idea of "one gene, one enzyme" since the DNA molecules are probably coiled up.

was then developed. It would seem now that the The area outside the nucleus contains two

minimal genetic change must involve one amino main structures-large sausage-shaped bodies

acid or one peptide link. This would appear to and smaller, more numerous, spherical objects.

be a more logical genetic unit. Attempts to The sausage-shaped bodies, called mitochondria,

estimate the size of the determining structure would be of the order of twelve feet long and

have been based on the capacity of ionizing three feet broad. Several scores of them are dis-

radiation to produce mutations. Working with tributed at random through the extra-nuclear

micro-organisms, it has been possible to deter- jelly. They might occupy rather less- than a fifth

mine the relative position and frequency of of the extra-nuclear space. From their bio-

2II

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

chemical properties it is clear that much of the which the cell parts could synthesize. From the

equipment for generation of energy, through amount of DNA in the nucleus, and assuming

stepwise oxidation of sugar and fat, is concen- that all is used for this purpose, 2,000,000

trated in them. This energy is stored in special different proteins of 100,000 molecular weight

phosphate esters which diffuse to other parts of could be constructed. This is a large number

the cell. Mitochondria certainly play some part considering that we know of less than 400

in formation ofproteins, for the energy necessary mammalian proteins. In contrast to the nucleus,

for this process is generated there. They may also individual microsomes appear to have a limited

be the site of some protein synthesis, but a great repertoire of protein synthesis. If the amount of

deal of evidence suggests that formation of RNA determines the number of proteins which

protein is most rapid in the smaller spherical can be synthesized, then an average microsome

bodies, the microsomes. On the scale we are can make only about a score of different pro-

discussing these would have a diameter of about teins (of 100,000 molecular weight). The cell

seven inches, and their number may be estimated probably has a hundred times this number. Ac-

as of the order of 150,000 per cell. In the cell they cordingly the microsomes of a cell must be

probably do not exist as separate structures, but specialized in a way which other cell parts are

are part of a series of membranes which occupy not. This has not yet been demonstrated experi-

much of the interior of the cell. These membranes mentally.

4ave been called the cytoplasmic reticulum, from

their appearance in electron micrographs. Studies Defective Molecules and Mutation

with isotopes indicate that amino acids are more Turning now to the production of defective

rapidly incorporated in the proteins of micro- molecules, there are thus at least two places where

somes than any other cell structure. Now these alteration might occur in the normal pattern

small spherical bodies which synthesize the upon which the cell proteins are constructed.

proteins are a long way from the nuclear deoxy- One is in the nuclear DNA, the other in the

ribonucleic acid into which is built the formula microsomal RNA. Possibly some third inter-

or code determining the all-important sequence mediate stage is also involved, but this is as yet

of amino acids in the proteins. A clue to the unknown. Whether the microsomes ever partici-

solution of this problem lies in the fact that pate in disease as independent units has not yet

microsomes contain a large amount of another been examined. One must note here, however,

form of nucleoprotein, namely, ribonucleic acid the existence of that roving band of microsome-

(RNA). There is some RNA in the nucleus as like bodies, which the bacteriologists call viruses.

well, and, considered as a whole, the microsomes Alteration of nuclear DNA will lead to a

of a cell contain about twice as much RNA as change in the amino acid sequence of proteins

there is DNA in the nucleus. The evidence in- and this will be inherited by daughter cells, or by

criminating microsomal ribonucleic acid as the offspring, if gametes are affected. In the latter

intermediary between DNA and protein syn- case, if the change is detectable it will be classed

thesis is thus largely circumstantial, depending on as a mutation.

the fact that RNA is found at the site of the The first mutations to be observed were spon-

crime. But in another context we know that taneous ones. In 1928 Muller noted that expo-

ribonucleic acid can determine amino acid sure to X-rays greatly increased the frequency of

sequence, for the viruses affecting plants contain mutations. It is accepted now that all ionizing

RNA, rather than DNA, and it controls the radiation has this effect, which is dependent in

hereditary pattern of these viruses. The remain- part on direct action on the DNA, and partly on

der of the virus particles is protein, and it is not the indirect effect of reactive radicals produced

infective alone whereas RNA is.

from the water of the cell. The native radio-

If we accept the postulate that a single amino activity of the cell constituents, notably

acid locus is determined by three base pairs in potassium, plays some part in producing the

nucleic acid, whether DNA or RNA, it is possible spontaneous mutations. To this must be added

to calculate the number of different proteins background radiation from the immediate

.2 I 2

DEFECTIVE MOLECULES AS A CAUSE OF DISEASE

environment, and cosmic radiation from outer the species involved, and lead to increased illness

space. Since 1895, when Rontgen discovered X- and eventually death, may have to be revised.

rays, man-made radiation has been increasing in Apparently not all the mutations of haemo-

amount, and in the past fifteen years the whole of globins are serious, and only a few are known to

humanity, rather than small sections, has been produce anaemia. This is what might be ex-

exposed to the radioactive products of nuclear pected from a biochemical viewpoint, for only a

explosions, to nuclear power station effluate few amino acids in each protein are necessary for

and the accidental escape of fuel breakdown the known function of the protein. What the

products. No accurate estimate of the effect can remainder do is not clear. Considerable altera--

be made, but it is now generally agreed that the tion to unessential parts of the protein molecule

increase in mutation, most of which is disad- might be possible without affecting its main

vantageous, is very thinly spread through the function, though a disadvantageous effect on

whole world population, making it unapparent secondary properties, as seen in the low solu-

to the casual observer, yet in total reaching large bility of haemoglobin S, may occur. From our

sums. present knowledge, about a fifth of the known

The increased number of mutations attribut- haemoglobin variants are disadvantageous. Per-

able to man-made radiations is quite uncertain, haps the most important conclusion to be drawn

and estimates vary widely. Among citizens of is that we are more ignorant than we might like

highly developed countries the most serious to think.

effects are probably produced by X-rays. Another As we have seen, some modifications of the

factor probably also plays a part in the produc- DNA of germ cells will result in a new structure

tion of mutations, for in 1947 Auerbach and in the offspring, and this will be passed on to

Robson pointed out that a chemical, mustard gas, succeeding generations. Genetic studies indicate

was a mutagenic agent. Since then many others that if the change is a significant one, it is likely to

have been discovered and a number, particularly be disadvantageous and will, in time, be elimi-

the nitrogen mustards, serve as therapeutic nated by the death of affected individuals. Body

agents. It is not improbable that certain natural cells also become mutated and pass on their

constituents of the cell are mutagenic, and it is altered constitution to daughter cells. This pro-

possible that cholesterol has this effect.

bably produces heterogeneity as the individual

The variety of haemoglobins that have been ages. Cancer may involve a change of this type.

found, of which a few are disease producing, In neither instance has the homogeneity of

suggests two conclusions regarding mutations. proteins been systematically examined, though

Firstly, the number of mutations observed in Putnam's finding of a remarkable degree of

genetic experiments will depend on the method individuality among proteins produced by

of examining succeeding generations. The bio- myeloma tumours suggests that a search would

logist generally looks at rather striking features be well rewarded.

like colour. His attention would be drawn to a As the body is a very active chemical system

mutation yielding mice with white blood, or whose pathways are determined by highly specific

blood of some other colour. But it is clearly enzymes, it is to be expected that the most strik-

possible for there to be scores, if not hundreds, ing results of anomalous protein structure would

of varieties of red haemoglobin. Thus one may appear when individual enzymes are modified.

expect the number of observed mutations, due to The number of possible diseases of this type is the use of a refined examination of protein, to be probably large. In 1957 Dixon and Webb were

increased by perhaps 10 to 100 times. Viewed on able to list 327 enzymes of animal origin. There this scale, ionizing radiation may be much more is reason to believe that most of these occur in

potent in the production of mutations than is the human body and probably ten to 100 times

considered at present.

this number will eventually be found, though

The second conclusion suggested by the variety many may be of little importance. A complete

of haemoglobins, is that the widely held general- defect of some enzymes, for example hexokinase,

ity that most mutations are disadvantageous to would probably result in the intra-uterine death

213

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of the individual. How large a contribution enzyme defects make to the intra-uterine wastage of human reproduction, which is of the order of 20 per cent, is not known.
Before surveying present knowledge of enzyme
defects as a cause of disease it may be asked by what test are we to conclude that a disease is due to an enzyme defect. Here we may paraphrase the second criterion which Koch used in defining disease due to infection, and say that proof of a single enzyme defect must rest on an examination of the patient's tissues in vitro, by a test which depends on a single chemical reaction mediated by an enzyme. By this criterion eleven pathological conditions have been defined during the
past ten years, as shown in Table 1. It will be noted that only one of Garrod's original four conditions, namely alkaptonuria, can yet be included in this group, and in this instance there was a span of fifty years between formulation of the hypothesis and its proof. There is a larger group of diseases in which the evidence for single enzyme defects is very strong, but the decisive test for the enzyme in the patient's tissues has not yet been made. Taking these two groups together, it seems probable that diseases due to enzyme defects have been discovered for about 10 per cent of the known enzymes of the body. In some areas of metabolism it is much higher.

Thus of the eight enzymes mediating the first stages of carbohydrate metabolism (Fig. 4) four defects have been noted. Defects in some of the remaining four enzymes might be lethal in the homozygous condition.

TABLE 1

ELEVEN PATHOLOGICAL CONDITIONS IN WHICH INDIVIDUAL

ENZYME DEFECTS HAVE BEEN PROVEN. IN NON-HAEMOLYTIC

NEONATAL JAUNDICE OF THE HUMAN OTHER ENZYMES MAY

ALSO BE UNDEVELOPED

YEAR OF

CLINICAL CONDMON ENZYME DEFECT PROOF

Methaemoglobinaemia Diaphorase I

1948

Hypophosphatasia

Alkaline phosphatase 1948

Glycogen storage disease Glucose-6-phosphatase 1953 of liver and kidney (von

Gierke)

Apnoea from succinyl Pseudocholinesterase 1953

choline

Haemolytic anaemia due Glucose-6-phosphate 1956

to primaquin

dehydrogenase

Galactosaemia Phenylketonuria

Uridylyl transferase 1956 Phenylalanine-4hydroxylase of liver 1957

Non-haemolytic neonatal UDP-transglucuronylase 1957

jaundice

Congenital familial non- UDP-transglucuronylase 1957

haemolytic jaundice

Alkaptonuria

Homogentisate oxidase 1958

Glycogen storage disease Phosphorylase ofmuscle 1959

of muscle

A good deal is also known about enzyme defects in the metabolism of aromatic amino acids, as the clinical conditions attributable to a

Glycogen

11 *
Phosphorylase

* Branching Debranching * enzyme l enzyme
Glucose-1-phosphate

Phsphoglucomutase
u ~~~~Phospho-
Glucose+ ATP- t Glucose-6-phosphate I. -m°)sbFructose-6-phosphate

*GlucOse-&PV h tasi EGucsdmeeh-y6drpohgoesnapsheate

Glucose

6-phosphogluconate

FIGURE 4
Initial stages of the metabolic pathways of carbohydrate metabolism. Diseases due to the absence of individual enzymes have been described for those enzymes marked with an asterisk.

2I4

DEFECTIVE MOLECULES AS A CAUSE OF DISEASE

block in four of six stages have been recognized. indicating that inherited traits play a part in the

One of these is phenylpyruvic oligophrenia, production of disease. There are a number of

which, as its name implies, is associated with an inherited conditions characterized by weird

extreme defect in intelligence. It now appears morphological abnormalities like achondro-

probable that the brain damage is due to the plastic dwarfism, or ichthiosis. Many diseases of

accumulation of unmetabolized phenylalanine. uncertain origin like schizophrenia and diabetes

This is an important disease as the heterozygous also involve inherited predisposition. The great-

condition occurs in 1 per cent of the population. est contribution to ill health is probably in the

The brain condition probably can be prevented large number of ill-defined conditions, which

from developing if an early diagnosis is made in appear in middle and old age, like adiposity and

the 1 in 25,000 infants in whom the homozygous arteriosclerosis. All three categories probably

condition appears.

include simple problems of individual enzyme

The list of conditions in which enzyme defects defects, but environmental factors may operate

have been defined includes one enzyme (UDP- as well.

transglucuronylase) which may be defective Thus we see that in a few instances it is now

from genetic causes (in congenital familial non- possible to trace the outlines of the structural

haemolytic jaundice, a disease marked by excess basis of inherited disease from the parents

plasma bilirubin, and damage to the brain) or through to the tissues of the children. It has been

from retarded development of this enzyme (in the predicted by Professor Charles Dent that the

much more common newborn jaundice, which simple concept that I have attempted to sketch

may also produce brain damage). This illustrates will turn out to play the same unifying role in

the fact that the herditary make-up determines medicine that the atomic theory played in

the potentiality, but other factors may prevent chemistry. How can this be, it may be asked,

its realization. The possibility that slow develop- when the diseases I have listed do not account for

ment of this enzyme is inherited must also be even 1 per cent of illness? The answer is, I think,

considered.

that we are still working on the periphery of the

Three of the listed conditions illustrate the key subject. But already a pattern is appearing from

role which environmental factors may play. Thus which we can see how to approach some of the

the haemolytic anaemia due to absence of more complex problems of constitutional pre-

glucose-6-phosphatase dehydrogenase in red disposition.

blood cells only appears when some factor inter- Biologists have noted that hybrids-crosses of

venes to oxidize the cell glutathione. Primaquine markedly differing strains or species-are often

and naphthalene metabolites do this. In this larger and more robust than either of their

sense moth ball poisoning is an inherited disease! parents. There is, I think, a parallel to this in the

In the same class, but more serious, is galacto- growth of science. Advance is most rapid when

saemia. The homozygous infant is not ill when there is the interplay of two subjects, or contri-

born, it only becomes so when it is fed on milk butions from independent disciplines. This is

containing the sugar galactose, which it cannot abundantly true of the subject we have been dis-

metabolize. Milk must be excluded from the cussing. Biological and chemical approaches,

diet of the affected individual for the whole of together with the spur of unsolved problems of

life. human disease, have thrown into relief a whole

The combination of genetic and environ- series of new aspects in each field. The amino acid

mental factors may be of great importance in the pattern of proteins is seen as the common basis

pathogenesis of many diseases which are frankly of physiological specificity, of inherited species

familiar in character. This interplay is probably specificity, and of constitutional problems in

even more crucial in those diseases like diabetes disease. Nature indeed works on a detailed

where constitutional factors are demonstrable, pattern in which everything may depend on which

but which up to the present have proved too one of twenty amino acids occupies one particular

complex for us to understand.

amino acid locus in a protein.

A vast amount of information is now available I am convinced that this concept will prove to

215

ER-E

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

be a great help in mastering illnesses which now appear to be outside our control. This concept is also aesthetically satisfying. It emphasizes the unity of the organism, while taking account of the diversity of its parts. Thus we see that the most varied signs and symptoms of disease, in-

volving six or eight organs, can result from interruption to a single stage of metabolism, and even from the replacement of one amino acid by another in a single protein. This illustrates, I think, the remarkable way in which chemistry can simplify medicine.

2I6

