SOME RECENT DOCUMENTS ON THE
SUBJECT OF INFANT MORTALITY, AND SOME REFLECTIONS THEREON.
By ERIC PRITCHARD, M.A., M.D.
The War and Infant Mortality.
POISONS find their antidotes in human affairs as well as among physiological processes, and one of the results of this terrible War, with its appalling toll of adult life, has been to stimulate human endeavour to compensate for these losses by effecting economies in other directions and not least in infant life. I have before me as I write a pile of volumes crowded with facts and figures relating to the birth-rate and the causes of infant mortality. This at a time when all the world is engaged in the business of war and the making of the engines of destruction affords proof, if proof be necessary, that infant life is now considered a matter of great national urgency.
My original mandate was to write an " omnibus" review of these volumes, summarising for the benefit of the readers of the EUGENICS REVIEW the more important conclusions at which the authors of these documents have arrived, but on reflection I have come to the conclusion that in following this plan scant justice would be done to these individually important publications, and I have decided to substitute for a conventional review a few of the general impressions left on my mind by a perusal of the more important of these reports.
A General Recognition of the Complexity of the Causes of Infant Mortality. In the first place there can be no doubt that a very much
wider view is now held as to the causes of infant mortality than was the case even a few years ago-it is now no longer a question whether, for instance, poverty, ignorance, bad housing or the industrial employment of women is " the " cause of a high infant mortality rate, but rather what is the relative importance of these various factors. Read, for instance, Sir

224 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Arthur Newsholme's report to the L.G.B. for 1915-I9I6. A very large part of this volume is occupied with appraising the respective values of the various circumstances of the environ-
ment which favour excessive child mortality; such circumstances, for instance, as lack of medical care and nursing, fecklessness of mothers, intemperance, poverty, overcrowding on area, size of town, overcrowding in rooms, defective sanitation, industrial employment of married women, size of family, influence of the birth-rate, and the incidence of infective
disease. That a knowledge of the complexity of the causes of infant mortality is not confined to experts was clearly proved to me at a recent examination held by the National Association for the Prevention of Infant Mortality and at which students of the type of intending health visitors sat for the Association's certificate. One of the questions was: " As a factor of infant mortality which is of the greater importance-maternal ignorance or bad housing? " Many of the candidates showed by their answers that they completely understood how interwoven these two factors are, how ignorance followed in the footsteps of bad housing, and how ignorance submitted to conditions of discomfort which would not be tolerated with a higher standard of enlightenment. A few years ago when a similar question was put to a group of students working for a similar object, the answers were very different and the problem was dismissed in a few words. That literature of the kind
which lies before me is now read by a large section of the public is not only proved by the size of the editions which it is found necessary to publish, but it is also proved by the answers which
are submitted by students who sit for the various examinations in mothercraft held by domestic economy, nursing and teaching institutions. Some of these students are young married women working with no other object than to acquire the necessary knowledge to bring up their own families in accordance with the modern principles of hygiene. Others are qualifying as
teachers.
Very few Infants are Born really Healthy. At one of these examinations the following question was
asked: " Discuss the statement ' From 8o to go per cent. of all

SOME RECENT DOCUMENTS ON INFANT MORTALITY, ETC. 225
infants are born healthy.' " This question was set because this statement has gained a very wide currency and is apparently accepted as true without reservation by a large section of the public. Many of the students who answered this question saw the necessity for qualification and the desirability of defining the term " healthy." Most individuals who, parrot-like, quote this statement appear to believe that an infant who is born free of syphilis, gonorrheea or gross organic defect is to be regarded as " healthy." On the other hand, experts now know that an enormous number of infants are born suffering from functional disabilities which, if they do not seriously jeopardise life, at least make successful rearing exceedingly difficult. The mere inspection of a new-born infant does not reveal its functional infirmities any more than the inspection of a watch will indicate whether it will keep good or bad time. The truth or the falseness of the statement that " 8o-go per cent. of all infants are born healthy " depends, therefore, on the meaning attached to the term " healthy."
The Toxcemias of Pregnancy. Personally I believe that a very large number of infants
are born suffering from minor degrees of debased vitality owing to soluble poisons circulating in the maternal blood, which cannot be filtered off from the foetus by the placenta in the same way that particulate bodies such as micro organisms are caught and generally destroyed by this protective mechanism.
These so-called toxoemias of pregnancy are now attracting the attention of pathologists and clinicians, and it is becoming generally recognised that if we are to make a successful fight against infant mortality the ante-natal supervision of the pregnant woman must be included in any comprehensive scheme of prophylaxis. These toxcemias are, for the most part, due to the development of bacteria within the system of the mother and the consequent production of toxins, which, apart from the damage they inflict on the mother herself, exercise a detrimental influence on the delicate tissues of the embryo or foetus, and especially on the sensitive nervous elements; these poisons may not be sufficiently powerful to cause the death
of the foetus or the production of organic malformations, but

226 EUGENICS REVIEW.
they may very readily lead to functional disturbances, which show themselves in the form of delicacy on the part of the new-born infant or want of resistance to the adverse factors in its new environment. Among the poisons belonging to this group of toxcemias must be included the following:
(I) Poisons generated in excess in the alimentary canal of the mothet from indigestion, intestinal stasis, colitis, etc.
(2) Poisons generated in the mouth of the mother from alveolar pyorrhoea.
(3) Poisons from any source accumulating in the system
of the mother, not necessarily from excessive production, but from defective elimination, as in cases of liver or kidney insufficiency.
To these poisons of internal or " autochthonous" derivation must be added those of external or " exogenous" origin, such, for instance, as alcohol or anodyne drugs for whatsoever purpose consumed by the pregnant woman. In a sense these soluble poisons, whether of internal or external origin, are more to be feared than the direct infections with the germs of syphilis and gonorrhoea; for, being common everyday evils which act slowly without producing obvious danger signals, they are held in little respect.
Toxcemias the Cause of Congenital Idiocy.
Thanks to a very brilliant series of recent researches we now know that the enigmatical disease, " Goitre," together with its complement Myxcedema, isdueto the chronicpoisoning of the system by the toxins of bacteria associated chiefly with sewage and excrementitious matter, and hence is explained the prevalence of Goitre in mountainous valleys where the drinkling water is so often contaminated by surface drainage.
Goiterous mothers produce offspring suffering from a special form of congenital idiocy known as Cretinism. There is no reason to think that this is the only variety of toxcemia existing in the mother which leads to the production of idiocy in the child. Evidence is gradually accumulating that various forms of defect and degeneracy, physical as well as mental, are to be

SOME RECENT DOCUMENTS ON INFANT MORTALITY, ETC. 227
traced to soluble poisons produced in the system of the mother, which circulate in the veins of the foetus and poison its delicate embryonic tissues.
The Influence of Infectious Disease on Child Mortality.
In his Report (3) to the Local Government Board for the year I915-I6, Sir Arthur Newsholme indicates very clearly the influence of such infective diseases as measles and whooping cough on the mortality of children under five years of age. The resisting power against such infective diseases is poorly developed in young children, but this same want of resistance almost certainly exists in young children against other and unnamed infections of the catarrhal and septic order. After some exposure to these common infections the child gains relative immunity, but at first suffers very seriously when attacked by bacteria belonging to these groups. A common cold may produce very severe symptoms in a baby or even death, and those who have any experience with young infants know how alarming the results of a " coli " or? " coliform " infection can be. This want of resistance to common everyday forms of bacteria on the part of young infants may be one of the explanations of the close association between bad housing, overcrowding and insanitation with a high infant mortality rate.
Evevy factor which introduces possible sources of infection aggravates the dangers to infant life. The favourable infant mortality rate of such countries as New Zealand, where density of population is low, is explicable on these grounds.
New Zealand and a low Mortality Rate.
Much may be learned from a study of the vital statistics
of New Zealand (4). The infant mortality in this country is
now the lowest in the world. But in spite of its natural advantages from climate, prosperity, sparseness of population and milk supply, absence of the industrial employment of women and of all the usual factors which determine a high mortality rate among infants, New Zealand had a death rate twelve years ago higher than that which now obtains in Hampstead and in many other London suburbs. The death-rate in New Zealand only began to assume its present favourable proportion after an

228 EUGENICS REVIEW.
active educational and propaganda campaign had been inaugurated (I907) by the Society for the Health of Women and Children, and provision for good nursing had been provided by the Institution of the Karitane-Harris Hospital and Plunket nurses. Intelligence and a good knowledge of mothercraft will triumph over the disadvantages and dangers of bad housing, insanitation and even poverty, but no amount of good housing and no climate will compensate for maternal ignorance and neglect. The death-rate among infants for the whole of New Zealand was 87 per I,000 births in 1907; in I912
it was 5I. In Dunedin, which was the centre of the propa-
ganda movement, the fall was from 8o to 40.
The Effects of Propaganda and Education Work on Infant Mortality. The same results have followed the propaganda movement
in England and Wales; the fall in the death-rate has been most conspicuous where an educational movement has been most actively pursued. Although it is customarv in this country to decry our own performances and to glorify those of other countries, we have no reason to be ashamed of our results in dealing with the mortality among infants. In the German Empire the rate for I9I2 was I47 and for Berlin 142. For the whole of France it was I27, for Belgium 167, for Italy I53, for Hungary I86, for Russia 248, while in England it was 95 and for London 9I. Making allowances for differences of climate, housing conditions, the industrial employment of women and other factors which influence infant mortality, I feel convinced that these discrepancies can only be explained on the grounds of varying degrees of skill in mothercraft. The results of the National Baby week should be watched in this connection. It is, however, easy to exaggerate the importance of a low infant mortality rate in the same way that it is difficult to appraise at its true value the importance of the birth-rate.
Population Influenced more by Birth-rate than by Mortality-rate
As far as numbers of population are concerned, a high birth-rate is infinitely more important than a low death-rate among infants, as Dr. G. W. Hope very clearly proves in

SOME RECENT DOCUMENTS ON INFANT MORTALITY, ETC. 229
his Report (1917) to the Carnegie Trust. To quote Dr.
Hope's own words:-" Take a town with a population of
750,ooo, having a birth-rate of 30 per thousand and an infant mortality of I20 per thousand births; if the birth-rate falls 3.6 per thousand, namely to 26.4, and every infant lives, not one death taking place under twelve months of age-an impossible eventuality-the increase in the population is precisely the same as it was when the higher birth-rate prevailed with the high infant mortality rate of I20 per thousand."
Overcrowding, a Method of Increasing the Population.
Following this line of argument, it suggests itself that if, in the national interest, our object is to maintain the population without consideration of quality, it would be more logical to encourage such conditions as obtain in Sunderland and Middlesbrough, where the birth-rates are respectively 30.2 and
28.5 and the death-rates 15i and 152, than to multiply our
garden suburbs where the birth-rates are correspondingly low and the death-rates negligible. To quote one instance only;
in Hampstead the birth-rate is I5.3, and the death-rate 76, yet
if we multiply our Middlesbroughs and suppress our garden cities we shall surely obtain more British citizens than if we plan towns never so hygienically and demolish our Sunderlands and Middlesbroughs. Although it does not necessarily follow that the quality of the national stock will deteriorate from the preponderating increase of the physically inferior elements of society to which modern industrial conditions in this country dispose, it is highly probable that the national interests will suffer by such a proceeding, although we are not in a position to say exactly what physical or mental type will best fit in with future developments. But for my part, I would rather put my faith in those stocks or in those families which have proved their superiority throughout the centuries than in those which have proved their inferiority by remaining permanently submerged and who are content to live in crowded,
insanitary areas. If this is wrong, little faith can be reposed in the principles of eugenics and heredity is a fraud.

230 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Conclusion. Speaking generally, one may say that the Great War has
stimulated human endeavour to find a satisfactory solution to the problems of infant mortality and of the falling birth-rate, and has materially modified public views with regard to the true significance of these important factors in the national life.
Although economics, housing and industrial considera-
tions greatly influence both the birth-rate and the death-rate, there can be no question that, as far as the death-rate is concerned, the most important factor is the intelligent application of the known principles of hygiene and mothercraft
to the problem of rearing children; for no amount of good housing or first-class sanitation can compensate for fecklessness
or ignorance on the part of the mother. Whereas with the extension of education and an increased standard of intelligence there must develop a consciousness of civic responsibility with respect to the birth-rate and a feeling of repugnance to living under those insanitary conditions which promote a high infant mortality.
RECENT REPORTS ON INFANT MORTALITY.
1. Report on the provision made by Public Health Authorities and Voluntary Agencies in England and Wales by Sir Arthur Newsholme to the Local Government Board, 1917.
2. Forty-Fifth Annual Report of the Local Government Board (1917), Supplement containing the Report of the Medical Officer for 1915-1916.
3. Supplement to the Forty-Fifth Annual Report of the Local Government Board, 1915-1916, in continuance of the Report of the Medical Officer of the Board for 1915-1916, containing a Report on Child Mortality at ages 0-5 years (1916).
4. New Zealand Society for the Health of Women and Children. Infant Mortality Series, United States of America, Department of Labour, Children's Bureau.
5. Maternal Mortality from all conditions connected with childbirth in the United States of America and certain other countries, by Grace L. Mays, M.D., United States Department of Labour, Children's Bureau (1917).
6. Report on the Physical Welfare of Mothers and Children, England and Wales, Vol. I., Carnegie United Kingdom Trust, by E. W. Hope, M.D., D.Sc. 1917.
7. Report on the Physical Welfare of Mothers and Children, England and Wales, Vol. II., Carnegie United Kingdom Trust, Janet M. Campbell. M.D., M.S., 1917.

