THE PHILOSOPHY OF WILFRED TROTTER

AND ITS BEARING ON EUGENICS

By CECIL W. USHER

SOME years ago Wilfred Trotter, in his
great work The Instincts of the Herd in
Peace and War, drew attention to the vast difference in time scale of history and biology. " It is scarcely to be expected," he said, " that even a gross movement on the cramped historical scale will be capable of detection in the vast gulf of time the biological series represents."' Nevertheless, he continued, " the infinitely long road still tending upwards comes to where it branches and meets another path, tending perhaps downwards or even upwards at a different slope ... a node in the infinite line ... a point ... capable of recognition by a finite mind and of expression in terms of human affairs." It was his belief that the human race " stands at such a nodal point to-day."2 Subsequent events-notably the production of atomic weapons-have gone far to confirm the sagacity of that belief.
Race Survival
Galton said that eugenics " deals with all influences that improve the inborn qualities of race "-but unless some vigorous steps are soon taken it may well be that there will be no race left at all, inborn qualities improved or not. It is therefore the purpose of these
notes to ask whether there is not some line of research other than positive and negative eugenics, as described in the pamphlet Aims and Objects of the Eugenics Society, which might yield results with greater rapidity.
Is it not possible that attention has been too much focused on " defect " and on the elimination of defective stock ? Can it be that, in our concern to bring about improvement of the individuals of our race, we are neglecting alternative lines of research?
One thing is certain. It has not been the "defectives" who have brought about the major calamities to civilization and culture: such disasters are, in fact, the work of extremely able individuals. Thus it might not

be too fanciful to suggest that whilst diligent attention is being paid to hygiene and sanitation between the decks of the Ship of State, there is brawling and confusion on the bridge -and the ship itself fast heading for the rocks.
Trotter frequently speculated on this theme; and as so many of his speculations have turned into such very unpleasant realities, it would be less than prudent to ignore the warning.
Man's Gregarious Inheritance
It was his view that society is not making use of man's gregarious inheritance to " anything approaching" the full possibilities. " To such an extent is this the case," he said, " that the situation of man as a species even is probably a good deal more precarious than has usually been supposed by those who have come to be in charge of its destinies. The species is irrevocably committed to a certain evolutionary path by the inheritance of instinct it possesses. This course brings with it inevitable and serious disadvantages as well as enormously greater potential advantages. As long as the spirit of the race is content to be submissive to the former and indifferent to the discovery and developMent of the latter, it can scarcely have a bare certainty of survival and much less of
progressive enlargement of its powers."8
Constructive and Destructive Forces
And again :- " Throughout the enormously long period during which modern man has been established on the earth, human society has been left to the uncontrolled contention of constructive and destructive forces, and in the long run the destructive have always proved the stronger. Whether the general level of consciousness will reach the height necessary to give a decisive predominance to constructive tendencies, and whether such a development will occur in time to save

'49

150 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Western civilization from the fate of its predecessors, are open questions."4
We may well inquire whether the problems of man's inherited gregarious instinct, a subject Wrhich proved so fruitful in Trotter's hands, should not receive close study by eugenists. If this is to be done it will be necessary, for the moment, to leave the questions of physical and mental defects and the prevention of their transmission, and concentrate attention on the fittest of our race and on the ablest brains and endeavour to discover where these " enormously greater potential advantages " spoken of by Trotter are concealed.
Corollaries of Gregariousness
They are to be found amongst the corollaries that accompany man's inherited gregarious mental qualities. These are truly instinctive qualities which, so long as man is man, will remain with him. Thus it seems that the most profitable line of approach will be first to endeavour to identify these qualities; it might then be possible to devise some counter influences, and in this manner achieve results in the direction in which all eugenists must wish to see man travel.
It is not possible to adduce in a paper of this nature the evidence and reasons developed by Trotter, but it is necessary to give-however summarily-some of the headings under which the arguments belong, even though they can do little more than refresh the memories of those already familiar with Trotter's views.
Two Significant Evolutionary Advances
Taking a comprehensive survey of the whole evolution of life it is impossible not to recognize two advances of a quite dramatic nature, each of which carried with it the most tremendous potentialities for further advancement. The first, of course, was when the single cell had attained the maximum of complexity and two or more fully developed cells remained together, or developed together, and formed the foundation of multicellular organisms. The universality of this step in each kingdom is all the evidence required to show this to be a fundamental and

inevitable principle if development is to proceed further.
The next step is when multicellular animal organisms have again reached a maximum of complexity and a number of these organisms remain together and form a superorganism or " major unit." It is only necessary to mention the words " flock," " herd," "pack," " swarm," "tribe," etc., to show that this step is also fundamental and inevitable in the animal kingdom if development is destined to continue.
Solitary and Gregarious Species
But the inherited mental reactions of an individual born into a species which has become gregarious are bound to show certain marked differences from the mental reactions of an individual belonging to a solitary species. The gregarious individual will have all his " normal " or " simple " reactions coloured and modified by the requirements of the " major organism " to which he belongs regardless of the consequences (often fatal) to himself. He must feed when the herd feeds, and flee because the herd is fleeing. To' hesitate and investigate the reason would spell swift destruction. He must develop an inner unquestioning sensitiveness to the feeling, or " spirit," of his fellows; resistance to impulses bearing signs of herd sanction must be suppressed.
Trotter gives a homely but very telling
illustration of these qualities in describing the differential reactions of a dog and a cat each caught in the commission of an offence. "...both recognize that punishment is coming: but the dog, moreover, knows that he has done wrong, and he will come to be punished, unwillingly it is true, and as if; dragged along by some power outside him, while the cat's sole impulse is to escape. The rational recognition bf the sequence of act and punishment is equally clear to the gregarious and the solitary animal, but it is the former only who understands that he has committed a crime, who has, in fact, the sense of sin." . . . " Conscience ... and the feelings of guilt and of duty are the peculiar possessions of the gregarious animal."5

THE PHILOSOPHY OF WILFRED TROTTER

ii

Altruism

Again, in speaking of philosophy, Trotter

We are here on the threshold of a better mentions that it has been cultivated by

understanding of the pleasure of service to perhaps most of the ablest minds the human

others, of altruism and self-sacrifice, of the race has produced. " It has evolved in-

satisfaction enjoyed in performing the un- numerable systems of doctrine, each ration-

welcome duty: emotions which have hither- ally proved by its founder to be true, and all

to appeared as anomalies in the mental inconsistent with one another. No enterprise

make-up of a predaceous animal such as man. has ever been longer or better pursued than

But Trotter placed upon such qualities a the effort to find a body of philosophic doc-

biological significance as great as that of self- trine which should compel the universal

esteem, yet with an immensely enhanced assent of rational minds. An experiment that

potentiality for the further advancement of has gone on failing for two and a half

our species. Indeed, we are here in contact millennia may well make us wonder whether

with the foundations of our own interest in the apparatus is adequate or the method

eugenics.

sound."7

It is thus clear that impressions arising in Then, in speaking of the intellect, Trotter

the conscious mind of man must carry with said: "For a good deal longer than two

them a formation due to his being a gregari- thousand years the ablest men of every age

ous species. It will be quite futile to en- have been fidgeting with the mechanism of

deavour to assess the " truth " of these the intellect in the hope of helping mankind

impressions subjectively, for each will be to think and therefore behave reasonably.

" an a priori synthesis of the most perfect The state of the world to-day (June I939)

sort "6 and will appear to the reasoning mind cannot but suggest that if practical thought

as a perfectly self-evident, obvious proposi- is to become strong enough to help in saving

tion, needing neither justification nor our social systems from their increasing con-

analysis.

fusions, some more radical corrective is

necessary."8

Mental Normality

In this connection it is interesting to recall

Needless to say, the specious nature of
pure reasoning has been realized for a very long time, and psychologists have reaped a
rich harvest of results in this field. But the
bulk of the work has been centred round
abnormality and has been content to accept as a norm the standard set by the majority.
To amplify that definition it would be fair to say that an acceptable norm is the beliefs and habits of the majority of individuals of
the same nationality, brought up in the same country, at approximately the same time, of the same religion, of the same sex, and of about the same age. It goes without saying

that we are forced to employ identically the
same mechanism for the solution of a momentous problem as for a trivial problem.
Doubtless a momentous problem receives longer deliberation, but the conclusion in each case is limited by the same defects of mechanism. Thus the longer deliberation is similar to a prolonged microscopical examination under a low-power objective, with no possibility of changing to high-power.
However, since the intellect is the only instrument we possess for thinking, it is to
this instrument and its peculiarities that attention must be devoted.

that such beliefs and habits bear very little

resemblance to an absolute norm, and are The Correction of Thought

not conducive to a really pure reasoning.

" The correction of instrumental errors,"

To return to the analogy of the Ship of wrote Trotter, " is a familiar idea in prac-

State, it is as though painstaking research tical science. The maker, having turned out

has resulted in a perfection of hull contour as perfect an instrument as he knows how,

and propeller efficiency whilst very little is studies the quality of its performance. Any

known of the internal electro-magnetic error now found is to be dealt with not by

forces which are disturbing the compass. tinkering with the machine, but by having

I52 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the constancy and amount of it carefully experience than the belief that a man, dis-

estimated and stated in a form that can be tinguished in one or even several, depart-

applied to the results. It is this method that ments of science, is more likely to think

forces itself upon us in determining the func- sensibly about ordinary affairs than any-

tion of the intellect, and rendering it fully one else."''3

available. Psychology has told us a great However, the gregarious instinct can be

deal about the working of the mind, and in shown to be " a definite fact of biology which

an incidental way about its liabilities to must have consequences as precise and a

error: but it has not systematically under- significance as ascertainable as the secretion

taken just this special practical task of, as of the gastric juice or the refracting apparatus

it were, calibrating the intellect for the con- of the eye "14; and when it is recalled how

templation of ordinary experience."9

accurate the speculations of Trotter have

proved to be as the years have passed, there

Calibration of the Intellect

can be little doubt that he bequeathed to us a

" The calibration of the intellect " is not line of investigation which we ignore at our

a new idea, albeit that it has not before been peril.

couched in such apt phraseology. Professor The course of events has now been greatly

Geoffrey Jefferson has recently drawn atten- accelerated by the achievement of atomic

tion to some earlier attempts in this direc- fission: to doubt whether this knowledge

tion.10 But all previous adventures have will be put to destructive purposes commits

been fatally handicapped by lack of know- one to the proposition that man's nature has

ledge of the corollaries of man's gregarious changed since 1945. Unless some steps are

inheritance and of the manner in which these taken to counter that nature it may well be

corollaries appear in conscious thought. All that ". . . civilizations will continue to rise

such attempts were therefore foredoomed to and fall in a dreadful sameness of alternating

failure. It might, however, eventually come aspiration and despair until perhaps some

to be shown, when the underlying influences lucky accident of confusion finds for hu-

at work on man's gregarious nature have been manity in extinction the rest it could never

identified, that his notorious variety of win for itself in life.'6L5

response to similar stimuli is only masking an These notes are therefore a plea for further

almost startling uniformity.

research into the gregarious instinct and its

corollaries and the consequent " calibration

Mind and Reason

of the intellect" envisaged by Trotter.

" In the first place," Trotter reminded us,
" we must get rid of the disastrous belief that there is any activity of the mind corresponding with the conception of pure reason. The mind has no such function. All processes

" Unless such a work can be done," he said, " it seems probable that the ominous fatuity and confusion that mark our social
and political affairs must continue to increase.''16

of reasoning, however abstract, are participated in and influenced by feeling."" Summary

Moreover, the only quality that lends itself Before, therefore, we can consider our-

to accurate abstraction is number (" five selves free to devote attention to the

digits in the mind are as good as regards "improvement of the inborn qualities of a

number as five fingers of the hand "12) and race," it is first incumbent upon us to ensure

all other abstractions are tainted at their the continuation of the race itself. And

source and cannot lead us of themselves to secondly it is becoming more and more

conclusions of any practical value. " It is important that governments should have

necessary here to guard ourselves from access to reliable information regarding the

thinking that the practice of the scientific qualities and predictable reactions of the

method enlarges the powers of the mind. material with which they have to deal, i.e.

Nothing is more flatly contradicted by human beings in a specific environment. At

THE PHILOSOPHY OF WILFRED TROTTER

present it would appear that this tremend-
ously important field of knowledge is largely
guesswork. Commander Stephen King-Hall recently said, " The public would indeed be astonished and even alarmed if it knew how casually and 'ad hockily ' the affairs of mankind are conducted by its rulers."17 Added
to which is the fact that the minds of rulers
suffer from all the basic defects of the minds of those who are led. To all of these ends it
would appear that research on the lines indicated by Wilfred Trotter is fundamental.
In concluding an address to the Institute of Pathology at St. Mary's Hospital, Trotter
said a word about our liking to believe that
we are receptive of new ideas. " Unfortunately," he said, " this is the exact opposite of the truth. The mind likes a strange idea
as little as the body likes a strange prot,ein, and resists it with a similar energy. It would not perhaps be too fanciful to say that a new idea is the most quickly acting antigen known to science. If we watch ourselves

honestly we shall find that we have begun to argue against a new idea even before it has been completely stated. I have no doubt that that last sentence has already met with repudiation-and shown how quickly the defence mechanism gets to work."18

REFERENCES

The Instincts of the Herd in Peace and War, p. Ioo.

2 Ibid., p. ioi.

3Ibid., p. 134.
'Ibid., p. 259.

6Ibid., p. 40.

6 Principles of Psychology, by William James,

quoted in The Instincts of the Herd, p. 15.

7 The Collected Papers of Wilfred Trotter, F.R.S.,

p. 177. 8 Ibid., p. I83.

9 Ibid., p. I83.

10 Jefferson, Geoffrey (1948), " Scepsis Scientifica," Brit. Med. J., 1, 379.

IL
13

The Collected Papers,
Ibid., p. 175.

p.

I84.

18 Ibid., p. i8I.

4 The Instincts of the Herd, p. 21.

15 Ibid., p. 247.

16 The Collected Papers, p. 184. 17 National News-Letter, No. 627, July 29th, 1948.
18 The Collected Papers, p. i86.

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION
For th. promotion of knowledge of the course of legislation In different countries, more particularly In the several parts of His MaJest' Dominions, and In the United States."
President: The Rt. Hon. Lord MACMILLAN, G.C.V.O. Chairman of the Executivg Committe: The Rt. Hon. Lord DU PARCQ Editors: Sir ARNOLD McNAIR, LCO. Sir CECIL CARR, K.C.B., K.C.,
assisted by Professor H. C. GUTTERIDGE, K.C., and F. H. LAWSON, Esq., D.C.L.
Honorary Secrtary: C. E. A. BEDWELL, Esq.
Annual Subscription - - - ONE GUINEA
Address: THE ROYAL EMPIRE SOCIETY, NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, LONDON, W.C.2

