EILEEN M. BROOKE
M.Sc., D.P.A.

Mental Health and the Population*

The Problem of Mental Health

fortunately there is no distinctive rash in

MOST PEOPLE would agree that at the schizophrenia, no X-ray which can photograph

present time mental health is one of the the broken mind.

most important aspects of health as a Nor, if we would assess the magnitude of the

whole. They would also agree that health is a problem, is all the information to be found in one

very difficult thing to measure positively. What place. To obtain any idea of the state of the

criterion can be used to say this man is healthy nation's mental health or ill health, we have to

and that man is not? It is easier to use ill health fit together a jigsaw puzzle, many of the pieces,

as a measure and say that a man is not healthy of which have not yet been cut out. We have at

because his sputum is T.B. positive or he is present three main sources of information about

answering voices which to us are non-existent. the mentally sick in the population of England

The promotion of health is so often a by-product and Wales, namely, reports from the Ministry of

of the prevention of disease. Where mental Health and the General Register Office, dealing

health is concerned we may ask ourselves how with hospital admissions; the reports of the

far we have moved along the road which leads Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance,

from curative medicine through preventive covering illness resulting in claims for sickness

medicine to the establishment of a disease-free benefit, and the studies of sickness in 106 general

community.

practices, made by Dr. Logan of the General

When people see that there is a need, they are Register Office.'

quick to respond. The tuberculous, the victims of cancer, spastics, as well as the mentally sick

MENTAL ILLNESS

. MENTAL DEFICIENCY

are groups which have inspired the population generally to voluntary efforts on their behalf. But

_N.sit.I ...........
(2.644)

before any health measure can be taken, the

size of the problem must be known. The incidence of notifiable diseases is relatively easy

3 1 * _ ~~~~~~~~Sltkadfsfed

to assess; the same applies to many of the

disabling diseases. When we come to mental

disease, however, we are faced with a vast

number of problems of definition and differential

diagnosis. Where does oddness end and mental sickness begin? The symptoms of diphtheria are the same in patients of different ages, but in

Whole-tim e

mental illness we are presented with a galaxy

_-r.5. .... . .Pot-I

of conditions, ranging from the temper tantrums of childhood, through the emotional immaturity

- r01 Pa"-time i=70t. (40.130)

of adolescence, the schizophrenia of the young 35 30 25 20 I 1 5 0

0 SI*10 IS

adult, and the depression of the middle-aged, to

FIGURE 1

the confusional state of the aged arteriosclerotic. MENTAL HOSPITAL SERVICES AS PERCENTAGES OF

Some patients seem to present a witches' brew of

ALL HOSPITAL SERVICES

symptoms culled from various diagnoses. Un- Hospital Care of the Mentally Sick

* A paper read at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics Society on October 21st, 1959.

First let us consider the amount of hospital

209 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1960, 51, 4.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

care devoted to the mentally sick (Figure 1).

MALES

FEMALES

The Ministry of Health's Statistical Digest (1958)

e18 249

shows that, of 2,644 hospitals, 124 (5 per cent) were mental disorder hospitals and 192 (7 per

.--:. :-: . *=.=..... Other.m:d.
....
............

cent) were for the mentally deficient. There may

also have been some mental patients in the 125

hospitals devoted almost entirely to long stay

,,

patients, or the 302 chronic hospitals. Owing to 05-14

1023

the relatively large size of many mental hospitals,

however, 31 per cent of the staffed beds were in

mental hospitals and another 12 per cent in mental deficiency hospitals. If we include mental patients occupying beds in general hospitals,

126 9253
65 nd overt.Co,o1t:~,o~t~i~o~e~~~~~~.~.r.~.a..t..e.... .........

between 44 and 45 per cent of all staffed beds

FIGUR 2S

were allocated to the mentally sick. There was,

however, a waiting list of about 9,400 patients,

8,000 of whom were mentally deficient. There

were more than 150,000 whole-time nurses in

1958; 14 per cent (21,655) were in mental

hospitals and 5 per cent (7,314) in mental

deficiency hospitals. In addition 18 per cent and 7 per cent respectively of the 40,000 part-time

MENTAL DISORDERS

nurses were in the two types of hospital.

The number of consultations for mental ill-

In 1956, about 73 per cent of statutory patients ness per 1,000 practice population was 118 for

going into mental hospitals for the first time were males and 249 for females (see Figure 2).

diagnosed as psychotic, and 80 per cent of re- Psychoneurosis contributed 100 to the male and

admitted patients were in this category. In 224 to the female rate. In each of the four age

general practice the majority of mentally sick groups shown, the consultation rates were

patients present with psychoneurosis.

higher for females than for males. Consultations

were most frequent at ages forty-five to sixty-four

Mental Illness in General Practice

averaging 190 per 1,000 males and 373 per 1,000 females. The proportion of consultations for

A statistical study of the clinical records of 106 mental illness other than psychoneurosis was

representative general practices was carried out highest in people aged sixty-five and over, due to

for the twelve months May 1955 to April 1956, the high incidence of senile and presenile psycho-

by collaboration between the College of General ses in this group. About 5 per cent of all consul-

Practitioners and the General Register Office, tations made were for mental illness, whether

and the sickness experience of roughly 383,000 psychosis, neurosis or a disorder of behaviour,

persons on the National Health Service lists of character or intelligence.

171 doctors was analysed. Two measures are The proportion of people consulting their

particularly interesting; the consultation rate, or doctor for psychoneurosis at least once during

number of consultations during the year per the year was twenty-eight per 1,000 for males and

1,000 practice population, which shows the sixty-one for females. At ages fifteen and over,

amount of medical care and advice given by the the prevalence among women was more than

family doctor, and secondly the rate of persons double that among men. One in every twenty-two

consulting, which shows the proportion of males and one in every eleven females who con-

-patients who consulted their doctor at least once sulted their doctor were recorded as suffering

during the survey year and thus provides a from psychoneurosis. In addition to those

reasonably accurate picture of the prevalence of demanding general practitioners' services for

any illness.

diagnosed mental illness there was a smaller

210

MENTAL HEALTH AND THE POPULATION

MALtS 32

FEMALES 66

.S,i,;.E.X...............

All o

61

0-84 15-44

1_s3 I1S3 :..
o39

Pslehselsr@ses yIi::.iiII
Other mental Lh disorders
78

76

43
4S."

so

65 end seer

2J 63

50 60 40 20 0 20 40 60 so
Patient asnsultiol rates
FIGURE 3
PATIENT CONSULTING RATES PER 1 ,000 POPULA-
TION IN 106 PRACTICES. PSYCHONEUROSES AND OTHER MENTAL DISORDERS

number who suffered from nervousness, sleeplessness, depression and similar symptoms.
It is clear, therefore, that mental illness, especially psychoneurosis, affects many people who consult their family doctors and the care given to them claims an appreciable part of the
doctor's services. Moreover it is the latter who are principally responsible for the treatment of
psychoneurotics, as out of about 17,500 such patients, less than 260 were sent to hospital.
How does mental disease compare with other sickness in claims for the doctor's attention? An earlier study in nine general practices showed that psychoneurosis is not among the five diseases requiring the highest number of consultations for males, but among females it is the third highest at ages fifteen to forty-four and forty-five to sixty-four, and second among elderly women of sixty-five and over. Although the nine practices were widely distributed geographically, a high consultation rate for psychoneurosis was found in each of them. The prevalence of psychoneurosis, as measured by the proportion of patients who consulted their doctor at least once during the year, was highest
in urban practices (51P5 per 1,000), lower in semi-

urban (38-2) and lowest in rural practices (36 7.) One in thirteen of patients who consulted their doctors in urban practices were diagnosed as psychoneurotic, compared with one in seventeen of those consulting in the semi-urban and rural practices.2
Mental Illness and Sickness Benefit It is to be expected that the prevalence of mental illness will show up in claims for sickness benefit under the National Insurance Acts. This is paid to people who are working, those unemployed but seeking work and those who have lapsed from the working population due to continuous sickness. Certain contribution conditions must be satisfied. A spell, as referred to here, is a period of incapacity for work. Relapse after return to work counts as a second spell. Short spells of incapacity of less than four days do not normally attract benefit and therefore are commonly not reported to the Ministry. Age limits are from fifteen to sixty-four for men and fifteen to fifty-nine for women; they are extended to sixty-nine for men and sixty-four for women, who, because they are still working, are not entitled to retirement pension.

MALES 43 _4
361

Total days

FEMALES

.

l

SEIS0S

23XE

1e

426

28

Claimants

57

40 20 Psyeboses

0

ncopacitoted 41
20

40

Psnchoneeroes : .

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~72
50 0

FIGURE 4
SICKNESS BENEFIT, 1955-56. PROPORTIONS PER
1,000 DUE TO PSYCHOSES AND PSYCHONEUROSES

For the year June 1955-June 1956, the following claims were attributed to psychoses or
psychoneuroses. Of every 1,000 days of in-
capacity, for men, psychoses accounted for

21I

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

forty-three and psychoneuroses for thirty-eight; for women these proportions were forty-five and sixty-nine. Six out of every 1,000 spells of incapacity among men were due to psychosis, and seven for women; for psychoneurosis the
women's rate was double the men's. The proportion of claimants for psychoneurosis followed the same pattern. The proportion of
persons incapacitiated on June 2nd, 1956, was forty-seven per 1,000 for both sexes for psychosis, compared with forty-one and seventy-two per
1,000 respectively for psychoneurosis. This means
that about one in twenty of all men and women incapacitated on a particular day were recorded
as psychotic; one in twenty-five men and seven in one hundred women were described as psychoneurotic.

one-third (13,124) and those with disorders of behaviour, character or intelligence, about oneeighth. Compared with discharges from mental hospitals, these were the shorter-term patients, many of them observation cases who were transferred to other hospitals.

HOSPITALS ( etedlagl Mental Hospitels) Up to week

MENTAL HOSPITALS

Uder wee

Geh

Over Iweeks op to 4eeko i

Wleek ua der month

Over 4weekes a op to9eekns Limonts

2month a under

Over 9eek E

2ouths a unde 12 months

AGE GROUPS
65 and 15-34 35-49 50-64 over

Pereestee trensterred to enother hospitel

6 Mlonths a Upr "

......

12Months 6 adr FM
...

Claimants incapacitated

Psychoses

6 10 9

Psychoneuroses

26 33 25

Days of incapacity

Psychoses

46 65 33

Psychoneuroses

50 46 31

3 17
6 22

Other mental disorders

SYosrs over 21.21

FIGURE 5 DURATION OF STAY IN HOSPITAL OF PATIENTS
DISCHARGED IN 1956

TABLE I PROPORTION OF CLAIMANTS AND DAYS OF INCAPACITY DUE TO PSYCHOSES AND PSYCHONEUROSES,
PER 1,000 FOR ALL SICKNESS, 1955-56, MALES AGED 15 AND OVER
The proportion of male claimants was highest at ages thirty-five to forty-nine, for both psychoses and psychoneuroses. For psychoses, the proportion of days of incapacity was also highest in this age group, but for psychoneuroses, the age group fifteen to thirty-five had the highest proportion of days of incapacity, and the proportions declined in the higher age groups.
Mental Patients in General Hospitals The majority of hospitalized mental patients go into mental hospitals; nevertheless, the other hospitals also carry part of this burden. From a one in ten sample of patients leaving general hospitals in England and Wales in 1956, we may deduce that nearly 38,000 mental patients had received care in these institutions. Of these, the psychotics comprised a little more than half
(20,000), the psychoneurotics rather more than

Thus 80 per cent were in non-mental hospitals for periods of up to one month, compared with about 31 per cent ofmental hospital patients. The latter retained 44 per cent of their patients for two months or more, compared with only 8 per cent in the general hospitals. However, 52 per cent of psychotics and 11 per cent of those with other mental disorders were transferred to other hospitals and we may surmise that most of these went to mental hospitals.
Mental Hospitals It is about the population of mental hospitals that we know most. Since 1949 the General Register Office has been compiling statistical information about all statutory patients. We may therefore ask, "who goes into mental hospitals and what are their chances of coming out? How long do they have to stay in? What is the likelihood of a relapse?"
In 1957, nearly 90,000 people were admitted to mental hospitals, as statutory patients, 48,000 of them for the first time, and at the end of the

212

MENTAL HEALTH AND THE POPULATION

year there were 143,000 on the books of mental hospitals. From 1951 onwards first admissions have been distinguished from other admissions in our statistics, and the increase in the number of first admissions since then has been 25 per cent while the numbers of readmissions, that is people who had been in a mental hospital at some time during their lives, nearly doubled. Departures and discharges have increased by 70 per cent, whereas deaths in hospital increased by only 1 per cent. The population on the books at the end of each year reached a maximum in 1954 and by 1957 was almost back at the 1951 total. The effect of new hospital policies and new methods of treatment has been to increase the numbers of people who are admitted for a short time and then returned to the community. Some of them may and, in fact, do have to be readmitted, but the trend is away from long, unbroken periods of custodial care, in which the patient may be forgotten by friends and relatives. By 1956, nearly 80 per cent of patients were coming into hospital on a voluntary basis and the new category of informal admissions should accelerate the trend.
So far as first admission rates are concerned, in general those for single persons exceed those for people who have been married at some time, whatever their status on admission to hospital. Whether this means that single people are the more prone to mental illness, or that those likely to develop mental disorder do not get married, or whether it reflects the fact that people who have ever married are more likely to have someone to look after them at home, we do not know. It may be, that if we had statistics for people treated in Out Patient Clinics we should find an excess of married people there, which would compensate for the lower numbers here.
Except in the case of single males, there is a very striking increase in the admission rates with increasing age. In 1956 the first admission rate at all ages was about 100 per 100,000, but at ages seventy-five and over it was three times as much. It is estimated that on December 31st, 1956, of people aged sixty-five and over, one in 109 was resident in a mental hospital.
Mental Illness and Social Class The difference in first admission rates between

single males and those who have ever married is not confined to a particular social class; this
shows up strikingly in the case of schizophrenics.
The Registrar General's social classes are based
on occupation and despite the well-known difficulties in recording this, social class rates are fairly reliable for men. For the five years
1949-53, around the last Census of Population,
first admission rates for single men aged twenty
and over ranged from 16-4 per 10,000 in Class I
to 68,0 in Class V, and for ever-married men from 2-32 to 7 99. The ratio of rates for Class V to Class I was 4 1 for single and 3-4
for ever-married males. The high rates for Class
V were not evenly distributed over the occupation groups which make up Social Class V. Two groups. in particular had admission rates much above the average, kitchen hands and labourers; these are occupational groups whose
ranks might well be temporarily swollen by casual workers whose mental instability prevented them from following their usual occupation. Admission rates among dock labourers were lower than average, but here we have a
different occupational pattern, since these workers must be registered with the Dock Labour Board, and in some parts, at least, it is
customary for sons to follow their fathers into
this work.
The social class gradient for schizophrenia does not apply to first admission rates for manic depressive reaction, the other large diagnostic group in mental hospital admissions. In 1956, for example, the first admission rate was highest in Class V, 523 per million, Class I came next with 315, then Class III, 307, Class IV, 292, with the lowest rate, 264, in social class II. These results raise some interesting problems. First, as regard the social class gradients, do they signify that there is more mental illness in Class V, or that more mentally sick people have collected in that group? Do they show that people in Class V
are more likely to be sent to hospital than those in the other social classes, without telling us anything about the relative frequency of mental disorder? Then as regards diagnosis, are there really more manic-depressives than schizophrenics in Social Class I, or is there a tendency for Social Class I males to be diagnosed manic depressive rather than schizophrenic? We shall

21 3

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

need a great deal more knowledge before we can hope to interpret the statistical findings, but at least they show what may be some fruitful topics for research.
Another diagnostic group in which Social Class I males have admission rates second only to those in Social Class V are the disorders of behaviour, character and intelligence.

FIRST 20

OTHER

0~~~~~~~~~~~~3
E
0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~4

0

X n m IV V

T

Socoil class

I0 In IV V

FIGURE 6 MENTAL HOSPITALS. FIRST AND OTHER ADMISSION
RATES PER MILLION HOME POPULATION FOR DISORDERS OF BEHAVIOUR, CHARACTER AND INTELLI-
GENCE. MALES AGED 20 AND OVER, 1956

This group of disorders includes alcoholism, acute, chronic and unspecified, but not alcoholic psychosis. It is their rate of admission for alcoholism which largely accounts for the excess in Social Class I. It must, however, be remembered, that we are dealing with hospital admissions, and these represent the number of people seeking treatment, not the number who have the disease. It is possible that among the professional groups who compose Social Class I, treatment is essential if employment and professional status are to be retained.

Cohort Studies of First Admissions
There is one question about mental illness and the population which is of paramount interest. What is the fate of people who go into mental hospitals? To answer this question we must forsake the traditional method of collecting hospital statistics of admissions and discharges, and concern ourselves with the hospital history of individuals. This is an involved but profitable

task. For patients first admitted to designated mental hospitals in 1954 to 1956, an alphabetical index by surname has been established at the General Register Office. When a patient whose card is in the Index is discharged or readmitted, the new card is paired with the index card and the data it contains are transferred to the index card. Even if the patient enters a designated hospital other than the one where he was first treated, the data for his two visits will be brought together. It is thus possible to follow up the hospital history of any patient and so to estimate the rate at which patients are discharged from first admission, their relapse rates, and the total time they spend in hospital during a given period, irrespective of the number of hospital visits paid in the time.
The 1954 cohort consisted of about 44,000 first admissions, and the record ofeach individual was surveyed for two calendar years from the date of his first admission. It was found that 56 per cent of the patients were discharged in the first three months. Altogether 12 per cent died in the two years following first admission, most of the deaths occurring among patients with senile psychosis or cerebral arteriosclerosis. By the end of the first year only 15 per cent were left in hospital on their first visit, and by the end of
two years the proportion had fallen to 10 per cent. The chances of discharge were higher among patients who had ever been married; 60 per cent of this group were discharged in the first three months compared with 47 per cent of the single people. These results cover all diagnoses, but there is considerable variation in the patterns of discharge and retention within diagnostic groups. Thus schizophrenics were discharged at a slower rate, and higher proportions remained in hospital continuously for two years, about one in five of single and one in eight of ever-married patients. There were, however, very few deaths in this group, which was a comparatively young one, 67 per cent of the males and 52 per cent of the females being between the ages of fifteen and thirty-five. On the other hand, the manic-depressive group were discharged more speedily, and only 9 per cent of the single and 3 to 4 per cent of the evermarried were in hospital throughout the two
years.

2I4

MENTAL HEALTH AND THE POPULATION

Speedy discharge can hardly fail to produce United States3 has assessed the cost at 3,000

some readmissions, and in fact about one-fifth million dollars a year. This is nearly 6 guineas

of those who were discharged returned for a per head per annum of the whole home popula-

second visit in the course of the two years; tion of the U.S.A. What can be done to lighten

only 5 per cent, however, had a second relapse this load? Few authorities are ever in favour of

in the time covered. General statistics of this increasing direct costs; nevertheless such in-

kind do not entitle us to predict the future of any creases may lower indirect costs, with a conse-

individual patient, and to say that Brown or quent saving on the total. We cannot estimate the

Smith will be discharged within three months. probable savings which might accrue from

They do, however, enable us to state the prob- increasing our expenditure on mental health

ability of discharge. A very encouraging fact is, research. And, as the report points out, an

that of the original 44,000 in the cohort, 34,000 economy can afford to spend whatever it likes

were discharged or departed from their first on mental health, since all that is necessary is to

visit; allowing for normal death rates, we can spend less on something else.

say that nearly three-quarters of those who were

discharged from their first visit could be expected Conclusion

to complete the two years from date of first In this paper an attempt has been made to show

admission without returning to hospital. Further some of the questions and even fewer of the

studies of the cohort at intervals of five years answers about mental health and the population. from first admission may show a higher pro- and these only from the statistical angle. Never-

portion of relapses, but the apparent trend is theless, we are living in times ofgreat significance,

for readmissions to take place fairly soon after when many efforts are being made to tackle the

discharge. The relationship between time before problem of mental disease in all its aspects.

relapse and length of previous stay in hospital is One of the most important findings is of the

something which is being studied, with a view effect on mental patients of the attitude of those

to seeing whether there is an optimum period of around them; an atmosphere in which the

treatment, which would result in minimum patients are aware that those in charge of them

relapse rates.

are confident of their improved behaviour, and

capability for rehabilitation has been shown to

The Cost of Mental Ulness

work wonders. Many hospitals are changing

The repercussions of mental illness are bound to affect the whole population. Most people have some experience of the effect of a mentally sick person on those around him, whether in the family, among friends or at work. Even those
people-if there are any-who would disclaim interest in the question on humanitarian grounds must take account of the financial burden which mental illness places on the community. This burden must be expressed, not only in terms of direct costs of treatment and of ancillary services, but in indirect costs due to actual working days lost and to tasks being inefficiently performed.

their institutional appearance completely; the drab wards of yesterday are giving place to gay and cheerful surroundings, which can hardly fail to have a good effect. New drugs are enabling many to maintain themselves in the community, who would previously have had to go into hospital. Mental illness is following the pattern taken in the conquest of many other diseases; first we find how to cure the disease, then how to control it. The last step is so to modify the environment that the disease is eradicated. To assist in this task is the price we may all willingly
pay for mental health.

This kind of sum is not an easy one. In England and Wales in 1958 it cost on the average £6 8s. 9d. per week to maintain a patient in a mental hospital and £6 2s. 3d. per week in a mental deficiency hospital but we know little of the total cost. In America, a recent report sponsored by the Joint Committee on Mental Illness of the

REFERENCES 1. Logan, W. P. D. and Cushion, A.A. 1958. Morbidity
Statistics from General Practice, Vol. I (General). Studies on Medical and Population Subjects, No. 14. London, H.M.S.O. 2. Logan, W. P. D. 1953. General Practitioners' Records. Ibid, No. 7. London, H.M.S.O. 3. Fein, R. Economics ofMental Illness. 1958. New York, Basic Books Inc.

215

C*

