HAN SUYIN
China's Population

TWO RECENT BOOKS

NVARIABLY WHEN THE subject of China comes up in the West the "peril" of its popula-
tion growth is formulated, sometimes with oSt alarmist prognostications. The emotional ne of such effusions are always reminiscent of e Yellow Peril complex, and there is little mpt to place the facts in perspective. Even the lurb to the first book to be considered here *a holarly work by Dr. Ping-ti Ho-asseverates t "China's population is not only a national oblem but a serious concern of the Soviet Jon and the Western world"; in fact, China's pulation may worry others, but does not seem worry the Chinese. Studies in the Population of China, 1368-1953 a already been reviewed from the demographic gle,t and I shall not labour the point which Dr. o makes and which should provide us all with
e rethinking: that for the past one hundred ,from 1853 to 1953, the population growth China has been at the rate of 0-3 per cent per To-day an average of 2 to 3 per cent vails in countries such as Ceylon, Malaya, os and Thailand, and the growth of population China is the Asian average of 2 per cent. With ustrialization, better basic technology, insed agricultural production, China maintains t she can sustain a population double the nt size. What is fascinating is the feeling this book es us of living with the particular problems ch the computers of the Ming dynasty, when ta was first collected, had to face in their unting of heads. To ensure that the officials did t falsify their returns through carelessness, ecking was instituted: each household that had
Ho, Pig-fl. Studies in the Population of China, 136853. Harvard East Asian Studies 4. Cambridge, Mass., 9. Harvard University Press. (London, 1960, Oxford Dversity Press). Pp. xiii + 341 + xxxii. Price 48s.
t TEim EuGErics REvnew. July 1960. 52, 114.

been entered being given a household certificate,
which was subsequently to be produced, and if
there were discrepancies the unhappy census officials were to be decapitated. A good example
of the thoroughness with which the Ming con-
ducted these registrations. Another interesting fact is that a legal definition of "household" had to be made, and this leads to a computation of the average size ofthe Chinese family in historical times and to-day, varying from 3-8 to 5-8 persons per family.
Then there is the constant under-registration through the centuries. A natural reluctance to being registered, ticketed, organized, inherent to the human being, pervades each census up to
1953, so that the 1950 edition of the history of a
certain county contains the truthful remark: "The changes in the numbers of households and mouths in the official registers are all unauthentic."
Other censuses followed the first Ming census, and again evasion continues, to mitigate the burden of labour services and land tax and other taxes which would ensue upon total registration. In the 1812 count, from sex ratios worked out by Professor Ho, a large surplus of males appears the rule. This, says Professor Ho, may be due to the practice of female infanticide then prevalent in certain areas such as Hupei, where it was the custom to rear not more than two sons and one
daughter and to drown the unwanted baby girls. Time and again infanticide was prohibited by official decree, but continued. "The poor worry about daily sustenance, the rich are concerned over future dowries." Hence the drastic reduction in infants, particularly female. Even then (in the eighteenth to nineteenth century) orphanages were erected by the Chinese imperial government to save many thousands of female babies, and the custom slowly became abhorrent "even to the gentry" some time before Christian missionary

229

EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1961, 52, 4.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

effort, with its own orphanages and educational work, began in earnest. But Western influence completed the end of this practice.
Wars, floods, famines, during the last century took their toll of millions of Chinese, and it is
related that in the Taiping wars alone several million were killed.
All in all, it seems, the census of 1953, after the communists came to power, is probably the most accurate ever done. It is fairly certain that collection of data, if not perfect, was at least efficient through the numerous overlapping organizations which permeated the total population. There was simply no place to hide from a census, and the new enthusiasm for "scientific accuracy" probably left little room for laziness among the cadres doing the returns. The figure of 582 million given by the 1953 census surpassed by 100 million previous estimates. Doubt was cast upon its authenticity. Professor Ho is inclined to think that this is correct, because censuses until then all suffered from underestimation. It is certain that in 1953, due to the general election of deputies to the National People's Congress and preparations for launching of the first Five Year Plan, the need for authentic population figures was substantial.
The official estimate of 582 million in the census of 1953 suggests a growth over the century 1850 to 1953 of only 0-3 per cent. The period 1850-1950 was full of calamities. famines, floods and wars, and in the Second World War at least 20 million people are estimated to have died. I remember, doing midwifery in Szechwan during the War, how high the infant mortality rate was, in the region of 500 per thousand, and this among the people that did avail themselves of"Westem" medicine. What it must have been in unreachedat villages is not known.
This study of Dr. Ho's, fascinating, eminently readable, packed full of interesting details, is thought-provoking as well as intensely good reading. Meanwhile, the world population continues to grow, not only in China, but everywhere else as well.
From the chronological viewpoint, Dr. Yang*
* Yang, C. K. A Chinese Village in Early Communist
Transition. Cambridge, Mass., 1959. Harvard University Press. (London, 1960, Oxford University Press). A publication of the Technology Press, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Pp. xii + 284. Price 52s.

starts where Professor Ho left off, and Chinese Village in Early Communist Transit brings the story of the Chinese family up to da In the preface to his book he makes an illu
ing comment.
It is now well recognized (he says) that it the strength of such forces [the peasant forces] that has carried the communist revol& to its initial victory. What goes on within seemingly simple peasant communities is likely remain a vital factor affecting the social transf mation of this ancient land.
Thus, in a couple of sentences, Dr. C. K. Yang sweeps away a good deal of the misconceptio that have been propagated abroad about communist revolution in China. The fact that revolution is based upon the village peasantry, as C. K. Yang says "80 per cent of the count 600 million people", though not over emp sized, is kept as it should be, solidly in
through the book.
The book is lucidly arranged, and the au starts with an analysis of a Chinese village in p communist days. The village he picks is a sub ban village, located near and therefore subject the influences of a city, in this case Canton. It these villages, now grouped together into co munes, which at the moment (1960) are beco rapidly agro-industrialized through the develo ment of modem means of transport, the enco agement of small factories and industries wi each commune, and the link up with o communes and with the main city. Dr. Yan book is valuable in pointing out the early s by which the more or less isolated village (even
surburban) is brought to function as a unit in
web of communities, which will eventually accessible to the villager the same kind of s
facilities (hospitals, clinics, schools, cinemas,etc
as are accessible to the town dweller.
Much of the information is derived from p reports. By choosing a village near Can
which is linked by railway and telephone to British colony of Hong Kong (and 99 per cent the latter's population comes from the province, Kuantung), information would be n only accessible, but checked and verified.
In such a large country as China there great differences in village structure: the an northern plains, with their small huddle of m

230

CHINA'S POPULATION

huts, their crops of cotton, their bitter winters,
differ much from the sub-tropical brick and tile
agglomerations of the south, with their relative abundance of wooded land, their round-the-year
green. In the village selected, called Nanching,
there were, in 1951, about 200 houses for a population of 1,100 divided into 230 families; paddy fields and vegetable gardens surrounded the houses, irrigation ditches criss-crossed the area, patches of higher land were covered with fruit
trees. Transport was by human carrier, costly and expensive, though a stream allowed small boats to be rowed into the village at high tide. The families were divided into clans, with demarcated areas of influence for each. An occasional bus, on
txhich a sign painted above the windows read case of accident, each rests with its own fate", bolized the spirit not only of the village but
the whole land.
Fate was the explanation for disaster. Fate ed life, and in spite of the proximity of
ton (incidentally, the distance of Nanching m Canton, the main city, is not mentioned, a pse in a book such as this), the village was ongly traditional and little urbanized. It pos-
ed none of the amenities of the city: absentee
dlords lived in the city, poor children had no
ooling and began to work as soon as they re able, labour in coaxing land to yield a crop
the central theme round which all individual d social activities were organized. Water ailability was the chief determinant of the d's value. The struggle for water and for igated land was carried on, sometimes collecely, the family and sometimes the clan being e basic organized unit. There was need for re and more land, but no advance in the
er of its tilling. Beginning in 1933 and 1934 ie of food-stuffs dropped due to world de-
on, hardships multiplied. The falling prices silk, for instance, delayed marriages in silk-
g districts. In Nanching the return to the ge of many who had left it for the town, and w unemployed came back, led to a demand for re land, and this to collective action to re-
some from the river; a hint of the sponus collective actions which to-day are the b in China's countryside.
The possessions of the average peasant conof the house he and his family lived in,

what little land he might have, a few simple farm tools he used. Since he had very little cash he could not hire human labour, work animals, or buy enough fertilizer for proper maintenance. Only three well-to-do peasants in the whole village had acquired some insecticide. Credit facilities were in the hands of usurers, and only worsened the situation. Private ownership accounted for 93-8 per cent of the cultivated land, five families owning about 26 per cent, 200 families the remaining 74 per cent. The landless, constituting the bottom group, made up about twenty families. Handicrafts were undeveloped, except for silk embroidery often resulting in loss of eyesight. 51-4 per cent of the village families were in debt.
It was in this deteriorating village structure, with no hope of advance, that the communist revolution was to effect the sweeping changes which have now culminated in the commune system. Professor Yang's step by step, always intensely fascinating yet sober accounts, make us feel village life as it was, and give us the shock of transition in its earliest form, the class struggle. This was the preliminary and necessary step to land reform, which was to change the whole social structure. Here Dr. Yang's words are illuminating, and once again challenge the emotional propagandist who would have us condemn, without due study, the steps taken to lift two million villages, many of them much worse off than Nanching (which as I knew it was deemed a "rich" village), out of constant insecurity. "The basic factor [of the village] was an agrarian economy that failed to provide minimum security for the village's population... normal family events, such as marriage, sickness or death, sank the family in debt, calamities put them at the brink of starvation."
The second part of the book goes on to describe the preliminary steps of land reform; they should be read with interest, and along with their reading I would recommend another book, Revolution in a Chinese Village by David Crooke, * as an adjunct and a help to the reader to understand the process whereby land reform, redistribution of land, abolition of rent, the establishment of a relatively uniform standard of living,
* 1959. Routledge. Price 21s.

23 I

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

came about. The fact that the new taxes came to about 30 per cent of the yield, a total which according to Dr. Yang was greater than the previous total of taxes and rent, the immediate difficulty in getting credit, a dislocation of certain forms of supplementary income, lack of transport, combined in the first years; and although the acquisition of rent-free land by the poor and landless alleviated the economic difficulties of the largest group, this created difficulties which in their turn had to be dealt with. In other words, Dr. Yang does not minimize the fact that all was not plain sailing, and that in such a vast transformation there is bound to be hardship for years
to come. Dr. Yang goes on to trace the alterations in the
kinship system, in marriage customs, in the status of women, the renovation of education with a number of short term training courses set up for peasants in various types of economic and political projects. Festivals were continued,

new types of entertainment of the audienceparticipation type, group singing, etc., introduced. The change in ideology was slow; from complete reliance on "fate", from ritual worship of various deities in control of floods and weather, the peasant was to be weaned to self-reliance, to belief in collective efforts of his group; and the deities, relegated to the back of the house, gradually lost their adherents. But this change of attitude takes time, especially
among the old. In a postscript Dr. Yang gives a quick analysis
of the commune. Here again I am all praise for Dr. Yang's impartiality and objectivity.
This book is a major addition to our knowledge of one of the most important human beings on earth to-day: the Chinese peasant. Important both by his number, his toil, and the new direc-
tions given to him. I hope Dr. Yang will continue his study of the peasant collective in the commune and its future developments.

232

