THE REVEREND D. SHERWIN BAILEY
Ph.D., Study Secretary, The Church of England Moral Welfare Council
The Lambeth Conference and the Family *

AT INTERVALS OF roughly ten years the ciples which demand from the Christian prior

bishops ofthe world-wideAnglican Church consideration; none the less, the Conferences

assemble in conference at Lambeth Palace have never set out to define matters of funda-

to discuss matters of common concern, both mental doctrine, though from time to time (and

domestic and general, and this year, for the notably in the case of the present Conference)

ninth such occasion, more than three hundred of theological considerations have been carefully

them met together under the presidency of the stated and elucidated.

Archbishop of Canterbury. Among the subjects But the Conferences are clearly not "councils"

for their lordships' consideration was one in in the accepted ecclesiastical sense of that term,

which interest had already been aroused and their resolutions are not legislative-they

throughout this country by the Warren Report, are "resolutions", not canons, and as such

The Family in Contemporary Society.- This command respect but not unconditional obe-

Report was prepared expressly for the Con- dience. For the loyal Anglican, however, their

ference, and particularly for the Committee authority will not on that account be greatly

(No. V) to which had been assigned the task of diminished. He will accept them as "safe

dealing with (a) the effect upon the family of guides" laid down by men of wisdom and

industrialization and urbanization, and (b) experience, in the light of Christian teaching and

the problem of the relation between the world's tradition, and after taking the best available

population and resources. Now we have the advice-and therefore not lightly to be set

Report of the Conference itself before us,2 and aside. But he will not hold them so binding as to

I have been asked to review the work of Com- preclude question, or to inhibit such freedom of

mittee V, together with the relevant Resolutions thought and experiment as the informed con-

and portions of the bishops' Encyclical Letter. science may dictate-witness the mounting dis-

satisfaction during the last two decades with the

The Lambeth Conferences and their Authority
First, however (since there is often misunderstanding upon the point), it may be useful to recall the purpose of the Lambeth Conferences, and to explain what degree of authority attaches to their pronouncements. In summoning the first Conference in 1867, Archbishop Longley expressly stated that its object was the discussion of matters of practical importance, and that any resolutions which might be issued were to serve simply as "safe guides to future action". Inevitably this very restricted aim has been modified in course of time, for behind all practical questions there lie theological prin-

resolution (No. 15) on contraception passed by the Conference of 1930. Likewise non-Anglican Christians, and indeed men of good-will everywhere, will receive the reports and resolutions of the Lambeth Fathers as weighty statements of Christian faith and duty expressive of the general mind of a Church which is at once catholic and reformed, and (to quote from the
Encyclical Letter of the Conference of 1908) the "Church of free men, educating them into a knowledge of the liberty wherewith Christ hath made them free." Finally, it should be noticed that only the resolutions have the authority of the whole Conference; the reports,
including that now under review, have only the

* A paper read at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics
Society on November 12th, 1958.

authority of the Committees which prepared them.

239
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1959, 50, 4

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

A Break with the Past

completion of husband and wife in each other,

This year's Conference was not the first to address itself to the problems of the family, but the report of Committee V and the resolutions based thereon represent in several important respects a clear break, both with the line taken by past Conferences, and (to some extent) with the
sexual tradition of the Christian Church in the
West. For this very reason they reflect also a gratifying and encouraging awareness on the bishops' part of the significant theological developments in the realm of sex and marriage which have occurred during the last few decades. Thus the institutional conception of wedlock hitherto dominant in ecclesiastical thought is rejected in favour of one which accords full recognition to the personal value of the union of husband and wife as an "essay in responsible freedom" for which "Church and State can only provide the setting and the protections of law and doctrine". To say this is not to minimize
its institutional importance, but only to assert that marriage is before all else a special personal
relation, and must be treated as such if violence is not to be done to its essential nature. The whole section in which this idea of marriage is expounded deserves the closest study, preferably with one or two modern theological considerations of marriage for commentary; it provides the clue to an understanding of the relation between husband and wife which, if it could be established as normative and could be inculcated convincingly, might revolutionize our society.

and the establishment of a stable environment within which the deepest truths about human relationships can be expressed and communi-
cated and children can grow up seeing and learning what mature life is really like". These three functions at once include and go beyond the three "causes" of the Prayer Book, and can
hardly be bettered as a comprehensive yet
succinct definition of marriage in language which is non-technical yet sufficiently precise, and gives
adequate recognition to personal and relational factors.
About the relative importance of each of these
three functions, however, the report speaks a little obscurely. On the one hand, it declares that procreation and the mutual completion and fulfilment of husband and wife are not directly related, and that each has its own independent value; further, it expressly states that all other duties and relationships in marriage must not be subordinated to procreation. To this extent it is rightly critical of the tradition which for so long has taught that procreation is the sole or the principal purpose of marriage-an idea which it ascribes to "fear of the misuse of the sexual relationship", or "a false sense that there is, in any sexual relationship, an intrinsic evil". On the other hand, the report allows that there is a sense in which procreation can be described as the "ruling purpose" of marriage, and in several places it is termed a duty or command which, if at all possible, the married ought to fulfil. We may, perhaps, detect here a slight

The Purposes of Marriage

hesitation to break too violently with the view that generation is primary-particularly when

Any such theological revaluation of marriage we bear in mind the approval accorded by the

involves some review of its purposes and their Conference to responsible family planning.

interrelation-and here, too, there is a welcome Nevertheless, it is difficult to establish sound

departure from tradition. The Book of Com- authority for the idea that procreation, if pos-

mon Prayer has familiarized us with three sible, is obligatory upon the married. Certainly

"causes for which matrimony was ordained": (though this may be dismissed as subjective,

procreation; remedy against sin (altered in the and therefore valueless, evidence) the married

1928 Book to the hallowing and directing aright themselves and those about to be married do

of our natural instincts and affections); and not usually think of parenthood as an obligation

mutual society, help, and comfort. For these, -save in abnormal circumstances, such as when

the report implicitly substitutes a formula more the principal reason for a union is to obtain an

consistent with its theological principles. heir. Yet if they are normal persons of average

Marriage, it says, has three functions: "the maturity, they will none the less expect and

procreation of children, the fulfilment and desire children. It would have been theologically

240

THE LAMBETH CONFERENCE AND THE FAMILY

preferable, and also more consistent with the and self-control are also good, and can be "a

realities of human experience, to treat procrea- positive and creative element in Christian

tion, not as a duty imposed by God, but as a living"; if biological and venereal impulses are

blessing promised by him to husband and wife, not restrained within their due limits, the

and as such expected by them-a blessing, Christian life would "lose the dimension of

however, pronounced upon marriage in general, holiness and its power to challenge 'the world' ".

but not guaranteed in every particular instance. Between the three purposes of marriage, as

This would accord better with the patristic they are reformulated by the report, there is no

and medieval view of offspring as one of the necessary or automatic unity, yet experience has

bona matrimonii-the blessings or good things taught Man that for the attainment of the highest

of matrimony, and would be a happier concep- good in human relationship, both personally and

tion of parenthood than to regard it as a marital socially, all three must be brought together and

obligation. I do not think that this is merely a held together "in one frame of moral reference"

question of terminology, and it would be valu- -an art, says the Committee, which "man has

able if further theological consideration could had a long fight to learn, and must still steadily

be given to the relation between marriage and fight to preserve". To-day the unity and harmony

parenthood-especially since Christian opinion between the different functions or aspects of

in the past has sometimes shown itself uncertain, sexuality can be broken more easily than ever;

whether vocation to marriage necessarily implies contraception now permits separation of the

vocation to parenthood.

generative from the relational purpose of coition

with an ease and certainty never before possible,

The Value of Coition in Marriage

and artificial insemination allows generation to

Ifthe report speaks ofthe obligation ofrespon- be abstracted completely from any kind of

sible procreation, it speaks also of "the duty to personal relation. These are but two of the

express, in sexual intercourse, the love which moral problems raised by the duty of family

[husband and wife] bear and mean to bear to planning, which the report handles in an

each other". Here again, the bishops might admirably sane and constructive manner.

have expressed themselves more felicitously;

would it not have been better to say that the Family Planning and Contraception

married have a duty to accept coition affirma- While the Committee recognizes that there

tively and gladly as an integral part of life as are potential dangers in the use of the techniques

one-flesh, and an unique means of communicat- and devices which make planned parenthood

ing sexual "knowledge" ? This, however, is only possible, it does not on that account condemn

criticism of a detail; in general, the report's the methods of contraception approved by

treatment of physical sexuality merits the highest medical science, but seeks rather to lay down

commendation for its soundness and realism. the principles which should guide the married

As already mentioned, the Committee rejects in the decisions which their freedom requires

decisively the Augustinian dualism which has them to make. It is important to appreciate

for so long dominated the Church's attitude the way in which the bishops approached this

to sexual matters. It affirms more strongly than question. From many press and other notices

did the Conference of 1930 the fact that coition of the Conference the impression might be

has a positive value of its own as "the most gained that contraception was the main item on

intimate and the most revealing" language of the agenda, and that the bishops, chiefly on

sexual love; and it condemns as "utterly wrong" expediential grounds, had given what is unfor-

the ideas that coition should never take place tunately called "birth control" a belated but

unless there is an intention to procreate, and enthusiastic blessing. Nothing could be further

that in the absence of such an intention the from the truth. The report makes it clear that

act has the nature of sin. At the same time, they began with a re-examination of the theolo-

however, the report refuses to concede anything gical principles relating to sex, marriage, and the

to secular hedonism, and insists that chastity family, and that consideration of these principles

241

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and their implications for human life and sexual Conference. Moreover, such considerations

relation to-day led them to endorse contracep- had been already reviewed in the Warren

tion as a morally acceptable means of family Report-not, it is true, exhaustively, but on a

planning. Hence it does the report less than sufficient scale and in enough detail to aid the

justice to applaud its conclusions while ignoring thoughtful Anglican to reach a decision. Now,

the arguments upon which those conclusions by giving its approval to contraception, the

were founded. Indeed, the two cannot be Lambeth Conference has encouraged theologians

separated; and the strength of Resolution 115, to address themselves seriously to the study of a

which approves of family planning "in such subject which, until recently, has been regarded

ways as are acceptable to husband and wife in as lying outside the field ofrespectable divinity-

Christian conscience", lies in a sound theological particularly in the Anglican Church.

insight into the nature and purpose of sex and

marriage. It is quite improper, therefore, to Methods of Family Planning not acceptable to the

accuse the bishops (as some Roman Catholic Christian

critics have done) of capitulating to the On the other hand, the Committee makes it

spirit of the age, or to depreciate their perfectly clear that there are certain means of

pronouncement as nothing but a "forced move" family planning which are quite unacceptable to

-a tardy concession, upon which they have the Christian conscience. Persistent refusal of

tried to put as good a face as possible. It coition by one partner is condemned as

cannot be stressed too much that we have here a "a denial of one of the supreme conditions and

theological decision made on theological purposes of marriage as God has established

grounds, and not merely an endorsement of it". Coitus interruptus and (presumably) coitus

current practice.

reservatus are rejected, since they preclude,

The general assent of the Conference to either in husband or in wife, the full and proper

family planning does not immediately solve all completion of the act. On the ground that, for

the problems which are likely to confront the the Christian, the sacredness of life is absolute,

Christian husband and wife in the duty of induced abortion and infanticide are denounced,

responsible choice which the report lays upon save when dictated by "strict and undeniable

them. It says, for example, that the means medical necessity"-though at the same time the

employed must be "admissible to the Christian Committee pleads for a compassionate under-

conscience"-but by what criteria must the standing of the predicaments which have com-

Christian conscience exercise in this matter the pelled families and governments in some parts

duty of moral judgement? In one case the of the world to regard abortion as a more

conscience may approve the rhythm method merciful thing than starvation. A.I.H. is accepted

and reject the contraceptive appliance, while in as a proper means, under reputable medical

another it may approve the contraceptive control, of enabling conception to take place,

appliance and reject the rhythm method; but when it would otherwise be prevented by "some

either way, the decision, if it is a good decision, physical or emotional abnormality"; but A.I.D.

will be made in accordance with clear moral is firmly repudiated on account of the gravity of

principles, and will not be simply the result of the problems which it raises for the Christian

irresponsible impulse. Here, no definite guidance -problems which would not be in any way

is given, nor is there any refutation of the argu- diminished by resolving the legal difficulties

ment (implicitly rejected by the report) that on which at present surround the practice.

theological grounds contraception is unnatural

and contrary to the divine law.

Sterilization

Yet these omissions are understandable. A Sterilization is discussed at greater length

full discussion of moral theological considera- than all the other rejected means put together,

tions would have been out of place, and could and it is clear from the report that members of

well have raised issues which, at this stage, the Committee were not unanimous in their

might have divided the Committee or even the views. All were agreed that in terms of our

242

THE LAMBETH CONFERENCE AND THE FAMILY

present knowledge, voluntary sterilization is Responsible Freedom

"6a major and irrevocable abdication of an Underlying the discussion of all these impor-

important area of responsible freedom", a viola- tant questions are two governing theological

tion of the body which is God's gift, and not considerations: first, that the ultimate signific-

entirely ours to dispose of as we will, and a ance of human sexuality is to be sought, not in

step fraught with unknown physiological and mere biological function, but in the realm of

psychological consequences. Yet its value as a personal relationship, and derives from the will

family planning device suited to poor and of God as revealed through the Scriptures and

illiterate peoples was appreciated, though not apprehended by the reason which is informed

approved; and it is clear that what chiefly with an understanding of divine truth; and

exercised the Committee was the fact that it is second, that Man's response to God's will must

now, generally speaking, irreversible. Curiously be an expression of human freedom as it is

enough, no reference is made in the report to exercised in the continual decisions which

the control of conception by means of drugs. sexual relation, marriage, and family life require.

Doubtless this was because research and experi- The bishops repeatedly emphasize this factor of

ment have not yet proceeded far enough to freedom: thus, "the whole enterprise of marriage

provide the assured results upon which alone and the establishment of a family is perhaps the

practical moral judgments can be based, but it most vivid expression we know of responsible

is important to recognize that such use of drugs human freedom under God"; "freedom is the

amounts in fact to the practice of temporary condition of every virtue and of every grace"-

sterilization, rather than of contraception as we and it is also "the way towards the attainment

now think of it. It may have been because they of all that is excellent and true". But they also

had in mind the possibility of temporary sterili- insist that the fruits of freedom can only be

zation of this kind, requiring no surgical inter- attained and enjoyed at the cost of self-discipline;

ference with the body, that some members felt and it is in this context that the report speaks of a

that the Committee ought not to judge finally "new freedom of sexuality in marriage in our

for the future.

time" which can be "a gate to a new depth and

Another minor division of opinion is revealed joy in personal relationships between husband

upon the question of government policies of and wife", dependent upon self-control, cour-

compulsory sterilization-whether for eugenic tesy, and "willingness to receive and give the

reasons, or as a means of family limitation, it is fullest communication of love, physically as

not clear. Some members of the Committee felt well as in every other way".

that "in our present state of knowledge and I have devoted so much attention to the first

understanding" such a method of population part of the first section of Committee V's report,

control could not be countenanced, while partly because it contains certain notable

others considered that it could never be justi- departures from tradition, but chiefly because it

fied under any circumstances. All, however, lays down general principles of the utmost

agreed that sterilization might be approved in importance for an understanding of the mani-

cases of "imperative medical necessity"; and fold problems which confront mankind in the

the Committee urged those who might be think- field of sexual relation. The bishops rightly

ing of sterilization not to act without the stress the fact that at bottom all these problems

"deepest and most conscientious thought", involve primary considerations of personal

prayerful consideration before God, and the best responsibility, relational integrity, and spiritual

obtainable counsel from pastor and physician perception-and this gives their words a

-and only with the full agreement of the other realism and directness of appeal which is often

spouse. The bishops expressed their concern at absent from more abstract and technical dis-

the thoughtless manner in which the operation cussions of social questions, and particularly

was increasingly sought or recommended, those concerned with population. They see

without any adequate appreciation of the grave men and women all the time, not as demographic

moral decision involved.

units, but as human persons and children of

243

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

God whose perplexities and distresses call forth an imagnative compassion as well as the skills of scientific research and the energies of government administration; thus they bring back the "population problem" to its source in "the personal life of husbands and wives in their own homes".
Social and Personal Responsibility In dealing with the many questions which
affect the family and its well-being, the Committee constantly returns to the idea of responsibility. Parents have a duty towards their children which overrides any mere "right to happiness", and which may only be abandoned in cases where competent counsellors agree that separation is the least harmful course. Because the family is the basic social unit, society owes it "a most solemn obligation". Industry must take a serious view of its responsibility to the family life of its workers, and if it requires the services of married women, must see that suitable arrangements are made for part-time employment of a kind which does not conflict with their domestic responsibilities. Countries which receive refugee and other immigrants must accept the family as a unit, even if this involves admitting some who are aged or ill; they ought not to accept simply those individuals who have actual or potential productive value. Nations and peoples, too, are responsible one to another, and the Committee quotes with approval a trenchant paragraph from the Warren Report which declares the duty of Christians in lands which enjoy a high and increasing standard of living; they ought to use every influence towards securing practical help for those countries where resources are unequal to need, under conditions which neither diminish self-respect and the sense of independence, nor carry political obligations. These are only some of the ways in which the bishops call for a show of responsibility, both individual and corporate-even if it should entail a real measure of sacrifice.
There is hardly time to do more than enumerate some of the other topics dealt with in the report. A new understanding of the complex problems involved can be detected in the short section on
polygamy, which is seen as a social and economic

rather than a sexual (and therefore, a moral)
question. Where plural unions are customary
it is the duty of the Church unfalteringly to teach that true marriage is by its nature mono-.
gamous, and it is the duty of Christians in such a situation to commit themselves to what is in
principle right; yet there must also be a sym-
pathetic approach to the many difficulties which
arise, and great care must be exercised in order
to avoid the dislocations in native patterns of
living which have in the past followed a hasty and irresponsible imposition of monogamous
standards upon peoples not educated to receive them. Another section stresses the importance
of remote preparation for marriage, and urges
the clergy to devote special pastoral care to the couples they marry, particularly during the first few months of married life, when their help may be of great value; it also commends the work of marriage guidance councils, and expresses the hope that "happily-married, convinced Christans" will consider the claim of
counselling as an urgently-needed service and witness. Finally, mention may be made of the concern shown by the report at the corrupting influences to which people are nowadays subject through journalism, radio, and television, and at the "sheer silliness and the low standard of social morality which are the content of much that meets the eye and assails the ear today".
Within the limits of such a review as this it is obviously impossible to do full justice to so important a document as the report of Committee V of the Lambeth Conference, but by concentrating upon its statement and application of the theological principles governing sexual relation, I think I have sufficiently emphasized its most notable and valuable feature. For myself, its greatest significance lies in the fact that the bishops have officially recognized the studies in this field which theologians have been pursuing for at least two decades, and have directly or by implication endorsed their conclusions. For those who have specialized in such studies the report is a great encouragement, and its impact upon the Church is bound eventually to be considerable, both in pastoral teaching and practice, and (one hopes) in theological education. And there can be no doubt that recognition of contraception as a

244

THE LAMBETH CONFERENCE AND THE FAMILY

method of family planning. acceptable, among to the close and sympathetic study of members

others, to the Christian conscience will have of this Society the section of the report headed

relieved many loyal Churchpeople of a burden "Christian Family Ideals", in which are set forth

which has sometimes been grievous.

the qualities which go to make the true family

and home and the considerations which should

The Report's Eugenic Significance

influence discipline therein.

You will naturally expect me to say something Here, then, we have a report which will

about the significance of the report for the commend itself to eugenists because it is con-

science of eugenics. Since, for eugenists, the cerned with the betterment of marriage, parent-

family is perhaps the main centre of interest, a hood, and family life: and if, as a Christian

report such as this, which addresses itself document, it implicitly recognizes aU through

radically, constructively, and thoughtfully to that Man's development is influenced, not only

the betterment of marriage and family life must by inborn qualities and dispositions and by

be welcome. But I would go further. It has no environment, but also by a spiritual factor lying

doubt been inevitable that eugenists should have beyond both-namely, the grace of God, then

been concerned in the past more with the that, too, is something of which we ought

scientific factors affecting the human race than perhaps to take more account. In short, we

with others; but I would submit that study of may be profoundly grateful to the bishops for

the moral factors bearing upon Man's develop- their labour on "The Family in Contemporary

ment are no less important and should, equally Society", and we may confidently expect to see

with others, be given a recognized place in it bear fruit before their lordships are again

eugenic science-and, of course, in the concerns invited to confer at Lambeth in ten years' time.

of this Society. The report of Committee V of

the Lambeth Conference fully substantiates this claim, for it shows better than any other

REFERENCES

comparable statement how relevant theological and moral considerations are to the study of
eugenics and to the pursuit of eugenic policies; in this connexion I would venture to commend

1. The Family in Contemporary Society (London, 1958, S.P.C.K.), which was reviewed in TH EUGENICS REVIEW, (July 1958), 50, 2. 125-129.
2. The Lambeth Conference 1958. London, 195X, S.P.C.K.: U.S.A., The Seabury Press.

The First Birth Control Clinic in the World

THE MOTHERS' CLINIC
Founded by Dr. MARIE STOPES, March 17th, 1921

Still the only birth control clinic giving FREE help to everyone who comes
or writes: no intrusive enquiry as to
money earned by applicants: no case refused help because she is healthy.

Dr. Stopes' helpful books can be ordered by post.
Change of LMiafreriinedMeLnovean7d/6Women 7/6 Birth Control Today 7/6
Contraception: Its Theory, History and Practice. Pp.Sl50e7eplll1u0s/t-r. 42/Posae 8d. each

OPEN DAILY (not Bats.) 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. FREE

108 Whitfield Stret, London, W.1.

