C. D. DARLINGTON
M.A., D.Sc., F.R.S., Sherardian Professor of Botany, University of Oxford
WOODHULL LECTURE
The Control of Evolution in Man

Past and future

ment, by nature and nurture, in the behaviour

W HEN DARWIN PUBLISHED his of individuals and races of men.

Descent of Man in 1871 he was Galton noticed that like mates with like in

concerned with showing that man had man and thereby creates self-sustaining breeding

arrived at his present state by long-continuing groups. Accordingly he pointed out the signi-

hereditary changes or variations in the past. ficance of a higher frequency of colour-blindness

He said as little as he could about these hered- in a particular group, the Quakers, and in doing

itary variations. He merely maintained that so he revealed the foundations of population

people varied, that the variations were partly genetics. He also studied the genetic component

inherited, and that in nature one was often of fertility and intelligence and applied this

selected in preference to another.

principle to the study of natural and sexual

In his uncertainty about the mechanism of selection in different social classes. His method

heredity and the causes of variation Darwin has been effectively developed to show that the

thought it better to study what had happened decline of governing classes is hastened by their

in the past, with results that could be seen, choice of wives of infertile heiresses.4,5 Similarly

rather than venture into discussing the future. he inferred that the expulsion of the Huguenots

This task he left to a younger man, to Francis from France and of the Jews from Spain was an

Galton.

enduring loss to those countries and an enduring

To-day we may consider the problem of the gain to other countries. In these arguments

future of man in three stages: the Galtonian, the Galton was assuming that men make manners

Mendelian and the present or genetic stage. or culture before manners or culture can be said

The points of view gained at these three stages to make men. Finally he concluded that "the

have long appeared to be in conflict. Let us human race has a large control over its future

follow their sequence.

forms of activity ... for it can gradually modify

its own nature".

Galton's contribution
Galton began with a point of view on human evolution formed by his medical training, his African travels and his study of Darwin's work."'2 On the basis of the cell theory he took a view contrasted with Darwin's, first, on the inheritance of acquired characters, and secondly, on the distinction between one-egg and two-egg twins.3 The use of this distinction led him to estimate the part played by heredity and environ-

Galton thus foreshadowed a genetic interpretation of the structure and also of the history of society. It is an interpretation whose validity has often been questioned but those who question it always neglect to refer to the words of Galton himself.
To-day a number of practical and theoretical advances may be traced to some aspect of Galton's work. One such advance is the use of intelligence tests for the measurement of educability especially in children.8 These tests have

* The Woodhull Lecture was given on March 21st, 1958 indicated that the less intelligent individuals,

at the Weekly Evening Meeting of The Royal Institution, W. E. Schall, B.Sc., F.Inst.P., Treasurer and VicePresident, in the Chair. It is here reproduced by kind permssion of Professor Darlington and of The Royal Institution, having first been published in the Proceedings of the Royal Institution, 1958, Volume 37, Number 165. A shortened version appeared in Nature on July 5th, 1958.

groups, and populations of men can now easily propagate their like faster than the more intelligent.7'8 This has not happened before in history or, we may say, in evolution. Survival which formerly depended on the abilities of individual

I69 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1958, 50, 3.

3-ER.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

parents now depends on the policies of nations. consider Ireland. In 1847 the population

The present world crisis in population is thus reached over 8 million with a density equal to that

likely to be not only a quantitative but a qualita- of England and Wales. It had multiplied six-fold

tive one. And it is likely to have consequences in under 140 years. Following alossbyemigration

for our evolution.'

in ten years of lj millionthe population of Ireland

A second advance we owe to Galton, both in has been almost stable for fifty years at half its

theory and technique, is in the demonstration in peak number. Selective migration has modified

Holland, the U.S.A., and recently in Tasmania the character of the people in many respects.

and in England10'11 that migration modifies the High fertility, it has been argued, would have

intelligence of a community. The most active been differential in its effects. It might have

farmers move on to the best land. They exercise selectively lowered the fertility of the people who

discrimination. They select their environment. remained and thus have led to the uniquely low

This is why in all countries, including our own, and stable birth rate in Ireland to-day. When we

the standards of farming vary from district to have learnt more of the genetics of fertility we

district. Similarly the migration from country to shall be able to return to this question.

town and from town to town, and, as Galton

pointed out, from the provinces to the metropolis, is reflected in the activities of the parents,

Classical genetics

and also in the educability of the children. It To a student of genetics to-day Galton's theories

should affect, but is not always allowed to affect, seem to be well founded and well considered.

the proportions of them who are thought worth But at the time they were bound to appear as

training in universities.

resting on a basis of a mysterious or incalculable

Later events have provided tests of Galton's heredity. In these circumstances the rediscovery

views on the effects of selective migration. For of Mendel in 1900 might have been expected to

example, when a metropolis is cut off from a strengthen the position of Galtonian as well as of

nation which has helped to create it by selective Darwinian theory. It did not do so.

migration, we have often seen the "balkaniza- For Bateson, to be sure, Mendelism at once

tion" that follows. With the present direction of seemed to clarify certain primary issues."3 For

cultural development it is the rural rather than the first time it showed that hereditary variation

the urban side which decays.

was largely invisible. A man might suffer from a

But perhaps the best test is through fertility. defect such as too little pigment in the skin or

On the one hand by selection for fertility too much pigment in the urine through heredity,

together with inbreeding the Hutterite community although no known ancestor had suffered from

have recently raised their average from 9-2 to it.14 For the first time heredity could be seen as

10-9 children per family.12 On the other hand responsible not only for the likeness of brothers

TABLE 1

Number of Children Ever Born to Married Ethnic Hutterite Women 45 Years of Age and Over, 1950

Age Group

NUMBER OF CHILDEN

Me-

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Totaldian

45-49 .. .. .. 2 0 3 2 2 2 7 10 4 11 10 9 13 6 7 6 0 94 10 9

50-54 ..1

1 1 2 2 5 3 8 9 5 4 1 1 9 3 2 3 3 72 10-3

55-59 ..4

1 2 2 3 4 6 3 4 9 6 12 4 1 3 0 1 65 9 9

60-64 .. .. .. 2 0 1 0 1 2 1 1 6 6 8 3 1 2 2 2 0 38 10-3

65-69 ..0

0 1 3 0 0 1 0 7 7 2 2 1 2 1 3 0 30 9*9

70-74 .. .. .. 1 2 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 3 9 4 1 2 1 1 0 29 9-2

75-79 ..0

0 0 0 1 1 0 3 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 7 ....

80-85 ..0

0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 5 ....

Total .. .. .. 10 4 9 10 10 14 20 25 31 42 40 42 29 16 18 15 4 340 10-4

(from Eaton & Mayer, 1954).

170

THE CONTROL OF EVOLUTION IN MAN

but even more significantly for their unlikeness. we see what is there after heredity has also, in its

Or, to put the matter the other way round, turn, selected the environment. The opposed

variation was largely concealed by heredity but agents are not independent: they interact in

occasionally revealed, and revealed by known sequence. And sequence usually begins with a

processes. In disclosing these primary paradoxes variable heredity.

suddenly Mendelism had magnified the genetic In the laboratory breeding experiment each

at the expense of the environmental component individual which arises by the uncertainty of

in all variation. Not only the cards but also the recombination is important. In nature the whole

process of shuffling was a manifestation of population which is almost exactly predictable

heredity, and a calculable manifestation.

is what matters. This contradiction leads to a

Owing to the hot disputes between Bateson shift of emphasis which affects our description

and the followers of Galton, however, the of variation in any organism. Again, to the

unexperimental aspects of the new advance were experimental breeder the unit of variation is the

pushed into the background. Since the Mendelian gene mutation. To the cytologist it may be an

design of experiment required gene mutations inversion or an interchange of a piece ofchromo-

of gross effect they were taken by Bateson and some. And to the naturalist it may appear as a

later by Morgan as the units of natural variation. polymorphism, a floating '"variety".1

Moreover the pure lines of Mendelian experi- The bringing together of these three methods

ment were taken as the raw materials of natural of inquiry has now established that the bulk of

variation. The model systems that resulted were natural variation is due to the mutually adaptive

easy to handle in theory but they gave an combining of mutations and structural changes;

unconvincing account of natural variation in that the mutations themselves are of different

any organism, above all in man where so much orders of size; that in most of their activities

variation failed to fit into a Mendelian scheme. they are the individually undetectable parts of

It was in this period that environmentalist multiple or polygenic systems; that genes expand

explanations of human variation gained ground or contract according to the size of the breeding

in the social sciences. Mendelism, unhappily group within which they are being exchanged.

using the word "character" instead of "variable" Not only this but polygenic systems are adapted

was too crude and naive to explain the subtleties to the range of variation of the breeding group

of human variation: they came to be left to the within which they subsist. Their evolution is

operation of spontaneous causes subsumed therefore itself subject to changes in the size and

under the word culture. And it has been argued character of the breeding group. Genes and

by a strange perversity that because culture can genotypes are therefore related to breeding

sometimes be socially transmitted it can never be groups and breeding systems and have to be

racially or individually or genetically created.15 considered together with them in examining the

Mendelism has now, however, grown into evolution of any species.17.18

genetics. The changes that it has undergone have This transformation may be illustrated in the

given us a new idea of human society and human most successful field of human genetics. For

evolution.

fifty years the study of blood group antigens has

proceeded on Mendelian lines. In this form it

Genetic systems

has led to the most detailed account of geo-

Genetics has grown, in the last thirty years, by graphical variation known in any organism.19

spreading down into the cell, up into the popula- Gradually, however, the structural complexity

tion and out into the open air. This growth has of some of the genes or super-genes concerned

developed the paradoxes as well as the laws of has been predicted by Fisher, and demonstrated

heredity. In the breeding experiment we see the by Race.20 Independently their physiological

reaction of a definitive heredity with a definitive complexity has been predicted by Ford2l on the

environment. In the fixed natural population we analogy of the polymorphisms of other animals.

see what is there after the environment has And this complexity has now been demonstrated

selected the heredity. In the mobile population with remarkable selective and evolutionary

'7'

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

implications by statistical studies of their rela- The effect is comparable only with what arises

tions with susceptibility to disease.22

from the incompatibility of plant systems. 26 It

Lately the hxmoglobin genes have gone means that within these groups three special

further in showing how malarial diseases have properties will be favoured: maximum hybridity,

forced whole races of men to modify the com- maximum recombination and maximum uni-

position of their hamoglobin as a means of formity. We expect, and the evidence seems to

avoiding extinction. In doing so they have confirm our expectations, that wherever the

introduced an adaptive polymorphism more groups are small and stable these properties will

drastic than that known in any other animal,23 24 soon be established.

comparable indeed only with that of hybrid All of these properties are, it would seem,

species of plants.

selectively valuable for the immediate welfare of

These relations, paradoxical or dialectical as the group. They have, however, one important

they may be, mean that we have to begin our consequence for the future of the group: it is to

study of heredity in any organism much farther discourage any spontaneous genetic cleavage

back than we had thought necessary. In studying within it so long as its members live within range

the evolution of man we first have to examine of one another. The group is homogeneous and

the history of his breeding groups. Fortunately, its homogeneity is preserved by the rules of

however, the breeding groups are better under- exogamy. Differentiation in social function, in

stood than those of any other organism. Let us occupation, will arise between the sexes and

see how they work.

between young and old but it will not arise

spontaneously between genetic sections within

Human breeding systems

the mating group. It has even been suggested

For some thousands of generations until that pairs of such primitive societies in Australia

recently, man has been a sparsely distributed may fuse and combine their marriage and incest

species gradually spreading over the earth as, rules to allow of a new uniformity in the enlarged

by his own evolution, larger areas became breeding groups. 27

profitably occupiable or habitable by him. He In advanced societies we have close parallels

still exists in simple societies whose breeding with the endogamy and exogamy rules of primi-

habits, since they are found in all continents, tive societies. Neither, to be sure, is so rigorously

are assumed to correspond with those of his maintained. And the breeding groups established

common ancestors. Mating is limited not by his can be shown-since we can follow their history

inmediate fertility but by self-imposed rules of over thousands of years-to be of varying

exogamy and endogamy, that is by a rejection stability. But their fundamental contrast with

or prohibition at once of close inbreeding and of those of primitive societies consists in their

wide outbreeding.25

differentiation. They are horizontally differenti-

The repugnance for outbreeding is of course ated or stratified in groups or classes which meet

a common property of all animals. But it has but do not mingle. These classes, which come to

become a more variable and also a more dis- work and think and speak28 differently, co-

criminating repugnance in man. The repugnance operate by virtue of genetic differences which

for inbreeding on the other hand is new. It has they preserve by not interbreeding.

demanded something more than discrimination. To the rule that social classes cannot be

It must have arisen either from the experience preserved if they freely inter-marry there is one

(which is universally true) that unusual inbreed- legendary exception, the Natchez Indian tribe

ing yields an unusual proportion of defective of the Mississippi valley. But the four classes

recessive types in the offspring; or from the described could not in fact have maintained

selection of races in which an instinctive reaction themselves in numerical balance let alone in

took the place of such an intelligent inference. genetical stratification if they had followed the

The combination of exogamy and endogamy rules attributed to them.29 There is indeed no ex-

must have always had, as it has to-day, a precise ceptionto the rule: socialdifferentiation and breed-

effect on the mating groups in which man exists. ing differentiation are mutually indispensable.

I72

THE CONTROL OF EVOLUTION IN MAN

Tlhe development of social classes, beginning
at the neolithic stage, has evidently been concerned with the development of all civilization. But it has followed quite different lines in the
main areas of civilization. The great religious systems of Hinduism, Judaism, Islam and Christianity have diverged in their effects on the breeding system. Most striking is the contrast between India and the Middle East. In India a unity ofreligion sanctions, and indeed prescribes, the diversity of "breed" or "caste". In the Middle East since the triumph of a tolerant Islam a multiplicity of religions is the chief guarantee for the permanence of a multiplicity of professional breeding groups. Underneath this contrast, however, the genetic principle is entirely uniform. It is also, we may notice, quite

distinct from the automatic systems of genetic
caste distinction which are known in the Hymenoptera.Y0 Inter-fertile classes which work together without breeding together uniquely distinguish advanced human societies from all other forms of animal life. The system, it seems, has made advanced societies possible.
If the breeding systems of primitive societies
always favour uniformity or homogeneity in their genetic structure how has differentiation or stratification come about in advanced societies ?
One source of differentiation is to be found in the nomadic communities best known in Arabia and Somaliland. Tribes where sheikhly and slave castes are undeveloped, have become different in their genetic character. Their

DIAGRAM REPRESENTING THE AUTHOR S THEORY OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF CLASS STRUCTURE
(Not included in the original Woodhull Lecture)

NATION

0
z
0
0

U,~~~~~~~~~~

0<
134~ ~ ~

~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~7

S P A CE

'73

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

differences are shown first in their mental and ing has often ceased and, owing to incidental

emotional character, and by derivation in the religious developments, the new stratification

kind of work they do and the skill they acquire has hardened. This unique circumstance enables

in it. From this differentiation of tribes us to see the genetic processes of a diversification

their co-operation and commerce arise by of society fossilised at a stage not far removed

agreement.31

from racial mixture. In other societies we see

Such a peaceful co-operation of racially differ- other instructive situations. For example, in

ent people has evidently been one of the bases of Russia and America strictly racial classes can

class differentiation wherever craftsmen and exist together with a theory of classlessness. And

sailors, merchants and missionaries have a dissolution of classes can exist side by side with

wandered and settled. But the foundations of a crystallization under a new form of a class

class structure have been laid as much by con- structure which spontaneously and predictably

flict as by friendship. Governing classes owe reconstitutes itself.

their origins largely to conquest. Agriculture In all these changes we know how valuable

owes its development largely to slavery and the mixture of groups must be in providing the

slavery also largely arises from conquest or recombination which releases variability. Con-

piracy. "Bondmen" shall be "heathen" and versely, how important a restriction of mixture

"strangers" (Leviticus XXV, 44-46).

must be, follows from the Mendelian principle

The evidence of history and of prehistory, that one act of crossing can undo the work of a

seen in the light of genetics, is unmistakable. hundred generations of faithful inbreeding. A

Differentiation within nations has always arisen, steady release of variability, therefore, demands

so far as we can trace it, from a mixture of races. a restriction of crossing. If a small group like

In Greece and Italy, in Britain and Russia, no the Greek merchants of Chios,32 or the

less than in India and the Middle East the nuclei Quakers in England, or the Hutterites in Alberta,

of class structure, the foci of discontinuity, have were to preserve their character they had to

been established from the mingling, friendly or inbreed. Thereby they reinforced the homo-

forcible, of different races.

geneity of that character, their consciousness of

On this view, introduced genetic differences, it, and often their desire to preserve it.

whether racial or tribal, have sown the seeds of On this genetic view our advanced societies

social differentiation and the co-operation of are vastly more complicated than anything

dissimilar individuals out of which the richness envisaged by Galton. They are not races in a

of human cultural development has arisen. How simple, primitive or biological sense. They are

have these seeds germinated? All stratified nations divided into differential classes. Their

societies that have survived (and there are some differentiation may be appropriate or inappro-

to-day which may not survive) have permitted priate to the needs of the time and in this we

a limited inter-breeding between the stratified may see the genetic component in the rise and

groups: slaves could be freed, freemen ennobled fall of empires. The differentiated classes may

and the Brahmin's offspring might sink to a begin by differing on the surface; but they end

lower social level. Roman Emperors and Indian by differing more under the surface like the

Kings have by legislation and by direct action cryptic species of plants and animals. Their

controlled these processes with the evident in- ability to keep apart is seen as indispensable to

tention of controlling evolutionary change. The the maintenance of civilization but their ability

development of class society has depended on the to mix is seen as no less indispensable to the

slow and controlled mixture of the materials evolution of civilization. For it is from this

brought together in this way, mixture subject to mixture that we have, on the one hand, the

the processes of mating, promotion and migra- hybridity and hybrid vigour that we ourselves

tion, all of them socially selective, and selecting need and, on the other hand, the recombination,

differently in different societies.

the release of variability that our posterity need

In India, after some mixture leading to the if they are to do anything new or face a changed

formation of new hybrid castes, the inter-breed- world.

I 74

THE CONTROL OF EVOLUTION IN MAN

How does this view affect our attitude to the weigh its advantages and its disadvantages.

future of mankind?

Meanwhile let us note a larger principle: every

branch of government in its own field controls

Control of our evolution

the evolution of the people it administers. The

It is now clear that man throughout his history punishment of crime affects the reproduction of

has been interfering with his evolution by most the criminal class. Education affects or even

of his political acts and most of his social habits. determines the mating group of those who pass

What has been almost entirely unconscious is through the system. Taxation and subsidies

bound now to become conscious. As we study affect the relative numbers of children born in

the consequences of our actions we shall the different social classes and can be adjusted

correct them. And as we introduce new actions to vary the results over a wide range. All these

we shall already be aware of their consequences. policies affecting health, crime, education and

How much do we know? We know that economy are carried out in unconsciousness of

changes in our breeding system has the effect of their evolutionary effects.

creating visible diversity of form. We know very The governments of Augusta and Claudius

little of its effect on the relatively invisible (according to Suetonius) seem to have been

diversity which concerns intelligence and fertility, aware of what they were doing in these respects

viability and resistance to disease.

by regulating the genetic diffusion between

In the large outbreeding groups found in classes. Modern authorities with their more

advanced societies almost as much variability drastic actions are unaware of consequences.

should be released by a change towards closer They are unaware because, like Darwin, they

inbreeding as by a change towards wider cross- are not quite certain about heredity; and also

ing. I have, therefore, made a small study of the because the actions themselves are traditional

frequency, distribution and effects of cousin and are directed, not to breeding, but to the

marriage in our own population. It suggests to present life of the individual and the present

me that human stocks can be readily adapted economy of the state. New processes, however,

to inbreeding. The change from outbreeding to are now appearing which are directed to breed-

inbreeding leads, as in other organisms, to ing. They are not traditional and they therefore

depression especially affecting the invisible at once attract attention. Three of these are

variables. But it provides the means of rapid worth considering: ionizing radiation, steriliza-

improvement, if we want improvement.

tion and artificial insemination.

On the simpler Galtonian selective level the The classical geneticist is much impressed by

development of medical science has, as we have the consequences of ionizing radiation in induc-

seen, upset the world's population both in ing mutations. When induced in the ripe sperm

quantity and in quality. And the qualitative of Drosophila, and followed by two generations

changes are very diverse. They affect race as of brother-sister mating, these mutations lead to

compared with race, class as compared with dire results. On man, living and mating at large,

class, and individual as compared with individual. however, we do not yet know what the lasting

Medical treatment of every kind of genetic genetic effects of such radiation may be.8' The

disability, except lack of intelligence, enables effects would be more likely to be deleterious

those who have been treated to survive and to than beneficial if it were to be followed fifty

reproduce when they would not otherwise do so. years later by cousin marriage among the grand-

Often those who were saved as children return children of the affected individuals. So far as we

to the same hospital with their children to be can foresee, they would be like the effects of

saved.33 In consequence each generation of a cousin marriage in an unaffected population;

stable society will become more dependent on this is another reason for studying those effects

medical treatment for its ability to survive and now.

reproduce.

The inverse of this problem is shown us by the

This is a process by which our control is introduction of the practical measure of the

changing the direction of evolution. We have to sterilization of genetically, usually mentally,

'75

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

defective individuals. This kind of evolutionary control has been used for sixty years in the United States and for thirty years in Scandinavia. Here is one way, a negative way, in which
governments are now assisting in the propagation of intelligence.85

TABLE 2

GENETIC-HYGIENIC COUNSELLING GIVEN TO PHYSICIANS
BY THE UNIVERSITY INSTITUTE FOR HUMAN GENETICS IN COPENHAGEN 1939-1956.

Legal Year abort.

Legal Genetic Legal steril. counselsteril. + abort. ling

1939 3 1940 25 1941 21 1942 101 1943 150 1944 158 1945 174 1946 293 1947 364 1948 432 1949 591 1950 702 1951 741 1952 969 1953 913 1954 983 1955 1,099 1956 870

00 10 10 80 91 25 15 28 34 36 37 29 51 37 48 66 68 37 87 62 112 63 110 55 103 71 133 95 145 92 196

3 4 10 26 40
50 58 50 58 75 58 55 69 79 84 80 68 92

Total 8,589

715 1,140

959

(from T. Kemp 1957).

A positive means of propagating intelligence is provided by artificial insemination.86 When this technique was first introduced pedigree cattle breeders foresaw great dangers to their own interests, and their foresight has been vindicated. The new method has undermined
the value of the old criteria in cattle breeding.
Now man, as we have seen, has a self-maintaining breeding system of a uniquely complex kind. It cannot be reduced to the steady formulk of a cattle breeding system. Artificial insemination from a donor (A.I.D.) is therefore likely to have more diverse, but ultimately no less valuable, consequences for man than for a domestic animal.
What are these consequences? A third party is introduced into the control of the breeding
process. If he is aware ofits genetic consequences he may, like the Russian landowner who bred his serfs for beauty,37 be able to render a service

to society. Moreover, since his activities are likely to be limited to the remedying of sterile marriages, we shall have time to judge their results before any danger arises from them. But there is one serious qualification: if his results are secret there will never be any possibility of assessing or correcting or improving them.
There is one respect in which assessment would be useful. In the past the rigidity ofhuman breeding systems has been mitigated by illegitimacy. From William the Conqueror to Abraham Lincoln illegitimate class-crosses, such as rarely arise through marriage, have produced men out of the common run. In advanced societies illegitimacy is declining; but through artificial insemination a means of escape from the laws of legitimate, that is, assortative, mating might be maintained with advantage to the community. And the advantage might be of an evolutionary decisive degree. For with the evidence of genetics before us we do not need to be persuaded that single individuals can alter the course of history or of human evolution.
The future
The problem of man's control of his own evolution now no longer appears as it did to Galton.
Two methods of control are continually operating. The one is through the process of selection which slightly or gravely changes the character of the world's popualtion in every generation The other is through the processes of inbreeding or outbreeding by which variability is preserved or released for selection to act upon. The first is obvious and easily understood; the second is deeper and less easily understood. But we now know we are interfering with both. It is a question of how we ought to interfere so as to do good and not do harm.
Most of the effects, good and bad, of any genetic policy can be felt only after the lapse of a generation. Moreover, the human breeding system is unique in its class basis, its elaborate discrimination, and its repugnance for outbreeding. Oppressed by closer fears modern governments take less care for posterity than did their predecessors in antiquity. Governments which provide us with education have forgotten that only our parents can provide us with the ability

i76

THE CONTROL OF EVOLUTION IN MAN

to profit by it. There is indeed much evidence of a genetic component in the survival of nations. The nation which takes most serious thought for its own genetical future is, therefore, most likely to have a future.
APPENDIX-*
ONE ExAMPLE MAY be given of how A.I.D. might be used for obtaining information ofvalue for the control of evolution in man. The crucial evidence of the effect of cousin marriage on the fertility of the progeny is obtainable from double marriages where a man has children by two wives, one a cousin and the other an unrelated woman. This is set forth in the table below.
In these cases, unless the family has already been inbred, the progeny of inbreeding have fewer children and fewer grandchildren than the progeny of outbreeding. With A.I.D. such tests could be made on a large scale as a matter of routine and with even more informative results. Provided only that records were kept and were available for scientific study.
Indeed we may say that information derived

in this way from A.I.D. in one generation would be indispensable for those carrying out A.I.D. in the next generation.
REFERENCES 1. Galton, F. 1869, 1892. Hereditary Genius. London. 2. Galton, F. 1883. Inquiries into Human Faculty.
London. 3. Darlington, C. D. 1953. The Facts ofLife. London. 4. Fisher, R. A. 1930. Genetical Theory of Natural
Selection. Oxford. 5. Last, Hugh. 1947. J. Roman Stud. 37, 152. 6. Burt, Cyril. 1957. Nature. 179, 1325-7. 7. Cox, P. R. 1955. Eugen. Rev. 47, 27. 8. Nisbet, J. D. 1958. Eugen. Rev. 49, 202. 9. Cook, R. C. 1951. Human Fertility. New York. 10. Scott, P. 1957. Geog. Rev. 47, 311-329. 11. Lee, J. A. H. 1957. Eugen. Rev. 49, 19-24. 12. Eaton, J. W. and Mayer, A. J. 1954. Man's Capacity
to Reproduce. Glencoe, Illinois. 13. Bateson, W. 1902. Mendel's Principles of Heredity.
Cambridge. 14. Garrod, A. E. 1902. Lancet. (2) 1616-20. 15. Childe, V. Gordon. 1958. The Prehistory ofEuropean
Society. London. 16. Darlington, C. D. and Mather, K. 1949. Elements
of Genetics. London. 17. Mather, K. 1953. Symp. Soc. exp. Biol. 7, 66-95.
,, 1955. Proc. roy. Soc. (B) 144, 143- 150. 18. Darlington, C. D. 1956. Proc. roy. Soc. (B) 145,
350-364.

TABLE 3 (i) JOHANN SEBASTIAN BACH (1685-1750)
Maria Barbara Bach (1684-1720) 2nd Cousin. Anna Magdalena Wilcken (1701-1760) Unrelated.

Marriage

C. g.c. g.g-.c

Date

t. S. M.

w.i.

t. s. M. w.i. t.

2nd Cousin .. 1707 Unrelated .. 1721

73 13 6

2 3

2 6300

0

2 6 4 4 3 10*

* 28 g.g.g.c., 52 g.g.g.g.c.

(cit. Geiringer 1954, The Bach Family, London: Allen & Unwin).

(ii) ANTHONY 3RD BARON HENLEY (1825-1898) 1846 Julia Peel, 1st cousin (1826-1862) 1870 Clara Jekyll, unrelated (1836-1922)

Marriage

F Date

t.

~~~~~~~
S. m. w.i.

~ ~~~~~C. g.c. g.g-.c t. s. m. w.i. t.

Ist Cousin .. 1846 6 4 3
Unrelated .. 1870 3 2 2

2 2

443 1 9887

2 23 +

(cit. Darlington 1958, Triangle, Sandoz, Basel, in the press).
Abbreviations: c, children; g.c. grandchildren; t, total born; s, survived to maturity; m. married; w.i., with issue.

* Professor Darlington has sent us this amplification of the discussion of A.I.D. towards the end of his lecture,
with the accompanying table, and the diagram on p. 173 which were not included in the Woodhull Lecture as originally printed.
EDITOR.

4-ER.

I77

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

19. Mourant, A. E. 1954. The Distribution of the Human Blood Groups. Oxford.
20. Race, R. R. and Sanger, R. 1958. Blood Groups in Man 3rd Ed. Oxford.
21.cf. Ford, E. B. 1957. Nature. 180, 1315-1319. 22. Roberts, J. Fraser, 1957. Brit. J. prev. Med. 11,
107-125. 23. Alison, A. C. 1954. Brit. med. J. 1, 290. 24. Lehmann, H. 1956. J. clin. Path. 9, 180.
1957. Acta Genet. 6, 413-429. 25. Darlinon, C. D. 1943. Nature. 152, 315-319. 26. Darlington, C. D. 1943. Ann. Eugen. Lond. 12,
44-45. 27. Jolly, A. T. H. and Rose, F. G. G. 1943. Ann.
Eugen., Lond. 12, 45-87. 28. Darlington, C. D. 1947. Heredity. 1, 269-286.

29. Hart, C. W. M. 1943. Amer. Anthrop. 45, 374-386. 30. Darlington, C. D. 1958. Evolution of Genetic Sys-
tems (2nd Ed.). Edinburgh. 31.cf. Doughty, C. M. 1888, 1926. Travels in Arabia
Deserta. London.
32. Argenti, P. P. 1955. Libro d' Oro de la Noblesse de Chio. Oxford.
33. Carter, C. 0. 1956. Gt. Ormond St. Jour. 11, 65-68. 34. Darlington, C. D. 1952. Biological Hazards of
Atomic Energy. Oxford. 33-45.
35. Kemp. T. 1951. Genetics and Disease. Edinburgh. 36. Muller, H. J. 1936. Out of the Night. New York. 37. Polunin, V. 1957. Three Generations: 1845-1902.
London.
38. Darwin, C. 1887. Life and Letters III. 99, London.

|INDIAN JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Established in I9I6

Volume XXXVIII

July 1957

No. 148

Editor: DR. OM PRAKASH

SPECIAL NUMBER ON INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC PROBLEMS

ARTICLES

SYMPTOMS OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
AN INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICY SOME REFLECTIONS ON THE CONCEPT OF "DISGUISED UNEMPLOYMENT DEFECTS IN THE CONCEPT OF REGIONALISM TO SOLVE TRADING PROBLEMS PARTIAL-VS. GENERAL-EQUILIBRIUM IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE DISCRIMINATORY TARIFF REDUCTION: A MARSHALLIAN ANALYSIS
FUTURE OF WORLD TRADE
OVERSEAS BORROWING: THE NEW MODEL MONEY AND BANKING PROBLEMS IN THE BRITISH COLONIES SOME ASPECTS OF FISCAL POLICY IN UNDERDEVELOPED ECONOMICS THE PROBLEM OF FACTOR PROPORTIONS IN UNDERDEVELOPED ECONOMICS REVEALED PREFERENCE FOR INDIAN JUTE

Om Prakash
J. Tinbergen
Jacob Viner
Gottfried Haberler G. P. Kindleberger
Harry G. Johnson S. L. Parmar
H. W. Arndt
A. Rasib B. K. Singh A. D. Sharma
George K. Chako

NOTES AND MEMORANDA
ACTIVITY ANALYSIS AND THE THEORY OF ECONOMIC EQUILIBRIUM FINANCIAL ASPECTS OF THE CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN A NOTE ON INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC RELATIONS

J. K. Mehta
M. S. Bhatia Mahesh Chand

ECONOMIC LITERATURE
Annual Subscription (four issues) Rs.I7, 26S. or $3.80. This Special Number costs Rs.6-50, IOS. or $I150 up to December 3ISt, 1958; and Rs.8, 12S. 6d. or $xI8o thereafter.
Write to the Managing Editor, Indian Journal of Economics, University of Allahabad, ALLAHABAD-2 (India).

178

