REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

71

family life of the pre-Revolution period into the family life of to-day.

For a long period after the establishment of the Napoleonic code, the

middle-class, organized into a compact network of officialdom, preserved

a high standard of rectitude, and maintained the traditions of rigid

parental authority. Circumstances, however, occurred which discredited

official rank to some extent, and an aristocracy of wealth arose in its

place, with a consequent lowering of moral standard. Divorce was re-

introduced, and family life deteriorated.

The Napoleonic code, which made an equal division of property

compulsory, gradually tended to reduce the size of families, and the

practice of neo-Malthusianism spread throughout the ranks.

Parental authority decreased as the place of the child in the family

rose in importance. The former spartan methods of training now made

way for a highly specialized and scientific system of rearing, which, though

excellent in many respects, rather tended to develop the mental and

physical side of the child at the expense of the moral.

In the industrial world, the woman wage-earner became a new factor

to be reckoned with, and the bad effects of married women's work upon

the husband, home, and children are traced in a very forcible and con-

vincing manner.

It is impossible in a short notice to give a fair idea of the scope of

this work. As an illuminating exposition of the laws of cause and effect

it may be recommended to all those interested in modern solutions of

social problems.

EDITH CORRY.

Leopold, LEWIS. Prestige: A Psychological Study of Social Estimates.

London. T. Fisher Unwin; 1913; price ios. 6d.; pp. 352.

THIS is a curious and unsatisfactory book, partly on account of the

nature of the subject and partly on account of the style, which is

often obscure and involved. The sentence summing up the outlines

of the argument is an example of difficult and uneasy English: "We

shall endeavour to prove the recipient of prestige, then its possessor,

and finally we shall strive, in the psychological situation of both,

to find that peculiar constantly recurring essential point which-setting

aside all coincidences-characterises prestige " (page 46). Again, the

constant and unnecessary use of italics is confusing to the eye and

mind : " For instance, the prestige spell of long past times that have

become up to date, of exiles who are expected home but live at a

distance, or of the Papacy, which is surrounded by religious sentiment

but shut off from the world in the Vatican, are classical instances "

"(PpraegsetiIg0e9).of

Even in its context, such a sentence, also in italics, intellectual career paralyses a good many possibilities

as of

proletarian self-consciousness" (page 230) is difficult of apprehension

by the ordinary man.

But apart from obscurities of style, prestige seems to be one of those

intangible creations of the human race which defy analysis, and even

350 pages of careful study, full of suggestive examples culled from

history and anthropology, do not bring us much nearer to a real under-

standing of the nature of prestige. Readers interested in the dark

places of human psychology and in the irrational values attached to

different actions and characteristics at different periods of time will find

much to stimulate their curiosity, but we put down the book with the

feeling that prestige has been successful in defying the efforts which

would reduce it to an affair of paper and ink and give concrete expres-

sion to its indefinable psychological effects.

C. D. W.

Parkinson, RIGHT REV. MONSIGNOR HENRY, D.D., Ph.D. A Primer of Social Science. London. P. S. King and Son; 1913; price 2s..;
pp. 276.
THIS little book was written at the suggestion of xmemberrs of the Catholic Social Guild. "It is intended for beginners, and aims at pre-

72 EUGENICS REVIEW.

senting social science with some completeness of outline and under the light of Catholic principles." As an outline the work is admirably comprehensive and clear, and it deserves a wide circulation among beginners who find it hard to co-ordinate their ideas of society. Monsignor Parkinson deals first with the elements of social life, such as the individual, the family, the State and the Church. He then explains production, distribution and' consumption under the general heading of Economic Relations. Lastly, he discusses poverty and its remedies. As a reformer, his attitude is practically that of modern conservatism, although he calls himself a Catholic social reformer, and is more advanced than "the Conservative School." Throughout the book Christian principles are appropriately stated, but they never get mixed up with economics or political science.
The Papal encyclical "On the condition of the working classes" ("Rerum Novarum ") is frequently quoted as giving the authoritative
view of the Roman Church upon modern problems of life and labour,
and at the end of each chapter a short bibliography of religious and secular works is given. Where all is good, it is hard to select passages for praise, but the economic explanation of the injury done to society by extravagance in all classes is especially excellent and more valuable than many sermons. Our only regret is that in a work dealing with fundamentals, the author has made no reference to the action of heredity in society or to the importance of the eugenic point of view.
A. W. COCKBURN.

MeCabe, J. The Principles of Evolution. London and Glasgow. Collins'

Clear Type Press; price is. net; pp. 264.

THIS is one of the series of small shilling books issued under the title of

" The Nation's Library." It gives a clear and easily comprehensible

account of the main facts on which the theory of evolution rests, and of

the less certain theories of the means by which it has been brought about.

The earlier chapters may be recommended to the novice who has not

made any previous study of the subject. It is somewhat doubtful, how-

ever, wlhether there is room for another small book of the kind when more

than one good account is available at no greater price, and in the later

chapters the author is frequently irritating and sometimes misleading.

Large parts of the book are obviously written at second hand, and the

dogmatic attitude adopted towards unsolved questions is regrettable. The

account of Mendelism is almost ludicrously inadequate, and clearly indi-

cates that the author has read little on the subject and has not grasped

the essence of what he has read. The sentence " The fluctuations are said

to be due to environmental influence, and to be transmissible; the muta-

tions are due to changes in the determinants and are not transmissible "

shows inexcusable carelessness in writing or proof-reading. The author's

philosophical attitude is exemplified by the sentence, " Idealism is the most.

singular and the most hollow delusion that ever entered the human

mind."

L. DONCASTER.

