HUMAN GENETICS

By HANS GRLNEBERG, M.D., Ph.D.
Reader in Genetics, University Colle,e, London

THE early attempt of the biometricians mately to present a readable account of

under Karl Pearson to establish this vast field of inquiry-this would appear

human heredity as a quantitative to be the aim in writing a- modem and com-

science ended in failure. In the years prehensive book on the subject. It is a

which followed, 'a vast amount of infor- Herculean task indeed, and no reasonable

mation on heredity in man was published reader would expect any single author to be

all over the world. Much of it was collected able to solve this problem with equal mastery

rather uncritically and without a proper throughout. It is with this in -mind that

understanding of the requirements of a the critical remarks on Professor Ruggles

scientific inquiry and is of little more than Gates's new work* should be understood.

anecdotal value. But during the past The scope of the book may best be gauged

decade or two, human genetics has once from the headings of the thirty-one chapters

more started to emerge as a unified branch into which the work is divided. They are:

of science on new fundamental bases. First Introduction; General Principles of Here-

and foremost among these is the realization dity in Man; Human Cytology; Linkage;

that human genetics is essentially the Eye Color and Hair Color; The Inheritance

genetics of a natural population. This shifts of Color-Blindness; Hereditary Variations

the interest from the individual pedigree to and Abnormalities of the Eye; Hereditary

the population as a whole and leads to the Variations and Abnormalities of the Ear;

collection of data which can be interpreted Albinism; Abnormalities and Diseases of

in terms of population dynamics. Next the Skin, Hair, Nails and Teeth; Anatomical

comes the necessity of a critical re-assess- Abnormalities of the Hands, Feet and

ment of human data in the light of concepts Limbs; Abnormalities of the Skeleton and

established by experimental genetics such of Bone Structure; Metabolic Defects and

as multiple allelomorphism, mimic genes, Derangements; Haemophilia and Related

modifiers, etc., and the attempt to construct Hereditary Conditions; Other Inherited

linkage maps ot human chromosomes. Diseases and Abnormalities of the Blood

Finally, while inherited congenital abnor- System; The Blood Groups-Genetical and

malities are difficult to study in man, the Racial Aspects; Allergy; Hereditary Syn-

numerous metabolic and degenerative dis- dromes; Inherited Abnormalities of the

orders of post-natal life offer excellent Alimentary Canal and Adnexa; Inheritance

material for physiological genetics, and in of Various Sexual and Intersexual Con-

this field, at least, human genetics can make ditions; Twins and Twinning; Inherited

its own contribution to genetics as a whole Muscular and Neuromuscular Abnormali-

rather than appear in the role of a bene- ties; Hereditary Variations, Defects and

ficiary. The progress made by human Diseases of the Nervous System; The In-

genetics in these various directions is very heritance of Mental Defects; The Inheri-

uneven, and the egg-shells of the anecdotal tance of Normal Mental Differences ; Cancer,

phase still stick to it in all too many places. the Genetic Aspects; Constitution, Body-

To sift the enormous literature on the Build and Susceptibility; Congenital Ano-

subject which covers the whole range of malies; Inheritance of Stature and Size;

medicine; to separate the grain from the Anthropological Characters; Odds and Ends.

chaff; to re-assemble and to re-assess the data within the framework of a unified
scientific theory of human genetics; ulti-

* Gates, R. R., Human Genetics, New York, r946.
The Macmillan Company. 2 vols. Pp. xvi + i5r8.
Price 75s.

59

6o

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Throughout the book there are numerous in what follows, attention is drawn to

references to related conditions in various certain of Professor Gates's tenets in the

animals which will be welcome to ical field of genetics which may mislead the non-

readers. Each chapter is followed by an genetical reader and in particular the medical

extensive bibliography; a rough estimate man who is apt to accept this book as an

of the total number of references leads to authoritative text in matters genetical.

the somewhat staggering figure of 5,500, and In the field of cytology, Professor Gates

for this large classified list of titles alone, maintains that man and indeed the primates

Ruggles Gates's work will be of great in general are tetraploid species. This is

value to geneticists and medical men alike. deduced from the fact that among the

The book is supplemented by a carefully marsupials the commonest chromosome num-

prepared index of 89 pages.

ber is 22 or just under one half of that in

A book of this dimension is unavoidably most primates (48), and that in the nuclei

based on thousands of notes and abstracts of normal human tissues four nucleoli are

of papers collected over a considerable found. The entire lack of evidence for the

period of time. The editing of this raw existence of polyploidy in bisexual apimals

material when writing the various chapters and the serious theoretical grounds against

unfortunately leaves much to be desired. such a hypothesis are brushed aside by a

Very often, related matters in the same reference to certain dicecious plants (Melan-

chapter are separated by long passages or drium, Salix) in which polyploidy has been

pages referring to other subjects, and not established without a serious upset of the

very rarely the same paper is summarized sex-determing mechanism, examples which

tw.ice over in the same chapter. The second are not strictly relevant to the argument.

half of p. 442 occurs again verbatimn on The non-genetical reader should realize that

pp. 5o8.509. As a consequence of these this tetraploid interpretation of human

editorial shortcomings, many sections do cytology is not shared by the overwhelming

not give the impression of an organic whole, majority of competent cytologists and is

but of a succession of more or less uncon- almost certainly an erroneous conception.

nected notes which have not been suffi- In the field of genetics proper, only a few

ciently integrated when the chapter was of Professor Gates's heterodox opinions can

prepared for the press. Though this makes be discussed here. He is impressed by the

for a somewhat jolting progress and requires fact that many conditions are known in

a good deal of extra attention when reading, man which are caused either by an auto-

it is perhaps not easily avoided altogether somal dominant, or by an autosomal reces..

in a work of this magnitude.

sive, or by a sex-lnked recessive gene. To

As the author points out in the preface, account for this common observation, he

the approach has been biological rather than advances the hypothesis that such triple

more strictly genetical throughout. As a genes are in reality only changes in a single

consequence the treatment of data tends to locus. As far as the autosomal dominant

be qualitative rather than quantitative and and recessive are concerned they may be

little attempt has been made at a critical allelomorphic to each other. The sex-linked

statistical evaluation of the raw material. variety of "the " gene is regarded as due

Though this may be welcomed by some to a translocation of the autosomal dominant

medical readers, it will be regretted by gene on to the X-chromosome. But, as most

geneticists. However, the delimitat'ion and sex-linked genes known are recessives, the

approach to his field is for the author to further (admittedly purely hypothetical)

decide, and it should not be held against assumption is made that a change of

him if the reader does not find in his book dominance has taken place as a result of a

what he had hoped to find.

position effect! Let us suppose for the

Criticism is, however, legitimate within moment that this hypothesis were true.

the confines of the author's chosen field, and Then the gene in question would occur twice

HUMAN GENETICS

i the chromosome complement, once in There is thus no need for the speculations

an autosome and once (by translocation) in advanced by Professor Gates to explain the

the X-chromosome. Then a recessive muta- mimic genes in man.

tion happening in the autosomal gene would On p. 83 the author gives a List of " prob-

not manifest itself because of the normal able or possible autosonial linkages." Of

aRlele carried in the X-chromosome, and a the 48 cases enumerated, 24 are given without

recessive mutation occurring in the sex- qualification, 8 as " probable," I3 as "pos-

linked gene would similarly be " covered" sible," one case " may be one gene " and

by the autosomal gene. Hence Professor two cases are given as "?." On closer

Gates's ingenious hypothesis does not even inspection this impressive list contains

account for the observed facts, at least not numerous instances which almost certainly

without making further ad hoc assumptions. are simply the pleiotropic effects of single

Furthermore, spontaneous translocations are genes-for instance absence of macula and

extremely rare and very unlikely to estab- aniridia, retinitis pigmentosa and deafness,

lish themselves in an animal population. retinitis pigmentosa and glaucoma (" pos-

That this should have happened not once, sible "), aniridia and syndactyly (" pos-

but scores of times and hence involving sible ") opalescent dentine and lamellar

numerous different autosomes is too far- cataract and fits (" possible "), defective

fetched a supposition to be seriously enter- enamel and juvenile cataract (t possible "),

tained.

camptodactyly with (i) anonychia pollicum,

Actually, genes with similar effects (" mimic"' genes) are not peculiar to man;

(2) absence of patella, (0) luxation of head
of radius, myoclonus and epilepsy (" pos-

many examples are known in Drosophila sible "), and tylosis palmarum and plantarum

where there is certainly no evidence what- and lipomata, to give only a few repre-

soever for such an explanation of " mimics." sentative examples.

In mammals a very striking example occurs in the mouse, though in this case autosomes
only are involved. There are seven recessive
genes, each occupying a different autosome, which produce circling movements, head-
shaking and deafness and which are almost
indistinguishable from each other clinically; they are waltzing, shaker-i, shaker-2, jerker, Kreisler, pirouette and dervish. In addition there are some six other genes which produce

How has this misconception arisen ? The answer is perhaps best illustrated by a further (" probable ") case involving apical dystrophy and macular coloboma which was originally described by Sorsby.* The syndrome occurred in a mother and five of her seven children; the mother's parents and her ten sibs were all normal. We read
(p. 19i):

the same syndrome along with complications elsewhere in the body. The pathological analysis is not yet complete, but it is clear

"Probably two linked genes are involved, the apical dystrophy being of the type described by MacArthur and McCullough. It appears probable (sic !) that the eye defect and the

that in some of these cases the same clinical skeletal defect were separate mutations, arising

syndrome is produced by very different pathological processes; in other cases the syndrome is produced by similar pathological processes. Such " mimics " probably

together in the same chromosome in one of the germ cells that produced the mother. If in homologous chromosomes, they would not be linked in the offspring. The alternative is one
mutation with multiple effects."

find their explanation by the fact that if a succession of processes a-+b-'*c-#d.+e happening in series is interrupted anywhere along its length, the final result will always be a disturbance of the end product e. Models of this type of mechanism have been dis-
covered in recent years in the biochemical

To take an incidental error first, if the
postulated two genes had arisen in homologous chromosomes, they would of course still be linked, but they would be in the
repulsion phase. The main argument here as elsewhere is that there are pedigrees with

mutants of the bread-mould Neurospora.

* Brit. J. Ophthalm., I935, I9, 65-90.

62 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

condition A alone, and pedigrees with con- certainly incorrect follows from a recent

dition B alone. Hence, Professor Gates observation* which can be explained as a

argues, if we find a pedigree with A + B the single mutation on the multiple allele hypo-

two genes must be linked. Let us suppose thesis, but requires the very unlikely

for a moment that in this and all the similar assumption of two simultaneous mutations

instances quoted by Professor Gates we were on the alternative hypothesis. It will be

really dealing with cases of linkage. We remarked that the latter is precisely the

should then have to assume that all these interpretation which Professor Gates puts

pedigrees show the two postulated genes in on the case under discussion, and that appa-

the coupling phase. But in a population at rently without any qualms.

equilibrium the coupling and repulsion phase
should be equally frequent. Hence we
should expect a similar number of pedigrees
with the two postulated genes in the repulsion phase. Their complete absence alone
is sufficient proof that Professor Gates's
linkage hypothesis is untenable. The true
explanation is, of course, that which Pro-
fessor Gates in this particular case quotes
diffidently as an alternative explanation, namely one gene with effects A + B.
There are many cases in experimental genetics where non-allelic genes with the
three phenotypes A, B and A + B occur. For instance, as mentioned above, there are sev,eral genes in the mouse with circling movements, head-shaking and deafness. Also, there are several genes which shorten
the tail. That the gene for shaker-short
which combines these features should be regarded as a case of linkage of a shaker gene with a short-tall gene would scarcely have occurred to an experimental geneticist.
In addition, there are instances where single and combination phenotypes occur within the same series of multiple allelomorphs. In the mouse, for instance, there occurs the series light-bellied agouti, darkbellied agouti, light-bellied non-agouti and dark-bellied non-agouti. In this case the hypothesis of two extremely closely linked genes has indeed been ventilated though the two suspected genes have never been

Limitations of space, already unduly
strained, make a full discussion of many other points impossible. These include sexlinked inheritance, where crossing-over between X and Y-chromosome is assumed all too freely; inheritance in the Y-chromosome which is postulated in several cases where alternative explanations, such as sexlimitation, are far more likely, and attached X-chromosomes which are several times
introduced on insufficient evidence.
Professor Gates's work is likely to be widely used on account of the large field covered and of the extensive bibliographies which make it an invaluable work of reference. In so far as the readers are geneticists, the heterodox views discussed above and others not mentioned will be of little consequence. But the work will also undoubtedly be used by medical men without critical judgment in the field of genetics. As. such readers will not be inclined to question the validity of the genetical discussions, the critical remarks made above were considered necessary. The reviewer has done so with some reluctance; being
himself the author of a much smaller monograph, he is full of admiration for the beelike industry with which Professor Gates has
tackled single-handed a field whose vastness might have frightened many a syndicate of
authors.

separated by an .observed crossing-over. That the two-gene hypothesis is almost

* Little, C. C., and Hummel, K. P. (I947), Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci., 33, 42-43.

Review, Vol. XXIXE, No. 2

