ON SEX LIMITATION IN HUMAN GENETICS*
By H. HARRIS, M.B., B.Chir.(Camb.)

IT is well known that in many instances
of hereditary disease the condition is
observed to occur more frequently in one sex than in the other. This phenomenon may be observed in quite a wide range of diseases. Thus hemophilia probably occurs only in men and never in women. Colour-blindness is about ten times as common in men as in women. Leber's optic atrophy is found in about six men for every one woman. Multiple exostoses occur about twice as commonly in men as in women. On the other hand, diabetes mellitus is about one and a half times and otosclerosis about twice as common in women as in men.
These remarkable facts have been known for quite a long time, and the matter was discussed at some length in i86i by William Sedgwick in a paper " On Sexual Limitation in Hereditary Disease." He quoted most of the examples mentioned above and also many others, and was able to give detailed family histories derived from his own clinical practice. Charles Darwin was also interested in the problem.
Sex LInkage and Sex Limitation
On the data then available it was possible to observe that two rather different sorts of phenomena were occurring, and it is of some interest to see how Darwin has described them.
From the various facts recorded by Dr. Prosper Lucas, Mr. Sedgwick, and others, there can be no doubt that peculiarities first appearing in either sex, though not in any way necessarily or invariably connected with that sex, strongly tend to be inherited by the offspring of the same sex, but are often transmitted in a latent state through the opposite sex....
In ordinary cases of sexual limitation the sons or daughters inherit the peculiarity, whatever it may be, from their father or mother, and transmit it to their children of the same sex; but generally with the haemorrhagic diathesis, and often with colour blindness, and in some other
* A paper read before the Eugenics Society oD,
January 20th, I948.

cases, the sons never inherit the peculiarity directly from their fathers, but the daughters, and the daughters alone, transmit the latent tendency, so that the sons of the daughters alone exhibit it. Thus, the father, grandson, and great-great-grandson will exhibit a peculiaritythe grandmother, daughter, and great-granddaughter having transmitted it in a latent state.
We now know that in this second group of disorders mentioned by Darwin the different frequencies in the two sexes can be explained by the hypothesis of sex linkage. It can be shown that, if the condition is determined by a recessive gene located on the X chromosome, then the observed difference between the two sexes can be easily explained and the actual configuration of the pedigrees, the peculiarity of which Darwin so clearly described, can be readily understood. This seems to be the most probable interpretation of the inheritance of colour-blindness, hemophilia, and of certain forms of icthyosis vulgaris.
However, in many instances the configuration of the pedigrees and the relative frequencies of the condition in the two sexes make a diagnosis of sex linkage extremely improbable, and it would appear that the genes responsible are located on autosomal, and not on sex, chromosomes. Otosclerosis, diabetes mellitus and multiple exostoses are typical examples of this class of condition. Here the chromosomal location of the gene does not serve to elucidate the nature of the unequal distribution of the disease in the two sexes. It has become customary to refer to this latter set of phenomena under the general term of sex limitation, so as to distinguish them from the cases of sex linkage, in which the cause of the occurrence of the differing frequencies in the two sexes is quite different and is, in fact, rather better understood.
Variations in Manifestation Rate
Now, when sex limitation of this sort occurs, it is apparent that not all the indivi-

70

ON SEX LIMITATION IN HUMAN GENETICS

7I

duals who carry the gene or genes appropriate from mortality statistics. Whether or not

for the particular condition, and whom we this has always been so is not at all clear.

would expect, in the ordinary Mendelian During the second half of the last century the

manner, to develop that disease, do in fact mortality figures for this country suggest that

do so. In other words, the manifestation rate considerably more men died of diabetes than

of the gene is diminished and we do not find women. It was not till about I920 that the

segregations of the classical I: I or 3: I female death-rate from diabetes began to

type. What is more, the manifestation rate exceed that of the male. Figures from the

differs in the two sexes, so that, although Joslin clinic in the United States show a

equal numbers of the two sexes may actually somewhat similar state of affairs. The exact

carry the appropriate genes, differing pro- significance of this remarkable change is

portions of them in fact develop the par- difficult-and perhaps impossible-to ascer-

ticular condition. Thus, if there is full tain, being bound up with the whole problem

manifestation in the male sex and complete of the manner of certification of death and

failure of manifestation in the female sex, the facilities for diagnosis, which have of

we will find the condition only in men and course altered considerably over the last

not at all in women. If there is three-quarter century.

manifestation in men, and a half manifesta- However, if we consider the position to-

tion in women, then the disease will occur in day, we find that, while the overall number

the population in the proportion of three of female diabetics is greatly in excess of the

males to two females. We can, therefore, male, this sex difference is not true for all

pose the problem in the following way: What forms of the disease. In diabetes starting in

are the conditions which allow the disease childhood, adolescence or early adult life, the

to develop in a manifest form in some indi- two sexes are equally affected. In diabetes

viduals carrying the appropriate gene and starting between the ages of 40 and 70 there

inhibit its development in others? Further- are very many more women affected than

more, how do these conditions differ in the men. Finally, in diabetes starting in very

two sexes so as to produce the observed old age, there is probably no difference in the

differing manifestation rates? It is clearly frequencies in the two sexes, although it is

part of the general problem of the mode of possible that the males are in excess. All

action of the gene and of how this is in- these types of the disease are certainly

fluenced by its environment. The environ- inherited and their distinction on genetical

ment may vary because of differences in the grounds is not easy, though it may perhaps

genetic make-up of different individuals, or be possible.

because of external influences. In virtually These findings are based on the ordinary

all cases we have practically no idea of what working-class population which we find

in detail is happening.

attending hospital outpatient departments

and clinics.

Diabetes Mellitus

To add to the complexity of the matter, it

Some of the problems which may be in- appears probable that among the wealthier

volved and the difficulties which may be classes, who make up the private patients of

encountered in their elucidation can be consultants, there are about equal numbers of

gathered by considering briefly the situation the two sexes affected. This is mainly due to

with regard to a common inherited metabolic the occurrence of the disease in relatively

disorder, diabetes mellitus. This disease is many more males of the wealthier than of the

today far commoner in women than in men. poorer classes. This curious effect is apparent

For every three female diabetics there are also in the mortality rates for different social

probably only about two, or rather less than classes which have been compiled by the

two, males. This fact we know from a study Registrar-General.

of the attendances of patients at diabetic All sorts of suggestions can be put forward

clinics, from hospital admission rates and to explain these differences in the mani-

72 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

festation rate in the two sexes and the varia- ably so in most men and not in most women.

tions which occur in different age groups, in Thus, men carrying the gene will develop the

different social strata, and at different times. condition and women will not.

The irifluence of the menopause, of variations This is perhaps only a first approximation

in diet and of differential fertility spring to to the actual state of affairs, but it does serve

mind as possible etiological factors, but how to illustrate the sort of way in which sexual

precisely the situation is created is not yet at limitation of a character like this might be

all evident. It is an example of the action of determined. It is interesting to note that,

the gene in a very variable environment. with a character such as this, if the gene

frequency were sufficiently common in a

Premature Baldness

given population, the character would tend

Another example of sex limitation which to appear as a secondary sex characteristic. presents somewhat different problems is that This is indeed the situation in most Western

of premature baldness. Premature baldness countries with regard to baldness, but it is

is common in men and is very rare in women. not so among at least some Oriental peoples,

It is inherited and appears to behave as a such as the Burmese, in whom baldness is

simple Mendelian dominant, with the excep- very rare even in men. Charles Darwin

tion that, when a woman carries the appro- summed up the whole matter quite clearly.

priate gene, she does not generally develop He said: " A tendency to baldness in men

the condition, while, when a man carries it, he before the advent of old age is certainly

does. In about half the cases, a man seems to inherited, and in the European, or at least

inherit it from his father, and in about half in the Englishman, is an attribute of the

the cases from his mother. In the former male sex and may almost be ranked as an

instance the father is affected, but in the incipient sexual character."

latter the mother is not. About half the male offspring of an affected father will develop Intelligence

the condition, and about half the male off- Genetically determined metrical charac-

spring of a mother who transmits this condi- ters, which are thought to depend on the

tion, but who is not herself affected, will action of a large number of additive genes,

likewise develop the condition.

may show sexual limitation of a rather dif-

We may ask-why does the condition ferent sort. General intelligence is commonly

develop in men carrying the gene and only supposed to be inherited in some such way as

rarely, if ever, in women ? A possible answer this, and a comparison of the distribution of

may be found in the differing endocrine intelligence quotients in the two sexes is of

patterns of the two sexes. Sabourand some interest. Various surveys which have

pointed out that baldness rarely, if ever, been carried out suggest that, while the mean

occurs in eunuchs, and Hamilton has shown value of the I.Q. is the same in the two sexes,

that, if eunuchs are treated with injections there is very much more variability among

of androgenic hormones, baldness develops boys than among girls. As a result there are

in some cases and not in others. It appears many more boys than girls at the two ex-

that it is liable to develop only where there tremes of very high and very low intelligence.

is already a hereditary tendency to baldness. There is, however, no satisfactory explana-

This fits in with the familiar observation tion of why the variance among boys should

that women who develop masculinizing be so much greater than among girls.

tumours of the adrenal or ovary and produce a large amount of androgenic secretions Huntington'8 Chorea

occasionally become bald. It seems possible It is now proposed to consider a set of

that premature baldness will develop only if phenomena of a rather different order from

there is an adequate amount of male hor- those already discussed. Dr. Julia Bell has

mone present in the person carrying the gene collected together all the available pedigrees

appropriate for the condition. This is prob- of Huntington's chorea in the literature, and

ON SEX LIMITATION IN HUMAN GENETICS

73

has found that, in the 99I cases recorded, Stocks and Barrington (I925) analysed all

there were about equal numbers of the two the published cases of multiple exostoses and

sexes. Actually, there was a slight excess of found that this condition was about twice as

males, but the difference was not considered common in men as in women. The disease

significant. The disease appears to be in- seems to be inherited as a dominant with the

herited as a simple dominant. It is trans- peculiarity that, while the manifestation rate

mitted fairly regularly from one or other is complete in men, or nearly so, it is defi-

parent to about half the offspring. Occa- nitely reduced in women. Stocks and

sionally, however, the disease appears to skip Barrington found nineteen examples of

a generation. Dr. Bell noticed a very curious apparently unaffected women transmitting

phenomenon in her data. She found that, the disease to their offspring, but could find

when the disease was derived from an affected no clear example of this occurring in men.

father, there were considerably more males Thus the condition can be regarded as sex

affected than females in the offspring, while, limited in the ordinary sense that we have

when the disease was derived from an affected already discussed above. However, if we

mother, there were slightly more females consider the offspring of affected females, it is

than males (see Table i).

found that there are nearly as many females

TABLE I

HUNTINGTON'S CHOREA

Affected sons Affeced daughters

Mother affected ...

153

I73

Father affected ...

232

I63

affected as males, and this contrasts with the
distribution in the progeny of affected males, in whom there are nearly three times as many male offspring affected as female (see Table 2).

It appears as if, in some family groups, there

TABLE 2

is a tendency for the disease to be limited

MULTIPLE EXOSTOSES

to the male sex. This occurs rather too markedly for it to be written off as a chance

Father affected ... Mother affected ...

Affected sons 227
59

Affected daughters 8I 46

finding. Haldane has shown that, if we

consider also the sex of the affected grand- It seems as if in some families, but not all,

parents, this tendency is still evident and is there tend to occur runs of affected males,

perhaps even more striking.

and this is well outside the range of chance

Under ordinary circumstances, if a disease variation.

is equally frequent in the two sexes and if it is inherited as a simple dominant, we would Sex imitation in Different Sibships

not expect any difference in sex ratio of the Penrose, by a method based on the analysis

affected offspring, whether these were de- of pairs of sibs, has shown that a similar sort

rived from an affected father or from an of effect may be found in diabetes mellitus.

affected mother. Even if there occurred sex Apparently the disease is more likely to occur

limitation of the type already discussed, in pairs of sibs of like sex than in pairs of

we would have no reason to expect that the unlike sexed sibs. The departure from the

sex ratio of affected offspring would differ expected values is too great to be explained

significantly, whether the condition were by chance. In other words, there is some sort

derived from an affected father or from an of sex limitation occurring which in some

affected mother. The observations of Dr. sibships favours the males, and in others the

Bell are, therefore, very striking and very females.

curious.

It seems likely that something similar

Multiple Exostoses

occurs in the non-sex-linked forms of icthyosis vulgaris and in cleido-cranial

What is perhaps more remarkable is the dysostosis.

rather diverse range of other conditions for Penrose has also described the same sort of

which published data are available and which phenomenon as occurring in certain mental

appear to show the same sort of phenomenon. disorders. It is interesting to note that

74 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

William Sedgwick in i86i gave an account simple Mendelian terms. Furthermore, there

of a family which, he considered, illustrated are apparently no satisfactory analogies

just this point. This description is perhaps that can be drawn from animal genetics.

worth quoting in full, because it illustrates The first question we must certainly raise

also the way the problem may present itself is whether the whole thing could not be due

in clinical practice.

to some sampling bias introduced by the

Amongst the cases which I have at present method of collection of the data. There is

under observation in private practice, there are nothing so easy in human genetics as to dis-

some well marked illustrations of sexual limitation in hereditary disease, in addition to those already mentioned. One is a case of hereditary imbecility limited to the female line. The

cover apparently remarkable new phenomena and to find on closer observation that
they arise solely from the way the material

mother suffered from the occasional recurrence has been collected, and have in fact no

of mental derangement, and died later from
phthisis at the age of fifty-two years, leaving a family of three children, consisting of one boy aged fifteen years, who being very intelligent is

biological reality. In most of the examples mentioned above we are relying on data
observed by a large number of investigators

qualifying himself for a teacher in one of our and recorded in the literature in a more or

Government training schools; and two girls less haphazard manner. However, in the

aged eighteen and twelve who are both imbeciles. A sister of this woman had occasional attacks of
mental derangement to a greater extent than herself, and there are three maternal aunts

case of the mental disorders and of diabetes mellitus, Penrose has demonstrated that the
same effects may be observed in familial data

(maternal grand-aunts of the children) in whose from a randomly collected series of propositi.

family a like condition prevails. The first aunt We must ask if there is anything in these

has three children, the eldest of whom is a daughter very eccentric in manner and silly in conversation; the other children are a son and

methods of collecting data which would tend to produce the observed effects. Are we for

a daughter both intelligent. The second aunt has some reason more likely to find an excess of

had four children, two sons who are intelligent, sibships or family groups in which one or the

one being a modeller and one an accountant, and
two daughters, one living and very eccentric, the other died in Hanwell lunatic asylum. The third aunt has two children-namely one son who is

other sex preponderates and a relative
scarcity of sibships and family groups in which this does not happen ? It is indeed very

an intelligent schoolmaster, and a daughter who difficult to see how such selection can be

is intelligent in most subjects, but is a religious taking place, but it would be perhaps unwise

fanatic and has lately taken up with the Mormons.

at this stage of our knowledge to exclude altogether the possibility.

Here, then, is a very curious phenomenon. Another possible cause of the phenomenon

In a series of inherited diseases as diverse as which must be discussed is the following: it

Huntington's chorea, multiple exostoses, might be that in the families considered there

diabetes mellitus and icthyosis vulgaris, tend to be produced an excess of offspring of

there appears to be a tendency for the disease one sex or the other, so that any particular

to show in different families a predilection family will be liable to have a preponderance

for one or other sex quite outside the ordinary of boys or a preponderance of girls, and so

range of variation which we would expect if the disease would naturally occur more fre-

the sexes were picked out at random. It quently in the sex which preponderated.

appears to be independent of the overall sex There is indeed some evidence to suggest that

distribution of the condition in the general in human families there may occur some such

population. Penrose has suggested the name phenomenon. Data recorded by Geissler

"familial sex limitation" to describe the and more recently by Slater do indicate that

phenomenon.

in human families the distribution of the

Discussion

sexes is not quite as we might expect it to be if it were determined by a random process.

How can we account for these findings? There appears to be a significant excess of

They are not immediately explicable in families in which there are mainly boys and a

ON SEX LIMITATION IN HUMAN GENETICS

75

similar excess of families in which there are
mainly girls. It is also true that very occa-
sionally one comes across large families in
which there is a very gross and remarkable
excess of one or the other sex. However, the
actual quantitative degree of this particular
phenomenon, if it indeed exists, is far too
small to account for the remarkable devia-
tions observed in the data discussed above.
Furthermore, it is possible to show directly that in fact the sex ratio abnormalities to be found in these families is not due to an overall excess of one sex or the other in the
families, but is due to an apparent tendency
for the disease under consideration to be
more likely to pick out the one rather than the other sex in any particular case.
Are there any possible genetical explana-
tions ? In the case of Huntington's chorea, it has been suggested by Haldane that, if there
existed modifying genes tending to lower the
age of onset of the disease in males, a man carrying such a modifier would be more likely than the average man carrying the
main gene for the condition to develop the
condition, and his sons would also, on the
average, develop it before his daughters, and
so be more likely to be included in the recorded data. This would account for the observed disturbances in sex ratio.
In the case of multiple exostoses, it might be that there are modifying genes which tend to make the condition less severe or perhaps fail to appear altogether in females, even when the main gene is present. This again could produce the observed distortion in the sex ratios. There is, perhaps, a piece of internal evidence from the data collected by Stocks and Barrington which tends to support this hypothesis. If such modifiers actually existed, then we would expect them to be present in females who, while not themselves apparently having the disease, are nevertheless, so far as can be seen from the pedigree, actually transmitting it. We would not expect to find them present in females who actually manifest the disease. We would therefore expect a deficiency of affected females compared with males in the offspring of the former group of women, and not in the

latter. Actually we find the data set out in Table 3.

TABLE 3

MULTIPLE EXOSTOSES

Affected sons Affected daughters

Mother affected ...

59

46

Mother unaffected

but transmitting

28

7

The hypothesis of sex-limiting modifiers
could also account for the phenomenon in the other conditions mentioned. However,
there is really very little direct evidence in support of such a hypothesis and until this is brought forward we must suspend judg-
ment.
A further question that we may ask is how
this phenomenon is related to or can be distinguished from the phenomenon of partial
sex linkage described by Haldane. In some instances, for example Huntington's chorea, the distinction, as Haldane has pointed out, is fairly clear. In others, particularly where the manifestation rate may be low, the differentiation is not at all easy. It may be that some of the phenomena which have been attributed to partial sex linkage should really be regarded as examples of familial sex limitation-and perhaps vice versa.
Finally, I think one can do no better than quote the conclusion of the discussion of the same problems by William Sedgwick in i86i.

It may be urged that there is perhaps no subject connected with our profession which
needs a deeper research than the hereditary transmission of disease and, if the preceding cases of sexual limitation in hereditary disease
are insufficient for any practical deductions to be as yet established, I will venture to claim for this branch of the subject a greater consideration
than it has yet received and at the same time
suggest the necessity for admitting a more extended application of the principle of the
hereditary transmission of disease than some writers of the present day seem willing to allow. The absence of any satisfactory explanation of the phenomena of sexual limitation in disease does not destroy the interest of our observations or the possible usefulness of our research.

It is true that we know now a little more about the matter than William Sedgwick
did, but, really, it is not very much more considering that he was writing eighty-six
years ago.

76 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

REFERENCES

which were normally autosomal. A study of

Bell, J. (1934), " Hun,tington's Chorea," Treasury of the chromosomes by recently improved

Human Inheritance, IV, 1. Darwin, C. (I868), Animals and Plants under
Domestication, 2, p. 73. London: John Murray.

methods would therefore be useful where this situation was indicated.

Haldane, J. B. S. (1941), J. Genetics, 41, 14I.

Dr. Slater remarked that he had been

Hamilton, J. B. (1942), Am. J. Anat., 71, 451.

much interested in Dr. Harris's paper,

Joslin, E. P., Dublin, L. T., and Monks, H. H. (I936), Studies on Diabetes Mellitus," Am. J. Med. Sci.,

which focused attention on a problem of

191, 759.

great medical interest and importance, which

Penrose, L. S. (1942), " Auxiliary Genes for Deter- had been much neglected for a long time. The

mining Sex as Contributory Causes of Mental Illness," J. Ment. Sci., 88, 308.

findings with diabetes were closely paralleled

Penrose, L. S., and Watson, E. M. (1945), Proc. Am. by those made with peptic ulcer, except that

Diabetes Ass., 5, I63.

in this case there was a male preponderance.

Registrar-General, Decennial Supplements, England and Wales, I92I-31.
Sabourand (I914), Arch. Mens. Obstet., 5, r.

Here, too, there was a marked recent increase in incidence, chiefly in one sex; in children,

Sedgwick, W. (i86I), " On Sexual Limitation in however, the incidence was the same in both

Familial Disease," Brit. and For. Med. Ch. Rev., 27, sexes. Pregnant women were almost immune

477-98, and 28, I98-2I4. Slater, E. (Ip944), " A Demographic Study of a
Psychopathic Population," Ann. Eugen., 12, 12I1-37.

to ulcer, and if an ulcer patient became pregnant, she was likely to remain free from

Stocks, P., and Barrington, A. (1925), Treasury symptoms for the duration of the pregnancy.

of Human Inheritance, III, 1.

In his investigation with Dr. Hugh Gains-

borough, there had been a marked excess of

DISCUSSION

single and widowed women. The explanation

Dr. Darlington said that the conditions for such facts must lie in a difference between

which Harris had necessarily in the first the sexes in the internal biochemical milieu,

instance considered together would probably in which the genes produced their effects.

on analysis prove to be heterogeneous. Dif- Attempts were often made to explain such

ferences in expressivity of particular genes preponderances by postulating the effects of

between the sexes were known in Drosophila, sex-linked genes, as for instance with manic-

and even differences characteristic of par- depressive psychoses, which were consider-

ticular families. On the other hand spon- ably more frequent in the female than the

taneous interchange between sex chromo- male sex. This could be shown to be false in

somes and autosomes discovered by his this instance, as there was no tendency for

colleague, Dr. Muldal, would account for the manic-depressive men to have manic-de-

appearance of complete and partial sex pressive daughters, rather than manic-

linkage in the affected families for genes depressive sons.

PUBLICATIONS OF THE ROYAL ANTHROPOLOGICAL SOCIETY
21 BEDFORD SQUARE, W.C.1

JOURNAL OF THE ROYAL

MAN

ANTHROPOLOGICAL INSTITUTE

A MONTHLY JOURNAL OF

In Half-Yearly Parts

Fifteen Shillings Each

ANTHROPOLOGICAL SCIENCE

Annual Subscription, fi; monthly numbers 2S. net

HUXLEY MEMORIAL LECTURES
(Complete List on Application)

OCCASIONAL PAPERS
(Complete List on Application)

Eugenics Review, Vol. XL, No. 2

