THE EUGENICS REVIEW
ANTHROPOLOGY
Jarcho, Saul. Human Palaeopathology, New Haven and London, 1966. Yale University Press. Pp. xiii+182. Price 56s.
THIS BOOK IS in no sense a textbook of human palaeopathology nor is it a popular account of the subject suitable for the informed layman in the style of Calvin Wells's Bones, Bodies and Diseases. It is, in fact, the edited proceedings of a symposium held in Washington, D.C., on 14th January 1965 under the auspices of the Subcommittee on Geographical Pathology. The chairman at that meeting was Saul Jarcho who is the editor of the volume under review; among the distinguished participants were H. Hamperl, Henry L. Jaffe, T. Dale Stewart and Owsei Temkin. Other contributors included authoritative workers in the fields of pathology, orthopaedic pathology, orthopaedics, radiology and anthropology. The book should therefore interest not only palaeopathologists and medical historians but all scientists whose disciplines impinge on palaeopathological studies.
The subjects included a review of the development of human palaeopathology in the United States and of problems in this field, difficulties in the study of the pathology of contemporary and ancient bones, palaeoepidemiology, radiographic studies in hematological bone disease with reference to the vexed question of the aetiology of symmetric osteoporosis and the morphometry of bone in palaeopathology. These major papers attracted much useful, informed and stimulating discussion.
Valuable as these contributions are, the importance of this book is that it heralds a renewed interest in human palaeopathology in the United States. In recent years, despite the valuable early work of Roy L. Moodie among others, palaeopathological studies have been largely neglected; this has not been so true of the United Kingdom nor of other European countries. Jarcho has pointed out that palaeopathology has never been a major concern of the Smithsonian Institution nor of the US National Museum. Nor has it ever been recognized as a legitimate branch of academic medicine in the United States or in Europe.
Palaeopathology has far too long been a poor handmaiden of medical history. There are major differences in the outlook of workers in the two fields; they cannot be divorced but should not live in too close intimacy. The plain fact is that the best place for palaeopathology in the academic structure has still to be defined.
Dale Stewart believes that workers in the field of palaeopathology may yet make important contributions to knowledge. As a result of this symposium, sponsored by the National Research Council and held in the National Academy of Science, it now appears that a Registry of North American Palaeopathology may be established in a major eastern university. In this book, however, Johnson sounds a warning note and believes that pilot studies might be advisable before embarking on any ambitious, elaborate or expensive schemes. Be that as it may, there seems little doubt that the establishment of a Registry would lead to a revival of active work in palaeopathology using newer technical methods. An important ancillary measure which is also likely to be realized is that medical indexing may be extended to include the whole literature of palaeopathology. At present only the Current Work in the History of Medicine of the Wellcome Historical Medical Library goes some way to cover this field.
Modern techniques which might be employed and which are discussed in this book include expert radiography not only of whole bones but of bone slabs, comparison of which with similar radiographs of contemporary diseased bones of certain diagnosis cannot fail to be fruitful. There appears also to be a place for the gross study of the cut surface of bone
126

REVIEWS OF BOOKS

slabs by the dissecting microscope; this may prove to be of greater value than the examina-

tion of conventional decalcified sections by the ordinary light microscope.

Jaffe gives some useful critical comments on the diagnosis of lesions in ancient bones

and Johnson emphasises that there are no such things as infallible diagnostic criteria.

Johnson believes strongly in morphologic examination of specimens with reliable charting

and holds that repeated contemplation and direct handling of dried bone specimens is

essential before essaying a diagnosis. Anderson sounds a warning note that palaeopatho-

logical discoveries are of no great intrinsic interest but are extremly valuable if they throw

light on the population in which the diseased individual lived.

Moseley rightly points out that before the results of modern cranial radiography in

thalassaemia and related diseases can safely be applied to ancient remains further surveys

of the entire skeleton are mandatory. In this he is supported by Blumberg and Kerley who

have shown that involvement of the finger bones in patients with sickle cell anaemia may be

due to low grade osteomyelitis and not to the anaemia. These workers also strongly advocate

routine radiography of the whole specimen and of cut slabs in all cases of bone disease.

Frost outlines some of the concepts of the biomechanics of bone which might prove

to be of value in the study of palaeopathological specimens. These studies are of great

theoretical interest but the non-mathematically minded reader may find them difficult to

follow. Blumberg and Kerley, while not quarrelling with Frost's fundamental principles,

suggest some caution in accepting his methodology.

In sum, this work will be of considerable value to all those interested in the biology of

earlier human populations and to workers in medical and historical fields who are concerned

with a temporal appreciation of human health and disease.

A. T. SANDISON

ECONOMICS
Baldwin, Robert E. Economic Development and Growth. New York and London, 1966. Wiley. Pp. xi+133. Price 38s. cloth; 15s. paper.
THIS VOLUME IS one of a series which the editors describe as constituting
a COMPLETE Introduction to Economics course which is based on the pedagogical premise that students should be introduced to economics by learning how economists think about economic problems.
The premise is ambiguous. It could mean either that students should be introduced to economics through the history of economic thought, or that the author should explain to his readers how he personally thinks about economic problems. The latter approach could be of pedagogical value to certain types of student; the former leads the reader to the subject by a roundabout route, and he can easily get lost unless the characteristics of the actual economies in question are clearly described. Professor Baldwin opts none the less for the first interpretation: Chapters 2 and 3 present a Readers' Digest-style history of economic thought on growth from Adam Smith to Harrod and Domar. The next two chapters survey contemporary trends in theorizing on development, and the remainder of the book is devoted to presenting some of the present day's broad arguments about policy for economic development. Too few facts are adduced to permit the reader to assess the merits of the arguments. Only the barest sketch of the anatomy of underdeveloped countries is given, in Chapter 1. The author's own opinions remain in the background throughout: each two to three page section in the non-historical chapters presents a balanced statement of conflicting views.
Adam Smith, Ricardo and Schumpeter were seeking to explain the process of growth in the peculiar cultural, institutional and physical circumstances of Europe. Although
127

