THE EUGENICS REVIEW.
Mate Selection.*
BY MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN , SC. D.
Wonderful results have been produced, so at all events it has been claimed, by the action of sexual selection in regard to the evolution of all kinds of organisms which are endowed with the power of sense perception; and, if this be so, ought we not to enquire whether this same agency cannot be utilized in our efforts to improve the human race? In attacking this problem it may be as well to begin by giving a brief illustrative sketch of the way in which sexual selection either has or may have promoted evolutionary changes amongst the lower animals; even though the only object sought to be attainied is to make some of the questions involved stand out more clearly.
The theory of sexual selection which is associated with the niame of Charles Darwin has been subject to a good deal of hostile criticism
in recent years; attacks which appear to one who may be prejudiced to have been on the whole unsuccessful. We are still blankly ignorant concerning innumerable events which occurred in the remote past during the evolutionary history of existing organisms; and it would indeed be surprising if we could bring all we see around us into harmony with our evolutionary theories, however true they may be. We should accept provisionally the explanation which best fits with known facts; for to wait for a theory which would explain everything would, to say the least, cause a most injurious delay. No doubt certain experiments seem to have indicated that nothing akin to the choice of a mate is exercised by certain birds and insects; but is it possible to imitate natural conditions so exactly as to remove all elements of doubt? The theory as originally propounded may no doubt need to be supple-
mented, as its author doubtless aniticipated. Sex may produce evolutionary results in two different ways. In
the first place there must often have been contests between two males
in order to secure a mate, willinig or unwilling as the case might be; and in thi.3 way qualities which make for success in combat may have
been slowly evolved. Human nature probably still shows some relics of this evolutionary process; but as in civilized countries men now seldom actually fight for their brides, this aspect of the effect of sex on evolution vwill be entirely omitted. Here we shall only be looking to the effects produced by the qualities possessed by members of one sex in attracting to them the members of the other sex. Before passing on to consider this, the second method by means of which evolution has been affected by sex, it may be as well to say a few words as to the meanings of the words to be used.
The word 'selection' is apt to bring to the mind the idea of a desire to possess something, and we therefore expect successful selection to promote progress; whereas it may be either the better or the
*Presidential address given at the Annual Meeting of the Eugenics Education
Society, on July 2nd, 1923.

460 EUGENICS REVIEW.
worse who are being chosen, and sexual selection may bring about either improvement or deterioration. Biology tells us nothing about ethics. Then again 'selection' seems to imply conscious choice; whereas the reactions which influence an organism in the 'choice' of a mate may be as little perceived as those which make our mouths water at the sight of a good dinner in due season. Selection may be merely an unconscious response to the unperceived stimulus of sight, hearing, smell, or touch; and in regard to mate selection in man, it would be well not to overlook the animal origin of the sexual impulses. The words 'prefer, ' 'choose' and 'desire,' if used in connection with sexual selection, must always be held to cover the corresponding influences or effects of these unconscious instinctive reactions.
According to the explanation which was first sugge ted of the evolutionary effects of sexual selection, we must assume, for example, that the females of the species under consideration were endowed with an instinctive preference for the more beautiful male. This being granted, and if the males were more numerous than the females, the females must have had a choice of males and would, ex hypothesi have chosen the more beautiful. In these circumstances all the males could not have paired, and it would have been as a rule the less attractive who would have left no progeny behind them. The qualities of the males who did succeed in winning a mate would have been passed
on in a measure to posterity, and this selection going on generationi
after generation, the evolutionary result would have been, according to this theory, a continued increase in the beauty of the males. The same kind of results might also have been produced if the males, though no more numerous than the females, had been polygamous in their habits, or if the delays experienced by the less attractive males in securing mates had been long enough to result either in a material number of deaths occurring amongst these unmated males or in a material decrease in the fertility of the finally captured females. In refutation of this theory it has been urged that in certain species, where the males are now adorned in a dangerously conspicuous manner, neither an excess of males nor any of the other necessary alternative conditions can be proved to have existed, and that in such cases sexual selection fails, therefore, as an explanationi. Moreover the esthetic taste of the female, if it should be so described, has merely been assumed to exist and has also to be accounted for. Undoubtedly there are gaps in this theory, and in filling them up the most useful suggestionis kno-xxin to rne are those xw hich were miiade by MIr. R. A.
Fisher in the "EUGENIcs REVIEW. "* Taking again for purposes of illustration the case of those species
in which the males exhibit certain useless ornaments, ornaments which
therefore canniot have been evolved in the ordinary manner by nlatural
selection, it should first be noted that ill health with many animals as a rule leads to a faded, dirty or bedraggled appearance; with the result that, in comparison with the unhealthy, the healthy have brighter colours and more clearly defined markings. Now the male must always somehow or other excite the female by his presence, and it is
See Eugenics Review vol. VII., I-. 184.

MATE SELECTION.

461

rational to assume that this excitement is aroused in somewhat different
ways in different females. In the past some females may have paid more attention than did others to the external appearance of the males; and those who were stimulated, consciouslv or unconsciously, by the brightness or clearness of the coats of their suitors would more
often have paired with males thus characterized. The females would
have been attracted whether the fine colour of the males was due to
inherited brightness of colouring or to good constitutions. They were
thus in many cases unknown to themselves selecting healthy mates, that is those whose appearance had niot been made shabby by ill health; with the results that their descendants inherited the good health of
their male ancestors and multiplied accordingly. But their descendants also inherited from their female ancestors a desire for a brightly coloured mate; and this process going on generation after
generation, this desire became universal in the species. This is the way, so it is suggested, that the rudiments of aesthetic taste first arose.
According to this theory regarding the origin of sexual preferences,
it will be noted that in the example just given, the taste for beauty
arose solely because beauty and health were in a manner associated together. The matter can be put more generally by saying that there is a good reason why it is likely that there will be evolved a taste for qualities in the other sex which either are beneficial from the racial
point of view that is which make for survival-or are frequently
associated with such beneficial qualities. Agility is obviously a useful quality in birds, and the useless wild mating antics of certain males may have arisen because an instinctive admiration for activity had been evolved in the females. Strength in males is another useful
quality; and an instinctive preference for a large male may have been evolved amongst females because size and strength are in some degree associated. Sexual selection may indeed have developed the size of the male to ani injurious extent in some cases; the disappearance of certain gigantic mammoths possibly thus being accounted for. In any case it is worth noting that sexual selection is capable of inflicting great damage on a race. Moreover different qualities make for sur-
vival in the two sexes, and consequently different instinctive desires as regards mates may have been evolved in males and females; for example, a desire for a bold and adventurous husband amongst women and for a beautiful and more stay-at-home wife amongst men.
We have seen how preference for certain qualities in members of the other sex may have been evolved, and also how when this preference has arisen, sexual selection will certainly be operative where, for
example, there is an excess of males. But even where delay in mating causes no diminution in fertility, sexual preferences are capable of evolving useless characters provided that they have arisen in both sexes. If both males and females prefer a beautiful mate, mutual attraction will tend to make the beautiful mate with the beautiful; and if by thus selecting their partners they do obtain a certain guarantee
against an unhealthy mate, it will be the descendants of these beautiful
couples who will tend to survive. Moreover the less attractive, in-
cluding the unihealthy, will be in a measure forced to mate together; and there will, therefore, be a tenidency for the fit to mate with the fit

462 EUGENICS REVIEW.

and the unfit with the unfit. Now the offspring of all suuchnliIons will

receive qualties making for fitness or unifitniess, as the case may be,

from both parents; with the result that all these qualities will be accen-

tuated. The
consequencesgeneration,an

fit will differ
dfitness will

more in

from

the

unfit than in
be promoted

tahneidpurnefcietndliensgs

facteliminated more effectively. In
ference has arisen either for a

qualwithyermeakininbgotfhorsesxuersviav-saelxuoarlfporrea-

theseuseless quality associated with it, the evolutioni of qualities will

thus be accelerated.

The foregoing explanationi of the actioni of sexual selectioni could

onlyappearanicenot, I thiink, accounit for the

in onie sex of remarkable

diminiutionfemale? n1 Ilottwainhhnceadrtemaeuasvseleedeblreysaislnbweffiaeenyragsttiurlrheieatjsyev,.ceteihfdBidsubethyclhaaaavnviecienssmuoacfthidneciaagtshIefhsasodebxetvfechoraerueorsceemcjdueacrttrieeoiddg?masloDemisedwmhuastt

somewhaton the average always have been

less fertile thaii those who

were accepted at their again are of interest; for very great results may be

hpfierroshtdauscastehtdoewbim-ypnts.heoxuwHaflerrsoeemleaicLtvri.oeirnyF.issmhWaelrel'sbheagtviheneoisrneiieenisg

how on account of. beauty aiid health being in a measure associated,

there may have ariseni a desire in the female for a beautiful male, and

inicreasilngteindedhow this inistinctive desire may have

to keep oni

More--gen-eratioin after geinerationi as lonig as this associationi lasted.

over in these circumstanices the more beautiful males would have been

as a rule the first to mate, and if
lpromotedmore fertile, beauty would thus

their
havre

early
beeii

success

rendered in the

them at all succeedinig

anly health,beauty guarainteeonegenerationis. As long as

gave

of the

desire for beauty in the sex anid beauty itself in the other sex would

onlhuaittnaijvlaueirntibyoieunoescfn;retcwaohshieinentngaintnputaaartlaculcerytiauevilnvetoisllfevelteaehdtce;utribeao.enniaduwTtothyhuiilsosdfwptihrhtoaehcveoemsuastbleweagonuiubnyleidcretafohmearepevnuepitocgseointtioievtteohhlneey

brake. It is by a run-away process of this sort that the woniderful tail

feathers
mammoths.possibly

of the peacock, for also the huge size

example,
of certain

may

have

beeni evolved, This theory

anisi,d

maniekxipnldainminagy wlhat foregoingattentiononethoughtherefore, of considerable importance in

in the past,

as to the future of

has occurred it help us but little.

There is conclusion which emerges clearly from the

discussion to which

should be especially directed; and that is

selectionthat any racial effects produced by sexual

depend entirely

descendantsonwhether or not the

ofthe selected mates tend to outnumber

importancethe descendants of the rejected. This poinit is of such

mannerthat it is perhaps excusable membersby considering the effects of

to emphasize it
sexual selection

in an elementary amongst the

of

a small group under ideally simple conditions. Take a group of four

individuals, one of each sex being superior and one inferior in regard

to certain qualities; and let it be assumed that the two superior

individuals are as much above the mean in regard to the qualities in

question as the two inferior are below it; the group being therefore, to
superiorsome extent typical of the whole community. First let the two by mates;-individuals select or be selected the two inferiors as their

MIATE SELECTION.

463

wheni it is evidenit that the qualities of the offspring to be anticipated
will oni the average be the s.ame as those of the mean of the whole
group; for the superior parenits wvill, as it were, tend to drag up the
qualities of their offsprinig just as much as the inferior parents will tend
to drag tlhem downvi. In other words, by such uniions the average of the qualities of the whole group will be neither raised nor lowered.
Next let it be supposed that the twvo superior individuals elect to mate
together, the two inferiors also pairing by choice or necessity. In these circumstanices it is cvidenit that the qualities of the offspring of the superior couple will oIn the average be as much above the mean as
the offspriiig of the inferior will be below it; and, assuming that an
equal niumber of descendants will be produced by the two couples, here again-i we see that tlle racial qualities of the group as a whole will neither be raised nor lowered. In short, as regards the future average qualities of a race, if fertility antd survival are the samne in all cases then it is of no consequence whatever how mates are selected; and this is the vital point always to be held in v-iew, but ofteni forgotteni. If the above
conditionis in regard to fertility anid survival were not fulfilled, and if,
for exanmple, the superior members of aniy group were to mate together
in each generationi anid wrvce always to leave more descendanits behind
themii than did the iniferior imlembers, theni it would be the superior stock which would prevail and would in time completelv oust the inferior stock. This would be so because death would always be at work keeping down numbers to a certain level, and it would be the
least productive stocks which would thus be exterminated. But it is equally true that if the superior couples always failed to produce as many descendanits as did the inferior, theni future generations would in timie come to be exclusively composed of the descendants of the inferior couples, anid to have nio superior blood running in their veins. WVhat good would the superior individuals then have done by electing to mate together? A policy which may seem advisable if fertility and survival were left out of accounit, might nevertheless, if fertility and survival acted unfavourably, lead inevitably to the extermination of the best types.
Passilng on to conisider mate selection amongst humani beings, we first have to enquire what are the qualities which we ought to desire in our offspring. If this questioni be regarded very broadly, all will agree that we wanit our descenidanits to possess good moral, mental and physical qualities, whilst it will generally be admitted that we should place character first, initellect second and physique third in order of importaince. To attempt to deal with this question in greater detail would lead to enidless discussions, and for our presenit purposes these broad conclusions are perhaps suflicient. WVe niext have to consider whether in civilized countries mates are in fact now generally preferred such as would be likely to pass on to posterity these desirable characteristics. This question has beeni investigated in America, young people havinig beeni asked to state what were their ideals in connection with matrimony, the results being at first sight on the whole very satisfactory. Both sexes placed health at the top of the list of the desirable attributes of a prospective mate, whilst disposition and education were also rated highly. If good looks appeared to count for a

464 EUGENICS REVIEW.
good deal, it must be remembered that pink cheeks are correlated with a good constitution. with healthy habits, and with youth, this last being of great importance from a biological point of view. Character and intelligenice were. no doubt, insufficienitly weighted; but good qualities probably often tell in ways which are not likely to be realized in advance. At all events, according to these enquiries, those pos-
sessing on the whole superior qualities, seem generally to be desired
now-a-days as mates* These investigations as to the ideals now entertained by young
people are no doubt for many reasons likely to inspire certain pleasant sensations of complaceincv. Aliany who have not studied genetics may be inclined to believe that whatever it may be which plays a part in carrving on from one generation to another the power of producing good stock, that is to say the entities which have here been described as good genes, would be damaged by being associated in any generation with bad genes; and those who hold such views will rejoice if persons with good qualities mate together, thus preserving their good genes from contamination in the cominig generation. But the students of Mendelism will pay Ino regard to any such argumen-t in favour of mate selection; for it is generally held that good genes, if separating or segregating out at any future generation from any such evil companionship, would show themnselves to be quite uninjured by the bad company which they had been keeping.t The argument which, though not consciously realized, probably tells with most force in favour of selective mating is, however, that when good mates are sought anid obtained, good progeny must on the whole be the result, and that the race must, therefore thus be made to prosper. Unfortunately this argument as thus stated is wholly illogical; for it leaves out of account all the effects which the search for good mates may have on the fertility
of both parties and on the number of their descendaints. We must regard these questions far more closely, utilizing all the knowledge acquired by a study of sexual selection in animals; and when we do so we shall come across many considerations which are not encouraging.
As we have seen, sexual selection under niatural conditions may act as an agency in evolution in several ways. The first explanation offered by science of the remarkable appearance of certain male birds, for example, was that, as the males were more numerous than the females, many of those males who could not at once draw attention to themselves had to go without mates, whilst it was those chosen for their beauty who passed on their fine plumage to their descendanlts. With mankind the sexes are nearly equal inl numbers; but as many persons do as a fact remain unimarried, mate selection may be exerting a considerable iniflueince in promotiing in a somewhat similar way in the coming genierations those qualities which are now desired in a mate. Any delay in winning a bride through want of attractiveness may result in a man remaining a bachelor for life. and therefore inlhis not pa7sing on his unattractive qualities to posterity. But it must be nioted
* "AppliedEugenicis." Popenoeand Johnson. p. 219.
t I am myself a little sceptical on this point. But the injury, if any, would only be appreciable after a great number of generations.

MATE SELECTION.

465

that if the ugly, for example, desired to mate with the ugly just as much as the beautiful do desire to mate with the beautiful, then mate selection would be producing no tendency to exterminate ugliness. This is not a state of things which I have actually observed, though it
does appear to me that certain degenerate types do prefer to matetogether. In any case statistical enquiries have proved that like tends
to mate with like as regards many qualities; and as some degree of assortive mating, as it is called, is the rule rather than the exception, it would be necessary to prove that the desire for any particular quality
in a mate is widely felt before we could be sure that mate selection is
now tending to promote its appearance in the coming generations to a material extent. If like always tended to mate with like, the inferior would experience no delay in getting a wife on account of their infer-
iority, and sexual selection would be inoperative in this respect. Now the American investigations were undertaken amongst somewhat
superior types, and similar enquiries ought to be made amongst all classes, down to the lowest, before we could form a correct forecast of the future effects of the mate selection which is taking place to-day. It is true that the desire for good qualities in a mate, in so far as it is operative throughout any section of the community, must tend to have a beneficial effect within that section; but we here find no right to assume that mate selection is now producing any good results amongst the more degraded types or that it is tending to stamp out degeneracy from the nation as a wbole.
We have seen that another method by means of which sex has, it is believed, influenced the process of evolution is dependent on a general desire having been created to mate with individuals of the opposite sex who possess qualities directly or indirectly indicative of fitness to survive; with the result that the fit were thus led to mate together by choice, whilst the unfit often had to do so of necessity. In this way natural selection may have been reinforced by the selective-
action of the sexes; for the fit and the unfit would thus have become
more widely differentiated, the fit multiplying and the unfit beingeliminated more rapidly in consequence. Now reasons have been given for believing that the possession of certain good qualities, good health for example, does now tend to increase the chances of marriage amongst human beings; and it might seem as if the evolution of all these good qualities by natural selection is now being accelerated bv mate selection. But to argue thus would be to confuse fitness with superi-
ority; for fitness only implies the possession of such qualities as make for survival, whilst good qualities may have no such effect. No doubt
if the 'unfit' are now being induced to mate together to any extent, to that extent the elimination of 'unfitness' is thus being promoted. But who are now the 'unfit,' amongst human beings? If the superior types
are dying out, it is they who are now the biologically unfit. May it not be, therefore, that the extinction of the superior stocks is being actually hastened by mate selection? Health is no doubt a quality making for the survival of a race; but where the superior types are now dying out, this may be because they possess other natural qualities producing a greater effect in an opposite direction; such qualities, for instance, as natural infecundity and all such as promote

466 EUGENICS REVIEW.
birth limitation, including forethought and ambitioni. If a diminu-
tion is now taking place in the numbers of the better types on account
of the general effect of all those natural qualities which affect fertilitv or survival, this net effect would be likely to be intensified if these natural qualities were to be accentuated by the fit and the unfit more
frequently mating amongst themselves. Assortive mating of this kind might, therefore, tend to increase the rate at which a nation was
deteriorating. To put it briefly, natural selection appears now to be acting in the wrong directioni; whilst mate selection, by bringiina together persons vith the same kind of qualities, may in some respects now be increasing the harm thus being done.
If on balance the existinlg natural tendenicies makinig for racial
deterioration are being intenisified by assortive mating in the manner above suggested, it follows that the lowest types are thus becoming more marked anid could therefore be more easily eliminiated by segregation or sterilization. Assortive mating does, therefore, facilitate eugenic reform; for to reverse the action of natural selectioin where it is harmful by the introduction of these less cruel methods is one of the main aims of Eugenics. Here unfortunately some of the obstacles which have to be encountered are due to the noblest of all human sentiments, namely pity for others and solicitude for their liberty. To secure human progress, the iniferior types must be eliminated; and all that should be demanded is that this process
should be made as little painful as possible and that liberty should never be unnecessarily limited. The philanithropists of to-day, how-
ever, only look to one side of the question anid entirely ignore all the racial effects of the reforms they are advocating. Both out of work doles to those constitutionally incapable of work and outdoor relief generally, if given witlhout regard to the probability of parenthood in the future; motherhood endowment to the naturally superior and inferior alike; these and other methods of relieving distress directly tend to promote iniferiority in the race in the future. Little weight can, therefore, be attached to the argument that mate selection is now facilitating the elimination of degenerate types whilst elaborate methods of promoting the fertility of these same types are being widely adv-ocated.
Turning from the past to the future, the Eugenist has to consider what would be the effect on posterity of a widespread propaganda in favour of greater care being taken in the choice of a mate; that is of stimulating a general desire amongst all young people to seek for superior mates. Unfortunately there are several reasons for anticipating that the ultimate racial results would be disappointing. To take the less important points first, if we could succeed in spreading abroad a belief that it is a positive duty to select as a mate a person of high character, good intelligence, and robust health, would it not be the naturally dutiful who would listen most to this call of duty? But the greater the zeal displayed amongst the superior types in this respect, the greater would become their difficulty in choosing a suitable mate, and the more often would their consciences drive them to end their days unmarried. Would not this be an effective method of breeding out from the race all those natural qualities which stimulate

AIAXTE SELECTION.

467

a sense of dtuty ? Anid -are nlot these amoIngst the best of all human qualities -
In reply to what has jtust beeni said it may be urg.ed that it would
be possible to inicutlcate the need for care in the selectioni of a mate without creatinig any tenidenecy to make marriage more improbable. Amongst aniimals the selection exercised by the female, for exanmple, is probably only effective as betweeni the males who presenit themselves simultanieouslv; for niatural selectioni mav be relied oni to m-iiake the sex impulse so overpoweringly strong that iund(ler niatural coniditionis the solitaryimale %vould niever be rejected. And this coniditiont of thingas amonigst animals is instractive; because it )oints to the advisability of giving to all superior human beings wheni youing every opportuniitv of meeting with other younig people of good type, rather than to trust to the effect of advice in regard to such matters. The point here is, however, that as far as 1 can jtudge it would be impossible to prevent those who pay any attentioni to the advocacy of care in mate selection from becominig in consequence more fastidious in their choice-that is, indeed, what is aimed at and( that such fastidiousness must have harmful effects in several ways. Take the case of a person enldowed with very exceptional abilities, and it is clear thlat he is likely to add something to the value of the race in the forml of his progeny if he marries anyone who is not more below the mnieaii inl natuiral qualities than he is above it; for under these coniditionis his offsprillg are likely
to be above the mean. In fact a geniius had better marry aiiyone not
an imbecile rather thani niot nmarry at all; yet it is the personl of superior stock who is most likelv to be hiindered in the selectioin of a mate by high ideals as to the qualities conisidered essential. This is so because where the stanidard of attainmenits is high, the numabers of those anywhere near oni anl equality is certain to be snmall. Oni the other han-d, if we look to the mediocre inidividual, his offspring are as likely to be below the meani as above it; aiid. fromii a racial point of view, it is a matter of entire in(liffereiice whether he marries or niot. If he does intend to marry he would do wsell to seek for a mnate better thaii himself; for in this way lhe might at all events either prevent a superior person from goinga unmiiiarried or lesseni the chances of ani in-ferior personi getting a mate. Thlus we arrive at the paradoxical conielusion that the better the qualities with wAhich a person is endowed the less care need he take in the selectioni of a mate, whilst it is the advocacy of care in mate selection amongst the mass of quite ordinary individuals -which would do most good from-l the racial poinlt of view. As to all belonging to definitely inferior stock, it wvill be better for the race if they do not marry at all; but if determined to seek a mate, they should be advised either to look for onie much superior to themselves, for that would make their success mlore improbable, or for one mituch iinferior. for that
might in various wNa)ys lead to the disappearaince of their descendents. But as such can-cdid adv ice as this would certainlv fall oII deaf ears, may we niot at all events conclude that as regards a large lportion of the
human race, the inculcation of the racial advantages of mate selection would be a fuitile task?
The most serious reason for entertaininga doubts as to the racial
effects of a propaganda concerning mate selection is one which has

468 EUGENICS REVIEW.
already been considered, though only from one point of view. When two persons mate together, both well endowed as regards character, intelligence, energy and health, they will have every reason to anticipate a successful future. They will as a rule have larger funds at their disposal for useful purposes than those who mate less advantageously, and this circumstance will no doubt make the burden of family life less onerous. On the other hand their good prospects will often make them more ambitious for themselves or for their children, and in either case an increase in the temptation to limit the size of the family will be the result. Which 'will be the stronger of these opposing influences affecting the size of the family, the rising income or the rising ambition t This question cannot be answered with any assurance; but we may be certain that if such a superior couple do rise into a distinctly higher social stratum, their children will in consequence be likely to have smaller families than if their parents had remained in humbler circumstances. There are exceptions to every rule, but the correlation between fertility and social status is too well established to make it possible to denv the validity of this conclusion in regard to average results. Now whenever the mating together of two superior persons leads to smaller families being produced by their offspring, this means that each of them will have fewer grandchildren than if they had not mated together and if each had been content with a less efficient mate. Doubtless those who select good mates and who also carefully limit the size of their families will be wise in their generation; for the comfort and prosperity of themselves and their household will thus be best assured.
But if we look forward to more distant times when intermarriage with other stocks will have scattered their good seed broadcast in all directions, we see that whenever mate selection tends to diminish the
number of the descendants of superior individuals, the ultimate effects must be dysgenic. That some harm will thus be done by careful mate selection under existing social conditions seems to me to be probable; this being the conclusion already reached when this matter was regarded solely in connection with the inborn qualities of the parents.
Turning to a different subject it has been urged that those belonging to inferior stocks should seek mates likely to be endowed with superior inborn qualities, so as to counteract any harmful tendencies of which they may be the carriers. Looking to their own comfort and to that of their children, all would be wise to take thought as to the inborn tendencies of any prospective mate; but is this a precaution more encumbent on the naturally inferior than on the naturally superior? From whatever stock a person may spring, he is likely to have superior progeny if married to a superior mate; and should not all pay some attention to this undoubted truth ? There is unquestionably an especial danger to the next generation when unions take place between individuals with the same inborn tendencies. This is always probable if the pedigrees of both parties contain many individuals with similar defects; for in these circumstances it is likely that harmful recessive genes will be brought together and that evil qualities hidden in the parents will become patent in the offspring. All would of course wish to avoid such a catastrophy; but it should be remembered that if the ultimate well being of the race be the sole object held ip -vriew, then those en-

MATE SELECTION.

46R

dowed with similar hidden defects had better mate together. This is true at all events when the defects on becoming patent are sufficiently serious to prevent those persons who exhibit them from passing on their harmful taint to posterity; for that is the consummation to be desired.
Tak.ing all these somewhat contradictory considerations into account, does it not appear that the question whether or not parenthood is justifiable should first of all be decided in the abstract, that is without reference to any particular mate ? It is no doubt extraordinarily difficult in some cases to assign fair weights to the competing claims of this generation, of the next generation, and of posterity, so as to be
able to decide whether it would be right for a certain individual to marry. When parenthood is only doubtfully justifiable, then the inborn tendencies of the mate selected should be taken into account in regard to the size of the family. We shall probably never arrive at conclusions so definite that it will be possible to divide all men into two classes,
namely, those who may have large families and those who ought to have no children whatever; and it appears to me, therefore, not
illogical to hold that the more doubtful the inheritance the smaller should be the size of the family. It is in this direction that difficulties in connection with doubtful stock should be met, and not by advocating
that it should mate with good stock. As to whether or not near relatives should marry, is a question
raisinag much the same difficulties as those just discussed. No doubt
the fact that cousins are descended from a common and not remote ancestor does considerably increase the probability that they are the carriers of the hidden seeds of the same kind of defects, defects which would become patent in all those childrcn whom they endowcd with a.
double dose of these hereditary influences. Here it may be interesting to note that if recessive genes were often the basis of good qualities, cousini marriages would be held to be especially desirable. But so far as is now known, it is only nieutral or bad qualities which come to the surface wheni recessive genes are brought together, and prudence in regard to the next generation does, therefore, dictate the avoidance of cousin marraiges where the common pedigree shows definite signs of heritable defects; whilst here again purely racial considerations point in the opposite direction. We could never actually advocate cousin marriages on the ground that such uniions would increase the number of
patently defective children and would thus facilitate the elimination of certain hidden racial defects; but we might go so far as not to blame
those who take the risk involved in marrying a relative, a risk from which they may suffer and the race gain. 11 the stock is good, the
chances of any harm arising from cousin marriages are very small; whilst those who have reason to fear marriage with any near relation
should think twice before marrving at all, or should at all events take the risks involved into consideration in regard to the size of their
families. Probably the objection most often raised against the belief that
care in mate selection could be made to produce racial effects is that no attention would be paid to any precepts as regards matrimony; for love always laughs at locksmiths. Sir Francis Galton answered this objection by showing how extraordinarily powerful custom has often

470 EUGENICS REVIEW.
been in the regulation of marraiges, notably amongst certain savage tribes; and as in regard to our primary instincts, human nature is much alike everywhere, we may assume that ideals, if firmly implanted, would not be without influence in all that concerns mate selection. It is true that after the passion of love has once been aroused, reason counts for little; and it follows that ideals will hardly be effective after friendship has ripened inito love. On this account youth is the season in which to sow the right seeds, anid at that season indirect methods of attack are often the best. Precepts in regard to mate selection alone might affect the young but little, whilst ideals accepted in regard to every department of life would automatically affect the choice of friends and therefore of lovers. Propinquity is, moreover, a circumstance sufficiently powerful in arousing love often to obliterate all previously formed ideals; and great care should be taken to give to all younig people of good stock ample opportunities of making friends with others of suitable age who are well endowed as regards character and health. Example being better than precept, those parents who put aside both social ambition and all useless display of wealth, and who follow the sounid rule of never making friends with persons they cannot respect, will be making households where their children when voung will naturally absorb high ideals and when grown up will be likely to meet with youth of good stock. This is the way in which the cause of eugenics can now, I believe, best be served in the matter of mate selection. Thus to promote racial progress could do nothing but good, for it would niot tend to divorce marriage from romance.
Summanry. It has just been seen that the question whether parenthood is or is not justifiable in the case of any individual ought to be decided without reference to any particular mate, and that those who mav marry should not be condemned for marrving a relative. The mnain practical question for the Eugenist is whether such individuals as are held to be fit for parenthood should be pressed to consider carefullv the natural qualities of any prospective mate. If looking only to the comfort of the individuals themselves and of their children, undoubtedlv much would be gained by exercising a wise discretion before making the plunge; but looking only to the ujltimate effects on the race, the results of a propaganda in favour of great care in mate selection cannot be foretold with any assurance. An examinationi of the theories of sexual selection shows that all the evolutionary effects thus produced were due to the rejected animals, because of their rejection, having left fewer descendants behind them. Amongst civilised men the racial effects of mate selection in like manner turn on questions of fertility and survivial; for the mere fact that good progeny will come of unions between superior individuals tells us nothing as to the future of the race. The main argumenit in favour of the advocacy of care in mate selection is that, in so far as succes:ful, it would lead to the rejectioni of inferior suitors, with the result that they would on the average have fewer offspring and that their inferior qualities would thu; be in some degree lessenied in future generations. It is also true that this advocacv would result in inferior stocks being more often led to mate amongst themselves and that their elimination by segregation, &c. 3 would thus be facilitated. Lastly such

MATE SELECTION.

47r

an advocacy would bring eugenic problems to the minds of young people with beneficial effects. The racial disadvantages of such
a propaganda would be as follows. The conscientious would listen most to this call of duty and would thus more often be prevented from marrying. If superior stocks are now decreasing in numbers, this deterioration in the race would be hastened by the superior being led to mate together; because all those natural qualities which on balance tend to diminish the size of the family-
amongst the better types would thus be accentuated; and because ambition would be aroused by the superior opportunities thus offered, and family limitation thus promoted. Lastly the inferior stocks being also thus induced to mate together, their high fertility would thus be relatively increased in so far as dependent on natural qualities. It is
true that for persons of great ability to seek for mates of great promise is the right course to pursue if the appearance of genius in the next generation be the object in view; but this object may be attained at the cost of a lowering of the average qualities of the race. Thus we see that opposing racial tendencies would be stimulated by any propaganda in favour of mate selection; the most important being the beneficial tendency due to greater delays in the mating of the inferior, and the harmful tendency due to a relative reduction in the size of the families of the superior. Which tendency would prevail cannot be foretold with any certainty; yet on the whole I judge that greater care in mateselection would be beneficial to the race, and ought, therefore, to be inculcated. But the fact to which I desire to call especial attention is that the strongest objection to the advocacy of care in mate selection would no longer hold good if in the future, by some method less cruel than that of natural selection, the inferior stocks could be made to multiply less quickly than the superior. Then, but not till then, mate selection might become a powerful agency for racial advancement. From whatever direction racial problems are approached, the conclusion we arrive at is that the main aim of eugenic reform should be to promote such measures or tendencies as would increase the
number of the descendants of the superior types-not merely of the very superior types, but of the great mass of useful citizens-or would
decrease the number of the descendants of the inferior types-not only of defectives or degenerates, but of all undesirable citizens. This must be our main effort. In the meantime the best line of action in regard to mate selection is to adopt an indirect method of attack; that is to strive to make parents see how harmful is a useless display of wealth or a desire merely to rise in social status as leading to unjusti-
fiable familv limitation; whilst young people should be given every opportunity of .making friends with other young people of good character and health. Where high ideals have been slowly and naturally ingrained at home and where a wide and suitable field of choice is available, worthy friendships will quickly enough tipen into love.

