DANISH EXPERIENCES IN NEGATIVE EUGENICS

choos such words as authoritarian or dic. scientific methods (expressed in anthro-

tatorial; we should select, rather, the pometric procedures) have not only been

epithet " naive." The desire for wealth, for statistically validated but publicly recog-

power, for social status and honours-nearly nized and universally accepted. The Senate

all the motives which, throughout history, of Kantsaywhere constitutes an oligarchy;

have contributed to political strife-have but the powers with which it is invested and

apparently beccme extinct. In Kantsay- which it freely exercises are no more re-

where. there are no rival political parties, garded by the country's imaginary inhabi-

no pressure groups, no caucuses, no in- tants as dictatorial than are the powers to-

trigue. What had become of these disturb- day wielded by an examinlng board so

ing yet formative movements ? Apparently regarded by the candidates who sit for the

the citizens had become as oblivious of them examination which it arbitrates. The man

as Galton had heen during the whole of his who is ploughed may be disappointed; he

life. They had shed them much as a snake may even feel bitterly aggrieved; but he

sheds its outgrown skin.

does not, if he is sane, regard himself as a

Galton's " Kantsaywhere " is projected victim of Fascism or as the slave of a

into a distant and visionary future when dictatorship.

DANISH EXPERIENCES IN NEGATIVE EUGENICS, 192945*

By TAGE KEMP
University Institute for Human Genetics, Copenhaten

IN 1883, when Francis Galton first formukted the principles of eugenics, the
possibilities of putting these pnnciples into practice were only slight, for but very little was yet known about human heredity. Long before a scientific foundation for eugenic theories had been provided, however, they were taken up by others, often with more enthusiasm than wisdom.
Eugenics soon spread to other countries, often under new names and, in some degree, with changes in content. In Denmark the term "hereditary hygiene " is now usually employed. In Germany, where eugenic ideas were introduced in the early 'nineties, the
* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on November x9th, 1946.

designation adopted was " race hygiene "- a concept which later was to be so grossly abused in the Third Reich. More recently
the term " eugenics " has been attached to any application of biology to social hygiene
in the widest sense of the term.
During the first epoch of eugenics towards the end of the past century and in the
beginning of this century, however, the whole subject was markedly speculative, for at that
time the study of heredity, which was to
form the scientific foundation of eugenics, was still in its infancy. Indeed, this essential basis of eugenics did not exist until the second and third decades of this century.
A distinction has been made between quantitative and qualitative eugenics, the

i82 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

former being subdivided into positive and in 1935 (revised in i94i), in FiMland in i935

negative eugenics.

and in Estonia in I937 (probably abolished

The practice of positive eugenics, however, after the Russian occupation of the country).

has met with almost insurmountable difficul- In Holland and England sinilar laws have

ties. Supermen cannot be produced arti- been contemplated, but not adopted so far.

ficially, for marnrage and the breeding of As to eugenic control of marriage and

children cannot be enforced compulsorily. interruption of pregnancy, the laws differ

It may be that attempts to carry out eugenic considerably in various countries, on which

aims indirectly have not been altogether un- account this legislation outside Denmark

successful, but it cannot be said that what will not be mentioned further here.

has so far been gained in this way repre- In some countries special clinics hare been

sents a significant advance for humanity. instituted with a view to giing matrimonial

As to negative eugenic measures the matter advice on eugenics, and information on con-

stands quite differently. Medical research traception is usually given at the same time.

into heredity has made it possible to apply In Denmark eugenic matrimonial advice is

these, and this development has been given to a not inconsiderable extent by

favoured by political developmen.ts in the general practitioners as well as by special-

between-war years. In the dictator countries, ists. Obviously the possibilities in this field

where considerations of state unconditionally gradually increase with the increasing devel-

overrode any rights of the individual, opment of medical research in heredity.

and where nationalism was- rampant, It is also of eugenic importance that

eugenic policies were looked upon as a means patients with hereditary diseases should

by which the nation might assert itself in stay for a considerable length of time in

competition with other nations and races. hospitals or institutions, or be submitted to

In democratic countries there has been a the control implied by public care. This

growing feeling that society must make results in a shorter or longer segregation or

living conditions tolerable for everybody, and separation of such individuals, which natur-

this has necessitated the employment of ally lowers their chances of propagation.

certain eugenic measures.

Thus the hospital or institutional treatment,

The most important negative eugenic public care and compulsory notification of

measures are sterilization, interruption of the feeble-minded, epileptic, deaf, blind and

pregnancy, prohibition of marriage, marriage crippled are of eugenic importance.

advice combined with instruction on contra- Finally, the abolition of areas of inbreed-

ception, and finally segregation of the indi- ing, where recessive hereditary diseases

vidual in hospitals or other institutions. prevail, may be of eugenic significance. If

It is usually stated that the first steriliza- such an inbred group is scattered about the

tion for eugenic purposes was performed in an population, as happens relatively often now-

American prison in 1899. Legislation con- adays through improvements in the means

cerning sterilization has existed in a few states of communication, their respective heredi-

of the U.S.A. since I907, and since that time tary diseases will disappear. On the other

at least 30,000 sterilizing operations have been hand, the tendency to such diseases will be

performed in the U.S.A. and a few Canadian more widespread, and in the course of time

provinces, about one-half of the operations this may involve a certain risk.

being performed in California, where through It is sometimes stated that the main pur-

a number of years about IOO sterilizations pose of eugenics is to spare society a good

were performed yearly per i,ooo,ooo inhabi- deal of expense. This, of course, is a great

tants. In Europe sterilization laws have been mistake. Negative eugenic measures are of

in force since I928 (in Canton Vaud in an entirely medical character, aiming at the

Switzerland). In Denmark the first steriliza- prevention of disease and misfortune. Like

tion law came into force in I929, in Norway other preventive measures they mean a

in I934, in Germany also in I934, in Sweden saving to the public in the long run, as the

DANISH EXPERIENCES IN NEGATIVE EUGENICS

I83

diseases would have cost society far more than the amount expended on their prevention.
In Denmark several negative eugenic or
heredo-hygienic laws have been passed during
the past fifteen years. Thus, in I929, Den-
mark was the first European country to adopt eugenic sterilization as a medico-legal
measure, while in I934-5 fresh laws were passed concerning this operation. Further,
the Danish marriage law includes certain prohibitions against a union wherein there
is a not inconsiderable risk of transmitting various serious mental affections or epilepsy to the offspring. Finally, a law which was enforced on October Ist, I939, established certain rules concerning the interruption of
pregnancy on eugenic grounds.
The first Danish law on sterilization and
castration was adopted in I929 and was replaced on May iith, I935, by a new law on
access to sterilization and castration. Sec-
tion i of this law lays down that after due application a person may be sterilized if such
a procedure is indicated for social reasons, and furthermore (i) with regard to mentally normal individuals that particular indications are present, especially a risk of a predisposition being inherited by the offspring; and (2) concerning mentally abnormal individuals who are not feeble-minded it must also be regarded as a benefit to the person concerned that he is incapacitated from propagation. The application for sterilization, which is made to the Department of Justice, must, among other things, be accompanied by a medical certificate giving adequate reasons for sterilization. The Department of Justice has in every case to ask the advice of the Medico-legal Council.
The law of May i6th, I934, which is concerned with the feeble-minded, also includes directions on sterilization. According to section 5, such persons may be sterilized when there are social reasons against their having offspring-e.g., when they are judged to be so defective as to be incapable of adequately providing for or educating their children. Application for sterilization is made to the Department of Social Affairs; decisions have in every case to be made by a- special

board comprising a judge from the Supreme
Court as chairman, a psychiatrist and a person experienced in sociology (at present one of the mayors of the City of Copenhagen). In doubtful cases the Director of the Institute for Human Genetics is consulted.

TABLE i

TOTAL NUMBER OF LEGAL STERILIZATIONS IN DENMARK, r929-45 (ESTIMATED)

1929-34 1935-39 1940-45

Women

... ...

88

... ...

975

... I,510

Men
20
405
6io

Tota Io8
1,380
2,120

Total, 1929-45

...

Castrations (sexual

abnormals resp.

sexual criminals)

2,573
a few

I,035 3,608
about (i or a 400 few boys)

Table i shows the total nuruber of persons legally sterilized in Denmark from I929 to
I945. The figures are approximate, but do not differ essentially from the true ones; they are estimated from the publications of Smith & Bruun and Sand* and on the yearly reports from the Danish Medico-legal Council
and information given by the Departments
of Justice and Social Affairs.

TABLE 2

LEGALLY STERILIZIED PATIENTS (FEEBLE-MINDED EXCEPTED) IN DENMARK, 1929-45 (ESTIMATED)

1929-34 r935-39 1940-45

Women Men

... ...

4

I

... ... I50

30

... ...

510

110

Total
5
}80 620

Total, r929-45

- 664

141

805

Table 2 shows the number of sterilized persons who are not feeble-minded. These patients suffered from various diseases or were hereditarily tainted. Some of the most common conditions in question were:
Mental inferiority (dullards), epilepsy, psychopathy, schizophrenia, manic depressive psychosis, other mental diseases, psychoses and nervous disorders in pregnancy, malformations, blindness or eye diseases, deaf-mutism, internal diseases (haemophilia, diabetes, etc.), nervous diseases (muscular dystrophy, Friedreich's ataxia, myotonia),
etc.

* Knud Sand, Ugeshrift for Lager, 1935. P. 25. Nordisk Medicin, 1940, P. 779. J. C. Smith & A. Bruun, Socialt Tidsskrift, 1939, P. 371.

184 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE 3

LEGALLY STERILIZED FEEBLE-MINDED PATIENTS IN DENMARK, 1929-45 (ESTIMATED)

1929-34 1935-39 1940-45

... ...
... *
..0

Women
84
825 I,0O0O

Mehi
I9 375
500

Total I03
1,200
1,500

Total, 1929-45

... 1,909

894 2,803

The Danish population, 1924: 3,389,ooo; I944: 3,998,000. Children born alive, 1924: 73,836; I944: 90,639.

Table 3 shows the approximate number of
feeble-minded patients sterilized in Denmark from 1929 to I945. During recent years nearly 300 feeble-minded have been sterilized. Twenty years ago about 74,000 children were born in Denmark; if one estimates that i per cent of these children were heredi-
tarily feeble-nminded they would total 740,
and about one-third to one-half of these
children have since been sterilized. These figures give rise to various con-
siderations. The first and most important
question is: Have some, or even one, of the 3,500 been operated upon with insufficient indications for sterilization ? To this the
only answer is that so far nothing of the kind
has been provec4 The risk of its happening is very slight, for every case is considered by several mutually independent medical ex-
perts and boards, each of which possesses
some particular expert knowledge. But, indeed, any human institution may fail occasionally, and a wrong decision may sometimes have been made. The principle for the responsible authorities must, however, always be rather to sterilize too few
than too many. The next question is: Is it correct to
reckon that on the whole all those who ought to be sterilized actually are submitted to this treatment ? It is difficult to give any answer to this question until the genetic registration, which will be mentioned later, has been carried through.
Then one might ask: Is it to be expected that within a surveyable future these sterilizations will bring about a distinct decrease in the incidence of hereditary diseases, especially in the frequency of mental deficiency in Denmark.? As mental deficiency is largely inherited as a recessive character that

P'an be transmitted through healthy carriers, it might be expected to take many generations to bring about a distinct reduction in the total number of mental defectives. But as the mental defectives usually select their mates from among other oligophrenics, we may take a somewhat more optimistic view of this question than if they nixed freely with the rest of the population. If the somewhat less than 3,ooo mental defectives
sterilized in the period i929-45 had not been sterilized they would have had over 5,000
children, of which onethird to one-half would have been feeble-minded. And among their descendants in later generations there would be many more mental defectives.
In the card index of the Institute for Human Genetics in Copenhagen there are numerous records of feeble-minded persons born about the middle of the past century who among their descendants in three generations have scores of mental defectives. There is every reason to assume that the 2,6oo sterilized mental defectives Within the next ioo years might have had several times 0o,ooo feeble-minded descendants, from whom posterity is now freed.
The Danish law on abortion mentioned above lays down in section i, sub-sectiot, I, point 3, that a pregnant woman may have her pregnancy interrupted when there is an obvious risk of the child being liable to inherit insanity, other severe mental disturbances, epilepsy or serious and incurable physical ilness.
Whether the conditions mentioned in this law be present in each individual case has to be decided by the physician concerned, i.e. the private physician of the woman in question or the physician attached to a mothers' aid institution, in consultation with another authorized physician, who is often chief of the surgical or gynecological clinic where the operation is to be performed. It is often necessary first to refer the woman to some special expert or to have her admitted to a psychiatric or other non-surgical department.
During the six years since the enforcement of the above-mentioned law, the University

DANISH EXPERIENCES IN NEGATIVE EUGENICS

x85

Institute for Human Genetics, Copenhagen, Among the eye lesions furnishing an indi-

has received 623 inquiries from physicians cation for induction of abortion, mention is

as to whether eugenic indications for inter- to be made of aniridia, retinitis pigmentosa

ruption of pregnancy are present in given and cataract.

cases.* These inquiries came from the Among the diseases of internal organs the

sources indicated in Table 4.

most frequent are hlemophilia and diabetes,

TABLE 4

IN*WURIES WITH RESPECT TO EUGENIC ABORTION

hospitals

... ...

mothers' aid institutions

other institutions ...

practing physicia ...

Cases

per cent

... 313 i.e. in 50 3

... 155 ,, 24-9

... 27 ,, 4,3

... 128 ,, 205

then various diseases of the blood, tumours and allergic affections.
In no less than fifty-two cases the question about eugenic indications for inter-
ruption of pregnancy was prompted by the
fear that the expected child might suffer from epilepsy.

In the first couple of years after the Other nervous diseases are far more infre,-

enforcement of the law the number of such quent, the most copamon being muscular inquiries was small, but has increased year dystrophy, 'Huntington's chorea and Fried-

by year.

reich's ataxia.

These inquiries may be classified accord- Among the forms of oligophren'ia are

ing to the diseases which it was feared that mental inferiority, feeble-mindedness, Mon-

the expected child might inherit-as shown goloid idiocy, tuberous or diffuse sclerosis.

in Table 5.

The second largest group is made up of

TABLE 5

cases of psychopathy often associated with

CLA5IMCATION OF CONDITION FOR WHICH EUGENIC criminality, alcoholism, anti-social behaviour,

ABORTION WAS CONSIDERED

etc.

Cases per cent Among the psychoses proper, nearly one-

Physical malformations ... 71 i.e. in IIT4
Deaf-mutism or ear lesions ... 21 ,, 3*4 Blindness or eye lesions ... 19 ,, 3'0

half is made up of schizophrenia, the other half of manic depressive psychosis or mental

Lesions of internal organs Nervous diseases ...
Oligophrenia ... ... Psychopathy ... ...

... 37 ... 66
... 105 ... 94

,, ,,
,,
",

5*9 Io-6
x6-9 I5.I

depression. As was to be expected, multiple indications
were encountered in a large percentage of the

Psychosis ... ... ... 66 Alcoholism and/or criminality 32 Various other lesions ... ... 10

,, ,,
,,

xo-6 5x r*6

cases, often with several affections-as, for instance, physical malformation together

Combined eugenic indications IO2 ,, 06-4 with epilepsy, oligophrenia or other mental

On studying the individual entries in this tabulation we find that the most frequent
lesion under the first heading-" physical
malformation "-is harelip and cleft palate, and the next are spina bifida and chrondro-

lesions. Such cases of multiple disability may be very difficult to judge, as no general rule can be laid down concerning them. Every
case has to be submitted to individual expert
consideration.

dystrophy. This group further comprises a large number of other malformations-e.g.
spontaneous amputations, ectrodactylism,
congenital defects of the radius and ulna, club-foot, congenital dislocation of the hip, Crouzon's disease and anencephaly.
Among the ear lesions that may be the cause of eugenic interruption of pregnancy by far the most frequent is the sporadic
recessive deaf-mutism; the next are labyrin-
thine deafness and otosclerosis.

Thus in Denmark negative eugenics has
been practised to a not inconsiderable extent. But there are many difficulties and problems.
Experience shows that the patients themselves as well as their relatives are nearly always able to understand the expediency of eugenic operations or precautions, and hence they make no objections to them. Still, it is
obvious that measures which interfere so radically with the fate and most intimate
life of human individuals may arouse sorm

* See Kemp, T. (I946) Acta Psychiatrica, p. 4I7. friction or conflict of views. The physicians

-i86 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and other authorities dealing with eugenic ness may in one generation appear in sdchi a

cases are always most considerate and mild form as to give insufficient indications

thorough in their investigations, and the for sterilization, while in the- next generation

guiding principle is always that too few it may assume a more serious character.

eugenic operations are preferable to too There is also the possibility that a hereditary

many.

disease may not manifest itself before the

An important aid to the carrying through ,,patient has had several children, who may

of eugenic measures is the establishment of very well have inherited the lesion. And,

a eugenic registration, comprising a register naturally, many practical conditions and

or card index covering all the patients in the human considerations may in various ways

country who are afflicted with any serious obstruct a consistent and radical carrying

hereditary affection-and also their families. out of eugenic measures.

Similar registers' have been made in small Somebody may ask: Are the eugenic

districts in,other countries. But I do not measures employed as effectively as possible,

think that an attempt has ever been made or, on the other hand, are they not sometimes

to cover an entire country. Since I938, employed in cases where they are not really

however, in the Institute for Human Genetics, needed ? Is the combating of the hereditary

a eugenic card index of this kind has been diseases going on in a haphazard way, with-

kept up, covering the whole of Denmark. out any definite plan, or is it carried on

Here we try as far as possible to obtain purposefully and systematically ? These

information about all the persons suffering questions cannot be answered properly with-

from any serious hereditary disease or out eugenic registration, for without that we

defect-and about their families too. If in' a are working in the dark. A more thorough

given case the question of a eugenic opera- centralization of eugenic measures is also

tion is raised, the card index may furnish required in place of our present procedure.

information about the person, or persons, in An essential prerequisite for effective

question and their families. It will thus, in eugenics is the co-operation of the public

many cases, be much easier to reach a health service, social care and the adrminis-

decision.

tration of justice that has largely been

It is not possible to predict with certainty established in Denmark, though legislation

what results may be attained by negative and public administration in these fields may

,eugenic measures. They can never lead to a sometimes function rather heavily.

complete eradication of morbid tendencies in In conclusion it may just be mentioned

the population. For one thing, new heredi- that to carry through heredo-hygienic or

tary diseases arise through mutation; and, eugenic measures successfully geIeral practi-

furthermore, it would be impracticable to tioners must be fully acquainted with recent

track down all recessive tendencies. Finally, results of research in medical genetics. It is

many dominant affections show varying also necessary for the population in general

manifestations, and cannot always be to have some knowledge and understanding

detected in the carriers, or a hereditary ill- of eugenic principles.

