ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION: THE SOCIETY'S POSITION
By C. P. BLACKER

Events of the last Decade
IN the last fifteen years, two things have happened to familiarize people with, and reconcile them to, the practice of A.J. The
first is its widening use in agriculture where its power to improve the quality of domestic cattle is universally perceived. This demonstration has much shortened the mental step involved in recognizing its bearings on human infertility and even, potentially, on human improvement.
The other development, dating from I945 when the first atomic bomb was exploded, is an awareness of the effects of radiation on human genes. This awareness has been carried to the point of convincing some people that if the threat of all-out nuclear war is sufficient to require the continuous maintenance in the air of American planes loaded with H bombs, it should also call for the construction of underground seminal banks, protected from radiations (the establishment of regional blood banks having familiarized the public with the idea of accumulating for general use supplies of fluids from the human body).
Publicity in Pre- and Post-War Years: The Society's Standpoint
In a valuable article published in the last issue of this REVIEW (The Development and Use of Artificial Insemination: EUGEN. REV. 49, 4) Mr. G. W. Bartholomew showed that the history of A.I. is longer than many people suppose. It was first carried out for a woman by John Hunter in I790.
The Society has been interested for the last twenty-five years-since the early thirties, in fact, when the subject was vigorously raised by Mr. Herbert Brewer, a Fellow of the Society. Mr. Brewer, in effect,

contended that the principle of artificial insemination could be enlisted by man to
bring about his own eugenic improvement in a manner comparable with its use by stock-
breeders in animal husbandry. He introduced the word eutelegenesis to denote such
a use by man. Mr. Brewer's ideas commended
themselves strongly to Lord Horder and to Mr. Clinton Chance (then respectively the
Society's President and Treasurer), and he read a paper entitled " Eutelegenesis," which was well received, at a Members' Meeting
(EUGENICS REVIEW, I935, 27). The subject was then discussed by the Council which finally adopted, with a few dissentients, an attitude of cautious endorsement; and it was included in a pre-war version of our Statement of Aims and Objects under the heading of matters on which further knowledge was needed (Eugenic Studies). " These experiments", we said, " should be studied, but it must be borne in mind that they involve difficult moral and legal problems."
A rather longer treatment was accorded in the revision of our Statement made in I950. The topic was more boldly included under the major heading of Eugenic Policies (not under that of Eugenic Studies as in the earlier version); and it was coupled with the treatment of infecundity in a sub-heading entitled Treatment of Infecundity: Artificial Insemination. But the Statement added that artifical insemination (A.I.D.) had" obvious eugenic possibilities" and ended as follows: "The Society holds that while caution is needed in espousing this revolutionary biological innovation, the practice of which should not outrun prevailing laws and sentiments, it should not be legally prohibited."
The reference to legal prohibition was included -because of the recommendation of

5'
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1958. 50, i.

52T H THE EUGENICS REVIEW

an Ecclesiastical Commission (Artificial Human Insemination: The report of a Commission appointed by his Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury, London, I948 and I952) that the practice should be prohibited by law on the grounds that it
constituted an act of adultery by the woman. (The same issue has been raised in the last few months and the same arguments have been put forward by the Archbishop).
Our most recent Statement of A ims
(I957 revision) alludes to the subject in
much the same terms as did the I950 revision. During the post-war years the Society,
while adhering to the principle of caution expressed in its Statements, has kept the subject alive. Three members' meetings have been held* and various articles published.
Recent Developments: Possible Future Developments
Meanwhile the subject has come into the limelight. Since I945 publicity has been given to the genetic effects of the explosions over Nagasaki and Hiroshima in August of that year, to the possible genetic effects of later and more lethal weapons causing windborne radio-active fall-out, and to the hitherto unsuspected effects of radiological procedures used as a routine in medicine. People are being led to think objectively in terms of mutant genes, of anatomical structures such as the testis and ovary, and of body fluids such as seminal fluid. All this is happening in a non-sexual context without overtones of indecency or-obscenity. The background is one wherein fear and wonder are jointly focused on the consequences of extraordinary advances in technique. It is now possible to discuss the procedures and potential benefits of artificial insemination without giving offence.
* May 23rd, 1944. Dr. Margaret Jackson on A Medical Service for the Treatment of Involuntary Sterility (EUGEN. REV. Jan. I945. 36, 1117).
October 26th, I948. Mr. Cecil Binney on Legal and Social Implications of Artificial Insemination (EUGEN. REV. Jan. 1949. 40, i99).
October 17th, I956. Symposium on artificial insemination, in which five people participated, including Dr. A. S. Parkes and Dr. Margaret Jackson.
(EUGEN. REV. Jan. I957. 48, 203).

Before the war Dr. H. J. Muller, the American geneticist who first discovered how mutant genes could be artificially
produced in animals by X-rays, had written a book called Out of the Night (-I934) which
was a geneticist's essay on the future. Here the possible use of artificial insemination for eugenic improvement of the human species
was discussed.
Dr. Muller came back to the subject in an even more sensational manner in November I957 in an address delivered at a conference arranged by Joseph E. Seagram & Sons, Inc., in celebration of its centenary. His remarks received an immense publicity in the U.S.A., also in this country. Indeed, on November 27th the Daily Express printed a centre-page article by its scientific correspondent on Dr. Muller's suggestions, thus bringing them to the notice of millions of readers. It was pointed out that Muller had not only outlined the revolutionary possibilities of breeding supermen by artificial insemination; he had gone on to describe a still more revolutionary procedure called artificial inovulation which has been successfully applied to sheep. Inovulation is the transplanting of one woman's ovum into another woman's uterus which then serves as an incubator for a child of which the first woman is genetically the mother.
But the stir caused by Dr. Muller's address was a small affair compared with the excitement caused by a legal pronouncement delivered in a Scottish Court of Law on January iith, I958. It was there adjudged that the performance of artificial insemination without the husband's consent was not in law an act of adultery. Artificial insemina-
tion immediately became hot news and the press was unleashed. The telephones of doctors with first hand experience rang much for several days, and they found themselves the centres ofunwelcome attention.
If we turn from the past to the future, imagination readily embarks on further flights. Why not fertilize a woman's ovum in vitro by the sperm of a donor and then implant the fertilized ovum in another woman's uterus? A technique of preserving

ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION: THE SOCIETY'S POSITION

testicular and ovarian tissues at low tempera- widespread ignorance exists and that an

tures over long 'periods (exceeding the lives astonishing amount of nonsense has been

of the donors) might be perfected. A man's talked and written. In such circumstances

sperm and a woman's ova would then be there are grave dangers in legislation. The

obtainable and viable after their deaths, outcome might be that A.I. would be pro-

and it would become possible for the women hibited by law; or more probably that, it

of one period to bear the children of parents would be hedged around with such compli-

of another period. A Mrs. Smith of the cated safeguards as to make it unworkable

future -might bear the child of an Anthony in practice. . Something would, presumably,

and a Cleopatra of the future who had lived have to be said in an enabling act about the

several hundred years before her; or (since thorny topic of the selection of the donor in

the genetic parents need not be contempora- A.I.D. This difficult matter is at present

ries), she might bear children of people settled quietly by the responsible doctor

equivalent to Shakespeare and Florence who, as far as possible, takes account of the

Nightingale, or to Queen Boadicea and Mr. wishes (sometimes extending to the religion

Gladstone. Eminent men and women could, of the donor) of the couple concerned.

before they grew too old, be courteously Genetic pitfalls (such, for example, as pro-

asked by the President of a National viding a colour-blind donor for a woman

Eugenics Corporation to contribute to who was colour-blind) are also carefully

posterity a portion of their sexual glands. avoided. What provisions about the selec-

The request could be treated as an honour tion of the donor could be built into an

conferred during life comparable with that of enabling act? There would be a strong

being included in the Dictionary of National temptation, difficult to resist in a free dis-

Biography after death; and the operation cussion wherein the dimensions of ordinary

scars would be regarded as honourable. The risks can be frighteningly magnified, to

human geneticists of the future would then be require that the donor be selected by at least

able to bring into existence children of which two doctors who should work in consultation,

any eminent man and any eminent woman, and that, to ayoid the possibility of consan-

whether contemporaries or not, whether guineous marriages being later involuntarily

alive, or dead, were the genetic parents. contracted, the donor should be registered.

He might further be able to determine the Ihe practice of A.I. could, by such safe-

children's sex. Indeed a field for experiment. guards, be suppressed almost as effectively

To some these possibilities will appear as by a categorical prohibition.

fascinating, to others abominable.

Possible Action by the Eugenics Society

Dangers of Premature Legislation

It seems common sense to take steps to

When a practice is gaining ground against gain more knowledge, perspective and under-

which moral and legal difficulties are alleged, standing, before incurring the risks of

a demand for legislation is fairly certain to legislation. This is the view which has been

arise. This is what has now happened with adopted by the Eugenics Society. The

A.I. whose praiseworthy purpose (appre- Society has therefore taken the initiative in

ciated even by opponents) is to relieve promoting the formation of an independent

infecundity. In the last weeks it has been body to study the practice of both A.I.H. and

widely contended (by The Times among A.I.D. This independent body, whose found-

other newspapers) that A.I. should be " put ation members are Fellows of the Society,

on to a proper legal footing ".

willbewhollyautonomous. Itwilldecidewhat

But legislation can be premature and its its title shall be, what sort of organization

results can be uncertain. A glance at the it will adopt and what sort of secretariat it

files of the daily and weekly press' during will need. It will define its programme and

the last three months is enough to show policy. This autonomous organization may

that strong feelings are evoked, that see fit, as a beginning, to make contact with

THE EUGENICS -REVIEW

doctors practising A.I. in the United Kingdom and, by means of annual returns, to ascertain how many artificial inseminations are undertaken. Information would thus be centrally compiled about how many inseminations involve the husband (A.I.H.) and how many a donor (A.I.D.), about how many succeed and how many fail, and about how many attempts were
made before success was achieved or failure acknowledged. Information could also be centralized on the consequences of A.I. To what extent has the marriage been strengthened or disorganized, how have the children turned out, what has been the attitude of the woman's husband? On a professionally organized basis a central register could be maintained.
Such an organization could offer services to its members or affiliates. It could advise them on such matters as the wording of expressions of consent from the people concerned, the selection of donors for A.I.D., the delicate topic of paying donors, and the propriety of mixing the seminal fluids of husband and donor (so as not to exclude a possibility of the husband becoming the father). It could, in short, not only collect

information: it could initiate a professional
ethic. The new autonomous organization would
also decide how far it wished to concern itself with such general questions as the possible
use of A.I. foreugenicpurposes (eutelegenesis),
the construction of radiation-proof seminal banks, and further research on the preservation of seminal fluid and of testicular or ovarian tissues.
The Council of the Eugenics Society has decided to assist the gestation period of the new organization by a grant. Its action will, in this respect, be similar to that taken in
I936 to establish the Population Investiga-
tion Committee which is now of mature stature, and wholly independent of the Society. For particulars of the grant to the new autonomous body, see the Notes of
the Quarter. At the end of five years some useful data
should be available, which could provide a basis for legislation if this were still felt to be needed. Manifestly, intelligent legislation based on a corpus of properly established knowledge is better than panic legislation prompted by misinformation, fear and
prejudice.

