>-"THEWORK OF THE
ULATION POLICIES COMMITTEE*

By FRAN9OIS LAFITTE
I

Population Policies Com-
its forerunner, the Popula-
tigation Committee, owe to the inspiration of ProCCarr-Saunders. His Galton
.4Eugenics in the Light of
ds" t was responsible for
new trend of thought in
He stressed the fact that this longer, as in the past, afford
with the quality of the t exclusion of considerations bers. He urged that it should itself the nickname " The
Detection of Persons Unteriy" by failing to develop of positive eugenics as impor~onete as its programme of * In view of the emergence c issue of the problem of the
stir population, he warned the
danger of allowing the initiative population policy to be taken and institutions who might
yiewsth the problem of ut considering at the same
of quality. t of Professor Carr-Saunders's
was a series of discussions t to the institution, on of this Society, of the Populao Committee, for the purpose QUT population trends, past and studying the influences which
The Investigation Committee
y a fact-finding body, and has
,work in elucidating the how
trends. But it is also con-
.diagnosis, with the why of ,nand, at this point, its work that of the Population Policies
before the Eugenics Society on

Formation of Committee
This Committee was brought into existence in the spring of I938, again on the initiative of the Eugenics Society, with the object of complementing the work of the Investigation Committee by tackling the vital question of remedies-of measures to " prevent the decline of the population from proceeding faster or further than may be deemed socially desirable." Whilst the Investigation Committee is primarily concerned with ascertaining facts, the Policies Committee is primarily interested in devising remedies; both Committees are concerned with the diagnosis of causes.
The reasons which led the Society to take the first steps in establishing this new Committee were admirably stated by Professor Carr-Saunders in his Galton Lecture:
The coming decline is as yet hidden from the people at large. Prophecy is dangerous; but it needs no courage to foretell that, once the decline in numbers becomes apparent, universal interest and concern will be aroused in the population problem. This problem may well assume first place among public questions, and put in the shade those economic and social matters which now occupy attention. Discussion will lead ultimately to action, and this is the point to which I wish to draw special attention. . . . If eugenists set to work now and formulate a policy designed to lift the birthrate, they will be first in the field. Under such circumstances their proposals will at least obtain sympathetic attention and may well be adopted in whole or in part. Such proposals will possess the great merit of having been formulated with the problem of quality as well as the problem of quantity in mind. But if they delay, measures will be proposed by others who have quantity alone in mind, and the nation will
get committed to a population policy in which eugenic considerations find no place. . . . The Society has an opportunity which is never likely to recur. Everyone will soon be asking what can be done. A population policy will certainly be constructed; now is the time to ensure that it will be a policy in which eugenic considerations are not omitted.*

1935, 27, II.

* 10c. cit., I7.

47

48 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

And so the Population Policies Committee later pass on to a consideration of

was established, by this Society and P.E.P. measures.

jointly, in the hope that its discussions of the factors involved in the framing of a

Position offamilies on relief

positive population policy and its sifting of Why did we begin with a study

the experience of foreign countries in this financial position of families on une

respect would result in the formulation of ment pay ? Partly because, since the s

proposals which could not be ignored when, we are tackling is both vast and so

in due course, national opinion became ripe elusive, we preferred to start on an as'

for action to be taken.

it the facts of which are fairly easily.'

The Committee, under the chairmanship tamnable and concrete; partly because

of Professor N. F. Hall, Director of the a study throws indirectly a good deal o

National Institute of Economic and Social upon the financial aspects of child-

Research, includes among its members among manual workers generally.

Professor Carr-Saunders, Dr. C. P. Blacker, analysis, some of the results of which

D. V. Glass, Mrs. Eva Hubback, and Mr. recently published in the EUGENICS RE

Max Nicholson, Secretary of P.E.P. Five of led us to two main conclusions.

its members are also members of the Popula- that unemployment pay, whether

tion Investigation Committee, so that co- or assistance, becomes progressively

ordination with that body is ensured.

adequate for human needs as the size of

dependent family increases. In other w

Immediate aims of Committee

unemployment pay, in spite of its

The Committee's immediate aim is to make basis, tends to reproduce, at a lower

a preliminary survey of the field of positive one of the weaknesses of the present

policies, and to embody the results in a fairly system-its failure to ensure to famili

detailed report, discussing pros and cons at different sizes an income commensurate

some length. This report it is hoped to their needs, its financial penalization

publish in April of next year. This is parenthood.

regarded as the first stage. After the publica- We found further that a substantial

tion of the report, according to its reception portion of the children in unempl

by the public and the attitude to it of the families must be living in circums

various organizations which are feeling their below any commonly accepted " po

way toward acceptance of the necessity of line," and that this position is not co

a population policy, it may be decided to to families on unemployment pay. In

reconstitute the Committee one a broader basis, to undertake more detailed investigations and possibly to work for the implement-

case of large families a considerable
laps" between normal wage-rates and
employment pay was found to exist.

ing of any generally agreed proposals. precisely because this " overlap " e

Nothing concrete can be said on this point because the scale of unemployment pa

at the present stage. Our work since June of last year has been

circumscribed by present wage levels an
the inflexibility of the wage-system,

concerned with three main topics:

even such a service as UnemployI

(i) the position of the family on unemployment pay;
(2) family allowances;

Assistance, specifically designed to su
income in accordance with need, avoid some penalization of the large f

(3) a diagnosis of the causes of the fall Financial position of dependent family

in fertility.

This study convinced us of the nec

We are now about to embark upon a series of considering the financial position of

of discussions of the general aims and principles of a population policy, and will

* F. Lafitte: " Unemployment and ChildEUGENICS REVIEW, I939, 80. 275.

THE WORK OF THE POPULATION COMMITTEE

49

imily in general, and the merits rebates and differential pricing schemes.

of family allowance schemes as The operation of all these agencies in com-

method of redistributing income bination requires to be considered before it

y as to eliminate or mitigate, at will be possible to determine what importance

kIvel, the financial bonus which to attach to cash allowances in respect of

'wage-system bestows upon the children in a reconstructed system of

the relatively infertile. It was taxation, social insurance and social services.

t, in so far as married couples One thing at any rate has become clear to us:

ilies for financial reasons, the that family endowment in the sense solely of

omic bonus on infertility must cash allowances cannot be regarded as a

by a redistribution of income in panacea for the population problem, nor even

ents. On this principle there necessarily as the simplest and most effective

agreement. Income, unlike the method of relieving the burden of parent-

family, is not elastic. Are family hood. A clearly thought-out population

the best or the only method of policy will probably include cash allowances

this inelasticity of income ? A in some shape or form among its measures,

Sied discussions of this topic left but it will include them as one element in an

b We had to consider, on the integrated system of measures rather than as

e apparent failure of the family the main plank of its programme.

tems in France and Belgium Our second reason for postponing a

to influence the birth-rate, and decision about family allowances was that

e rejection of cash allowances in our work had made us keenly aware of the

population policy, as an ex- necessity of considering the motives behind

tire which might have un- family limitation, and the social factors that

quences. On the other hand underlie those motives. To what extent are

the experience of Germany in families limited for financial reasons rather

Mwhere the birth-rate has risen, than on less tangible grounds, and what

is not clear to what extent cash exactly are the financial reasons involved ?

"have contributed to this rise.

was the argument that cash Motives behind family limitation

Ibay have had no appreciable A diagnosis of causes was therefore our

countries because they are next task, and it is proving to be an im-

an " adequate " scale; larger mensely complex undertaking. As Dr.

tught to stimulate births.

Blacker and Mr. Glass remark in a recent

up against two difficulties. (a) publication:

de the size of an " adequate " relation to an income of a given

Many people are in the habit of putting forward on this subject opinions which are based

how to raise the money for allow- on personal problems which happen to be

"adequate " scale. On neither y definite decision been taken. eration of the matter has been
two reasons.

occupying their minds at the time, or on preconceived political theories. Here are some of the separate " causes " which various people who have written to the papers regard as accounting, singly or exclusively, for the whole problem:

place we have come to realize fear of another world war; the inadequate wages

many methods apart from cash which the desired redistribue might be effected. It was
Ladvsable first to make a study

paid to the working man; the cost and difficulty of obtaining domestic servants; the craze for
amusement and pleasures; the " pace " of modern life; over-indulgence by the modern girl in athletics; the danger of dying in child-

cies by which income is or may m the childless to the parents. include direct and indirect
insurances, social services,

birth; the increase of homosexuality among men; the selfishness of the modern girl; the demoralizing influence of towns. It has been
well remarked that " hardly one of the opinions arrived at in this ' intuitional ' fashion will bear

50

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

I

examination." The problem is not so simple and since have brought about this ch

straightforward as many people seem to think.
Different causes are at work which, in various combinations, affect people in different occupations and in different parts of the country in

outlook, this ever-extending desire t family responsibilities ? The atte
answer this question involved us

many complicated ways about which we should sociological analysis of British life o

know more.

past hundred years. Since this an

The more closely the problem is studied, the clearer does it become that, in fact, the causes of the decline in fertility are numerous, complex

still being considered by the Comnii what follows I shall be expressing

and deep-seated. In western European countries sonal opinion rather than the final N

they form so intimate a part of what we may call the Committee.

the twentieth-century view of life, that we can prophesy with some confidence that really effective counter measures will not be easy to find. The raising of our national fertility would,

My own view of the basic factor in is somewhat complex. It seems to the development of British society o

in fact, prove a gigantic task, the achievement past hundred years-that is, sin

of which would necessitate a drastic revision of stabilization of the modern industrial

many of our current ideas about wages, social services, the economic system and the family.*
Nevertheless, in order to see the problem in its right perspective, and to achieve at any rate a first approximation to a correct assessment of the relative importance of the main factors discouraging fertility, it is necessary to attempt such a diagnosis. Without it we cannot hope to devise a realistic or an adequate policy.
The birth-rate has been falling for the past sixty years, and one thing at least is clear: that by far the most important reason for this is the fact that people have to an increasing extent consciously sought to avoid having large families. The problem is basically one of volition, of the motives of married couples, of attitudes to parenthood. What we have to find out is why in the ' seventies of last century there developed a new attitude to parenthood which was

-has awakened the great mass of the possibilities of high standards of and comfort, and thereby to a hith
paralleled realization of wants, whi only in part been satisfied. Since th
quarter of last century the growth of of living seems to have outstripp growth of actual standards of living-
to say, an increasing proportion of to-day perhaps the majority, have expect more of what are called the
things of life" than they are getting. At the same time children hay
turned into a financial burden for t fourteen years of their existence. F has consequently been sacrificed to a determination to span the gap betw actual standard and the desired stan living by individual effort to " get on to " make good." *

unfavourable to fertility. It is not a sufficient Effect of high economic and cultural sta

explanation to state merely that the publicity given to the idea of family limitation by the birth-control trials of the late 'seventies led
people to realize the possibilities of avoiding large families . . . and so the birth-rate fell.
That is of course true, but it is not the whole
truth. For the revival of the birth-control movement at that time, after a period of quiescence lasting some thirty years, was itself a response to the growth of a new attitude of parenthood. What developments

The great economic, social and expansion of Britain since the middle
century has given us higher stan living, a multiplication of the varie comforts and luxuries, made possi mass-production, a growing richness possibilities of enjoying life, and abe the achievement of what has been " silent social revolution "-mass lit
popular education, the " civilization,'

in our social life in mid-Victorian times and * The phrase " the good things of life"

REvIEw,* Population and Fertility. See EUGENICS

concept of a standard of living are intended include cultural and spiritual as well as

1939, 30, 235.

desiderata.

THE WORK OF THE POPULATION COMMITTEE

5I

mass of the people. These " get on in life " was bound in the end to

have resulted in a transforma- generate a critical attitude towards parent-

attitudes. As standards rose hood. "Self-help " implies saving, and

reen faster. Economic and social children were becoming more and more

lagged behind the growth of costly.

welfare and comfort. The less Education in particular-a major instru-

more prosperous classes above ment for competitive self-advancement-

mode of lving they strive to was becoming a heavy expense, not merely

t they now enjoy tends to be for the manual worker but in all classes.

but a foretaste of what they may Throughout the second half of last century

future, if they can only " get education was assuming an ever greater

ld" by individual striving. To importance to the middle and upper classes,

hich s not unlike the phenome- for reasons both of social prestige and of

described by Arsene Dumont economic necessity, as Dr. Grace Leybourne

capillarity," children tend to be so clearly demonstrated in an address to this

Society.* Social progress was continually

of standards has brought with raising the standards of professional and

n of child labour, compulsory educational qualifications, abolishing patron-

to fourteen, and the enforce- age and privilege in one sphere after another,

standards of child welfare and throwing posts open to competitive examina-

nsibility, all developments tion, and making it necessary to educate

weakened many of the old daughters as well as sons. Moreover, every

to parenthood. Education and great step forward in working-class education

sion of norms of living have had its influence upon the educational

an ever greater awareness of the standards of the middle and upper classes.

of parenthood. Because people Education was turned into a necessity for

of life, both for themselves and all and the financial burden of parenthood

, they tend to have fewer thereby increased. What applies to educa-

to care for them better, and tion applies to many other things which have

ons which in the past would come to be regarded as necessities. To

barrier to fertility have to-day parents inspired with these new tastes the

into barriers.

one obvious economy was to reduce the size

edern attitude to parenthood

of the family.

of the modem attitude to
can be traced back to mides. The moral atmosphere of dominated by the doctrine of which after all was in fact the
tion of M. Dumont's " social
The " self-help " doctrine,
upon individual enterprise, ought and hard work, was a
min raising a large body of en out of the social degradathirties and 'forties. " Selfthe emergence of the typical of the period, industrious, tion, ambitious to make his by becoming his own master "inw. Individual striving to

Stabilization of modern attitude And so gradually the new attitude to
parenthood was formed. It still had to become explicit and widely acceptable. Its wide acceptance was hindered by ignorance, the conventional morality, the lack of sex equality, and the unreflecting moral certainty of the age (typified in the dogmatic belief in " progress "). It required a social crisis to crystallize the new outlook and to make it respectable. The great depression, the economic crises and the land slump of the last quarter of the century provided the necessary shock. Victorian complacency was shaken. The thrifty workman was frightened. After
* EUGENICS REVIEmW, 1938, 30, 175.

52 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a quarter of a century of unparalleled and to-day in the urge to achieve securi

practically undisturbed progress, uncertainty than independence, has penetrated

and fear of falling back into the poverty he every rank of society. General ed

had barely escaped replaced his earlier the standardization of patterns oi

confident belief in automatic and inevitable through the growth of towns, the

economic advance. He had tasted the fruits down of rural isolation and of inde

of the new industrial order and he wanted rural life, the growth of opinion-

more. In this situation the birth-control agencies on a national scale-the

trials had the effect of a catalysing agent. press, the film, the radio-have gen

The new attitude to parenthood was crystal- in all classes the tendency always to

lized and made respectable. The trials gave little more, and to live a little abo

fine publicity to contraception, but far means. There is probably more co,

greater was the publicity for the idea of ness to-day than in the past of

family limitation. The trials constituted, as between the desired standard of li

it were, a " show-down " between the con- actual financial possibilities.

ventional morality and the new outlook, Finally, the twentieth century h

and the old morality did not emerge un- steady increase in the social impo

scathed. For the first time it became widely section of the community whi

appreciated that children were not the historically predisposed to low fertili

inevitable consequence of marriage, and the great lower-middle class of bla

idea spread that it might be right and proper non-manual workers. The nature

to limit one's offspring.

work requires relatively high stan

For the wealthy too this was a period of education and personal appearance, al

transformation of values. Economic develop- in the mass their remuneration appro

ments accomplished the eclipse of the social to that of skilled manual worke

values of the landed gentry; henceforth it sequently the tendency to live so

was money rather than land, birth or status above their means is perhaps chronic

which conferred prestige. The growth of them, and they feel the pinch

" conspicuous expenditure " among the norms and limited means with

wealthy and the growing burden of educa- keenness. Their importance as

tion expenses to parents of the upper and exemplars for the mass of manual

middle classes must have provided strong must not be underestimated. Th

reasons for family limitation.

respectable, everywhere in evidence

Present-day determinants offamily limitation

in the new suburbs and along the by thronging the shopping centres. Th

Once voluntary parenthood had gained a look finds expression in the daily

foothold, contraception ceased to be merely They spend perhaps no more

a means to family limitation, but became in manual workers, but they spend their

addition a contributory cause of family differently and to greater advantage.

limitation. The gradual diffusion of the idea are looked up to, and their mode of life

of family limitation opened up new vistas to to become an ideal pattern for those

many who previously would have accepted them.

the " devastating torrent of children " as part of the order of the universe. It was not

Further factors in the problem

difficult for people to discover hosts of new Such is my view of the main issue.

reasons for not wishing to have large families, are many additional factors which m

and social emulation assisted in making the be overlooked, of which I think four r

small family fashionable.

special notice.

Subsequent developments have general- I. Industrialism has resulted in

ized and reinforced the new attitude. The may describe as a far-reaching

" self-help " morality, expressing itself sonalization" of work-the mn

- 1IIE WORK OF THE POPULATION COMMITTEE

53

s cale production and the labour-and this has led, in ons, to a sharp division
leisure. Work means less than it did in the past, and
ce is being attached to from earning a living. The has become greatly enhanced, reason and because of the > accorded to the leisure
wealthy by press and film.
*ied and commercialized * on of enjoyment has itself
try, and its products must
oney. So that, to a certain because it involves the spendhas become an alternative to
seIies of developments has earmarking in advance of a
on of income. Accurate easy to obtain, but it seems t the past fifty years have growth of the proportion of has to be written off in sexcd charges such as rent, expenses, house and hirecets, voluntary and com-
contributions, income tax,
Te result is that a relatively of income is left over for
,including budgeting for
e family. .do not fit well into modern
its street accidents, its lack le open spaces, its lack of adequate housing accommoon. Moreover children tend to important kinds of leisure it should be noted that this t not because towns to-day in than the towns of last use people expect and are
t far more now than in
must refer to the growth of of sexual knowledge. The
cnt of our society has
y of its former importance,
6xtraverted social life. The
reduced from an earning

unit to a consuming unit dependent upon one main earner, it has lost a great part of its educational functions, and much of its leisure and recreational functions. Simultaneously increasing sex equality and sexual knowledge have enhanced the importance of the husband-wife relationship, often to the detriment of the parents-children relationship. As marriage becomes more and more a partnership of equals, the health and happiness of the married couple assume greater importance, and children tend to become a welcome, but not indispensable, addition to the happy marriage, rather than an integral part of it.
The formulation of policies
Such, in the baldest of outlines, are the main features of the problem as they strike me. What about policies ? The Committee's next task is a discussion of the basic principles and general aims of a positive policy. After that we shall pass on to consideration of specific measures in detail, including cash allowances.
At this stage I can do no more than to indicate some of the main issues upon which we shall have to dwell. I cannot do better than to begin by recalling the way in which Professor Carr-Saunders has formulated the problem with which voluntary parenthood confronts us:
Children were formerly the inevitable accompaniment of married companionship and home life. There was no question of any attitude to size of family; that settled itself. There was no thought of replacing the present generation; replacement was automatic. Children were a forced levy; now they are a voluntary contribution. But though size of family is now a matter of deliberation, replacement as yet plays no part in these deliberations. To how many people does it ever occur to connect the size of their family with the future of their country ? No such notion ever enters the head of the man in the
street.
Voluntary contributions have, as we all know, to be earnestly solicited; but for these essential contributions there is as yet no solicitation on behalf of society. It is therefore a mistake to speak of a retreat from parenthood if by that is meant a deliberate refusal to replace the present generation. Replacement is not and never has been a conscious matter. But with a system of voluntary parenthood it must become so if

54 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

society is to survive. . . . When children were a tax which could not be escaped by those who desired home life, the community, which relied upon this revenue for its perpetuation, was under no pressure to smooth the path for those who had to pay it.... Under a system of voluntary parenthood, however, the situation undergoes a profound change; the community now relies for its revenue upon voluntary contributions, and it must see, not only that obstacles do not stand in the path of contributors, but that all the resources of modern knowledge and skill are employed in order to assist those who take their share in the essential task of replacement.*
At every stage in the formulation of policy we are confronted with the need for making choices. At the outset we have to choose between the new system of voluntary contributions and the old system of enforced levies. I am certain that this Society shares the view of Professor Carr-Saunders that the achievement of voluntary parenthood is a great step forward in human history, and that it would be both mistaken and ineffective to attempt now to suppress birthcontrol. But accepting voluntary parenthood, do we merely accept it, or do we seek to foster and encourage it ? Here there may be some difference of opinion. Professor Carr-Saunders argues that " parenthood must be made truly voluntary throughout society, in the sense that all births must become wanted births," but others might point out that at present the elimination of all unwanted births might result in an enormous fall in fertility. Every eugenist wishes to see knowledge of contraception and sexual hygiene disseminated as widely as possible. On the other hand it may be urged that it is better to soft-pedal contraception until the positive aspects of our policy begin to bear fruit. Here again a choice will have to be made.
"Voluntary parenthood " as basis of policy
Whatever we decide we must understand that there is a certain risk involved in basing our policy upon voluntary parenthood and wanted births. It means that we shall be
relying upon freely given contributions, whilst doing all we can to make it easv for

the contributors to make their offeri4 means in fact that we shall be relying
the strength of the instinct to pare#,
having removed the major obstacles4
expression.
Now while there is much evidence philoprogenitive instinct is often th4 we can none the less not be certain th4 removal of the major obstacles to i! pression would in itself suffice to maj our numbers. Moreover, in those cases I an unwanted pregnancy results in a child, the generalization of voluntary hood would presumably prevent children from being conceived, by ing unwanted pregnancies.
For these reasons the removal of o to parenthood must go hand in han measures to enlighten and persuade to want more children. To bo analogy from another field, if the vo system of recruiting is to survive, must be made to see the need to m work. Therefore I would agree with Proi
Carr-Saunders that a positive popul policy must have two objects:
first, to make it universally understood, with a system of voluntary parenthood, munity can only survive if participation task of replacement is undertaken as a n social duty, and secondly, to remove obe to, and to create facilities for, the fulfilmi this duty.*
But I should disagree with his pi enlightenment and propaganda in th rather than in the second place. It 4 that over the past sixty years only On of the question has been put-namel case against fertility. Social developx public opinion, the continual incitem expenditure that is a feature of advertising, have all stated the case a fertility. The high-pressure salesmaj tended to supersede the parson as th stant visitor on the housewife's doz and he, unlike the parson, is not inte in her family affairs or her children. quite recently the case for fertility has been stated. All this is true. There is fore ample room for propagandla.

* Carr-Saunders, A. M., loc. cit., I6.

* 1c. cit., 17.

W THE WORK OF THE POPULATION COMMITTEE

55

tributor will make a donation Objectives of birth-promotion measures

he has been convinced that cause. But there are many
recognize the worthiness of the
Wt feeling that they are in a
K make any contribution themis therefore a danger in speak-
e duty of parenthood without y providing for the rights of children. As Dr. McCleary has
we may get the retort: " What
ever done for me that I should to it? " It is dangerous to talk -selfishness as a cause of family When what some call selfishness
by others as plain common sense, u strong sense of responsibility,
ts a married couple from the world more children than ey can bring up in health and o is to say that their standards bigh ?
regard to propaganda, we shall what emphasis to place upon
and to which sections of the they should be mainly directed.

What should be the material basis of propaganda for birth promotion ? At present the needs of society clash with the private interests of the individual married couple. The aim of a positive policy must therefore be to resolve this conflict of interests. It seems to me that there must be two main objectives:
i. To reduce the extent to which childbearing and -rearing is dependent upon what Miss Rathbone calls the " rough and tumble of wage negotiations," by providing the family with a source of income other than the earnings of its breadwinner, an additional income, independent and distinct from wages, which will vary according to the size of the dependent family. By an additional source of income I do not merely imply cash allowances. I include, as I have already explained, every form of " horizontal redistribution "-rent rebates, school-feeding, improved maternity and medical services, differential pricing schemes, taxation, and so forth.

g is that, since we are soliciting 2. The second objective should be to

atributions, we should do what ensure that every child that is brought into

t charity for good causes do, and the world is guaranteed an adequate basic

appeals mainly to the better-off minimum of food, clothing, shelter and

would perhaps be a little rash to medical care. I incline to the view that

from the eugenic point of view, poverty at the bottom of the social scale is

e most valuable sections of the likely, in these days of voluntary parenthood,

but at any rate they are not by to prove more and more a deterrent to

the least valuable. The fact that fertility. At any rate there should be a

the least fertile groups seems revision of the absurd social accountancy

that they require special atten- which provides that ten times as much

money should be spent weekly on a mentally

cally they are less important defective child as on the (potentially)

reat mass of wage-earners. In healthy child of an unemployed worker.

some sections of the latter To sum up my two objectives into one

entertain misgivings about the formula: everything possible should be done of any indiscriminate exhorta- gradually to reduce the extent to which the

*ty. For my own part I feel that fate of the nation's children is bound up with

the creation of conditions the struggle for economic welfare and social

for birth-release is more impor- advancement of their parents. opaganda, and that any positive Many less fundamental lines of reform

go hand in hand with birth- come to mind.

eugenic enlightenment, and that, i. The social services must be reorganized

ble, eugenic safeguards should so as to incorporate the family as a unit.

ted in the programme.

This applies especially to National Health

56 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Insurance, which to this very day continues railway fares, electricity, etc., in the

to exclude the dependent family of the vision of free holiday accommodatic

insured worker from the benefits he enjoys. wireless sets, and so forth, but also, 4

A chain of community centres, on the lines paribus, in the allocation of employi

of the Pioneer Health Centre in Peckham, This is a controversial matter upon

might well be founded, to act as centres for the experience of Germany and Italy

prophylaxis and at the same time as centres throw some light.

for encouraging " neighbourliness " on a The foregoing are merely the sort of

family basis, and generally creating an which my Committee will probably be

atmosphere in which family ties are strength- sidering in the near future. What dec

ened and family troubles dissipated.

will be taken I cannot of course forecas

2. Our towns should be purged of the I conclude with a suggestion. I hay

harmful features which discourage fertility. touched upon the question of the nat

Housing accommodation suited to the needs the eugenic safeguards which it woul

of large families, nurseries and creches where advisable to incorporate in such a popula

infants can be safely parked when parents go programme. It would be highly interes

out to shop or to enjoy themselves, play- to learn the opinions of members of

grounds, parks, green belts, and much Society as to the kind of measures w

besides are needed before our towns will be would be necessary to ensure that

fit for children to live in.

expansion of the birth-rate shall not

3. There is probably considerable scope eugenically undesirable consequencesJ

for preferential treatment of parents of large recommend this point as a topic for ful

families, not merely in differential pricing of reflection to all members of the Society.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XX, 4

