DEMOGRAPHY-SCIENCE AND ADMINISTRATION

By R. R. KUCZYNSKI

1. The Beginnings of Demography

vast amount of common sense. He even

U NTIL ten years ago the word
" demography" was rarely used in
this country. Population experts, it is true, had attended the International Congresses for Hygiene and Demography, and they studied the Aper;us d6mographiques published by the International Statistical Institute, but the Concise Oxford Dictionary still defined demography as " statistics of births, diseases, &c., illustrating condition of communities," while demography, as is evident from the word itself, aims primarily at a description of the population, using, of course, if available, censuses, birth, marriage, death, and migration statistics, and occasionally also statistics of diseases. However, in recent years " demography " has been used more frequently and more correctly, and the University of London even appointed (in I938) a Reader in Demography.
Demography, like every other science, has to do with methods and with results. A few scholars have been interested only in the development of methods by which the basic data may be correctly interpreted, and the demographer owes much to those pure mathematicians. Among demographers, who are all, of course, interested in interpreting results, a certain number have contributed to the development of methods.
The first man who ever made a demographic study was the London haberdasher John Graunt. His little book Natural and Political Observations upon the Bills of Mortality, published in I662, was a remarkable achievement. His basic material consisted of the weekly London " Bills of

went so far as to construct a life table for London. This life table, of course, was most primitive and inaccurate-about as inaccurate, I should say, as the recent official life tables for India or for Lagos. His motive
for " deducing so many abstruse, and un-
expected inferences out of these poor despised Bills of Mortality " was that " the Art of Governing, and the true Politiques,
is how to preserve the Subject in Peace, and Plenty.."' When Graunt published his pamphlet he had not the faintest idea that he had created a new science. Demographic
data, he thought, could be useful only to the Administration. " There seems to be good reason, why the Magistrate should himself take notice of the numbers of Burials, and Christnings, viz. to see, whether
the City increase or decrease in people; whether it increase proportionably with the rest of the Nation; whether it be grown big
enough, or too big, &c. But why the same should be made known to the People, other-' wise then to please them as with a curiosity, I see not."2
Graunt lived in an enlightened period. The great importance of his work was at once recognized both by the State and by Science. His name appears in the original list of Fellows of the Royal Society, which received its charter in I662, and Sprat, in his History of the Society, speaks of "the Recommendation which the King himself was
pleased to make, of the judicious Author of
the Observations on the Bills of Moitality:
In whose Election, it was so far from being
a Prejudice, that he was a Shop-keeper of

Mortality" which showed baptisms by sex London; that his Majesty gave this par-

and burials by sex, age, and cause of death. ticular Charge to his Society, that if they

He compiled all available Bills and analysed found any more such Tradesmen, they-

the content of his tables, which covered should be sure to admit them all, without

many decades, most thoroughly and with a any more ado."

12

DEMOGRAPHY-SCIENCE AND ADMINISTRATION -

I3

The orginal list of Fellows contained also
the name of Sir William Petty, who wrote Essays in Political Arithmetick and other demographic studies.4 An able disciple of his friend Graunt, he was both more know,ledgeable and more brilliant, but his contribution to the development of methods was not important. Edmund Halley, on the other hand, who joined the Society a few decades later, was hardly interested in demography as such, and his whole demographic work covers only eighteen printed
pages.5 His great contribution was the discovery (in I692) of a most ingenious method of constructing a life table. He was not sufficiently explicit as to his data and the use he made of them, and his method has, therefore, been very often misunderstood. Many of his successors in various
countries committed grave errors in trying
to apply it, while others introduced slight improvements. But in a general way it may be said that Halley's method was for about I75 years the usual device for constructing life tables.
2. Science and Adminitration
England was the cradle of demography, and in the two centuries following the publication of Graunt's Observations England's contribution to the new science was equal to that of any other country. But the position has since changed. If a list were made of the hundred best demographers who set out on their careers during the last hundred years, it would be very difficult to find five Englishmen to include in it.
The causes of this stagnation in English demography can be easily discerned. In the first place, the number of people engaged in demographic research (full time or part time) is probably smaller now in relation to the population than it was fifty or a hundred years ago. On the Continent their number has increased by leaps and bounds. In England there is one Registrar-General's Office. On the Continent there are, apart from a Central Statistical Office for each country, numerous State and municipal statistical offices. Moreover, in the RegistrarGeneral's Office priority is given to all

matters dealing with registrAtion; in the
continental statistical offices population statistics are not at such a iisadvantage. A
Registrar-General is rightly chosen according to his qualifications to function in this capacity, and he may never have dealt with population statistics before his appointment. On the Continent a civil servant becomes director of a statistical office after having
worked for many years either in the same or another statistical office, and it is incon-
ceivable that he be appointed without having had experience in population statistics. It may be argued that the Registrar-General. has demographic assistants who are in charge. of this section of his office's work. But experience shows that this offers no solution of the problem. The Registrar-General
George Graham, in I879, concluded his last annual report by saying: " Lastly, I must express to Dr. Farr, whom in I842 I had the good fortune to find here presiding over the Statistical Branch, my grateful acknowledgment of the important services he has ever since continually rendered. He is acknowledged throughout Europe, the United States, East Indies and the Colonies as one of the first statists of the day. To his scientific researches and reports I attribute any reputation that may have accrued to
the General Register Office of England and Wales from the time he accepted office in this Department."6 All this was perfectly true. Dr. Fart, in the Statistical Branch, made the best use of the basic data he got from the Registration Branch. But his efforts to improve,those data failed. The birth registration form introduced in I837, when the Registrar-General's Office was created, was quite defective. From a demographic viewpoint it was much less satisfactory than, for example, the birth registration form introduced in Sweden in I775. Dr. Farr became early aware of that. In his report for I842 he wrote:
no provision has yet been made for deter-mining the simplest fundamental facts-the foundation of all reasoning on the subject-such
as . . . the ages of mothers of children . . .
Upon many of these points the greatest ignorance prevails, writers on population depending on rough
approximations derived from scanty, imperfect,

'4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and often erroneous data, because the censuses and usual for such students, after -they have

registers of Europe have not yet been taken and abstracted upon a comprehensive, well-considered plan.7
He made similar complaints over and over again. In his report for I867 he said:

terminated their university studies, to be appointed assistants and later directors of municipal or other statistical offices, and to
become in their turn university teachers. Nothing of the kind exists in this country.

Two grave defects in the registers of the United Kingdom deprive them of much of their utility as
pedigrees, and as records of facts for the solution
of the great problems of population. Neither the

The scholar interested in population problems usually knows very little of the technique of statistical administration; he

age of mothers at the births of each of their chil- cannot appraise the technical difficulties and

dren, nor the order of birth, is recorded; so that the cost of carrying out the proposals which

the number of children borne by women at different ages, and in the course of their lives, cannot be ascertained. This defect was supplied in the first

he may suggest to the administration; he cannot effectively answer the arguments of

schedule of the Scotch Act, but the important the civil servant. The administration, on

parts of the schedule were unfortunately dis- the other hand,, focuses its attention on its

continued after i855.8

immediate needs and is, as 'a rule, reluctant

It is pathetic to read in the Congress to acknowledge specific legitimate needs of

reports of the International Statistical In- the demographic scholar. This, of course,

stitute the appeals which Dr. Farr made does not affect the pure mathematician

for the registration of the mother's age in interested in methods but not in results.

all countries keeping birth records.9 His As a consequence thereof, the foreign reader

appeals were not altogether in vain. By of a review such as the Journal of the Royal

I192i England was practically the only Statistical Society must be struck by the

civilized country where this question was high standard of the purely mathematical'

not asked. The birth schedule -of I837 contributions dealing with a fictitious popu-

remained unchanged until I938, when Par- lation, and by the s.carcity of demographic

liament insisted on its reform. If Dr. Farr papers. The barrier between administration

had been Registrar-General-and it was the and science deters the British scholar from

great disappointment of his life that he was demographic research; another deterrent is

-never promoted to this position-the basic the low standard of the official vital statistics,

demographic data for many decades would compelling him to resort to foreign statistics

have been as ample in England as in the which are difficult to understand without

British Dominions, the United States, a knowledge of foreign conditions and foreign

France, Germany, Austria, Italy, the Scandi- languages. The general level of demo-

navian countries, etc., etc. As he was graphic doctors' theses submitted to English

second in command his country derived only universities is high, but a demographic

very limited benefits from the last prominent study of the authors would probably reveal

demographer it has producei That he that comparatively few are born in this

accomplished as much as he did was due to country.

the fact that he was not only competent

but also obsessed by an urge for research 3. English Cemus Statistics

and a deep interest in demography. None Censuses have been taken regularly every

of his successors combined these qualities. ten years from i8oi up to I931. These

Another cause of the deterioration of censuses furnish valuable information to

British demography is the lack of contact demographers, sociologists, economists, geog-

between administration and science. On the raphers, and administrators. I shall deal

Continent many directors of statistical here only with those data which are of special

offices are at the same time university interest to the demographer. They refer to

teachers; they sometimes hold seminars in the sex and age composition of the popula-

their office and teach the students the whole tion, to marital condition, and to fertility.

process of statistical technique. It is quite The sex was ascertained from the first

DEMOGRAPHY-SCIENCE AND ADMINISTRATION

15

census onwards. The ages of the population were more men and more women aged 58

were obtained in I82I and again from I84I than aged 57, more men and women aged

onwards. The marital condition was asked 48 than aged 47, more men and women

for the first time in I85I, and thereafter at aged 38 than 37, etc. That the age statistics

each subsequent census. Questions relating of many other countries are not so defective

to fertility were put only in I9II.

as those of England is due to the fact that

At the early censuses the omission of in their census forms they do not ask for

persons was apparently frequent, but from the age at the last birthday, but rather for

I84I on the censuses in England have the date of birth. It seems desirable that

probably been as complete as in any other henceforth England should follow their lead

country. This does not mean that the in this respect.

omissions are altogether negligible. There Misstatements of marital condition are

is, fori example, a tendency everywhere to also quite frequent. The large excess of

leave out young infants, and this tendency married women over married men which

is strengthened in England by the habit of appears at every British census can be

delaying the registration of births. Thus explained only in part by the fact that the

the General Report on the I92I census number of married members of the Army,

states:

Royal Navy, and Merchant Service who awe

It may' be observed that the population always temporarily abroad exceeds the number of

comprises a large number of newly born infants married foreigners who are temporarily in

whose births have not yet been registered, and this country and have left their wives at

that this number may easily have been as high as 50,000 or 6o,ooo at the date of the census. The attitude of mind which regards such children as

home. It seems that tens of thousands of women report themselves as married though

not having been placed upon the official roll and they are not. But a much graver defect is

uGt subject, therefore, to the census procedure is the inadequacy of the statistics of divorced

an intelligible one .10

people. Until I92I all persons over I5 years

It is impossible, of course, to estimate were asked to state in the census forms

even approximately the numerical impor- whether they weresingle, married, orwidowed.

tance of the omissions at various ages, but a As to divorced persons, it was evidently left

guess that they aggregate something like to their discretion which of these three

one or two per I,000 of the total population alternatives they liked to choose, and if by

would probably not be far off the mark. any chance they were obstinate enough to

They are offset in part by the erroneous reveal their actual marital condition they

inclusion of persons temporarily abroad and were probably counted as widowed. In I92I

by dquble counting.

a discreet attempt was made to identify

While, then, the English censuses may be divorced persons. The heading of the column

considered fairly complete, the demographic relating to marital condition now read:

details are not as accurate as might be For persons aged 15 and over write " Single," expected. The mistakes in the returns on "Married," " Widowed," or if marriage dissolved

sex, to be sure, are undoubtedly few. But by divorce write " D."

the age data are less satisfactory. There The innovation was introduced with great is in England, as everywhere, a tendency reluctance and with the conviction that it

to report age in round numbers-that is, in would prove to be a failure. The report states:

numbers ending with o. It may suffice to mention that, according to the I93I census,

At the I92I census an attempt was made for the first time in this country to ascertain the number

there were 245,684 men aged 50, but only of divorced persons in the population . . . The

2I5,999 aged 5I; 280,i82 women aged 50,
but only 240,793 aged 5I. Ages ending with the digit 7 are unpopular, while there is a marked predilection for ages ending in 8& According to the I93I census, there

total number returned in this category amounted
to I6,682 in all, of which 8,464 were males and 8,2i8 females . . . It is greatly to be feared, however, that doubts as to the value of such returns, which were felt and expressed when it was
first decided to include the inquiry in the general

-THE EUGENICS REVIEW

census questionnaire, have proved only too well tions had been taken in I875 in Massachu-

founded, for from an examination of the records of the divorces which have been granted year by
year, after making full allowance for reductions in the numbers by mortality and by a very high

setts, and many other countries followed suit. The decline in the birth rate made, of
course, the demand for such enquiries ever

remarriage rate, the expected numbers might well more urgent, and between I920 and I936

be put at a figure twice as large as the total alone fertility censuses were taken in France

recorded above, and it appears more than probable
therefore that a large number of persons failed to return the desired infotmation.'L

(I92I, I926, I93I, and I936), Holand (I920
and I930), Norway (I920 and I930), Hun-
gary (I920 and I930), Estonia (I922 and

The number of men reported as divorced was then slightly greater than the number of

I934), Spain (I920 and I930), Italy (I93N),
Czechoslovakia (1930), Germany (1933), the

women. Since the remarriage rate of divorced Union of South Africa (I92I and I926),

men is much higher than that of divorced Southern Rhodesia (I92I and I926), North-

women, misstatements of marital condition ern Rhodesia (I92I and 193I), Austraha

must have been particularly numerous (I92I), New Zealand (I92I and I936). But

among divorced women. According to the in this country no such enquiry has been

193I census the divorced males numbered made since I9II.

13,546 and the divorced females i1,169. It will be interesting to read the official comment on these figures in the General Report, which has not been published as yet.

Another grave defect which must be men-
tioned in this connection is the date of publication of the English census reports. The fertility enquiry of I91I was made through-

From a demographic standpoint the I9II out the United Kingdom. The complete

census is still to-day the most valuable of all reports for Scotland and Ireland were both

because it included questions concerning published in I9I3. For England and Wales

fertility. Each married woman had to state a first volume, containing a number of,basic

the number of years the present marriage tables, was published in I9I7; the second

had lasted, the number of children born volume, containing all other tables and the

;alive to the present marriage, the number of text, was published in I923. I have already

children still living, and the number of chil- mentioned that the text volume of the 193I

dren who had died. The question about the census is not yet available. The volumes

duration of marriage was answered incor- published so far contain merely tables. This,

rectly by a very large number of wives. The it seems to me, is an intolerable situation,

tendency to concentrate on round numbers which should be remedied and could be

IO, 20, 30, 4o-was even more pronounced remedied easily. I happened to be connected

in the case of marriage duration than in the with the United States Census of I900. The

statement of ages. Moreover, misstatements publication of the I890 census reports had

of short durations were exceedingly numer- been very slow. But Congress was not

ous. The ratio of couples returned as willing to run a similar risk again. The

married o-i, I-2, and 2-3 years to the number Census Act of March 3rd, I899, provided

of marriages concluded in the three years therefore:

preceding the census was 68, 85, and 89 per cent. respectively, the understatement of the

The only volumes that shall be prepared and published in connection with the Twelfth Census,

number of couples returned as married under except the Special Reports hereinafter provided

one year being mainly due to a desire to for, shall relate to population, mortality and vital

conceal ante-nuptial conception. The instruction to return only the children of the present
marriage was often disregarded. On the

statistics, the products of agriculture, and of manufacturing and mechanical establishments . . . and shall be designated as and constitute the Census Reports, which said reports shall be published not

other hand, many mothers seem to have later than the first .day of July, nineteen hundred

omitted in their statements children who and two.

died young.12

We then had barely two years for the

The first census embodying fertility ques- preparation and publication of the reports,

DEMOGRAPHY-SCIENCE AND ADMINISTRATION

not only of a most elaborate population on, the registration form recorded the date

-census but alsQ of a most intricate census of of birth and the date of registration. But in

agriculture and of manufactures, in a coun- the published birth statistics no account,

try with a population nearly twice that of (until I944) was ever taken of the date of

England and Wales and with an area more birth. We knowv the number of births regis-

than fifty times as large. But we knew that tered in a given year, but we do not know the

we had to do it, and all the volumes, tables number of births which occurred in that

and text, covering nearly IO,OOO large, year. According to a statement published

closely printed pages, were published within year-in year-out in the Registrar-General's

the prescribed time limit.

Statistical Review "the average time lag

between occurrence and registration is

4. English Vital Statistics

usually about a month." This seems to

Civil registration of births, marriages, and indicate that the average time lag is usually

deaths was started on July Ist, I837. The though not always about a month. But

records are probably as complete as in any even if the average time lag were always

other country. Birth registration, to be sure, exactly one month, the difference between

was somewhat defective prior to the intro- the number of registered and of actual births

duction of compulsory registration in I875, might vary considerably from year to year.

but it is safe to say that nearly all children It may well be, therefore, that even in peace-

born thereafter have been registered, though time the changes in the official birth figures

often with great delay. Death registration sometimes convey a distorted picture of the

was almost complete from the outset. actual changes in natality. The number of

Marriage statistics, of course, are absolutely registered births dropped from 6I3,972 in

complete, since, while people may be born or I932, to 580,4I3 in I933, and rose again to

may die without being registered, there is no 597,642 in I934. The number of registra-

marriage without registration. As to accu- tions in the last quarter of I933 (I29,8I0) was

racy the vital statistics suffer from defects over io,ooo lower than in any other quarter

similar to those of the census statistics. The from I850 to this day. It is possible, of

age at death is too often reported in numbers course, that the number of births was

ending with o. There is also, at least among actually as low in the last quarter of I933 as

middle-aged persons, a predilection for ages indicated by the official statistics. But until

ending in the digit 2. Here again the remedy there is proof to the contrary it seems safer

lies in asking for the date of birth instead of to assume that the drop in the actual

the age in years.

number of births in I933 was smaller than

Until the new Population (Statistics) Act the drop in the number of births registered

came into force, the Registrar-General's in that year. The official birth rates in

Statistical Review showed merely the number I933-7 were I4.4, I4*8, I4-7, I4*8, and

of male and female, legitimate and illegiti- I4 9. It may well be that the actual birth

mate live births and still births, registered rate in I933 was not lower than in I935.

in each quarter. From July Ist, I938, on the And which year had the highest birth rate is

Statistical Review shows in addition the anybody's guess.

births by order of birth, age of mother, and In periods in which rationing of food

duration of marriage. The Decennial Sufpple- induces parents to hasten birth registration

ment gives in addition data about fertility by or de-rationing of food removes this incen-

occupation in the period centring around the tive the official birth figures, of course, are

census. The Supplement dealing with the absolutely misleading. From I9I8 to I919

year I92I was published in I927; the volume the number of registered births (which alone

which is to cover the years I930 to I932 is not appeared in the official statistics) increased

available as yet. But the records of the from 662,66I to 692,438 or by pnly 29,777.

father's occupation are not the only ones of Actublly, the number of births registered in

which little use has been made. From I837 I9I8 was much larger than the number of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

births that occurred in that year while the per cent. It seems desirable, therefore, that

reverse was true in I919, and the increase henceforth not only the births but also the

in the number that occurred has been esti- deaths be classified throughout by date of

mated at three times the increase in the occurrence.

number of births that were registered. In The Population (Statistics) Act intro-

I938-40, the numbers of births registered duced only some questions of minor impor-

were 62I,2o4, 6I9,352, and 6o7,o29 respec- tance to be asked on the registration of death.

tively. How many births actually occurred But the collection of details about deaths

in 1938 it is impossible to tell. In I939 and has been fairly ample for many years, and

1940-according to the Statistical Review for the mortality statistics of England compare

1940 (published in I944)-the numbers were favourably with those of other countries.

614,479 and 590,I20. It is most welcome I would even go so far as to plead for the

that the Registrar-General, who naturally is curtailment of the published tables in one

more interested in birth registration than in respect. I would advocate that the publica-

birth statistics, has at last yielded to the tion of standardized death rates be stopped.

demographers' urgent demand for dealing The standardized death rate, which is meant

with births according to the date of the to convey a better picture of the trend of

event, and has published the numbers of mortality than the crude death rate, has

male and female legitimate and illegitimate decreased from 20 in I876-80 to 9 in I935-9.

live and still births which occurred in I939 The crude death rate has decreased only

and 1940. But the statistics for those years, from 21 to I2. This crude rate is no adequate

showing order of birth and duration of gauge of the trend of mortality, as it'is calcu-

mamrrage, unfortunately still refer to regis- lated without regard to the changes in the

tered births and, therefore, do not convey a age compositiox of the population. Since the

true picture of the decline in fertility during age composition is now more favourable

the first period of the war. These statistics than sixty years ago, the crude death rate

include for I939 54,144 live births which overstates the decline of mortality. The

occurred in I938 but were registered only in official standardized death rates are those

1939, while they exclude 49,27I which which would have been recorded if the age

occurred in 1939 and were registered in I940. composition of the population had been the

The statistics for I940 include those 49,27I same as in i90i. All depends, of course, on

births, but exclude 32,362 which occurred what year is taken as a standard, and it so

i 1940 and were registered in I94I.

happens that by choosing the year i90i the

The deaths up to now have likewise been decline of mortality in the last sixty years is

shown by date of registration. But here the overstated still more than by a comparison

consequences are less serious. According to of the crude death rates. To compute what

a statement published each year in the the death rates would have been sixty years

Registrar-General's Statistical Review " the ago and what they would be now if the com--

time lag between occurrence and registration position of the population by age at both

is usually only a day or two." It would seem, dates had been that of I9OI is perfectly

however, that the exceptions to this rule are futile. It is just as futile as to compute what

very numerous. Of the twenty-three tables would have been the death rates then and

on mortality embodied in the Statistical to-day if, both in the late seventies and now,

Review one shows the deaths by months of the composition of the population by occu-

occurrence. A comparison with the returns pation had been the same as in I9OI. But

by date of registration reveals that the the computation of such standardized death

differences are sometimes pretty large. From rates is not only futile, it is a nuisance.

the third to the fourth quarter of 1935, the Nothing, I am convinced, has contributed so

number of registered deaths increased by much to conceal the actual trend of mortality

22,677, or 22.7 per cent., while the number in England as the regular publication of

of actual deaths increased by 24,785, or 25 * I these standardized death rates. The correct

DEMOGRAPHY-SCIENCE AND ADMINISTRATION

death rate derived from the life tables has stituted only o02 per cent. of the remarrying

decreased in the last sixty years from 23 to persons, but it is most confusing to-day,

i6 or only by about 30 per cent. England, since in I939 no fewer than IO,698 or 2o per

which in the i88o's had a lower mortality cent. of the remarrying persons had been

than, for example, Germany, Holland, and divorced. One average which is particularly

Switzerland, had in the I930's a higher misleading and which is published every year

mortality than those countries. The time in the Statistical Review, is the average age

that is wasted in computing misleading at marriage. This figure was rising before the

standardized death rates could not be better war and gave the impression that people

used than in studying why the progress nowadays marry later than in former times.

achieved in lowering mortality in England But it was rising only because the population

lags behind what has been accomplished in a was ageing. It is obvious that in countries

good many other countries.

where owing, for example, to a heavy

The position is particularly unsatisfactory decrease in fertility the proportion of

as regards life tables. Thirty years. ago younger spinsters decreases, the average age

such tables were available for I838-54, at marriage may increase, even if the

I87I-80, i88i-90, I89I-I900, I90I-I0, and nuptiality of the younger spinsters rises

I9I0-I2. Since then tables have been pub- while that of the older spinsters declines.

lished only for I920-2 and I930-2. While the Since I93I the frequency of marriages in

earlier tables comprised all years from I87I England has increased enormously. Yet the

to I9I2, the recent ones cover only six of the average age at marriage of spinsters rose

thirty-two years elapsed since I9I2. Formerly in every year up to I937. No wonder

the bad years were taken with the good years. that people who see those figures conclude

It is obvious that the results of the new that the increase in the number of marriages

procedure, which completely ignores not was largely due to the contraction of

only the war years but also such a bad peace marriages that had been postponed during

year as I929, are much less conclusive. The the depression. But a correct computation

existing life tables should be supplemented of the mean age at marriage of spinsters,

without delay by a life table for females for that is of the mean expectation of single life

19II-20, and by tables for each sex for at birth for those who eventually marry,

I92I-30 and I93I-9. The necessary data are shows that it has actually decreased in every

all available in the Registrar-General's Office, year since I93I. The additional marriages

and by using modem short-cut methods concluded in that period were then early

which yield results sufficiently accurate for marriages, not delayed marriages.

all practical and scientific purposes a life The correct mean age at marriage can be

table can be computed in a few hours. derived only from a nuptiality table which is

The marriage statistics in England are not constructed according to the same principles

as ample as the death statistics but they are as a life table, and which shows the pro-

not as meagre as the birth statistics were bability of marrying. Many official nupti-

until I938. As in the case of the death ality tables have been computed in the

statistics it is not so much the tables showing course of the last forty years in foreign

the basic figures which need modification countries, but none in England. Our know-

but rather the published rates and averages. ledge of the frequency of marriages, in so far

The Registrar-General's Statistical Review as it is based on official documents, is, there-

gives the marriage rates of (a) bachelors and fore, quite defective. As in the case of life

divorced men, (b) widowers, (c) spinsters and tables all necessary data are available in the-

divorced women, and (d) widows. This Registrar-General's Office, and nothing could

lumping together of single and divorced destroy as quickly the myth that our popu-

persons was immaterial sixty or seventy lation problem may be solved by an increase

years ago when the marrying divorced per- in marriages as the publication of official

sons numbered only ioo a year and con- nuptiality tables.

-s 20

THE EUGENICS REVIEW -

5. Official Statistics and Population Problems
In February I944 the Government set up a Royal Commission on Population. Its first term of reference is " to examine the facts relating to the present population trends in Great Britain." Let us assume
that,, on being appointed, a member of the
Commission would have tried to examine the facts by consulting all published official statistics. He would have found that the
most recent general census available was the
one of I93I and that the covering report was not yet prepared; that no fertility inquiry had been made since i9ii; that all birth statistics were based on the date of registration and were therefore somewhat uncertain; that the most recent statistics of the father's occupation were those of I92I; that no data collected under the Population (Statistics) Act of I938 had been published so far. If he had looked for gross and net reproduction rates or for nuptiality tables, he would have seen that such rates or tables have never been published and never even been mentioned. If he had asked for any official publication on population trends he would
have been given the Registrar-General's White Paper Current Trend of Population in
Great Britain, of which Earl De La Warr said in the House of Lords on June 8th, I943: "This Report, if I may say so, is ,completely misleading and therefore extremely dangerous. I cannot see the reason or excuse for a Report of this character unless it is just an attempt to allay public
concern on a problem that is in fact dangerous to the extent that the public do not Tecognize it." If he had pointed out that the Government in that same discussion had announced that the Minister of Health 4 proposes to publish a document on the lines of the recent White Paper, in which the statistical outlook would be set out and discussed in a reasoned and balanced manner," he would have been told that the plan to publish such a document had been abandoned.
Since the appointment of the Royal Commission the position has improved considerably.
I. The results of the emergency census taken for purposes of national registration

on September 29th, I939, were published in
the spring of I944. The report shows the civilian population by sex, age, and marital condition. The returns are less trustworthy
than those obtained at the general censuses, and the data for men are particularly defective inasmuch as they exclude (for England and Wales) about 900,000 non-civilians;
but our knowledge of the age composition and the marital condition of females has
become much more up to date. 2. The Government published in the
summer of I944 data for 1940 collected under the Population (Statistics) Act; similar figures for I939 were published in the
autumn of I944, and shortly thereafter for
the second half of I938.13 The tables for
I938 are accompanied by a covering report
which shows the gross and net reproduction rates for I938. Unfortunately the text is
written in the same vein as the White Paper on current trends of population. The Registrar-General evidently thought that the main object of such a report was to fight what his Medical Statistical Officer called " that lamentable sense of national inferi-
ority from which a large section of the population now seems to be suffering."" The essence of his argument is that the population problem is not serious since a population decline could be prevented by
encouraging marriage and particularly early
marriage. For I939 and I940 only tables, have been published, but no rates and no text. It is to be feared, therefore, that in their present state these statistics will be of little use to the members of the Royal Commission. However, the basic data are now available, and it should not cause unsurmountable difficulties to relate them
to other data hidden in the RegistrarGeneral's Office and to provide an unbiased interpretation of the figures.
3. The Registrar-General, in the spring of
I944, published for I934-43 " approximate
reproduction rates, corresponding to the births which occurred in each year and making allowance for a continuing improvement in survivorship conditions."1" In his Statistical Review for I938 he had included a net reproduction rate computed according

DEMOGRAPHY-SCIENCE AND ADMINISTRATION

21

to the principles accepted all over the world 6. Future of Administration and Science

(and adopted by the League of Nations and It may well be that in some very small

the International Statistical Institute), which countries population and vital statistics do

imply that such rates should be computed not suffer if they are prepared in a Registrat-

on the basis of current fertility and mor- General's Office, but this combination is to

tality. His new rates take no account what- be found in no large country except England,

ever of current mortality. Although in I940 and it has yielded here quite unsatisfactory

fertility was lower and mortality was much results. It seems, therefore, advisable to

higher than in I935, he obtains for I940 a create an independent office dealing with

higher reproduction rate than for I935 population and vital statistics. Whether

because, irrespective of the facts, he assumes such an office should also be put in charge of

year-in year-out a steady gradual " improve- some other related statistics is not of decisive

ment in survivorship conditions." These importance. The Economist of October 7th,

rates are not comparable with those of any i944, contained the following suggestion:

other country; they are speculative because It is already contemplated to take the census of

all estimates of future survivorship condi- production each year after the war; formerly it

tions are uncertain; they tend to overstate was taken every five years. There is a strong case

reproduction because they disregard fluctuations in mortality. But if they were recomputed on the basis of current mortality

for taking a census of distribution at frequent intervals, perhaps every two years. Similarly, the
interval between population censuses has been far too long in the past; it might -well be reduced

they would be most useful.

from ten to five years. But if the number of such

A start, no doubt, has been made in the statistical investigations is to be increased. and if

course of the last year to increase our knowledge of the demographic position of England. But much has still to be done in

they are to be carried out at short intervals, the existing facilities at the disposal of the Government will have to be overhauled. It might be an
advantage, for example, to follow American prac-

order to enable the Royal Commission " to tice by creating an organization analogous to the

examine the facts relating to the present population trends." A few things have been suggested before, such as the computation

Bureau of the Census, that is by making a single organization responsible for all censuses. The creation of a strong permanent organization would not merely simplify the procedure, but it should

of life tables and nuptiality tables, of gross make for speed in the assembly and publication of

reproduction rates and of genuine net repro- statistics.

duction rates, a.nd a proper analysis of the The American Bureau of Census is in fact

statistics collected under the Population in charge not only of population censuses

(Statistics) Act up to I944. But the most but also of vital statistics, and an organiza-

important task of all is the immediate taking tion analogous to this Bureau may prove as

of a special fertility (or family) census which beneficial here as it has proven in the United

would fill many gaps caused by the numerous States. The only reasonable objection which,

sins of omission committed in the course of may be raised against the proposed change

the last decades. Such a fertility census is that it would not necessarily " make for

would convey a comprehensive picture of speed in the assembly and publication of

essential demographic facts upon which (to statistics." But it is an incontrovertible fact

use Farr's words of I844) " the greatest that for several decades publication of popu-

ignorance prevails," for example, the inci- lation statistics in this country has been

dence of childlessness, the spacing of births, slower than in any British Dominion or

fertility differences between occupational Colony or in any foreign country. An out-

and social groups, and the distribution of standing example of speed in publication is

families of various sizes. The information to to be found in India. The area covered by

be derived from such a census is indispen- the Indian census of I93I was thirty times as

sable for a serious study of the population large as that of England and Wales, and the

problem and for the framing of an adequate population was nine times as large. Yet, the

population policy.

forty-nine volumes of that Indian census

22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

which included an admirable text of several data may be correctly interpreted but he

hundred thousand words were published himself cannot collect those data. They can

within thirty months after census date. be collected only by the Administration, and

Would anyone suggest that it is easier to take his chances of'getting the data he needs wil

a census in India, that it is easier there to obviously be much greater if he contributes

instruct the supervisors and the enumerators towards the education of the future personnel

(2,000,000 as compared with 40,ooo in of the Administration.

England), to assemble the filled-up forms at

headquarters, or to train the necessary clerical staff for coding, punching, and attending the electric tabulating machines?

NOTES
1 Natural and Political Observations, p. 72.
London, I662.
2 See ibid., p. I2.

And would anyone suggest that with the 3 Thomas Sprat, The History of the Royal Society

present organization it would be possible of London, for the Improving of Natural Knowledge,

here to achieve what has been achieved in
India ? Difficulties, it is true, may arise in finding

3rd ed., p. 67. London, I722. 4 See The Economic Writings of Sir William
Petty, ed. by Charles Henry Hull. 2 vols. Cambridge, I899.

the adequate personnel for the new organiza- 6 " An Estimate of the Degrees of the Mortality

tion. The leading men should be competent, unbiased, eager, and preferably young. It is. here that Science can play an important part. Our universities should establish

of Mankind, drawn from curious Tables of the Births and Funerals at the City of Breslaw," Philosophical Transactions, vol. 17, No. I96, Jan.
I693, PP. 596-6IO; " Some further Considerations on the Breslaw Bills of Mortality," ibid., No. i98,

chairs for demography, and the students of March I693, pp. 654-6.

demography should be thoroughly trained in statistics. This training would enable them to find a position as statisticians if they

6 40th Annual Report of the Registrar-General of Births, Deaths, and Marriages in England (x877),
p. xl. 7 6th Report (i842), p. xxvii.

fail to secure employment as demographers. 8 30th Report (1867), p. 222. See also 14th

But the demand for demographers will be considerable in the future. The increasing importance of the population problem will afford many opportunities of doing useful
work in this country, and the great develop-

Report (i85Ix), p. xiii; i6th Report (I853), p. x;

27th Report (I864), pp. xix-xx; Supplement to

35th Report (1872), p. Xi.
9 See, for example, CongrSs

International

de

Statistique d la Haye, Compte-rendu des travaux de

la septihme session, seconde partie, p. 533. The

ment schemes in the Colonies cannot be carried out effectively without the assistance
of expert demographers. In the field of demography, as in many

Hague, I870.
10 Census of England and Wales, I921, General
Report with Appendices, p. 78. London, 1927. 1" Ibid., p. 84. 12 See R. R. Kuczynski, The Measurement of

other fields, the Administration needs the co-operation of Science. But there is hardly any other field in which Science needs so much the co-operation of the Administration. The demographic scholar can discover

Population Growth, 18 See Statistical

pp. 83-90. London, 1935. Review for the Year

1938,

Tables, Part II, Civil; same for 1939 and for I940.

London, 1944.

14
15

SBreietiBsihrtMhes,diDceaaltJhosurannadl,MaMrarricahge2sISrte,giIs9t4er2e.d

in

methods by which the basic demographic the Quarter ended 3Ist December, I943, p. I.

