PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES & NEUROTIC TRAITS IN NORMAL TWIN SCHOOLCHILDREN
A Study in Psychiatric Genetics*

By JAMES SHIELDS, B.A.
(Genetics Unit, Institute of Psychiatry, Maudsley Hospital, S.E.5)

w | sHE subjects of the research are 62 pairs * of same-sexed twins, 36 being of the
1 "identical " kind, 26fraternal. They are fairly representative South London schoolchildren aged 12-I5. The investigation, carried out from Dr. Eliot Slater's Genetics Unit at the Institute of Psychiatry, was 'based primarily on life histories of the twins obtained from the parents. This information was supplemented by reports from the schools and by interviews with the twins themselves. Most of the pairs also came up to the Maudsley Hospital for psychological testing as part of the independent research programme of the Psychology Department under Dr. Eysenck. (At the end of this paper an attempt is made to relate the test results'and the histories.) We, in the Genetics Unit, were interested mainly in similarities and differences in personality between the twins, and in how many of them showed to a greater or lesser degree the kind of nervous symptoms and behaviour difficulties that bring some children to child guidance or other clinics for help. We wished to compare the two kinds of pairs in these respects. Take, for example, cases where one of the twins had a nervous symptom, say bedwetting. Was the " identical " twin of an enuretic more likely to suffer from the same 'trouble than the " non-identical " twin ? Where the twins differed in symptoms or in severity, did the history suggest any likely
* This paper reports an investigation, the results of which have already been presented in abbreviated form
in a communication to the gth International Congress of Genetics at Bellagio in August I953 and at a members' meeting of the Eugenics Society in October 1953. The author is greatly indebted to the Eugenics Society for a grant which enabled him to attend the Congress.

reason for this ? Now the principal reason for studying twins is a genetical one. This research can therefore be looked upon as an experiment in fertilizing social and clinical child psychiatry on the one hand with genetics on the other, and in consequence it may perhaps be of some relevance to positive
eugenics.
Twin Research Twins are a fascinating study in them-
selves, but their main value from the scientific point of view is the light they can throw on the age-old problem of heredity and environment and the interaction between them. Like seed and soil both these are essential, but their relative importance varies greatly from condition to condition. The effects of a head injury, for example, are clearly due almost entirely to the environment. In characteristics such as the colour of the eyes, differences between people are due almost entirely to differences in their genetical make-up. Twin studies have limitations all of which it is not proposed to discuss now, but they remain one of the few and one of the best methods available for investigating the relative importance of heredity and environment in any human characteristic and especially in psychiatry.
The theory on which twin research is based assumes that twins are in no essential respect different from singly born persons so far as the subject studied is concerned. More will be said about this later on. There are held to be two kinds of twin pairs. The first are those derived from one fertilized egg-cell. These are the so-called " identical " pairs and are here referred to as uniovular (U). They

213

2I4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

are alike in having the same genes and must both schizophrenic than are a pair of ordinary

among other things be of the same sex. brothers and sisters. With criminal twins,

Differences between them must be due to however, the situation is different. In one

differences in environment from the time of study, that of Kranz (I936), only 66 per cent

conception onwards. They offer an unparal- of the U twins both had a criminal record,

leled opportunity of investigating the effect while as many as 54 per cent of the B's were

of environmental influences, while heredity also concordant in this respect. This suggests

is held under control. The second kind of that environmental factors are very much

twins are those derived from two separate more important in criminality than they are

ova, fertilized by two different spermatozoa. in either mental defect or schizophrenia.

These are known as fraternal or binovular Even with criminality, however, some im-

(B) twins. They are like ordinary brothers portance must be allowed to genetical factors

or sisters who happen to have arrived at the through their effect on the personality.

same time. They are as likely to be of differ- It is sometimes objected that B pairs are

ent sexes as of the same sex. They will, on not treated so much alike as U's and that the

average, have only about half their genes in environments of the two kinds of twins are

common, and so differences between them therefore not comparable. Later it will be

will be due not only to the effects of environ- shown why this objection is not considered

ment but also to those of heredity.

an entirely valid one. In any case the

From a comparison of the two sorts of environment is open to investigation in each

twins we gain an appreciation of the effect individual case. One of the practical limita-

of genetical differences between persons tions of twin research, in so far as it aims at

brought up in similar environments. If it is sorting out the most important environ-

wished to eliminate the effect of sex differ- mental influences, is not that the environ-

ences, we can compare a series of U pairs ments are too different to be comparable,

with one of same-sexed B pairs drawn from but that twins with major differences in

the same population. If the average re- upbringing and early environment are so

semblance between members of the U pairs rarely to be found.' One could hardly find

is markedly greater than that of the B's then individuals subjected to more similar environ-

there is a strong case for the view that a ments than are twins. Both kinds are born

person's genes make a big difference in deter- into the same home at the same time with

mining whether he shows the characteristic all that this implies. They are more alike

in question or not. For example, studies have in these respects than pairs of singly born

been made of twins where one of them is brothers and sisters who arrive at different

mentally deficient. Here the second twin stages in the development of the home and

has been found likewise to be defective in the family.

about 90 per cent of the U pairs, but in only It can only be held that any alleged

about IO per cent of the B's.* This suggests difference-of environment between U and B

that most kinds of mental defect are genetic- twins is of serious importance if it can be

ally determined. With schizophrenia the shown that ordinary sibs are less alike in the

findings in twins are somewhat similar. characteristics in question than are B twins.

Although a higher proportion of uniovular

twin partners remain normal than is the case Previous Work

with-mentally defective twins, the difference There have been numerous single case

between the two kinds of twins is still very studies of twins where one or both of them

marked-the concordance rates being about have had a psychiatric illness. Systematic,

76 per cent for U's and I4 per cent for B's.t non-selected twin investigations are of greater

B twins are hardly-if at all-more often scientific value. Up to now these have

concerned themselves principally with the

* Smith, I930. t Slater and Shields, 1953.

psychoses and with criminal behaviour, and these studies have been reviewed in Slater's

PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

2I5

recent M.R.C. monograph.* Neurotic illness and psychopathic personality have received much less attention from twin investigators and other geneticists. Table i shows the crude results of twin studies in this field.

however, that U twins can differ quite considerably in degree of social or psychiatric abnormality, and further, that in certain social environments B pairs can develop very similar troubles. On the less startling varia-

TABLE r UNSELECTED SERIES OF NON-PSYCHOTIC TWIN PAIRS

Condition studied

* . AA|uutthhorry (Country)

I|Uniovular pairs BiSnaomvuel-asrexpeadirs BOipnpoovsuiltae-rspeaxierds

Year

-

Con- Dis- Con- Dis- Con- Dis-

cordant cordant cordant cordant cordant cordant

Adult crime ... ... ...

Lange I929 10

3

3 15

(Germany)

,, ,, ... ... ...

Stumpfl 1936 II

7

7 12

(Germany)

,, ,, ... ... ...

Kranz 1936 20

II

23

20

(Germany)

,, , ... ... ... Borgstroem 1939

3

I

2

3

(Finland)

,, , ... ... ... Rosanoff et al. I934 25

I2

5 23

(U.S.A.)

Juvenile Delinquency ... ...

,

39 3 20 5

_ 2 *26 7 43 28 I 3I 8 32

Behaviour Disorder in Children

41 6 26 34 8 21

Institutional Re-education of

Juveniles with personality

Kranz I937

7

4

0

3

2

6

abnormality

(Germany)

Childhood Maladjustment ...

Kent I949 7

O

4

2

2

I

(U.S.A.)

Hysteria ... ... ... ... Stumpfl I937 3 6 0 9

N (Germany)

Psychopathy and Neurosis ...

Slater 1953 2

6

4 25

I 13

(England)

The German studies of criminals, particularly that of Kranz, show in a striking way how alike were the abnormal personalities of U twins where either one or both were persistent offenders. Violence in one twin was generally matched by violence in the other. Both might be confidence tricksters of a similar type or both suffer, at different times and independently, from some compulsive sexual deviation. B twins, where both had a criminal record, did not resemble one another so much either in type of crime or in personality make-up. Kallman (I952) studied 40 U pairs where one was a homosexual. The twin partner was likewise homosexual in every case. The binovular pairs were often very different from one another in this respect. These findings suggest that gross personality abnormalities are often genetically determined. Slater's own study shows,
* Slater and Shields, I953.

tions in personality even less genetical work has been done.
The findings of Rosanoff and his associates on a large series of twins, which included not
only adult and juvenile delinquents but also young children with behaviour disorders who had not come before the courts, are relevant to the present study and show some similarity to those of Stumpfl and Kranz. Unfortu-
nately Rosanoff's fuller I94I account of these twins is not available. From his earlier report (I934) and from the author's abstract of the later one (I94I), he appears to stress the importance of heredity and of birth injury perhaps more than his findings warrant. This seems to be the case particularly with juvenile delinquency. In all his groups the same-sexed B twins were much more alike in their behaviour than both the opposite-sexed pairs and pairs of singly born sibs, which surely might be regarded as

2i6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

evidence of the importance of environmental factors of a social kind. As Rosanoff himself
points out, criminality in the female is in our
society much rarer than in the male. Nevertheless the U twins in his youngest agegroup were, for whatever reason, very much
more alike than the B's. Twenty-one out
of 25 U male partners were likewise con-
sidered to have a behaviour disorder, and
20 out of the 22 females. Of the same-sexed B pairs only I3 out of 23 males were con-
cordant in this respect, and I3 out of 37 females. In only eight out of 2I opposite-sex
pairs were both members similarly affected. Rosaioff's earlier paper has been criticized for his lack of clinical description and his
later one for an arbitrary classification of
each child as either having or not having a behaviour disorder.
Descriptive clinical studies of the minor psychiatric disorders of childhood have never been adequately made on twin material. However, Kranz (I937) studied a series of i6 U and 22 B twins from correctional and
re-educational institutions in Lower Silesia. He found that the younger twins in his series suffered mostly from reactive conditions associated with poor environments. He considered that the older twins more often had predominantly endogenous conditions such as mental defect and character dis-
orders. The members of the 6lder U pairs were very much alike psychologically, but
less alike in social behaviour. Out of eleven U pairs in the older group, both members had required institutional treatment in seven cases, and one member only in four cases.
Edith Kent (I949) reports a study of maladjusted twins. Her material consists of i6 pairs, in seven of which both twins and in nine of which one twin only had been referred to the Jewish Board of Guardians' Child Guidance Centre in New York. Her research is based on records only. Diagnosis of ovularity is doubtful and information about the twins that were not seen at the clinic extremely scanty. The investigation was made " to challenge the assumption that twins reared in the same household are exposed to the same emotional environment." The evidence she gives for her own

assumption to the contrary is not very
convincing. The home backgrounds of the twins were generally psychologicaliy disturbing ones for small children. Only three
of the twins were regarded as completely
normal. These were all members of B pairs.
There is clearly scope for further twin
work in all these fields as well as in normal
psychology, so that the role of the genetical
factor and how it is modified may be
appraised. Psychological studies of normal twins have
included some interesting reports of twins
brought up apart or subjected to different methods of training. Many are devoted to the psychological aspects of being a twin, rather than to genetical investigation. The genetical studies consist mostly of studies of schoolchildren (because of their availability), and some are based on samples much smaller even than the present one. They have been made from many points of view, such as graphology, eidetic imagery, facial expression and others. They include the examination of school reports, questionnaires, and performance on specific psychological tests of intelligence or personality. Some of these have been reviewed by Eysenck,* and there is a very full account in Italian in Gedda's book (I95I). The results are sometimes conflicting or indecisive, but the majority show a greater degree of resemblance between U than between B twins in the particular aspect of psychology studied. For example, studies of personality as assessed in terms of Klages' characterology by Lottig (I93I)
and by Kohn (I935) show U twins frequently
to be alike and B twins frequently different in all but the more superficial aspects of personality. Lassen (I93I), who studied 226 pairs, found that teachers' ratings of social and moral characteristics gave very much higher correlations between U than B twin pairs.
In- order to avoid the unreliability of ratings and the lack of validity of single
tests, Eysenck and Prell (I95I) used a battery
of objective personality tests of different kinds on a series of schoolchildren similar to the present one and factor-analysed the
* Eysenck and Prell, I95I.

PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

2I7

results. They used the scores of a sample of important, perhaps, is the interesting light

child; guidance patients as a criterion for they can throw on psychological and social

" neuroticism" or degree of emotional problems themselves.

stability. Dr. Eysenck (I95i) has reported

his results to the Eugenics Society. He and Ascertainment and Selection

Prell found that U twins resemble each other In any scientific study of twins it is of the

very closely in degree of neuroticism, much greatest importance to see that the selection

more closely than B twins. Correlation co- of the twins is not biased in any way which

efficients were *85I and -2I7 respectively. would prejudice the results. In some coun-

They conclude that the concept of neuroti- tries this is done by inspecting birth records

cism derived from factor analysis is not a to make certain that all twins of a specified

statistical artefact but a biological unit and population are included in the investigation.

that neurotic predisposition is to a large Ascertainment of twins by means of birth

extent hereditarily determined. It seems registrations is impracticable in this country.

that more could be learnt that might be of Twins are not recorded as such, and from the

benefit both to clinical workers and to way the records are arranged at the central

statistical psychologists by a combined offices it would be an almost impossible task.

clinical and psychometric investigation of to pick out all the twins born in a certain

the same series of subjects. For example, it locality. Tracing the whereabouts of any

would be interesting to see what kind of twins found would involve enlisting the help

psychological or social problems have been of other authorities such as the schools, and

shown by children who score high on the so the search for twins by examining birth

factor of neuroticism, and equally interesting records would defeat its own ends.

to see what are the social and clinical charac- In the present study the headmasters and

teristics of people who lie at the extreme of headmistresses of all secondary schools in cer-

the stable end of the scale. It may be pointed tain South London boroughs were asked by

out that to say there is a high correlation Mr. H. A. T. Child, Chief Educational

between U twins in degree of neuroticism as Psychologist of the L.C.C., to supply him

measured by Eysenck's tests is not quite the with the names of any one in their school in

same as saying that if one of a pair of identi- the I2-I5 age group who was one of " like-

cal twins has a neurotic breakdown the sexed" twins. It was from Mr. Child that

second twin will probably follow suit.

we received the names of our twins, and to

So far as I know, no attempt has until now him and the schools concerned we are most

been made to carry out on an unselected grateful. Our thanks are also due to the

sample of normal twin schoolchildren an L.C.C. Education Authority for kindly per-

investigation of psychiatric adjustment in mitting us to study London schoolchildren.

the widest sense, based mainly on the case- The investigation was restricted to twins

histories of the twins. Such an investigation in the I2-I5 age group because many of the

may lack scientific precision and be all too psychological tests would have been unreli-

liable to human error. Its main value would able if applied to younger children. Further,

seem to lie in the fact that it is an attempt it has the advantage of bringing the period

to apply genetical science to personality of observation for neurotic traits up to early

adjustment, assessed in a way which has adolescence. If older twins could have been

been found useful in child guidance practice. obtained, the information about early years

Studies relating genetics to general human would have been correspondingly less reli-

problems at this level of complexity and able. Many twin investigations based on

urgency have a part to play alongside other small numbers can be criticized on the

methods of human genetical research of a ground that the age range is too wide.

more limited but scientific kind, such as the In all, we received over an eight-month

investigation of rare psychological abnormal- period the names of I02 pairs of twins from

ities and population genetics. Even more four adjacent South London areas. There

2I8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

were 48 male and 54 female pairs. Fortyseven were probably uniovular, 49 probably binovular and six of doubtful ovularity. (In the case of pairs not seen personally, ovularity was assessed from information supplied by the schools.)
The parents of most of the twins notified were then approached by letter and their voluntary co-operation in the project sought. The order of approaching and investigating the twins was decided in collaboration with the Psychology Department. The psychologists required an equal number of U and B pairs for testing, each group equally divided by sex; their series consists of 52 pairs. Apart from these requirements, the twins
were approached as they were notified. When these 52 pairs had been obtained, no further twins were approached, but histories were taken from those pairs, mostly U girls, who had already expressed willingness to
co-operate but who were not required by the psychologists. Their series includes one pair on whom a psychiatric history could not be obtained.
Table 2 shows the main reasons why all the pairs were not investigated. Of the

TABLE 2 EXTENT OF INVESTIGATION OF TWIN PAIRS NOTIFIED

Not investigated Not approached... Refused co-operation... Left school ... No replies ...
Total ... Investigated ...
TOTAL ...

Total
8
O 13 9
40 62 102

Sex Probable Ovularity Males Females Uni Bin ?
3 5 233 3 7 I8I 8 5 652 7 2 27o 21 I9 II 23 6 27 35 36 o 26 48 54 47 49 6

eight pairs that were no-t approached, the
twins were discovered to be too young for testing in five cases; in one case one of the twins was at a school for the educationally subnormal; in another the twins were Italian-speaking; and one pair was notified after it had been decided to terminate the
investigation. In I3 pairs testing was prevented by one or both of the twins leaving school. The " no replies " include one pair where it was later learned that one of the
twins was in hospital with chorea; in the

other cases no further enquiries were made. In nine cases we were refused permission to test the twins, and in one to obtain a history. This was sometimes because a parent disapproved, more often because the children
did not like the idea. It is interesting that binovulars objected more often than uniovu-
lars, who are presumably more used to receiving attention on account of being twins
and often take pleasure in it. Table 3 shows the distribution of the 62
pairs investigated, by age, sex and ovularity.

TABLE 3 AGE, SEX AND OVULARITY OF TWIN PAIRS INVESTIGATED
Age (years) ... ... I2 23 14 25 All ages

Uniovular male Uniovular female
Binovular male Binovular female

... ...
... ...

2 5
I*

4 8
8 3

5 6
5 5

Total ... 9 23 2I

* Actually a. iI IO/I2 on testing.

2 4
0 3
9

13 23
14 1I2
62

Forty-four of them were aged I3 or I4.

Thirty-five were girls, 27 boys ; 36 uniovular,

26 binovular. There is thus an excess of

U girls. (At birth same-sexed B pairs are

more numerous than U's in the approximate

ratio of II :9.) At each stage in the investi-

gation B pairs had dropped out. Of the

pairs originally notified where the twins

were at different schools, twelve were B

pairs, only one was U. In nine of these

cases both twins were at different schools'

in the area covered by the research, but

in only four of these were both twins'

reported by the schools as they should

have been. Thus it is possible that a few

B pairs were misged entirely in this way.

Further, as we have seen, a higher proportion

of U's than of B's was investigated because

of the planning of the research and the

greater co-operation of the U's.

--

It is not considered that this excess of U-

twins is a serious drawback. The material

is probably sufficiently representative psychi-

atrically. There is no reason to believe that

it is biased in any way in favour of psychi-

atrically similar pairs or of neurotic or other-

wise unstable twins. It is worth noting that,

where the reasons for refusal to co-operate

were known, these were often because of

some minor psychiatric abnormality. Thus

PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

2I9

in one pair the twins are reported as being if not entirely, by heredity. A difference

duill and suspicious. In another, one of the between twins in any of the blood groups,

twins has many anxieties and could not be for example, can be taken as proof that they

persuaded that he would not be " sent away are not uniovular, as twins with the same

if he came up to hospital.

genes would have to have the same blood

groups. In the same way, a distinct differ-

Educational Data, Social Class

ence in ability to taste phenyl-thiocarbamide

It may be of interest to note here that 23 (PTC) as bitter, a difference of more

of the I24 twins investigated were receiving than 3 in. in height, a distinct difference

a grammar school education, I9 were in in hair colour or iris pigmentation, or a

technical or " central " schools and 82 were marked difference in features or build, can

in secondary modern schools. The members be taken, in the absence of any pathological

of one U pair and eleven B pairs were having condition, as excluding uniovularity. Where

different types of secondary education. Of there is no decisive difference, then the

the twins at the same schools twelve U and greater the number of similarities the

seven B were (or had been) in different greater is the probability that the twins are

classes. The U twins were sometimes in uniovular. In practice it is found that twins

different classes, not so much because of any compared in this way soon sort themselves

marked difference between them in scholastic out into two clear groups, the " identicals,"

ability, but to avoid their being mistaken by showing marked resemblance in all sorts of

the teachers or to encourage them to develop small details and frequently so alike that it

individually.

is difficult to tell them apart, and the

The occupations of the twins' fathers have " fraternals," whose general resemblance is

been classified according to the Registrar about that of a pair of ordinary brothers or

General's Social Classes. None of the sisters. When one compares side by side

families belong to Class I, eight belong to twins who are neither very young, nor very

Class II, 33 to Class III, nine to Class IV old, nor very ill, it is generally not difficult

and twelve to Class V.

to reach a reliable conclusion. Such a com-

parison was possible with all our pairs, and

Ovularity Diagnosis

was generally made independently by the

Obviously it is very important in any psychologists and the writer. In only two

research on twins to do all one can to ensure cases, seen early on, was there any serious

'that a correct diagnosis of ovularity is made. doubt as to whether the twins were uniovular

Evidence regarding the birth of twins and or not, and in these cases blood groups,

the number of- placentae is generally uncer- which are a most valuable scientific check,

tain and, as a number of authorities have decided the matter.

pointed out (Essen-Moller, I941; Price, In 54 pairs in all, full blood-groupings were

I-950; Curtius, Lassen, Waardenburg and very kindly done for us on eight or nine

others, quoted by Gedda, I95I), it is unreli- independent systems and their subgroups*

able as a means of deciding whether twins by Dr. R. R. Race or Dr. Ruth Sanger of

are derived from one ovum or not. Price the M.R.C. Blood Group Research Unit at

considers that about a quarter of all uniovu- the Lister Institute.t Twenty-one of these

lar twins are dichorionic, and occasionally a pairs differed in at least one group, thus

pair which is clearly binovular is reported

as having shared one placenta. Ovularity * Antisera used: anti-A, -B, -A41; anti-M, -N, -S,

diagnosis is normally made by the Siemens similarity method, and this was the means employed in the present research. According to this method the twins are compared as to

and (sometimes) anti-s; anti-P; anti-C, -c, -CW, -D, -E, (sometimes) -e; anti-Lua; anti-K; anti-Lea, -Leb anti-Fya; and (sometimes) anti-Jka.
t I am particularly indebted to Mr. P. Chappell of the Clinical Pathology Laboratory, Maudsley Hospital,

their resemblance in a number of physical characteristics which are influenced largely,

who took nearly all the blood samples, sometimes calling on the parents of the twins in the evening for this
purpose.

220 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

confirming binovularity. (Seven pairs differed in two groups, seven in three groups, five in four groups and two in five groups.)
Of the 33 others who had the same groups 3I differed in no way that would exclude uniovularity, while the remaining two were
clearly binovular (see descriptions in Table 4). Race and Sanger (1950) have shown how to calculate from a knowledge of the blood groups of the parents the probability that
same-sexed twins with the same blood groups are binovular. This estimate of probability does not take other similarities or differences into account. In i6 of the cases where the twins had the same blood groups, including the two pairs classified as binovular, the parents agreed to have blood samples taken too,* and the probability of binovularity was calculated by Dr. Race and Dr. Sanger according to the above method. The results
are shown in Table 4. It was in no case

TABLE 4
TWIN PAIRS WITH THE SAME BLOOD GROUPS: BLOOD GROUPS OF PARENTS ALSO DONE

Probability of binovularity from Number knowledge of sex of pairs
and blood-groups (Total-I6) only

Ovularity as classified on all available information.
Remarks

22-6%
12 .7% 6 80,,, I 3-35%-5%~
I *8% 0.9% 0°45%

I Binovular. (One twin has auburn hair, the other black; marked difference in eye colour, features and build; 2 stone, II lb. difference in weight.)
2 Uniovular.
r 6 Uniovular. (In one of these pairs
~ J~7]groounlpyed'.o)ne parent was blood-
I Binovular. (One twin tastes PTC as bitter, the other as " just
water"; 8j in. difference in height; differences in build, colouring and features.)
3 Uniovular. I Uniovsular. (Blood groups of an elder
sister also taken into consideration.) I Uniovular.

necessary on learning the blood groups to reverse an opinion previously reached on clinical grounds. It is considered justifiable to include in the series eight female pairs
(5 U and 3 B) where the twins would not
agree to blood samples being taken, but of whose ovularity there is no reasonable doubt.
Fingerprints of the twins were taken, but
* The parents of five binovular pairs with different blood groups were also tested in order to obtain additional family data on blood groups.

these were not considered when deciding ovularity. Mr. W. L. B. Nixon of our Unit is using these in a special study of fingerprints and their value in discriminating between the two kinds of twins.
Physical Differences
Even with uniovular twins there are of course physical differences. There are slight differences in height which are often associated with a corresponding difference in weight; and one of the twins frequently appears just a little fuller in the face or healthier looking. Sometimes a birthmark or difference in moles serves to distinguish them fairly easily; in others there is just a difference in " expression," or to outsiders no detectable difference at all. Mothers do not like to admit they make mistakes (see Burlingham, I952) and they probably do so less frequently than anyone else, but even mothers will sometimes say they have bathed or smacked the wrong one by mistake. A difference in handedness is fairly common among twins of both sorts. In eleven out of 36 (30.6 per cent) of our uniovulars and eight out of 26 (30.8 per cent) of our binovulars one of them was left-handed and the other right-handed. One B pair and possibly one U pair were both left-handed. Differences in health varied considerably from case to case, but were more marked in the B pairs.
In two U pairs interesting physical differences were observed. In a pair of U boys one twin had a congenital malformation of the fourth and fifth toes of his right foot, both toes being abnormally short. His left foot was normal, as were both feet of the other twin. In a twelve-year-old girl pair one twin weighed 9 st. i lb., the other 7 st. IO lb. Both were plump and awkward, one much more so than the other. However 7 B pairs showed a greater difference in weight than this pair.
It may be of interest to give some brief account of the present differences in height and weight between the twins in our series. Tables 5 and 6 give an idea of the distribution of these differences for U and B pairs. However at birth differences between U

PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

22I

twins in weight (as reported by the parents) were not smaller than those between B

TABLE 5 PRESENT DIFFERENCES BETWEEN TWINS IN HEIGHT

U pairs ... B pairs ...

Less than I in. I in.... 26 (73%) I0 (28%)
9 (35%) 6 (23%)

2 in.O (0%)
II (43%)

a difference as small as this, and with four B pairs there are differences of a year or over in onset of menstruation.
When considering psychological differences between U twins, it is helpful to bear in mind the extent of these physical differences.

TABLE 6 PRESENT DIFFERENCES BETWEEN TWINS IN WEIGHT

U pairs ... ...
B pairs ... ...

Under 2 lb.
I4 (39%) 2 (8%)

2 lb.20 (56%) II (42%)

8 lb.2 (6%)
I3 (50%)

TABLE 7 REPORTED DIFFERENCES BETWEEN TWINS IN BIRTH WEIGHT

U pairs. B pairs.

Under j lb. I3 (38%) I5 (6o%)

ib.-
9 (27%) 5 (20%)

lb.-
I2 (35%) 5 (20%)

No information for 2 U and I B pairs.

TABLE 8 REPORTED PREMATURITY OF BIRTH

U pairs. ... B pairs ... ...

Not premature
I3 (4I%) I2 (56%)

Premature, ? by how much, or Premature by
premature by 3 weeks or nsore less than 3 wks..
9 (28%) IO (31%) 7 (28%) 4 (I6%)

No information for 4 U and I B pairs.

twins. On the contrary they were more
frequently greater, as Table 7 shows. This was noted by Dahlberg (I926) and is presumably due to features peculiar to monochorionic pregnancy. Further, the U twins were reported as being more frequently prematurely born than the B twins (Table 8).
Karn's data (I953) show that pairs of the
same sex have a shorter gestation time than opposite-sexed pairs.
Secondary sex development is another character which, though largely genetically determined, shows slight variations in uniovular twins. For the female pairs information regarding menstruation is available for 20 U and eleven B pairs. In three U and one B it had commenced in one member of
the pair only; in eleven U and six B pairs it had started in both. In four U pairs the periods had started within a few weeks of each other in the two twins. The greatest difference reported for the U's is six months
(three cases). In only two B cases was there

Maternal Age, Size of Family
A further point of interest is the higher age of the mother at the birth of binovular twins. This has been noticed by Waterhouse (I950) and Stocks (I952) who compared same-sexed and opposite-sexed twin births. Our data is given in Table 9. Of the 33 pairs born when
the mother was under 30, 27 were U. Of the
29 pairs born when the mother was 30 or
over, 20 were B. X2 (Yates) is I4*3 and very
highly significant.
As a consequence of this the binovular
twins came from slightly larger families and had a higher proportion of older sibs than did the uniovular twins (Table io).

TABLE 9 AGE OF MtOTHER AT BIRTH OF TWINS

-~Age

Ovulariyty ars)
of twinsg

20-24

25-29

30-34

35-39

40-

Uniovular ... IO I7

72

Binovular ... 33 II 8

0 I

Total Mean
36 27-25 26 385

TABLE io

NUMBER OF OTHER CHILDREN BORN TO MOTHER (INCL. MISCARRIAGES AND OTHER TWINS): RELATIVE PLACE OF TWINS IN FAMILY

Other children
Ovularity of tWills

Younger Older 0 I 2 3 4 5 6 6+ Total Mean than than
twins twins

U (36 famnilies) ... 9 7 7 4 6 3 0 0 72 2 00 38 B (26 families) ....4 6 7 4 0 I 2 2 70 2-69 I6

34 54

Other Twins in the Family In this sample the frequency of twinning
was increased in the siblings of the binovular twins. Four of their mothers' 66 other
pregnancies were twin births-one oppositesexed pair, and three same-sexed pairs of which one was certainly and two were probably, also binovular. The mothers of the
U twins had 7I other pregnancies including only one other pair of twins, which on clinical and serological grounds was also uniovular. The frequency and type of twinning among the parents of the twins is shown overleaf.

222 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

This appears also to be increased. In Great the whole the more willing informants, per-

Britain, one out of 83 births is a twin birth. haps because they were more used to receiv-

Parents of U Twins
Fathers-2/36 were themselves twins (twin partners: i ? U, i stillborn)

ing attention on account of their twins. The parents were encouraged so far as possible to tell their story in their own words, but an

Mothers-2/36 were themselves twins (twin partners: i ? U, i female d. inf.)

attempt was made to cover the following points: Social environment including war--

Parents of B Twins

time evacuation history; health and per-

Fathers-i/26 was a twin (twin partner female)
Mothers-none were twins

sonality of the parents and of any other brothers or sisters ; family relationships, in particular the relationship between the

The occurrence of twins in the sibships of twins; birth and early development;

the parents and elsewhere in the family was physical health, and education. Personality

reported more frequently on the maternal similarities and differences were elicited by

side (42 cases) than on the paternal side (2I enquiring whether the twins were alike in

cases) ; this was true for the families of both their ways, and by discussing such topics as

U and B twins.

food, sleep, money, clothes, discipline, inter-

ests, ambitions and social life. Neurotic

Psychiatric Investigation

traits and behaviour disorders such as the

The principal source of information about following were enquired about: Excessive

the twins was the parents. In 37 cases both thumb-sucking, nail biting, enuresis, food

parents were seen, in 20 cases the mother fads, sleep disturbances, stammering, nervous

only, and in five cases the father only. Inter- mannerisms, fears, marked shyness, sensitiv-

views were in the homes of 54 of the families, ity or aggressiveness, truancy, delinquency,

the other interviews being at the Maudsley disturbed personal relationships. Where

Hospital. The principal interview was rarely symptoms such as these occurred the history

of less than one hour's duration and often -sometimes suggested their psychopathology,

longer. In 35 cases there was more than one but the research was not, of course, designed

interview; the second one generally took especially to investigate this.

place either when the parents came up for It was only rarely felt that the severity of

blood grouping or if they had asked to be psychiatric maladjustment was exaggerated

told how the twins had got on in the psycho- by the mothers. It is more likely that the

logical testing. As already stated, the reported incidence of these traits is an

parents' information was considered in con- underestimate. This seems to be the case,

junction with reports from the schools, both for example, with aggressive disorders in

as to academic performance and character, early childhood and with sexual difficulties

and along with, my personal impression of iin adolescence. The quantity and quality of

the twins on interview. For the purpose of the information obtained naturally varied

this report, the results of the psychological from case to case, though the data obtained

tests were not considered although the twins' about one twin was always comparable in

reaction to these was sometimes taken into these respects to that relating to his twin

account. The majority of the children seem partner. In most cases it is felt that a fairly

to have enjoyed their day at the hospital. reliable picture of the children was obtained.

The interviews with the parents were

carried out as far as possible on lines that Frequency and Severity of Psychiatric

might have been followed at a child guidance Disorder

clinic except, of course, that the focus was We may now proceed to the principal

on research, not therapy. Most parents findings. First we will consider the extent

seemed genuinely interested in talking about and severity of psychiatric abnormality in its

their twins and some had problems to discuss. widest sense, as found in the sample. Small

The parents of the uniovular pairs were on though it is, the material may give some

PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

223

indication of the frequency of minor childhood psychiatric disorders in the general population. This is a point of relevance to both genetics and social psychiatry, and one which has never been adequately studied. On it depends the genetical and psychiatric significance which can be attributed to these troubles and also the planning of psychiatric services, both educational and therapeutic.

TABLE II
SEVERITY OF PSYCHIATRIC MALADJUSTMENT: NuMBER OF INDIVIDUALS IN EACH OF FOUR GROUPS

Degree of Severity

(I) Moderately severe

(2) Mild ... ...

(3) Neurotic traits ...

(4) Well-adjusted ...

Total

...

Individuals

Uniovular

Binovular

Male Female Male Female

14 IO 7 I 4I2

4 12

5

4 9 I48 35

4

4 3IO 5

26 46 28 24

Total
25 22 I24

Table ii shows the number of individuals
grouped as to severity on a four-point scale
and divided according to sex and ovularity.
We are justified in taking each twin singly, as the twins were not selected by reason of
one or the other of them being abnormal.
However, the sampling error will be greater than if we were dealing with a series of unrelated persons. In Group i of the scale (" moderately severe ") are those individuals
who at one time or another have been disturbed to a degree that might have warranted referral to some social agency. In Group 2 we have those who have suffered from a
definite psychiatric or behaviour disorder of a similar kind, but milder or more transitory than those included in the first group. Groups i and 2 together may conveniently, if rather arbitrarily, be regarded as " neurotic" in a wide sense of the term.
Group 3 comprises persons who are within normal limits but have neurotic traits. The fourth group are the well-adjusted in whom no neurotic traits of significance were elicited. The four groups should be regarded as merging into one another.
A few examples may be given of the sort of case included in each of the four groups. In Group i are four children who appearedbefore a j uvenile court because of a conduct

disorder; also all those who were taken to a
child guidance clinic or to a hospital on account of nervous symptoms, with the
exception of one or two where the trouble
seemed to be one of maternal anxiety. Cases of enuresis after the age of eight were always
included. There is a boy who is extremely
resentful and unhappy-looking, who adopts
a " don't care " attitude with fiequent
shrugs of the shoulders and who is in trouble
at home on account of ag'gressive behaviour.
Another example is a pair of girls who used to have frequent night terrors and are now,
at I3, only just ceasing to wet the bed. In
Group 2 there is a girl of good personality who developed a facial tic which cleared up
when some difficulties at school had been
dealt with; and another girl who since adolescence has been difficult at home and who at school is obstinately not working, perhaps because she feels she can never be as good as her twin sister. Group 3 includes the person who might, in lay terms, be
described as a little highly-strung-the somewhat anxious or hysterical personality who has shown no real abnormality. Also included in this group are one or two children who made a somewhat odd impression but who appeared to be fairly well adjusted. For example, there was a pair of girls who were extremely quiet and rather awkward. The fourth group includes among others a girl of low-average intelligence who is placid, capable and sociable. There is also a selfcontained but quite averagely mischievous boy who is probably of university scholarship level and has athletic and artistic abilities besides; he has shown no neurotic traits.
Low intelligence was not taken into
account in assessing severity unless it was
accompanied by personality or social difficulties. But the age at which a symptom occurred was given due weight. Thus phobias at the age of twelve were regarded more seriously than phobias at the age of three. These ratings are of course personal ones, but it is hoped they are consistent, and they are based on all the information available. Other observers might disagree in
placing some of the children by one point on the scale, but there would probably be few

224 THE EUGENICS REJVIEW

cases where there would be a much wider
,disagreement. Of the I24 individuals 42 are in Group i,
the most severely disturbed group, 25 are in Group 2, 35 in Group 3, and 22 in Group 4,
the least neurotic group (Table ii). The boys appear in the most severe group much more frequently than the girls, as the per-
centages of Table I2 show. This is in

,TABLE I2
SEVERITY OF MIALADJUSTMENT ACCORDING TO SEX AND OVULARITY: PERCENTAGES

Perceotage of Individuials

Degree of Severity

Males (54)

Uniovular BinIovular

Femiales (72)

(52)

(70) 'Percentages corrected

for sex differences)

(i) Moderately severe 46 24 38 34

(2) Mild

17 23 2I

8

(3) Neurotic traits 24 3I 23 33

(4) Well-adjusted ... 13 2I 19 I6

Totals ... I00

99 I1O

101

accordance with the observation that in our culture boys are more troublesome than girls. Of 985 children seen at the Maudsley Hospital Children's Out-patient Department between I949 and I95I, 62 per cent
were boys. As the total figures of Table ii stand, there are slightly more B than U twins in the most severe group-36 per cent as against 33 per cent. But since there is an
excess of girls among the U twins in our
sample, some correction is necessary before we can accept this comparison of U and B
twins for severity. This is most easily done as follows. It will be seen froin Table iI that in Severity Group i there are I4 out of 26 (54 per cent) U boys and ten out of 46 (22 per cent) U girls. The mean of these two percentages is 38 per cent. Similarly there are eleven out of 28 (39 per cent) B
males and seven out of 24 (29 per cent) B females, the mean of the percentages being 34. We proceed in the same way with Severity Groups 2, 3 and 4 to obtain the corrected percentages given in the second part of Table I2. It will be seen that there are now slightly more U than B twins in Groups i and 2. The' differences are slight and do not justify our saying that one kind of twin is likely to be more neurotic than the other. If we deal with the figures relating to sex in the same way, correcting them for any

supposed differences due to ovularity, we find that the percentages of Table I2 are practically unaltered.
These findings suggest that childhood psychiatric disorders are of frequent occurrence. Over half the children observed fall into the so-called " neurotic " Groups i and 2. In nearly half the families (47 per cent) either one or both of the twins had at some time in their lives suffered from a disorder as severe as that of many children who are, in fact, referred for psychiatric investigation.
The Commonest Troubles This material is not well suited to an
accurate analysis of the relative frequency with which all the various behaviour difficulties and nervous troubles of childhood occur. However it may be of some interest to note the most frequently mentioned complaints for each sex. The figures relate to the number of families in which one or both of the twins are reported as showing the trouble in question. These are to be regarded as minimum figures.
The most frequent single symptom in both sexes was nail-biting (eleven male and twelve female). Then came, for the males, enuresis (ten), school problems of all kinds (ten), food fads (eight), night terrors (seven), adolescent emotional reactions (six) ; and for the females, hysterical attention-seeking or display (ten), fears, worries or other anxiety symptoms (nine), over-dependency (eight), adolescent reactions of rebelliousness or sensitivity (six), enuresis (six). After these the most frequently mentioned symptoms were marked shyness, marked resentment or jealousy, overactivity, headaches and other psychosomatic symptoms such as blushing, fainting and vomiting.
Are Twins Different from the Singly Born? We must now consider the possibility that
twins as such are particularly liable to psychiatric disorders. If this were the case it might partly explain the high incidence of maladjustment reported.
First, may I point out a danger into which many people fall ? Twins are in themselves somewhat unusual. If they show any unusual

PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS . 2225

characteristic it is tempting to jump to the conclusion that this is because they are twins. For example, one parent asked if her boys were late in talking because they were twins,
another whether they talked too much because they were twins. I may say for what it is worth that I do not recall any parent attributing nervous symptoms to the fact of
twinship. Some psychiatric colleagues are
inclined to do the same sort of things and to attribute troubles such as a dyslexia or an anxiety state occurring in one or both of a pair,entirely or very largely to difficulties in the inter-twin or parent-twin relationship. I may fall into the same error myself in
attributing differences between a pair of
twins to the relationship between them rather than to any other cause.
Some indication of the -answer to this question can be obtained by finding out whether twins are in fact referred for psychiatric treatment more often than one would. expect. In Slater's recent monograph it is reported that the standing population of the L.C.C. mental hospitals- in I936 did not contain a higher percentage of twins than the percentage of twins born. Table I3 shows that if we examine referrals to hospitals where less severe psychiatric disorders are treated we likewise do not find an excess of twins. The figures in the table for the Children's Department and for Adult Outpatients at the Maudsley Hospital relate to discharges cver a three-year period, I949I95I, those of Belmont Hospital, Sutton,

(adult in-patients) to admissions between
November 1950 and July I953. At both these hospitals systematic enquiries are
made as to twinship.* The percentage of twins in this combined material (2-I8 per cent) is in close agreement with national
statistics on twin births. If anything, the twins reported are fewer than might have
been expected. Over a period of ten and a half years, the statistics of the Registrar-
General show (according to Waterhouse, I950) that on average I2-I2 per i,ooo
maternities are twin maternities, i.e. 2-39
per cent of all persons in this country are born twins. It can further be seen from Table I3 that the proportion of male to female patients among twins and among all admissions is very similar (55-8 and 54-8 per cent males respectively).
Next let us consider whether U twins are more likely to have a psychiatric illness than are B twins. This might be considered possible because of the greater pre-natal and
neo-natal risks they run, or because. of
psychological difficulties inherent in being al twin which might be presumed to be greater ini the case of the uniovulars. Again the evidence, is against the hypothesis. In; systematic studies of mentally ill twins inthe United States and in Germany no excess of U twins has been found. In Kallman's
* I am indebted to Dr. C. P. Blacker and Mrs. M. Perkins, and also to Mr. A. T. Gore (L.C.C. Public Health Dept.) for the Maudsley figures; and to Dr. L. Minski, Dr. Maxwell Jones, Mrs. F. Taylor and Nurse L. Keeling for their help at Belmont.

L TABLE I3 NUMBER OF TWINS IN A PREDOMINANTLY NON-PSYCHOTIC PSYCHIATRIC POPULATION

Hospital

All Patients *

Twins I

Sex of Twin Partner Expected

Hospital

I_-I.

I_l Twins as

I__

Ipercentkge

F-F-

pecntagel

Oppo-.o

Fe- Fie- of all Same site Not uniovular

Males males Total Males males Total patients as from Known pairs

patient patient

(Weinberg)

Maudsley Children's Dept. (I.P. and O.P.) 780 489 I,269 23 7 30.' 2.37 Maudsley
Adult O.P.D. 2,751 2,558 5,309 56 55 III 2-09
B3elmont (In-patients) 2,o88 I,630 3,718 46 37 83 2-23

i6 I2

2

65 33 13

43 27 13

I4.3
32 7 22-9

Total

... 5,619 4,677 IO,296 I25 99 224 2-I8

124 72 28

26.5

* Excluding 17I Maudsley out-patients where it is not known whether patient was a twin.

226 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(1946) large series of schizophrenic twins the proportion of uniovulars was according to
expectation. However, studies by Conrad
(I936) and Juda (I939) on epilepsy and
mental defect respectively show a significant increase in the proportion of B twins which
is rather difficult to explain. According to
Weinberg's formula the expected number of uniovular pairs is the total number of pairs less twice the number of opposite-sexed
pairs. Applying this formula (uncorrected
for the small excess of males) to the Maudsley
and Belmont twins., where the sex of the twin partner is known, we would expect 26-5 per cent of the pairs to be uniovular. From G.R.O. statistics, Waterhouse (loc. cit.)
has calculated that 28-6 per cent of all twin pairs born are uniovular. The two figures are in close agreement.
Thus we are justified in saying that one
of the assumptions underlying twin research is correct. Twins of both kinds are different
from other people in no way that funda-
mentally affects the subject being studied. The only possible exceptions to this are in
the fields of intelligence and speech develop-
ment. So far as intelligence is concerned,
Mehrotra and Maxwell (I949) showed from
data obtained in the Scottish Mental Survey that the average I.Q. of twins from all sizes of family was very slightly lower than that of non-twins; and twins in special schools for the defective in Germany were found to be
in excess by Gudden (I934), FrischeisenKohler (1936) and Juda (I939). However
Schiller (I937) investigated this point in Stuttgart and found that 204 twin-pairs from the ordinary schools were on average quite as intelligent as the non-twins in the same schools. Newman (i942), from his wide experience in the United States, likewise considers this to be the case. Day (I932)
and Davis (I94I) consider twins to be
retarded in speech development compared with the singly-born. Any tendencies of these kinds are probably only slight and are of little relevance to the present study. So far as could be judged, our twins do not
appear to be unduly retarded in intelligence or speech development.
This is not to say that having a brother or

sister of exactly the same age and perhaps almost a double of oneself does not colour the personality in any way. But just how being a twin affects a person varies considerably from case to case, depending among other things on how the situation is handled by the -parents, on the relative size, health and intelligence of the twin partner and on the innate personality make-up of the person concerned. The dependencies and jealousies that sometimes occur in the twin situation can have a pathoplastic effect on the psychiatric illness of a twin, but their effect is likely to be pathogenic only in a predisposed person. Being a twin may be of much the same kind of importance as being an only child or being the eldest or the youngest of a family.
Wartime Influences Another factor which might have tended
to increase the incidence of neurotic traits in these twins is that they were born between 1937 and I940, and so frequently had their early years disturbed by evacuation, the absence of fathers in the forces or by bombing. It is difficult to say just how much or how little importance should be attributed to the stresses of wartime in predisposing children to neurotic symptoms later on.
Significance of the Frequency of Psychiatric Disorder If we accept the figures given in Table I2
as a Yery rough approximation to the frequency of neurotic and behaviour disorders of childhood in the general population, then it is clear we cannot regard these generally as being seriously abnormal conditions ; they are too common. Though their causes are different, the frequency of moderately severe physical and psychiatric disorders in children are probably not very different. Probably over a third of all children suffer (or at any rate not so many years ago used to suffer) from a moderately severe physical illness, such as an acute attack of one of. the childhood infections involving an anxious stay in hospital, or a milder chronic or recurrent complaint involving a good deal of medical attention or absence from school. However, the line between what 'can be regarded as

PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

227

pathological and what normal is even less clearly defined in mental health than it is in the case of physical health. A more convenient way of regarding these psychological conditions and their severity is as representing different degrees of normal variation in
psychological adjustment. It would be unrealistic to look upon them either as being due to some pathological gene, or as symptoms of a dynamic process which, unless treated by deep psychotherapy, will lead to severe or chronic mental ill-health in later life. Evidence as to their often solely incidental nature was seen in Slater's series of twins (loc. cit.). Here the U twin who had the more neurotic traits in childhood did not tend to be the more abnormal in later life.
That psychiatric troubles are widespread
not only in children but also in adults has
been indicated by a number of workers, among them Russell Fraser and his collaborators (I947), who found in a large sample of light and medium factory workers of both sexes that over 25 per cent of all sickness absence was due to neurosis. Ten per cent of the workers examined had suffered from disabling neurosis during the six months under review and a further 20 per cent of them from minor forms of neurosis.
This is not the place to attempt to discuss all the implications for social and preventive psychiatry of these findings: the figures need confirmation, and there are important administrative and therapeutic considerations.
Certainly our present psychiatric services in most areas are not large enough to cope with the latent demand for help; and many of the problems could no doubt be dealt with without referral to child guidance clinics as we know them today. In I948 Blacker suggested a combination of two kinds of psychiatric service for children: Child guidance centres under the education authority for educatibonal and minor psychiatric problems, and child psychiatric clinics attached to adult psychiatric clinics for children who need more intensive treatment than the centres would provide. For three of the former he considered that one of the latter might be required. In his suggested service

for a popujation of a million (which would include 200,000 schoolchildren) Blacker
reckoned on an estimate of between i and 2 per cent of schoolchildren as requiring child
guidance referral in a year, and he thought about ten child guidance centres would be required to meet this demand. An expansion
of general medical and social services, together with an increased psychiatric awareness on their part, would enable them to
prevent or alleviate even more of these children's and parents' psychological problems than they already do at present.
Nevertheless a certain amount of emotional discomfort and social difficulty is probably an inevitable accompaniment of learning to grow up in society. These symptoms of maladjustment cannot be reduced to a minimum just by " treating " individual children and " advising " individual parents. Society itself must also adjust itself to the varying needs of its children.
Perhaps some of the variability of children's needs and the problems they create is due to genetical differences between them.

Intra-pair Differences in Severity
We now turn, therefore, to a comparison of the two members of a twin pair as to the severity of psychological disturbance. Table I4 shows in how many cases the twins belong to the same severity group and in how many they differ by one, two or three points on the four-point scale. Sixty-nine per cent of the U
pairs belong to the same group while only 3I per cent of the B pairs do so. Table I5 shows

TABLE I4
INTRA-PAIR DIFFERENCES IN SEVERITY: COMPARISON OF U
AND B PAIRS

Severity: Numnber of points U B on scale by which pairs pairs
twins differ

Differ by No.

25 8

o points Percent 69 31

Differ by No.

6 II

I point Per cent 17 42

Differby No.

35

2points Percent 8 rg

Differ by No.

22

3 points Percent 6 8

Total No.

36 26

Percent Ioo o00

TABLE I5 MEMBERS OF TWIN PAIRS: CONCORDANCE/DISCORDANCE FOR
"NEUROSIS"

Severity Group U B pairs pairs

Both I or 2 No. (" neurotic ") Percent Both 3 or 4 No. (" normal ") Percent
One Iora2 No. One 3 or4J Percent (" discordant")

17 47
13 36
6
17

9 35
8
31
g
35

Total

No. 36 26
Percent zoo ror

E

228 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

concordance as to " neurosis," as defined above. Only I7 per cent of the U twins were discordant in this respect, that is, one being neurotic, the other not; 35 per cent of the B pairs were discordant. Examination of the case histories shows that this discordance can be due to a variety of environmental factors. However, these, though of the greatest importance, do not entireiy explain the difference between the twvo kinds of twins. The findings suggest that genetical factors influence the threshold at which symptoms show themselves in response to stress.
Some Probable Causes of Differences in Severity Between Uniovular Twins A few exa mples may now be given of
uniovular pairs where the members show differing degrees of psychiatric disturbance. These illustrate the apparent effect of some environmental influences which in childhood
can affect one twin and not the other, among them differences in birth weight or difficulty in birth, differences in physical health, dominance and submissiveness in the twin relationship, parental discrimination against one of the twins, separation of one twin from home, and differences in school career. A statistical analysis of some of these and other factors is attempted in a later section.
First, there is a pair of I4-year-old U boys, Peter and Paul, where one is in the most severe, the other in the least severe group. At birth Peter, who is in Severity Group i, was the lighter of the two and weighed only 21 lb. He had to be reared in an incubator at first and is said to have had treatment for some blood disorder. In infancy he had asthma. From the age of six months he used to bang his head on the side of his cot at night for several months. He had a curious crablike crawl, unlike Paul. At i8 months he developed a severe squint for which he had an operation a few years ago-his mother says he nearly lost the sight of one eye. At
three, he had frequent nightmares and screaming attacks at night. At four, he had what his mother calls a " convulsion fit." At seven she sought the advice of a consultant psychiatrist because Peter was so " shy,

nervy and whining " and was not doing well
at school. Paul has had none of these symp-
toms; but both boys have been nail-biters,
mother treating them for this with bitter
aloes. (She herself was a severe nail-biter in childhood, and feels strongly about the
habit.) Peter used to be in a lower class than
Paul at school but has nearly caught up
with him now; both are of good average intelligence. While Peter leans on Paul
intellectually, he is the more boisterous and talkative in company. There is a close relationship between the boys. Both seem
well-adjusted now; but Peter has fainted
twice recently, and he is a little more irritable
and slapdash in personality. Perhaps the
fact that it was only Peter who showed fairly severe symptoms in his earlier years can be
attributed ultimately to his weaker physical
condition at birth. Some of his symptoms suggest an organic factbr.
In a pair of uniovular girls we see a
possible consequence of one of the twins having a more difficult birth, though this has resulted in no very severe symptoms in this case. Iris had a difficult birth; she was " black and blue " when born and weighed less than Doris. As a baby she cried a lot more. The twins had the same childhood illnesses but Iris got them more severely. Doris, the bigger child, became the dominant partner. The cumulative effect of these and perhaps other factors has resulted here in these twins being rather less alike than most of our so-called identical pairs. Though both are in a dancing troupe they are not so alike in manner that they can successfully do a twin act together. Iris is lacking in confidence and has a nervous blink when talking to people. She has been placed in Severity Group 3, Doris in Group 4.
A somewhat similar personality difference is that between Susan and Shirley, of whom the latter is over-reliant on her twin and afraid of doing things on her own. But here there is no known environmental factor which is likely to have caused this difference between the twins other than that of the twin relationship itself. This is the only case where a dominant-submissive twin relationship by itself has resulted in the twins being

PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

229

placed in different severity groups, Shirley
in 3, Susan in 4. Nowhere in this series does
the inter-twin relationship appear to be the decisive factor in making one of the twins neurotic; but it does seem to cause slight
differences in personality. In only two of the 36 uniovular pairs has
a marked parental preference for one of the
twins been obvious, and in each case this has had an effect on their psychological development. In one pair the mother talks of
" my Clem " but never of " my Winston." Winston is said to posess all the worst characteristics of his father. The result is
frequent scenes at home between Winston and his mother. He has also stolen articles from home. He is described as " very deep "; he " overstudies " and he is much preoccupied with religion and with art. Clem had poor health since babyhood. The effect of this, together with mother's psychological make-up, has here been the favouring of the weak twin and the rejection of the other. Winston is in Severity Group I, Clem in 3. Clem had night terrors when very small and now like Winston is regarded at school as being nervous and easily cast down; but he seems hardly disturbed enough- to be placed in Group 2.
The second of these cases of parental discrimination is a pair of girls whom I saw at home being treated very differently by their mother. "Come in, don't be shy," she said to Norah; " Can't you see we're busy ? " to Nancy. Relatives have remarked to her that she always complains of the one twin, never of the other. Nancy, as the alleged ringleader, comes in for more than her fair share of blame and is the focus of the restrictive parents' anxieties. Her behaviour has become more difficult and the attitude of both parents has hardened even more in conse-
quence. Nancy is an unhappy-looking, resentful girl, who has untidily cut off her curls after persuading mother to allow her
to have a perm, and who seeks admission to hospital on the slightest pretext just for the thrill of it. Norah is a much more normal personality, although she has been caught stealing along with her twin and an older girl and has some minor hysterical traits.

These cases of parental discrimination are
the exceptions. Quite often the twins appear
to have been treated very much as a single
unit. In other cases the mother seems to
stress differences between them in an effort to give each a distinct personality. Or she
may carry over feelings she had about the
twins when they were babies. More than one
mother referred without thinking to " the little one" when there was no longer any
difference between the twins in size. Differ-
ences such as these appear not to affect a mother's fundamental attitude to her twins and they have no appreciable effect, unless perhaps to encourage one twin to be the more responsible of the pair.
Cases of one twin being closer to mother, the other twin closer to father, are comparatively rare, and this also seems to have little or no dynamic effect on the personality. In one pair the boy who was father's special charge when a baby asks father more
questions today, but these boys are otherwise strikingly alike in character and personality. In another pair one girl supports OxfordT in the Boat Race like father, the other Cambridge like mother; but here the identification with different parents ceases.
In none of our pairs were the twins brought up in different homes. But some had separations from home at an early age when this might possibly be thought to involve a risk of disturbing the mother-child relationship and in this way of forming an " affectionless personality." In most instances where only one of a pair of uniovular twins was in
hospital for a short period at an early age, the separation experience does not appear to have led to any major difference in their personalities. But emotional reactions to early hospital experiences such as described by Bowlby (I95I) were mentioned a few times. For example when Bill had his tonsils
out at three, he fretted in hospital. He would not speak to his parents when they visited, but hugged possessively any toys they brought him. On return home he would not
let his mother out of his sight for a week or two. However it was Bill who was the first
to give up thumb-sucking a little later, and both he and John continued to wet and soil

230 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

themselves by day until the age of six or U twins. However, as was seen in Table I4,

seven. At I3 they are very similar personali- they do not always do so. In about two-

ties, their behaviour at school and at home thirds of the U's the twins were in the same

being distinctive in precisely the same ways. severity group, while this was the case with

In another pair, Charlie, who had less breast- about only one-third of the B's.

feeding than his twin David, was in hospital It might be argued that this difference is

for four months at two and a half and would due to the fact that B's are more frequently

not recognize his mother on return. It subjected to different stresses. This may be

might be thought that he had the poorer partly true. However it is difficult to sort

start in life. The twins are alike in being out the importance of genetical differences

very shy with adults, but there are differ- between B pairs in robustness, temperament

ences. However, it is not Charlie who is and intelligence in predisposing them to

described as " rougher in his ways and more these stresses. The interviews with the

of a lone wolf," but David.

parents did not suggest that rejection of

Nevertheless there is one case where one twin in favour of the other was any more

separation and readjustment difficulties were frequent in the B group. So far as parental

perhaps the most important factor causing discrimination is concerned, an observation

differences between the twins. At six, which most impressed me was the insistence

Derek fractured his femur and was seven by mothers that they made no difference

months in hospital. On his discharge the between their B twins. This must often have

family had been billeted in someone else's been untrue; for the twins had different

home and Derek showed behaviour problems needs and made different demands on their

such as jealousy with which the mother had parents. But it does indicate a strong social

difficulty in dealing. Since then Derek has pressure on parents to give twins " the

been the more demanding of the twins and same of everything." To risk a paradoxical

the one who is less able to control his feelings. generalization, the parents of U twins make

It was only he who at twelve, when another a special effort to treat their twins differently,

addition to the family was expected, began those of B twins to treat them the same.

to wet the bed frequently; and two years

later he still does so nearly every other The Family Environments Compared

night. Derek and his twin Patrick are alike The importance of environmental causes of

in most of their ways; and at ten both neurotic behaviour can be seen even more

truanted from school for a month. But clearly if we compare the family backgrounds

Derek is the only one to have suffered from of the twins from a psychiatric point of

enuresis.

view (Table i6). In rating the families as

In two pairs slight differences between U poor, greatest weight was given to those

twins in intellectual performance at school factors which in child psychiatry are con-

seem to have resulted in the less bright one sidered likely to have a disturbing effect on

showing anxiety symptoms. In another case a child's emotional development. Thus a

one of the twins, in addition to being the broken home life in early years involving,

less intelligent, was bullied at school and it say, a stay of two years in a residential

was possibly this that led to a psychogenic nursery was regarded as poor from a

loss of weight. It is reported in a later psychiatric point of view. Much quarrelling

section that the less well adjusted twin between the parents was likewise taken into

tended to be the less intelligent of the pair. account, and so were the more marked cases

Thus we see that a number of environ- of parental rejection, over-protection or

mental factors, both physical and psycho- spoiling, over-anxiety, over-restrictiveness,

logical, generally interacting with one lack of discipline and inconsistent discipline..

another, can even within a family cause If both parents were somewhat unstable this

differences in the degree of psychiatric dis- was considered worse than if only one was

turbance shown by the members of a pair of unstable. Low socio-economic status did not

PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

23I

necessarily imply a poor psychological traits, but who differ in details. Partially

environment. I did my best to avoid rating concordant (P) are those pairs whose chief

an environment as poor because I knew it symptoms are different, but who have some

contained a maladjusted child.

important characteristic in common; and

Of the environments 27 per cent were rated as belonging to the group labelled " good," 24 per cent as " moderate," 3I per cent as " poor'" and i8 per cent as " bad," that is as having the worst sort of environment from a psychological point of view. Table i6 shows clearly how the worst homes produce the greatest number of disturbed

TFABLE 17 QUALITATIVE CONCORDANCE

Qualitative Concordance

(l)
All pairs

(2) (3)
Pairs where 1oth twins Where both are " neu- twins are in rotic," i.e. the same in Severity Severity
Groups i or 2 Group

UB UB UB

children and the fewest without neurotic

C Comipletely No. o3 concordant Per cent 36

o6 0 35

0 12. 0 48

0 0

traits ; and the best homes, vice versa. This C' Essentiallv No.

2 3 8 I Io I

analysis does not exclude the possibility that

concordant Per cent P Partially No.

33 5

some of the children were abnormal because concordant Per cent 14

12
5 19

47 1I 40 333
i8 1332

13
2 25

of the genes they obtained from abnormal DDiscordant Per cent |7 69 o 56 o 63

parents rather than because of the psychological attitudes of the parents; but not all

Total

36 26 'I7 L 9 25 8

fathers or mothers with neurotic traits were discordant (D) those whose symptoms or

regarded ipso facto as bad parents, and personalities are quite different in all essen-

some of the worst environments were tial respects. The first part of the table

attributable to fortuitous circumstances of shows there is a very marked difference

wartime.

between the two kinds of twins in this

TABLE I6 RELATION BETWEEN PSYCHIATRIC ENVIRONMENT AND SEVERITY

respect. No B pair was so alike that it could be placed in group " C " showing almost

Psychiatric Environment

-
Number

I n d i v i d u al s

Per cent

Severity Group 234

photographic similarity; over two-thirds of them fall into the discordant group. By contrast over a third of the U pairs are

Bad ...
Poor ... Moderate Good ...

... ...

22
38 3
34

I8 I5 4 2 I completely concordant and only one-sixth

31 24

14
II

9 I3 69

2 4

of them are discordant. A similar result is

27 2 6 I I I5 reached if one takes only those pairs where

Total ...

I24

I100

42 25 35 22 both members are in Severity Groups I or 2,

This is further evidence for the importance of environmental factors in determining the presence or severity of psychiatric disturbance in childhood.

that is to say, pairs which could be regarded as concordant for " neurosis." Here five out
of nine B pairs showed quite different kinds of reaction, while all the U pairs showed at least some similarity (see the second part of

Qualitative Concordance

Table I7). And the same is true if we apply

We now turn to the kind of disturbance. this analysis only to pairs (whether " neuro-

Are U pairs more alike in this respect than tic" or not) who have been placed in the

B pairs ? In Table I7 each pair has been same group for severity (third part of the

classified as to qualitative concordance, again table).

on a four-point scale. As completely con- With U pairs where there is a difference

cordant (C) I have rated all pairs who are in degree of concordance there is often an

strikingly alike both in their outstanding underlying basic similarity which may poss-

psychiatric characteristics and in all other ibly be genetically determined. There is,

important details. Essentially concordant for example, a pair of boys where only one

(C') includes pairs who are alike in their has shown head-shaking movements, has

most distinctive symptoms or (in the case been preoccupied with fears of death, and

of the symptom-free) in most personality tends to be over-conscientious about some

232 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
things. His symptoms may be regarded as like father. It is noteworthy that during his obsessional. But both twins are hyper- formative years he was separated from father, kinetic, have a manneristic cough and -a as often were the twins from mother, so that slight blinking tic, and are liable to fear the these personality differences are unlikely to worst if accidentally separated from one have arisen through psychological identificaanother. These twins have many good tion with different parents. qualities and there appeared to be nothing U twins can show similar symptoms in' very much wrong in the environment; so different contexts or at different times'. Thus the outlook is probably good. However it is there is a pair of girls where one was desinteresting that the father has obsessional cribed as obstinate, lazy and.disobliging at traits of a different kind, and it might be school; and these are practically the same considered that the twins had inherited much complaints that the mother makes, particuof their psychiatric constitution from him. larly of the other twin's attitude at home.
Another U case where one can perhaps see These girls' behaviour can probably be the possible genetical transmission of person- explained by their upbringing and by the ality traits is that of Nigel and Ronald, relationship between them: they hate being although here circumstances have been twins. Again, there is a pair of girls where against the boys. Owing to the ill-health of one has a fear of pulling the lavatory chain,' the mother and to the father being in the the other a fear of being locked in. Forces, the twins had to leave their home for Another example is that of Brian and Bob.. an institution on six separate occasions These are good-looking, friendly lads -who
between the ages of i8 months and six and a excel at boxing and -dancing. The main half years. During this time they were for personality difference between them is that-
two years in a residential nursery. There is Bob loves manual work, while Brian hates' probably a good deal of neurotic pressure getting his hands dirty. Both have an on the boys at home. No serious difficulties ambition to succeed in engineering; but' are reported from their earlier years. They whereas Bob is trying his hardest to get are said to have been very adaptable and, experience in an engineering workshop, being twins, to have come in for a lot of Brian is concentrating on his mathematics, special attention. Their outstanding person- and by dint of hard work he has improved ality characteristics are their extreme liveli- himself considerably in this subject. Both ness and their engaging inquisitiveness, but these boys are overdependent on the good: they have always presented a disciplinary opinion of men. Bob is leaving school at the, problem. They have been excluded from a earliest opportunity because the headmaster scout troop, referred to a child guidance to whom he was closely attached is retiring. clinic on account of stealing and until Brian has a special respect for the maths recently have been described at school as teacher, of whom he used to be afraid.
" lacking in social consciousness." One of Further, both boys are liable to spells of1'.
them has in addition had moody spells and insecurity and lack of confidence. Brian the other hypnagogic hallucinations. An went through a bad patch of this at eleven interesting point is that the mother is a when changing schools. He was then takeit cyclothymic personality who describes her- to the doctor because he cried so easily and self as " always either up in the heights or had begun to stammer and to bite his nails down in the dumps," and who has suffered badly. At I4 Bob is going through a similar from a depressive illness. It seems possible phase. He is losing confidence in his boxing that the twins have inherited her psychiatric ability, and he too complains of biting his' constitution. The twins have a brother who nails badly. Both bqvs were enuretic and'
is only I5 months older. He went through were taken to a clinic for this when they much the same experiences at much the were nine. Brian was more severe in this'
same age; but he has turned out a different respect. At present it is Brian who appears sort- of boy, quiet, determined, serious, more to be the slightly better adjusted.

PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS - 233

In contrast to these similarities in U twins, kinds of twins was much greater than that

the B pairs include some where both twins found in the quantitative analysis of severity

are neurotic or difficult, but who show quite of disturbance. However, so-called " identi-

different symptoms in response to similar cal" twins are, by no means replicas of one

stresses or as the expression of very different another psychologically. More impressive

personality traits.

than their degree of resemblance are the very

Among these there is a pair where the one much greater differences in kind which are

twin, Denis, at I4, is still enuretic and sucks fairly frequently found between members of

his thumb. In personality he is quiet, self- B pairs ; and it is this difference in behaviour

contained and conforming. He has recently between the two sorts of twins which is the

had an experience of religious conversion. most impressive evidence for the importance

His twin brother, Drummond, is quick and of genetical factors.

restless, makes fun of Denis's religious interests and has always been difficult to, manage

FIGURE I PSYCHOLOGICAL RESEMBLANCE BETWEEN TWINS

at home on account of his tempers. At nine he stole a large sum of money which his mother had saved up for a holiday, and at

QUANTITATIVE CONCORDANCE

QUALITATIVE. CONCORDANCE.

present he is suspected of taking an elder

UB

brother's cigarettes and 'distributing them 100among his friends to gain popularity. He
n rlikes to amuse himself at the pin-tables and

UB
r

is said to have a " mania for gambling.?' tn

The family situation here is a difficult one,

but the twins have reacted to it in different a.

ways.

60-

Then there is a pair of B girls, Jean and 61

La

Betty, where one of them, Jean, is fidgety, 40

always on the go and a nail-biter. She

v ve 0v* o e *^..

enjoys cycling round the streets. She makes

friends quickly, but often changes them. `- 20 She is a quick, impulsive worker and over-

estimates her abilities. Between eight and

nine she was a frequent sleep-walker. She

has very much a mind of her own and needs careful handling on this account. Jean has

BOTH TWINS
NORMAL

COMPLETELY
CONCORDANT

always been different from her twin. As a O

ESSENTIALLY

baby Jean would smile at everyone, Betty at no one. Betty kept a dummy till four,

BOTH TWINS
°N1lEURQTIC

CONCOROANT
PARTIALLY CONCORDANT

used to lisp, blushes. easily and is very shy.
She has difficulty in making friends, particularly with boys, and has one special girl friend only, with whom she spenuds nearly all her time indoors. Compared with Jean she
is an awkward, untidy girl. She cannot ride

DISCORDN Li FOR NEUROSIS

CD1ISCCORRDAANNTT

(Data from Tables I5 and I7.) The columns on the left show that identical (U) twins are only a little more alike than fraternal (B) twins as regards the presence or absence of neurosis or behaviour disorder: environmental factors are very important here. The columns on the right show that identical twins are

a bicycle. She works slowly and painstakingly and underestimates her performance.

very much more alike than fraternals in type of neurotic symptom and personality: here constitu-
tional factors are of great importance.

Here again personality differences, of a kind

I have never come across in U twins, lead in a The Effects of Close Attachment Between

B pair to quite different kinds of problems. Twins

Thus, in this qualitative analysis of It might be thought that the close similarity

symptoms the difference between the two between uniovular twins in personality and

234 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

symptoms could be due to the close relationship that often exists between them. In the pair with nervous mannerisms described above, one twin was seen unw.ittingly to copy the other in clearing his throat. But this does not explain everything; for, as already
shown, very similar symptoms can present themselves in the two twins at different times or in different contexts. Further,
there are some B pairs who are very close friends and quite alike physically, but who
show different symptoms; and there are U pairs who quarrel frequently or who go about separately, but nevertheless have strikingly similar personalities or neurotic traits. The following two examples illustrate the point.
-Tom and Jack are a B pair who have a very strong mutual attachment, who go
about everywhere together and who share hobbies of bird-watching and puppetmaking. Yet Jack is a tough, somewhat restless and noisy boy who is apt to throw a temper if he can't get his way, while Tom is quiet and more girlish. He has missed schooling because of headaches, is a fussy eater, is
liable to nervous fears, thinking, for example, that he had appendicitis after his mother had it; and until eleven he was occasionally enuretic.
Fred and Jim are a U pair!. These boys are in different classes at the same school but
their teacher has never seen them together out of class. In spite of having no very close relationship they are alike in their resentful, disgruntled attitude to life, their lack of sociability and their mannerisms. Fred's aggressiveness has become more marked recently (Severity Group i). Jim is a little quieter. With him, a mannerism which they both share of speaking out of the side of the mouth and hardly opening it has become more pronounced. He is placed in Severity Group 2 because of his abnormal personality. As the differences between them are small
and ones of degree only I have classed them as completely concordant in quality.
We may throw a little more light on the argument, frequently put forward by those who deny the importance of heredity in psychology, to the effect that any greater similarity in U twins compared with B twins

is due to the fact that the former are more closely attached and identified with one another than the latter, by giving quantitative expression to the degree of attachment and relating this to the degree of similarity in symptomatology. I have attempted to do this by allotting each pair of twins to one of three groups: (i) Very closely attached to one an6ther; (2) only moderately attached; (3) very independent or antagonistic. This classification is somewhat rough and ready and does not do full justice to the many different facets of the twin relationshipdependence and independence, competition and collaboration, jealousy, companionship and so on-to differences between the twins in the degree of mutual attachment, or to the changes which occur in the relationship leading in most cases to a gradual lessening of the tie. But if there is any tendency for the " inseparable " kind of twins to be more alike than the others it should show up in the analysis.

TABLE I8

DEGREE OF ATTACHMENT BETWEEN TWINS: PERCENTAGES, BY SEX AND OVULARITY

Uniovular pairs Binovular pairs Total

Attachment

Male Female Male Female

______________

(I3) (23) (14) (12)

UnI Bin

Very close ... ... 54 44 2I

8 47 15

Moderate ... ... 38 35 50 50 36 50

Very independent or. antagonistic ... 8 22 29 42 I 7 35

Total ... IOO IOI I0OO

0O

100

Tableji8 shows that U twins of both sexes
are much more often closely attached to one another than are B twins. This is what other observers, among them von Bracken (I934) and Lehtovaara (I938), have found. The table also shows that. in this sample girl twins, whether U or B, were rather more likely to be antagonistic to one another than boys. This finding is contrary to that of Lehtovaara who found the attachment quotient for girls to be higher than that of
boy twins, and it is perhaps a little surprising. However, if we examine the " very closely attached" U pairs more carefully we find that the extremely close relationships with strong mutual dependency are rather more frequent among girls than boys. The latter
are possibly better able to retain a strong

PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

sympathy for one another and still become independent of one another; the girls are more often described as frequently arguing
and quarrelling. Perhaps we may say tentatively that U girls are at this age more likely than U boys to show extreme types of relationship.
Now, if the closeness of the relationship is related dynamically to concordance in symptoms, independently of ovularity, then the tendency should show itself in the U and B twins separately. Table I9, where the material is broken down in this way, shows that this is not generally the case. If it were

TABLE I9
RELATION BETWEEN CLOSENESS OF ATTACHMENT AND QUALITATIVE
CONCORDANCE FOR U AND B PAIRS SEPARATELY
Qualitative Concordance

Degree of Attachment Uniovular Pairs

Binovular Pairs

_ ~I-

C C' P D T C C' P D T

Observed 9 4 I 3 17 Very close
attachment Expected 6-I 5-7 2-4 2-8 I7

o022 0 0-4 o-8 2-8

4 4

Observed 3 4 3 3 13 Moderate
attachment Expected 4-7 4-3 If 8 2-2 I3

0 I 39 0 I-5 2-5 9

I3 I3

Observed I 4 I 0 6 0 2 0 7 9 Very independent
or antagonistic Expected 2-2 2'0 o-8 I-o 6 0 I-0 1-7 6-2 9

Total

13 I2 5 6 360 3

I8 26

we should, for example, have expected the six discordant U cases to appear mostly in the least closely attached column and some at least of the very closely attached B pairs
to appear as essentially concordant. In general, allowing for the smallness of numbers, it may be said that the figures running across the tables for the different degrees
of attachment are in approximately the same ratio to one another as the figures in the
totals for C, C', P and D. This can be seen by comparing the observed figures with those expected on this assumption. The only possible exception is that there may be a tendency for U twins who are not very closely attached to show that striking similarity in symptoms, which was sometimes seen, less frequently than those who are bosom companions. But beyond this we cannot say, according to this analysis, that similarity in psychiatric state is a function of the attach-

ment between the twins: it seems to be related rather to the degree of genetical
resemblance and to the common social
environment. The close attachment between
twins is quite as likely to be brought about
by their sharing the same tastes, interests
and habits as the other way round.
Burlingham (I952) has suggested that in early childhood uniovular twins who feel
themselves rejected by their parents-in
particular those brought up in an institutional environment-are thereby driven
closer together psychologically. This may be so in individual cases, but it is not borne out in general so far as our information goes.
The U pairs who were brought up in residen-
tial nurseries during wartime did not grow
more attached to one another than those who appear to have enjoyed a happy, stable
home life. The close relationship often reported
between twins, in fact as well as in fiction, is part of a growing relationship which like other human relationships has its ups and downs, its positive and negative elements. In general twins become more independent of one another as they grow up. It is possible that the way in which this weaning process from the twin is carried out may have a bearing on later psychiatric adjustment, but this is not a hypothesis which can be tested on the present material. There are, of course, stories of twins pining for one another when separated at school or through illness. In other cases a parent insists that the twins shall go about together when they no longer wish to do so. With some pairs one could see the twins themselves making attempts, unsuccessfully at first, to do things independ-
ently. Many uniovular pairs claimed they de-
cided things mutually. In one pair this mutual decision was a long-drawn-out affair, both girls being slow and indecisive thinkers like their mother. Asked at lunch in the hospital whether they wanted soup, they conferred together, partly in whispers, partly in gestures, and at length they made up their minds-of course they had to have the same; and it was the same again when it came to deciding which meat course they would have.

236 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

In the matter of clothes, nearly all U twin she did not want to go to stay with an aunt

girls were dressed alike and many of the for a holiday. However, Susan had not been

U twin boys wore the same coloured shirts away many days when Shirley decided she

and ties. This was less often so with the missed her so- much that she must go and

B twins, though they were sometimes encour- join her. She is more attached to Susan than

aged to dress alike on the day they came to Susan is to her, and is very upset if Susan

the hospital. So far as the U's are concerned, goes off to school without her. She feels a

it was generally the case, at least originally, compulsion to be with her twin which she

that the twins had wanted to be dressed cannot resist even when she wants to. Never-,

alike. They insisted on having everything theless this polarity does not extend to every

the same. One pair even thought it would field in the'same way. It was the submissive

look silly if they were dressed differently- Shirley who was the more communicative-

-everyone would stare at them! But by when the twins were seen on their own.

adolescence some had begun to want different Both Gedda and von Bracken have referried

kinds of clothes, and there were a few who to two different functions which. are not

had a struggle to get their own way over this. always carried out by the same twin, that

of responsibility for dealing with the outside

Leadership in the Twin Situation

world, or foreign minister, so to speak, and

Of perhaps greater psychiatric relevance that of guide within the twin pair, making

than the effects of attachment between decisions or perhaps acting as the conscience

twins is th'e polarity which is liable to occur of the pair. In one of our pairs the twins did

within a pair where, for example, one perhaps divide roles rather in this way. One.

becomes the leader, the other the follower. would speak up more in company, while the7

This can be related to psychiatric differences. other was more concerned that they should

In Slater's series of psychotic and neurotic be well turned out, and would smarten up

twins it was noted that in the schizophrenic her sister if she thought it necessary. How-

group the less dominant of the pair tended ever they said they decided things mutually.

to be the more'handicapped, in that it was Sometimes one twin will make use of the

he who fell ill or, if both twins were schizo- other. With Nigel and Ronald, Nigel says

phrenic, was likely to be the more severely he will think of things first, but Ronald is

affected. In the psychopathic and neurotic the more likely to do them, though he may

group it was the dominant twin who, being do so under the former's supervision. For,

more aggressive and extraverted, was the example, Nigel decided they should go to the

more likely to suffer from some of these woods. He is not very good at climbing

disorders.

trees and, seeing a rook's nest, he asked

In the present material, one twin might Ronald to climb up for him and bring it

speak up for his partner as well as for him- down-which he did. On their way home

self. Sometimes one might look at her sister from the hospital it was Nigel who organised

for support before answering. In one pair where they should sit on the bus, putting

of I4-year-old U girls a marked order of Ronald on the seat behind, while he sat with

precedence was noticeable. When collected the psychologist. Nigel is taller by X in. and

from school to come to the hospital Susan is proud of this. He does not like being

was the first to board the bus and she chose mistaken for Ronald, but Ronald does not

a seat near the window; Shirley sat next to object to being taken for his bigger twin

her. When changing buses Shirley stood by brother. Generally speaking, twins do not

to let Susan out first, and the same procedure mind being mistaken for one another so*

repeated itself on the next bus, and again much as being called indiscriminately " twin-

when entering the hospital. It is reported nies." The wrong name is better than none

that Shirley has less initiative and is rather at all. The natural desire to be someone in -

afraid of doing things on her own. She is one's own right probably encourages the

more self-conscious. Recently, unlike Susan, development of differences between twins.

PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

237

With the U twins, minor personality differences, such as those in degree of energy or initiative, were sometimes matched by corresponding differences in symptom. Thus with Gillian ahd Jennifer, a U pair of nearly I5, it is Jennifer who is the bigger, the more robust and, until recently when they began
to go their own ways, the leader of the two. The home is a restrictive one and not very
happy. Both twins are liable under minor
stress to show emotional reactions of an hysterical kind. With Jennifer these take a
more aggressive and openly resentful form, while Gillian is more likely to have outbursts of crying or a tremor of the hands.
The examples given sofar of the division of roles in the twin situation are the more
extreme ones. Here is a more typical case and an example of a well-adjusted pair for a change. Donald and Duncan, a stable, highly intelligent U pair, have always got on excellently together. They decide things mutually " as if by telepathy." Donald is thought to be the leader as he is the more active. In early years he used to take the initiative while Duncan would be content
to take advantage of Donald's energy. A photograph of the twins aged about two, showing Duncan sitting on, and Donald pushing, a toy horse bears this out. A year or two later Donald was nicknamed "Do-itmyself " and Duncan " Why-is-it ?" Duncan continued to carry his teddy-bear around with him longer than Donald. The
psycho-analysts tell us that the fantasy of having a twin is a fairly common one, Perhaps Duncan had the fantasy of having a triplet ! The twins have a strong sympathy for one another. If one is in danger the other
" seems to know instinctively and helps him out." There is also a great deal of competition between them: " they vie with one another." Duncan won't be outdone. Aged ten, Donald did a daring climb over the roof, and Duncan had to do the same. However they do not rely on one another at school and for some years they have made separate friends. They are regarded by themselves and others as alike in most respects, but the small differences between them may date back to Donald's greater initiative in early years.

Donald's drawings are in a rougher, bolder style, while Duncan pays great attention to detail. In character Donald is described as the more rugged, Duncan as the more
gentlemanly., The parents think that
Donald will be a good leader, Duncan an administrator.
This division of roles is not always permanent and does not always occur. Some twins
switch roles fairly frequently; with others one will take the lead up to a certain age, when there may occur a fairly permanent change-over. The reasons for this, as also for the original division of role, are not always clear. With some pairs the leader was the heavier at birth and has always been a little taller, but a difference in physical development is not always related in this way to a difference in degree of initiative. This is discussed further below.
B twins are, as already reported, not so closely attached to one another. They more often have different interests and develop independently. Being a twin is likely to have a different meaning for them, and spontaneous division or sharing of tasks does not occur in quite the same ways as with the U pairs. The B twin relationship is more like that of ordinary brothers and sisters and shows about as much variation. Sometimes one of the twins is more mature both physically and mentally and treats the partner as a younger brother or sister, humouring him or bullying him or protecting him, as the case may be. Minor Jealousies between B girls were relatively common. They were the group that least liked being compared with one another. There is an instance of considerable unhappiness in one of them who, after finally succeeding in obtaining admission to grammar school with her twin, found herself unfavourably compared. with her in appearance and in scholastic ability.
Other Similarities and Differences in Personality A twin pair has been likened to a society in
miniature. From the above description of some of the different relationships which can develop in this twin society, we can now go on to consider personality differences between

238 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

them of a kind which it would be more the other quick, one excitable, the other

difficult to regard as being solely the result placid, one soft-hearted, the other hard-

of their social interaction.

hearted, one extraverted, the other an

It seems that members of a U pair can introvert ; or one a greedy eater, the other

differ from one another by chance in almost fussy, one a heavy sleeper, th6 other a rest-

any way. These differences are generally less one, and so forth. Moreover they are

small and ones of degree only. They seldom liable to show differences in physique, in

differ in many ways at once and in their intellect and in maturity. In one I4-year-old

outstanding characteristics, whatever these pair, the boys might have been taken for

may be, they are likely to be very similar, i6 and I2. Hence it is not surprising that

at least up to the age of early adolescence. binovulars often make a very different total

It is possible, however, that these minor impression on their surroundings. For ex-

differences may sometimes become of crucial ample, there was one pair of twins who

importance to their adjustment as the were nicknamed " The Terror" and " The

circumstances of their lives change. Differ- Professor." Needless to say, they were

ences may relate, for example, to such binovulars.

spheres as anxiety, irritability or sensitivity. One further example may be given, that

Once or twice the parents suggested in of Geoffrey and George. When they first

their histories that one of a pair of identical went to school, some teachers could not tell

boys was more girlish than his twin brother, " who's who," but they have grown less alike

or that one of a girl pair was more of a tom- and are clearly binovular (blood groups

boy. This was the case with Derek and different). They have always been different

Patrick, referred to earlier, where Derek was in temperament. George is described as

enuretic and somewhat unstable. Patrick is slow, easy-going, "comfortable," cannot be

described as being fonder of girls' company. rushed, loves his bed, rather self-conscious.

He grows his nails excessively long, is fond Geoff is restless, energetic, "a tease", "can-

of cooking and likes making clothes for his not sit still for a moment except when he is

sister's dolls-" He should have been a girl," watching the television " ; he is rather vain

his mother says. He is also the more inter- and he takes a greater interest in money than

ested of the two in religion. But with U George. The twins have different eating and

twins differences such as these are generally sleeping habits. Geoff is a good deal more

submerged by much greater similarities, and intelligent and attends a different school.

this was the case with these two, both being The boys can co-operate with one another-

young for their years, talkative, irresponsible, and get on quite well. In physical tussles

messy and surprisingly interested in medical George wins (he is a little bigger) ; Geoff gets

details.

his own back by teasing. Both are very.

It would be risky to single out any features healthy. There is no obvious parental dis-

of. the personality as being more genetically crimination between them of an unfair kind.

determined than others, for it seems likely

that all traits are modifiable by the environ- The Genetical Explanation for these Differ-

ment and twins share very similar environ- ences the Most Likely One

ments. Nevertheless, it might be worth The most likely explanation for this

mentioning tentatively that the characteris- marked difference between the two kinds of

tics in which normal U twins resemble one twins is a genetical one. In a number of

another most seem to be maturity, emotional cases differences in the behaviour of B twins

responsiveness and motility.

were noted very early on, one twin being,

B twins of course'often show family resem- for example, a more demanding baby, the

blances in these and other traits; but it is other placid and conforming. Even where

not unusual to find one of the pair near one differences become apparent only in the

extreme of temperament, the other nearer middle years of childhood, this does not

the opposite one. Thus one might be slow, necessarily mean that environmental factors

PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

239

are responsible. The genes are likely to
influence mental and emotional maturation
just as they do physical development, and indeed they continue to play an important
part throughout the whole of life. In some
cases initial genetical differences between B
twins are made larger by the environment-
and one must always think of the interaction
of heredity and environment; but in other
cases the effect of the cultural and educa-
tional environment may well be to make
twins grow more alike than they would if
they were able to give free rein to their own
inclinations and impulses. In any case it
would be far-fetched to try to explain the
frequent qualitative personality differences
between B twins and the marked similarities between U's by factors in the family environ-
ment alone.
Let us for a moment (at the risk of some
repetition) see what the psychodynamic theory in its extreme form would entail,
denying as it does any importance to genetical factors in causing differences in personality and attributing these mostly to the subtleties of the mother-child relationship in the earliest years of life. This theory would imply the existence of large and systematic differences in the behaviour of the mothers of U twins on the one hand and those of samesexed B twins on the other-most U pairs would have to be treated very much the same, and most B pairs treated very differently from one another by their mothers. Now twins' mothers are generally unsophisticated about there being two genetically distinct sorts of same-sexed twins, so any difference in the mothers' behaviour would have to be based on differences in physical resemblance between the two sorts of twins in their earliest years. In fact, these physical differences are not so marked then as they are later on. Many B twins are very much alike in early childhood and some U twins are actually less alike as babies than later. As reported, they differ quite as much in birth weight as do B twins and sometimes one has had an advantage over the other in intrauterine life, making for a difference in strength between them at birth.
The extreme environmentalist theory

would further imply that those B twins who are physically the most alike in infancy and
early childhood would be the ones who are most alike psychologically in later life; but this is not the case.
Now it seems that the way a mother handles her children is determined very largely by the sort of person she is, by her
experiences in life and by the marital and social situation with which she is faced. She will probably have a fairly consistent attitude towards children in general. The importance of factors such as these, which
are the same for both members of a twin pair,
whether U or B, make it unlikely that the mother will adopt radically different attitudes towards the members of a B pair and
to them only. We have seen how marked
parental favouritism can occur, but found it
to be the exception and to be no more fre-
quent in B than in U pairs. In so far as social pressures influence the mother's behaviour,
these are not likely to encourage her to treat binovulars very differently from one another. And concerning identical pairs, Dorothy Burlingham (I952) has suggested that the mother makes a special effort to regard them as different so that she may be able to love them as two separate individuals'. (As already mentioned, I noticed what was perhaps a similar tendency for some of my informants to overstress the differences between U twins.) Maternal attitudes alone do not therefore offer a sufficient explanation
of twin differences. Nor can these be explained simply by a
tendency for U twins to identify with one another. A tendency to " polarization " is likely to be just as important, as we have seen. And if U twins identify with one another, why not B twins too?
Thus the extreme psychodynamic theory sounds implausible and does not seem to be borne out by such facts as are available. Children make demands as well as parents, and here inborn constitutional differences between them must be taken into account.
In so far as binovular twins are treated differently- from one another and more differently than uniovular twins, this is likely to be due, not so much to causes outside

240 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the twins as to innate differences in the needs of the binovular twins themselves, manifested by different patterns of behaviour. It is difficult to see how such small and often unimportant differences in their environments that B twins obtain for themselves in childhood can be reckoned as an external environmental factor sufficient to explain the greater part of the considerable differences in psychological resemblance between
U and B twins.
Relation of Symptom to Personality From this discussion of personality similar-
ities and differences between twins we can return to the question of neurotic symptoms. There appears to be a very close relationship between personality characteristics and type of problem. This was illustrated above in the cases of the discordant B twins Denis and Drummond, Jean and Betty.
Many of the behaviour problems of childhood are simply the results of personalities in action. The restless, impulsive person is liable to have different troubles from the shy, anxious one. Further, it is often a somewhat arbitrary matter, or one determined entirely by social circumstances, whether or not we regard people of the more extreme temperaments as showing a neurotic or behaviour disorder.
While this relation of symptom to personality is true in the main for reactions of an anxious, dependent or aggressive kind, it is not so applicable to the more specific kind of symptom such as stealing, enuresis, sleep disturbances, food fads or tics. Obviously parental handling and other cultural influences must be taken into account too, along with chance factors which influence individual psychopathology. However, tics (which are generally discordant even in U pairs) seem to be related to an over-conscientious type of personality; and food fads perhaps to an anxious restlessness.
In so far as genetical factors play a part in determining the type of reaction they probably do so through their influence on the physical basis of personality. In the case of enuresis it is possible that the influence of the genes is more direct. While most of the

enuretics in our series had other nervous
symptoms, either mild or fairly severe, these
were as likely to be of one kind as another.
Their social and family circumstances,
though inclined to be unfavourable, were also of very different kinds. A family history
of enuresis was not enquired about systematically ; nevertheless the mother of one
enuretic volunteered the information that
she had suffered acutely from the same complaint until adolescence, and the father of
another is occasionally enuretic in adult life. In I933 Hubert noted the frequent occurrence of enuresis in the family history of enuretics. Petrovsky (I934) and Frary (I935) go so far as to claim recessive inheritance for the
condition. It is therefore possible that further investigation might confirm heredity to be one of the factors entering into the complex aetiology of this psychosomatic symptom. Heredity is certainly not a sufficient cause by itself. Two out of six U pairs were discordant for enuresis. But of the ten B pairs where one member had the complaint rather surprisingly all ten twin partners were free of it. (Twelve of the 20 enuretic individuals were boys. Only four out of the 20 could be regarded as comparatively mild cases.)
Juvenile delinquency (when not merely a symptom of gross personality disorder) is probably less influenced by the innate personality than any of the other conditions examined here, except negatively in so far as certain character traits such as extreme timidity might militate against it. In the few instances we have of stealing, of being out of control and of actual trouble with the law or imminent danger of this, both the twins were rather similarly affected, whether they were U or B pairs. We have four U and two B. There is also a probably binovular pair who, because they are too young, fall just outside our series, where both twins are on probation. Five of these seven pairs are male. In the six pairs investigated, parent-child relationships were clearly disturbed in three cases ; in two others there was a very unsettling evacuation history and in one of these criminal influences in the environment besides ; while in the remaining

PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

24I

pair, who were members of a very large ing (two cases, both mild and occurring in

family, there was probably considerable lack the left-handed twin only), anxiety reaction

of parental supervision.

due to hospitalization (two cases).

The binovulars differed in all these

Concordance and Discordance in Symptoms respects ; also in obsessional traits, food fads,

A detailed examination of concordance or over-activity, headaches and in other ways

discordance of individual neurotic symptoms too many to mention.

and behaviour disorders in the two kinds of twins was attempted but found to be unprofitable, especially so far as the minor symptoms were concerned. The number of cases falling into the four groups (U and B, each divided into concordant and discordant), especially concordant binovulars, are very small for most symptoms. Information is not always reliable. It is also difficult to decide what to call neurotic, and how to classify symptoms. For most symptoms uniovulars were perhaps rather more often concordant than discordant. Binovulars were only rarely concordant and frequently
discordant. Ignoring the minor neurotic traits, the
following are the more severe symptoms or syndromes for which uniovulars were concordant: Enuresis (four), habit spasm or

Statistical Analysis of the Case Histories
An attempt has been made to interrelate
some variables of a physical, psychological or environmental kind. Wherever possible
the following points were noted: Which twin was the first-born, had the more difficult birth, had a lower birth weight, was behind the other twin in early physical development ; is the shorter now, the lighter in weight, of the more asthenic build; is less developed sexually; has had more illness; is the less aggressive, is habitually submissive to his twin ; is less well-adjusted psychiatrically; is left-handed (his twin being righthanded). Information was not always available for all these items. They were then paired with one another. The following pairings appeared to be of greatest interest.

mannerisms (four) ; delinquency (three); Intelligence and Severity. There was a

adolescent rebelliousness (three) ; marked close relationship between intelligence, as

resentment (two) ; marked shyness or unsoci- assessed mainly on performance at school,

ability (two) ; emotional reactions (two) ; and and mental health. The twin who was rated

one each of the following: Epilepsy, reading as the more severely disturbed psychiatric-

disability, night terrors, sleep-walking, pho- ally was less intelligent than his twin partner

bias. Less severe reactions which were con- in 47 out of 62 pairs. This ratio of 47 to I5

cordant in U pairs were : Over-activity, rest- is significantly different statistically from

lessness, inability to concentrate (four); that of 3I to 3I which would be expected if

quiet, subdued, shy (three); anxious, inse- there were no relationship between the

cure (three).

variables. X2 (Yates) with i D.F.=I5-5,

B pairs were only rarely concordant. One p<o-ooi. The same tendency showed itself

pair were both borderline defectives, one pair equally clearly in the U and the B pairs.

both had a reading disability, two pairs both Taking only those pairs where the difference

showed rather similar emotional reactions between the twins both in intelligence and

(frequent crying and over-dependency) and in severity was a fairly marked one, I5 out

in two male pairs the boys were either of I7 pairs showed the tendency.

delinquent or out of control.

This finding can in a few cases be explained

The principal U discordances in psychiatric by the method of assessing one twin as the

states have all been mentioned. They also more severe of the pair, whereby, if the

differed in a number of other minor or difference between the twins in neurotic

incidental symptoms: An over-breathing fit traits was negligible and the difference in

when in a temper, nail biting 4or picking scholastic ability clear and consistent, the

(three cases), nightmares, travel sickness, less intelligent twin was classed as the less

blinking habit (two cases), lisping, stammer- well-adjusted. This was much more likely

242 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to occur with U pairs than with B's. Here studies of twins (see above). In ten of our

the twins have the same innate intellectual pairs one onily of the twins is reported as

ability, and it can justifiably be argued that having had a difficult birth. In eight out of

the twin who is making less good use of his ten this was the twin who is now lighter in

intelligence is the less well-adjusted. In a weight and in seven out of ten the twin who

few cases it seemed that the slightly better is the less intelligent. Of seven of these pairs

performance of one twin at school had led where it could be said that one of the twins

to the other showing symptoms of anxiety was habitually submissive to the other, this

or resentment, or to his giving up trying to was the twin who had the birth difficulty in

compete with his twin. In nearly all cases, six cases. Similarly in six out of seven cases

however, intelligence was not taken into the twin with the more asthenic build

account in assessing severity.

had the difficult birth. For the other items

From this, two suggestions arise, which investigated the differences were less marked,

may both be true: (I) That those who are but generally favoured the twin who did not

less able to cope with intellectual problems have the birth difficulty. The figures are not

are for the same basic reason less able to startling. They do little more than suggest

cope with emotional ones, and (2) that that a difficult birth can be a handicap.

emotional maladjustment lowers the level Birth Weight. It may be that the U twin

of intellectual efficiency. Slater (I953) found with the heavier birth weight has before

that the less intelligent of a pair of B twins birth gained an advantage at the expense of

was the more likely to suffer from a neurotic his twin, due to the tendency for their

or psychopathic state. That in the present placental circulations to anastomose, as

series the tendency was as marked in U pairs described by Price (I950). In 28 cases the

as in B pairs may perhaps be explained, lighter U twin at birth is also the lighter now,

either by the greater number of pairs and the same tendency was shown to a lesser

observed, or by the fact that we are here extent by the B twins. There was also a,

dealing with children and that in one's tendency for the U twin with lower birth

schooldays small differences in intelligence weight to be submissive to his partner; this

are likely to appear of greater importance is discussed below. But there was no signifi-

than they do later on. Eysenck (I952) reports cant tendency for. the twin with the lower

that, of tests which discriminate between birth weight to have more physical illness

neurotic and normal soldiers, those of intelli- later, to be the less intelligent or more dis-

gence are among the most successful, neuro- turbed psychologically, or to be the less

tics on average having a lower score than aggressive personality.

normals. Clinically it is interesting to note the kind
of case which did not show the above tendency. The U cases where the more intelligent twin was also the more neurotic were nearly all ones where the slightly more intelligent
was rather more conscientious and anxious to please his elders. He did a little better at school and was liable to show more minor anxieties. There were three B and one U pairs where the more intelligent member suffered from emotional difficulties associated with adolescence ; the weaker and less intelligent twin had in these cases been the more
protected at home.

Poor Health and Lack of Aggressiveness. Some Swedish psychiatrists stress the effect which a debilitating illness can have on the constitution. According to them, a severe attack of one of the common infectious illnesses of childhood can lead to a lasting diminution of energy and an increased liability to symptoms of a psychasthenic kind. This state they designate as hypo-
phrenia. To test whether such a concept has
much general relevance or not, we have wherever possible noted which member of our twin pairs has had more illness and seen
whether or. not this is the one who also has the less aggressive personality. Out of 42

Birth Difficulty. This is a factor which pairs where a reasonably reliable rating on

has been greatly stressed by Rosanoff in his both these points was possible, the twin with

PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

243

.the poorer health was the less aggressive in 23 cases, the more aggressive in I9. There was no difference between the U and B pairs in this respect. This lends little support to the hypothesis of hypophrenia. If we take only those pairs where the difference on both variables is marked the number is very small. However, in six cases the twin with more illness was the less aggressive, in two cases the more aggressive. Four of these eight pairs were uniovular. In one pair, one of the boys had meningitis at two and a half; one of a pair of girls had a wasting disease followed by bronchial trouble in infancy; and in another female pair, one member had severe gastro-enteritis, chicken-pox and pneumonia all before the age of one year. In each of these three cases, the twin who was ill is the one who has less energy. In the fourth U case, one twin, Peter (see above), had troubles of an organic kind, including a fit, and he is more irritable than his twin. This is what might be expected in the light of the association between epilepsy and irritability.
Sex Development. Secondary sexual development showed no obvious relationships of interest with the other items investigated, except perhaps with intelligence. The more sexually developed twin was also the more intelligent of the pair in 2I out of the 3I cases (mostly girls) for which information was available.
Handedness. The number of pairs where one twin was left-handed and the other righthanded was rather small (I9, including two doubtful cases). The left-handed twin was shorter in I3 out of I9 cases, had the lower birth weight in eleven out of i8, was less intelligent in twelve out of I9, was more severely disturbed in twelve out of I9, was submissive to his twin partner in ten out of twelve, and was less aggressive in nine out of 17. There was no difference between U and B twins in these respects. It is therefore possible that left-handedness is a slight handicap.
Leadership. It would be of interest if this analysis could throw light on the causes of one of the twins becoming the habitual

leader of the pair. In 42 pairs a rating on dominance-submissiveness was attempted. In the remaining 20 pairs the twins were either too independent or else did not divide roles consistently in this way. We have already noted that in the cases where one twin had a greater birth difficulty than the other this was the twin who was
submissive in six cases and dominant in one. The other factors which appeared most closely related to leadership in the twin relationship were: Lighter birth weight, in U twins only (submissive 20, dominant seven
-x2 significant at 0i02 level); behind
twin in early development, U and B combined (submissive twelve, dominant five) less intelligent, U and B combined (submissive 25, dominant 7) ; left-handed (submissive ten, dominant two). Other variables such as birth order, present size, health and psychiatric adjustment showed almost no difference between the submissive and the dominant members of the pairs. In so far as this analysis tells us anything it seems to be that, in cases where a habitual dominance of one twin occurs, this relationship is established almost as soon as the twins begin to take notice of one another, and that it is then likely that the more robust will take the
lead.
If the material had been larger, it is possible that a statistical analysis on the above lines would have been more informative. The concept of psychiatric maladjustment is too heterogeneous for it to show any relationships of general significance. However the analysis might be regarded as
bearing out some of the interpretations we have placed on individual case-histories.
Comparison of Findings with Psychological
Test Results Many practical details of the research were carried out in collaboration with two colleagues in the Psychology Department, Mr. Duncan Blewett and Mr. Hugh McLeod, who were working under the direction of Dr. H. J. Eysenck. It will be of interest to compare their findings with those based on the histories. Blewett was interested firstly in the

244 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

measurement and inheritance of intelligence. From his test scores he isolated a factor of intelligence, derived principally from Thurstone's " Primary Mental Abilities " test, which gave a correlation of 0.76 between uniovular twins and O-44 between binovular twins, thus indicating that intelligence is to a considerable extent an inherited ability. That Blewett's factor of intelligence agrees closely with general ability at school is seen in the fact that the twin with the higher factor score in intelligence was the one who, according to the histories, did better at school in 48 pairs out of 52.
Blewett was also interested in " neuroticism." He hoped, with a different series of tests purporting to measure emotional instability, to repeat the experiment of Eysenck and Prell described above. However, Blewett's tests did not all intercorrelate with one another in the directions expected and he could not identify any of the factors obtained in his analysis as being " neuroticism." A factor, defined by tests such as body-sway, self-rating in neuroticism and certain scores on the Rorschach test, did not give evidence of hereditary determination* and showed only a random relationship to our own rating of severity of maladjustment. The twin with the higher factor score was rated as the more maladjusted of the pair in 24 cases, the less maladjusted in 28 cases. Children with a high factor score did not appear from the histories to be any more neurotic than children with a low score. Nor did any of the individual tests in this battery show any obvious relationship with the clinical findings.
McLeod was concerned with the measurement and inheritance of an " extraversionintroversion" factor, thought of in terms
somewhat akin to those of Jung. He claims to have identified such a factor, the factor scores for which were derived from five tests, including the Rorschach (M%) and tests of autonomic nervous function and sociometry. Intracorrelation for factor score was o077 for uniovular and o0o3 for binovular twins. McLeod, therefore, concludes that
* Intra-correlation for factor scores: rU = + OI9,
rB = - oi8.

" extraversion-introversion " is largely in-
herited. An independent attempt was made
by the writer to relate the twins clinically in degree of introversion, but no great reliability
or validity is claimed for these ratings. In
33 pairs the twin who was regarded as the
more introverted had the more introverted
factor score ; in I9 pairs the reverse was the
case (Yates' x2 of 3X25 does not reach signi-
ficance at the 5 per cent level). But of the I3 pairs who, according to the rating scale,
differed most, the more introverted member had the more introverted factor score in eleven cases. Approaching the material
from difference in factor score, it so happens
that the pairs with the greatest difference in
factor score were the binovular twins, Betty and Jean, and Denis and Drummond, who have already been given as illustrations of the extent of temperamental differences sometimes found between twins, and the differences were in the expected direction, Denis and Betty both being near the intrbverted end of the scale. In five out of six pairs whose scores differed by 20 points or more, clinical and psychometric results were again in the same direction. A correlation coefficient was calculated between " introversion " ratings on a four-point scale and factor scores. The result was r= +o025.
The above findings suggest that the psychological tests and the somewhat rough and ready ratings of " extraversion-introversion " may be attempts at measuring the same thing, which are most successful at the extreme ends of the continuum. However the individual test scores from which the factor score was derived did not by themselves show any obvious clinical relationship.-
To Dr. Eysenck and my colleagues in the Psychology Department I am most grateful for their practical co-operation and for their kindness in allowing me access to their test results.
Conclusions This brings to an end the present survey of
personality differences and minor psychiatric maladjustment in the two sorts of twins. The sample (to repeat) was a small but

PERSONALITY DIFFERENCES AND NEUROTIC TRAITS

245

fairly representative one of normal London
secondary-school children. It is not considered that twins as such are
especially liable to psychiatric disorder. From the frequency with which nervous
troubles and behaviour disorders were
reported, some of them minor, some of them
pretty troublesome, we are led to the con-
clusion that in our culture probably all of us can, and most of us in fact do, during childhood, suffer from some symptoms of these kinds: they are something in the
nature of emotional growing-pains.
The dependence of their severity, and often
their presence, on the environment was seen firstly in the fact that twins of identical
genetical make-up did not always both suffer
from the same complaint in the same degree.
The individual case-histories suggested
reasons for this, and illustrations of some of
these have been given.
The effect of environmental influences was seen perhaps even more clearly in the close relationship between a family and social environment assessed as poor from the psychiatric point of view and the presence of abnormal traits in the child. Poor
environments of this kind were not uncommon. We should not therefore attribute the rarer mental abnormalities solely to parental lack, disharmony in the home or morbid parental attitudes of the kinds sometimes encountered in this sample.
That the external environment alone does not entirely explain the degree of psychiatric disturbance was seen in the significantly closer resemblance between U twins than B twins in this respect. It would seem that for genetical reasons some people are more vulnerable than others to the minor stresses of life. Conversely genetical reasons might in part explain why some people do not break down in circumstances of extreme difficulty.
A difference between the two sorts of twins was seen even more clearly when we compared their resemblance in kind of symptom and in outstanding personality characteristics. Identical twins, though far from being replicas of one another psychologically, generally showed a verv close similarity in these respects which can be

attributed ultimately to their genetical similarity. Fraternal twins, on the other hand, could show quite different types of reaction. These differences were often related to the differences between them in temperamental characteristics. Some illustrations of the kind of personality differences found in U and B twins were given and discussed. The contrast between them in these respects was difficult to explain plausibly by external environmental factors alone, such as the way mothers treat twins. Nor was similarity in psychological state related to closeness of attachment between the twins. Genetical differences, therefore, probably do much to explain differences in behaviour between people brought up in the same family.
It is suggested that the genes most often influence neurotic behaviour through their effect on the physical basis of personality. With some psychosomatic symptoms genic action may be more direct; but, in general, disorders such as juvenile delinquency, which are not closely related to type of personality, are likely to be determined by the genes to a lesser extent than those disorders which are so related.
It seems then that any explanation of human behaviour which neglects the genetical factor is likely to be a partial one. A realization of this does not imply a fatalistic or authoritarian attitude. Further research on genetical lines should, on the contrary, lead to a better understanding of the nature of individual differences and to a more rational, successful and humane way of dealing with their social implications.
In conclusion, it only remains for me to
thank Dr. Eliot Slater and Mr. W. L. B. Nixon of the Genetics Unit for much valuable assistance and all those others who have helped in this research in various ways, including the I24 twins and their parents for their willing participation in a project from
which they had nothing to gain.
REFERENCES
i. Blacker, C. P. (I948). Neurosis and the Mental Health Service. Oxford 1\edical Publications.
2. Blewett, D. (I953). An experimental study of the
inheritance of neuroticism and intelligence. Ph.D. Thesis, University of London Library.

- 246 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

3. Borgstroem, C. A. (I939). " Eine Serie von Krim-
inellen Zwillingen." Arch. Rass. u. ges. Biol., 33,
334-3434. Bowlby, J. (I95I). Maternal Care and Mental
Health. Geneva: World Health Organization.
5. Bracken, H. v. (1934). " Mutual Intimacy in Twins." Character and Personality, 2, 293-309.
6. Burlingham, D. (1952). Twins: a Study of Three Pairs of Identical Twins. London: Imago Publishing Co.
7. Conrad, K. (I935-6). " Erbanlage und Epilepsie." Zeitschr. ges; Neurol. Psychiat., 153, 271-326;
- 155, 254-297 and 509-542.
8. Dahlberg, G. (I926). Twin Births and Twins from a Hereditary Point of View. Stockholm.
9. Davis, E. A. (I941). " Linguistic Skill in Twins, Singletons with Siblings, and Only Children." Inst. Child Welfare Monogr. Series 14: University of Minnesota Press.
Io. Day,~E. J. (I932). "'The Development of Language in Twins: a Comparison of Twins and Single Children." Child Development, 3, I79-199.
ii. Essen-M6ller, E. (I94I). " Empirische Ahnlichkeitsdiagnose bei Zwillingen." Hereditas, 27, 1-50.
12. Eysenck, H. J., (I95I). "Neuroticism in Twiiis."
Eugen. Rev., 43, 79-82. 13. Eysenck, H. J. (I952). The1 Scientific Stgtdy of
Personality. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
I4. Eysenck, H. J., and Prell, D. B. (I95I). "The
Inheritance of Neuroticism: an Experimental Study." J. Ment. Sci., 98, 441-465.
I5. Frary, L. G. (I935). " Enuresis, a Genetic Study." Amer. J. Dis. of Children, 49, 557-578.
i6. *Frischeisen-Kohler, I. (I936). " Zwillinge in den Familien von Hilfsschulern." Zeitschr. f. menschl. Vererb. u. Konstitutionslehre, 20, i-8.
17. Fraser, R., et al. (I947). The Incidence of Neurosis among Factory Workers. (M.R.C. Industrial Health
Research Board Report No. go.) London: H.M.S.O. i8. Gedda, L. (195I). Studio dei Gemelli. Rome:
Edizioni Orizzonte Medico.
I9. *Gudden, H. (I934). Arch. Rass. u. ges. Biol., 28. 20. Hubert, W. H. de B. (I933). " Aetiology of Nocturnal
Enuresis." Lancet, 1, I281-I283.
21. Juda, A. (I939). " Neue psychiatrisch-genealo-
gische Untersuchungen an Hilfsschulzwillingen und ihren Familien: I. Die Zwillingsprobanden und ihre Partner." Zeitschr. ges. Neurol. Psychiat., 166,
365-452.
22. Kallmann, F. J. (1946). " The Genetic Theory of Schizophrenia." Amer. J. Psychiat., 103, 309-322.
23. Kallmann, F. J. (1952). " Twin and Sibship Study of Overt Male Homosexuality." Amer. J. hum. Genet., 4, 136-I46.
24. Karn,M. N. (I953). "Data of Twin Births occurring
in Two English Metropolitan Hospitals." A cta genet. med. et gemell., 2, I52-I63.
25. Kent, E. (I949). " A study of maladjusted twins." Smith College Studies in Social Work, 19, 63-77.
26. Kranz, H. (I936). Lebensschicksale krimineller Zwillinge. Berlin: Springerverlag.
27. Kranz, H. (I937). "Untersuchungen an Zwillingen

in Fiirsorgeerziehungsanstalten." Zeitschr. f. Indukt. u. Abstam. Vererbungslehre, 73, 508-5I2.
28. *Kohn, W. (I935). "Die Vererbung des Charakters."
Arch. Rass. u. ges. Biol., 29.
29. Lange, J. (I929). Verbrechen als Schicksal, Studien
an krimmellen Zwillingen. Leipzig: Thieme. 30. *Lassen, M.-T. (193I). " Zur Frage der Vererbung
sozialer und sittlicher Charakteranlagen." Arch. Rass. u. ges. Biol., 25, 268-278. 31. Lehtovaara, A. (I938). Psychologische Zwillingsuntersuchungen. Helsinki: Annales Academia Scientiarum Fennica, B 39.
32. McLeod, H. (I954). An experimental study of the
inheritance of introversion-extraversion. Ph.D. Thesis (submitted to the Universitv of London).
33. Mehrotra, S. N. and Maxwell, J. (I949). " The
Intelligence of Twins: a Comparative Study of
Eleven-year-old Twins." Population Studies, 3,
295-302.
34. Newman, H. H. (1942). Twins and Super-Twins. London: Hutchinson's Scientific and Technical Publications.
35. Petrovsky, S. G. (I934). "Heredity in enuresis nocturna." Sovetsk. Psykhonevrol., 1, 10-I7.
36. Price, B. (I950). " Primary Biases in Twin Studies."
Amer. J. hum. Genet., 2, 293-352. 37. Race, R. R., and Sanger, R. (1950). Blood Groups in
Man. Oxford: Blackwell's Scientific Publications. 38. Rosanoff, A. J., Handy, L. M., and Rosanoff, I. A.
(I934). " Criminality and Delinquency in Twins." J. crim. Law and Criminal., 24, 923-934. 39. *Rosanoff, A. J., Handy, L. M., and Plesset, I. R.
(I94I). " The etiology of child behaviour difficul-
ties, juvenile delinquency and adult criminality, with special reference to their occurrence in twins." Psychiat. Monogr., 1, I87: Sacramento, Cal.,. Dept. of Institutions.
40. Idem (I94I). Authors' Abstract of the preceding.
Amer. J. Psychiat., 97, I479.
41. *Schiller, M. (I937). " Zwillingsprobleme dargestellt
auf Grund von Untersuchungen an Stuttgarter Zwillingen." Zeitschr. f. menschl. Vererbungslehre, 20,
284-337.
42. Slater, E., and Shields, J. (1953). Psychotic andNeurotic Illnesses in Twins. M.R.C. Special Report
Series 278. London: H.M.S.O. 43. Smith, J. C. (I930). " Das Ursachenverhaltnis des
Schwachsinns beleuchtet durch Untersuchungen an Zwillingen." Zeitschr. ges. Neurol. Psychiat., 125, 678-692. 44. Stocks, P. (I952). " Recent Statistics of Multiple Births in England and Wales." A cta genet. med. et gemell., 1, 8-I3. 45. Stumpfl, F. (I936). Die Urspriinge des Verbrechens dargestellt am Lebenslauf von Zwillingen. Leipzig: Thieme. 46. Stumpfl, F. (1937). " Untersuchungen an psychopathischen Zwillingen." Zeitschr. ges. Neurol. Psychiat., 158, 480-482. 47. Waterhouse, J. A. H. (1950). "Twinning in Twin Pedigrees." Brit. J. Soc. Med., 4, 197-2I6.
* Quoted by Gedda; not personally verified.

Eugenies Review, Vol. XLV, No. 4

