DIVORCE AND EUGENICS

Some Notes on their Relationship

By MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN

AGOOD deal of confusion is often more often arise that when living apart

displayed when divorce is considered children would be likely to become a solely with reference to its racial serious encumbrance. And if the birth

effects, and I feel that I may have erred rate were thus lowered, it would be lowered

in this respect by not clearly realizing that there are in this connection two quite

most amongst the foreseeing and the prudent and least amongst the stupid and

distinct questions to be held in view. They the reckless. Free divorce would, there-

are as follows:

fore, thus tend to increase those differences

I. What would be the effect of legisla-

in the birth rate which now constitute the greatest danger to our race.*

tion facilitating divorce on the birth rate? In my book on Eugenic Reform I had

More especially, would it affect one section previously argued that the effect of divorce

of the population more than another?

on the individuals thus separated is to

2. What would be the effect of divorce increase their fertility, and here are, there-

on the individuals divorced in regard to fore, two conclusions which I have come

their probable fertility?

to at different times, and which appear at

Divorce only enters on the field of eugenics when it affects procreation differentially, and this is for our Society a fundamental scientific truth which, however, seems usually to be ignored when divorce is being discussed under its auspices, a truth which I wish here
especially to emphasize. In a message which I sent to the Inter-
national Congress at New York last year, I dealt with the first of these two questions very briefly, and I then stated my belief, though not without doubts, that free or unfettered divorce would lower the birth rate generally by the further promotion of birth control, the greatest effects being thus produced amongst the superior types, this being an obviously dysgenic conse-
quence. The reasons which I gave for this belief
were as follows: The more easily could
divorce be obtained, the more probable

first sight to contradict each other.t There is, however, not necessarily any antagonism between these two opinions. Legislation facilitating divorce might lower the birth rate generally, whilst lowering, it least, not only amongst many inferior types, but also amongst those who have actually been divorced. And this is what I have suggested would actually occur.
It is true that I am now less sure than I was that divorce does increase the probability of parenthood amongst those actually divorced. To illustrate why such an increase seems probable, the case of a man whose ill-temper was the ultimate cause of his divorce may be cited. His divorced wife may have had as many children as she wanted; she may have become familiar with contraceptive methods; and she may from experience have acquired a dread of marriage. None of these things may be true of the woman

would a dissolution of the marriage tie appear to be in all circumstances. In

* "Although few statistics are available, what there are agree with ordinary observation in indicat-

consequence, family limitation would be ing that divorce lowers the birth rate." Builders

more practised, because both before marriage and after it the thought would

of Ame-rica. Huntington and Whitney. p. 123.

thetreEudgiesnciscassedReffoorrmw,hicp.h

465. there

Several points are is no space here.

I5

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

whom the divorced man wishes to marry, In such cases divorce is in fact eugnic;

and the number of his children may, there- for it prevents further procreation on the

fore, be actually increased by his divorce. part of the couple thus separated, and this

It seems at all events to be evident that without any corresponding disadvantages;

in some cases divorce would actually that is if we may leave the doubtful effects

increase the fertility of the individuals of assortive mating out of account. But

divorced; and, with such a possibility in the desire to be separated from such a

view, divorce is a futile racial safeguard markedly defective partner would gener-

in regard to the hereditary transmission ally be strong, and as long as divorce i

of any defect. Eugenic reformers should possible in such cases, there is little need

devote their main efforts towards facilita- that it should be very easily obtainable.

ting voluntary sterilization in the case of There are, moreover, reasons for believ-

those divorced on account of any suffi- ing that where divorce is impossible,

ciently serious hereditary defect, this illegitimacy is promoted and marriage

being the most efficient safeguard.

comes to be regarded as a less necessary

It should, moreover, be remembered that prelude to parenthood. Such a state of

the easier it is to obtain a divorce, the less things produces dysgenic results by

often will those couples, who fail to agree, encouraging carelessness in mating, and

be separated one from the other without we thus again come to the conclusion that

being divorced. Such a state of things, of if looking to eugenic considerations only,

course, does not prevent illegitimate divorces should not be too difficult to

parenthood, but it can hardly be doubted obtain. The above-mentioned conflicting

that it does to some extent diminish the claims will be best met, in my opinion, as

fertility of those thus separated. From I have suggested elsewhere, by making

this it follows that the easier it became to living apart for a given period-I now

obtain a divorce, the greater would become suggest four years-as the one and only

the fertility of those divorced and the ground for divorce And here let it be

greater would be such dysgenic effects as noted that if any such proposal were

might be produced.

adopted, then there would be no advantage

The types most frequently divorced in making insanity and certain other grave

include those difficult to live with, the defects a sufficient ground for divorce. No

quarrelsome, the discontented, the neurotic, one has or will suggest that the mere

the drunkard, the insane, and the criminal. certification of a person as being insane

Moreover, as mating appears to be to some should be all that is needed in this rspect;

extent assortive, we may assume that because, amongst other reasons, the doctor

even when the fault appears to be on one when deciding on such an important

side only, the other spouse is probably also question ought to be able to concentrate his

below the average in racial value. All attention on the welfare of his patient and

those divorced may, therefore, be held to on the safety of the public without being

be on the average below the median of the disturbed by thoughts concerning divorce.

nation as a whole; and, if greater facilities Continuous detention in an asylum for a

for divorce would in truth increase the certain number of years has no doubt been

fertility of both parties, we are thus con- suggested as being an adequate ground for

firmed in our belief that dysgenic effects divorce; but such a proposal is also open

would be produced by facilitating divorce. to some extent to the above-mentioned

In the case of any divorced person, how- objections on medical grounds. It would-

ever, who is endowed with failings suffi- at all events be interesting if a considered

ciently apparent to make a second marriage opinion of the Board of Control on the

very improbable, the foregoing conclusion subject could be obtained. What I wish

that divorce tends to increase his or her now to urge is, however, that if living apart

fertility obviously no longer holds good. for a given period were legalized as a

DIVORCE AND EUGENICS

17

ground for divorce, then all that is needed that the existing rigidity of the marriage

in this respect in regard to insaity and tie causes a reaction and increases the

certain other grave evils would thus be desire for divorce. This is, I hold, a

automatically dealt with as far as it is psychological error; for such opinions seem

possible to do so.

to arise from a wish on the part of those

A not uncommon misconception in regard aiming at greater sexual freedom to

to the racial effects of divorce is that, when rationalize their desires. I may here also

all obligations in respect to an unworthy add that if living apart for a given period

partner are cancelled, such a breaking of were made a ground for divorce, there

the marriage tie must produce beneficial would be no need to place, as at present, a

effects by permitting parenthood with a most objectionable piemium on adultery in

worthy spouse. But it must be re=em- this respect.

bered that, if we may put assortive

mating out of the question, divorce is in this way exactly as likely to promote the

THE EUGENIC ATTITUDE

fertility of those below the average in what The foregoing arguments indicate that

Galton called civic worth as of those above when the matter is considered in regard to

it. We shall all admit that merely to racial consequences only, there are reasons

increase the numbers of a herd of cattle of no great weight or cogency for not making

does nothing towards improving its breed, divorce obtainable with either great ease

and we should never forget that in the same or great difficulty. This is, as I have

way to encourage parenthood without indicated, also the conclusion at which I

reference to quality is useless from the myself arrive when the more immediate

racial point of view.

consequences only are taken into account.

Merely to avoid giving a false im- Indeed, these social effects seem to me to

pression, I wish here to state clearly that be of so much greater importance that I

I am definitely opposed to making it either hold it would be wise when considering

very easy or very difficult to obtain a divorce to leave racial consequence out of

divorce; but as my main reasons have no consideration altogether. The moral ques-

connection with differential fertility and tions connected with these problems give

therefore none with eugenics, it would be rise to acute difference of opinion on points

out of place to discuss them here. Perhaps having no racial bearings; and divorce has,

I may, however, go so far as to state that therefore, not been included in our Outline

my chief objections to free divorce arise of a Practical Eugenic Policy, and I hope

from my belief in the extreme importance it never will be. Provided that they pull

of keeping the family together, the together in a common determination to do

advantages being obvious, including the what is possible to improve the inborn

bringing tip of as many children as possible qualities of future generations, the mem-

with the care of both a mother and a bers of the Eugenics Society should not be

father; an argument against facilitating hindered by their membership from holding

divorce which only holds good up to a any opinion whatever in regard to divorce

certain point. It is true that some authori- law reform, these controversies being, how-

ties, for whom I have great respect, believe ever, carried on in some other arena.

B Eugmac. Revie, VoL XXV, No. 1.

