THE GENETICS OF MENTAL DEFICIENCY*
By J. A. FRASER ROBERTS, M.A., M.D., D.Sc., F.R.C.P.

ALTHOUGH it is a hundred and thirty namely, that from the point of view of

years since Francis Galton was born causation there are two kinds of mental

and more than forty since he died it is defectives. One kind shows the sort of

noteworthy how often workers in the most variation that interested Mendel: the sharp,

diverse scientific fields refer to him as one of clear-cut difference. The other shows the

the originators, or more often the originator, sort of variation that interested Galton:

of the theme they are developing. My continuous variation, by imperceptible steps,

subject today is no exception. Writers like from the very bright, through the average, to

Professor Burt, when dealing with mental the very dull, and finally to those whom we

measurements, make frequent references to classify as mentally defective. If there are

him. Sir Godfrey Thomson, when he gave indeed two kinds a recognition of that fact

this lecture six years ago, said: " In the is quite the most important step in under-

words of Karl Pearson, ' Galton created the standing how mental deficiency comes about.

subject of correlation,' and from correlation If we mix them up together we shall never

has arisen that branch of psychology in which get very far with our analysis. And the

I am most interested-I mean the factorial practical consequences are of great impor-

analysis of human ability." Twin studies tance: any hope of reducing the amount of

take us straight back to his paper of I875. mental deficiency demands totally different

On the side of genetical theory I should like appreciations and totally different pro-

to mention an important recent book-very cedures.

relevant to the subject of this lecture-Pro- Now the hypothesis is an hypothesis, and

fessor Mather's Biometrical Genetics.t Not not the kind of proposition which once it has

unnaturally Mendel's name appears in the been pointed out is self-evident. It has gone

first sentence; but Galton's appears in through the history of many useful scientific

the third. Here is a short quotation from the hypotheses. First, there is too much resis-

introductory chapter: " Neither the Gal- tance, or it is ignored; then there is, perhaps,

tonian nor the Mendelian method was of too uncritical an acceptance. This view of

itself capable of supplying the solution. The the causation of mental deficiency has been

understanding of continuous variation widely accepted for a good many years; but

awaited a fusion of the two methods of it is in fact more than ever necessary to put

approach, the genetical and the biometrical, it to the test. It can be tested for, as with all

for each supplied what the other lacked. useful hypotheses, predictions to be verified

The one gave us the principles on which the or disproved can be deduced from it. The

analysis must be based; the other showed tests are straightforward enough in theory,

the way in which to handle continuous but difficult and expensive in practice. That

variation, the way of representing it in a is why we are not farther ahead. Even now

form which made fruitful analysis possible." it is conceivable that the hypothesis is, I will

not say wholly wrong, but only partially right.

The Hypothesis

The genetics of mental deficiency is a big Early Studies

subject and one cannot cover a great deal of The first Mendelians tried to make mental

it in one lecture, so I propose to devote the deficiency a single-factor difference from the

time to discussing a particular hypothesis: normal. In the light of the knowledge that

existed then, this was a perfectly reasonable

* The Galton Lecture delivered at a meeting of the Eugenics Society on April 4th, 1952.
t Methuen, I949.,

thing to do; but it would not work. Meanwhile the genius of Binet and Simon had

7'

72 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

provided a means for measuring mental ability. In I9I2 the Swedish psychologist, Jaederholm carried out a very fine survey indeed. The great bulk of the mentally defective children of Stockholm, excluding idiots and imbeciles, were provided for in
" help classes "; the number at that time was 320, of whom Jaederholm tested no fewer
than 30I. He also tested a corresponding sample of children from the general population. The data were analysed in collaboration with Karl Pearson and the results were
published in I9I4.*

JAEDERHOLM'S DATA
NORMAL
(27,065)

3200 1600
800
400 z00 100

MlENTAL DEFECT
(30-1)
-7 -6 -5 -4 -3 Z -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
INTELLIGENCE.(1= STAND. DEV ) FIG. I
Frequency distribution of Binet I.Q.s of high-grade mental defectives and normal schoolchildren in Stockholm. Normals actually tested were 26I. The vertical scale is reduced continuously so as to show both groups on the same graph. (From K. Pearson, " On the Inheritance of Mental Disease," Annals of Eugenics,
I930-3I, 4, 362-80
The distribution of intelligence test scores conformed reasonably well to the familiar normal curve and it will be seen from Fig. i that the children in the help classes belonged to it. Pearson and Jaederholm showed that the fit of the normal curve was three times better if the help-class children were included with the rest of the general population. They recognised clearly that idiots and imbeciles
* Mendelism and the Problem of Mental Defect. On the
Continuity of Mental Defect. Cambridge University Press.

could not be accommodated in the normal curve. They also pointed out something else. There was some excess of low I.Q.s above 50. They considered two explanations for this.
First, it might be an artificial excess, due to the accidents of small numbers and the difficulty of making good estimates for the constants of the curve. Secondly, it might be a real excess, in which case, they said, some of those above the level of intelligence of imbeciles might not form part of the normal distribution, but, like imbeciles, owe their mental state to pathological causes. The
possible excess, they estimated, was not likely to be more than one-third of the helpclass children.
So here, as long ago as I914, is our hypothesis in all its essentials: that the highergrade defectives, roughly the feeble-minded, are the lowest part of the ordinary distribu-
tion of intelligence in the population, no more abnormal than the geniuses and near-
geniuses at the other end of the scale. Below
that come the pathological variants, roughly the idiots and imbeciles, owing their mental state to some major accident of heredity or environment. Furthermore, as I have mentioned, Pearson and Jaederholm posed the question which is still open today: does the feeble-minded fraction contain some appreciable proportion of persons who owe
their state to the same kind of causes as those
which result in idiocy and imnbecility ?
It was a misfortune that Pearson could
not resist the temptation of presenting this
work as a polemical fulmination against the Mendelians; and so its significance was obscured and for a long time it made little impression on workers in the field of mental deficiency. The facts, or many of them, had been displayed; but the underlying genetical explanation was wanting. It is true that the concept of multifactorial inheritance, for ever associated with the names of Johannsen, Nilsson-Ehle and East, had begun to take shape in I909, but it was not until I9I8 that Fisher,* in a paper of immense importance in genetics, showed that the results of the biometricians accorded perfectly with multifactorial Mendelian inheritance. The fusion
* Trans. Roy. Soc., Edin. 52, 399.

THE GENETICS OF MENTAL DEFICIENCY

73

of the two approaches to the problems of tribution of intelligence do not display any

heredity had been achieved.

"definite lesion or abnormality." On the

other hand, quite a proportion of the pre-

Lewis's Contribution

sumably normal feeble-minded variants do

In the field of mental deficiency older ideas so: sometimes undoubtedly as the result of

tended to persist. But inI929* came another
very important event-as you will see I am

coincidence, for it is an important fact that many physical and mental abnormalities

just mentioning one or two of the high- become progressively more common as we

lights-when Lewis published the results of descend in the scale of intelligence. Penrose his extensive survey in connection with the then turned to an entirely different method Wood report. His observations had led him of classification, namely by I.Q., and this

to a conclusion very similar to that of produced a clearer differentiation, as I shall

Pearson and Jaederholm, though his approach be mentioning shortly. It may be that some

was different. He distinguished between day the two types of defectives may be

"sub-cultural " defectives, to be regarded as distinguished by observable qualitative dif" normal" _and atholo a" ferences-and an immense advance that

deIctives, to beregarde as ca normal"
variants. Broadly, the first kind were the

would be-but that day is not yet. I think that Dr. Lewis felt this himself, even then,

eeible-minded and the second the idiots and for I can recall him saying to me about the

imbeciles. He mentioned the normal curve, time my colleagues and I started work on

but his argument was not biometrical. He these problems in 1933: " Let us forget

stated (this was in an amplification published about heredity and mental deficiency and

iD I933)t: " The pathological group comprises all

concentrate on heredity and Binet I.Q." That was certainly the main thought behind

those defectives whose condition is invariably our work, and I am glad to be able to make

associated with and in most cases is due to some reference to the help and support that

some definite lesion or abnormality.... Dr. Lewis has continued to give us over the

The sub-cultural group, on the other hand, years.

indudes those cases of mental defect in But though Lewis's guess was in one

which no such alien factor is found." These particular ahead of the available means of

were bold claims and up to the present at investigation the consequences of his con-

least, whatever may happen in the future, tribution have been very important indeed

they have been only very partially realized. in the field of mental deficiency. It is prin-

A thorough test was made by Penrosef in his cipally due to him that a rational and work-
Colchester survey. He classified his subjects able hypothesis has come to be generally

in the greatest possible detail. Many impor- accepted and that it has been increasingly

tant differences did indeed emerge, but few realized that the problem of high-grade

proved clear cut and there was much over- mental deficiency is an affair of the popula-

lapping. In fact the separation of mental tion as a whole-not just a special problem

defectives into groups by their physical and in one little corner of it.

mental abnormalities does not lead to the most useful classification from the point of view of genetics and of causation in general. In particular many idiots and imbeciles, who cannot possibly form part of the normal dis-
* Report on an Investigation into the Incidence of Mental Defect in Six Areas. I925-1927. London. H.M. Stationery Office.
t Jour. Ment. Sci., 79, 298. t A Clinical and Genetic Study of 1,280 cases of Mental Defect. M.R.C. Sp. Report Series 229. London, 1938. H.M. Stationery Office.

The Consequences of the Hypothesis
Some mental deficiency is genetic; even more is partially genetic. Let us first consider, then, the genetic differences between
our presumed two types. These types correspond to the most fundamental distinction in human genetics: the major genes on the
one hand, the minor genes, or polygenes, on the other; single-factor inheritance with large
qualitative differences versus multifactorial

C

74 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

inheritance with continuous variation- have to fall back on mental measurements.

that is, a number of genes, each of small Let us take the high-grade group first. (From

effect individually, but additive in their now on I will refer to the presumed high-

action, so that the end result depends upon grade group as the feeble-minded group and

their combined influence. When heredity is to the other as the imbecile group. This is not

responsible for idiocy or imbecility-actually intended to prejudge the issue, but it should,

some small part is due to recessive genes-it I think, help to avoid confusion.) In the

will be a single major gene which is respon- feeble-minded group, then, we are dealing

sible-not, of course, always the same gene. with multifactorial inheritance, or with

To the extent that feeble-mindedness is due environmental influences acting in much the

to heredity it will be the result of the com- same way. The-combined action of many

bined action of many genes making for low genes sounds complicated, but it is not really;

intelligence. I might interpolate here that a at least to a first approximation. In fact we

person of quite low general intelligence need need only a quite simple equation, involving

not be mentally defective in the social and three constants to be determined fron

legal sense; it is the combination of in- measurements, in order to specify the whole

adequate mental endowment with unfavour- thing for the general population, including

able temperamental traits and adverse the feeble-minded group, which is part of it.

environmental conditions which produces

that result. But without a relatively low so

intelligence there is no mental deficiency, and 2X it is the determination of that low level that is of most interest in connection with our ~20

,,' -.B.. 0GrYIs:: NN~=445404

subject today.

15

Most idiocy and imbecility, however, is not

genetic, or at least only partly genetic. And

heredity accounts for only a part of the 10

variability of test intelligence in 'the general population. We need not stop to argue how

*8454

45 54

55
64

.6754

7854

.8954 *19054 *110164

112145

118245 *11455

*114545 *11M6i4 PI.hQ.d

much. If we say something between one-half and three-quarters of the variability that we

FIG. 2 Frequency distribution of Stanford-Binet I.Q.s in a complete sample of Scottish children. (From A. M.

observe between human beings, we are unlikely to offend anybody. The introduc-

Macmeeken, The Intelligence of a Representative Group
of Scottish Children, University of London Press, I939.)

tion of non-genetic factors into the analysis The first thing to look at is the distribution

need not complicate it unduly. When of I.Q.s in the population. Here axe the

environmental causes produce low-grade frequency curves from a particularly fine

deficiency, they will, like the major genes, sample-that of MacMeeken.* As you will

tend to be single big accidents of develop- see, the curves are reasonably normal

ment. The non-genetic influences that affect -exactly how normal I will not go into-

the continuous variation of intelligence will that is one of the difficulties of the analysis-

be the sum total of many individually small but anyway reasonably normal. Now a

influences just like the polygenes. Our normal curve is specified completely by two

analysis will, in fact, quite reasonably figures. One is the mean and the other is the

take care of both hereditary and non- standard deviation. Do the feeble-minded

hereditary variations, whether qualitative form part of the curve as specified by these

or quantitative.

two constants ?

-As I mentioned previously, Pearson and

The First Test: The Normal Curve

Jaederholm found that at least two-thirds,

The attempt to classify defectives effici- or perhaps all, the children in the help

ently by relying on associated pathological, physical and mental factors fails us. So we

* The Intelligence of a Representative Group of Scottish
Children. I939. London Univ. Press.

THE GENETICS OF MENTAL DEFICIENCY

75

classes of Stockholm belonged to the curve, It is found with many physical characters,

but that the idiots and imbeciles could not like stature, that the average resemblance

possibly do so. It is not easy to make a between relatives can be specified by the

better test than they did. One difficulty is figures you see in Fig. 3. If we

that relatively very large numbers are measure a number of subjects and then their

required and a Binet test takes more than an relatives, we find that the parents, the

hour. Group tests, incidentally, cannot be children, and the brothers and sisters, that is,

used, because they do not sort out mental the sibs, of the subjects are on the average

defectives efficiently. Another difficulty is half-way between the subjects themselves

that it is very hard indeed to secure a good, and the mean for the whole population. This

unbiased sample. There are also difficulties diagram is in terms of Binet I.Q., so if we

about the precise form of the curve, exactly selected, say, I00 children of I.Q. 8o we should

how normal it is at very low levels. My expect their sibs to average 90. If we had

colleagues and I* made an attempt in con- I00 fathers of I.Q. I40, we should expect the

nexion with our survey on the school- average I.Q. of their sons to be I20, which is

children of Bath carried out in the 'thirties. why clever men cannot have sons who are,

TABLE I

on the average, as clever as themselves. But

NORMALITY OF LOWER PART OF THE FREQUENCY CURVE it cuts both ways. Sons of I.Q. I40 wil have

OF STANFORD BINET I.Q.S (BASED ON A COMPLETE

SAMPLE OF 3,36I CHILDREN)

Range of I.Q. Expected No. Observed No.

Above 73*78 ...

3,193.0

3,I95'2

fathers who average I20, So it is equally true that clever men cannot have fathers who are as clever as themselves on the

73.78-67.57 ...

Ioo-8

67 57-44.97 ...

66-5

BelOw 44.97 ..0. *7

94.9
58.4 12.5

I think that we surmounted the difficulties

fairly well, though I am afraid there is not

time to go into the arguments. Table I shows

the result in very brief summary form. You

will see that the expected and observed

numbers down to an .L Q45 correspond

closely. Below this point we expect less than

one child, but in fact find eighteen times as

many-a very big discrepancy. So it would

seem that Stanford I.Q.s follow the normal

curve down to about I.Q. 45 (on such

numbers the point on the scale cannot be

determined very precisely), and that below

there is the anticipated excess of idiots and

imbeciles-just about the number expected

on the basis of Lewis's survey.

average.
These figures were found empirically by the biometricians for characters that are practically entirely determined by heredity. Now we know the reason. It is very simple indeed. A pair of sibs, or a parent and child,
have half their genes in common, so with multifactorial inheritance half the genes of the sib make him or her like the subject; while the other half are different and are, on the average, those of the general population. Uncles and aunts, nephews and nieces share a quarter of their genes in common with the
subject; first cousins one-eighth. The regressions in the diagram presuppose
complete hereditary determination, whereas intelligence is by no means completely determined in this way. Nevertheless the regressions turn out in practice to be very

The Second Test: The Regressions

close to these values. One reason is that

I mentioned that there was a third figure husbands and wives tend strongly to resemble

that we need in order to specify completely, each other in regard to intelligence: in fact,

to a first approximation, not only the dis- to about the same extent as do brothers and

tribution of I.Q.s in the population but the sisters. This makes relatives more alike than

whole story of the average resemblance they would otherwise be. Moreover, there

between relatives. This is the regression co- are doubtless non-genetic influences that

efficient. Needless to say, the term regression tend to make relatives alike and so increase

goes back to Galton.

the regressions. The result is that we do not

* The Genetics of Oligophrenia. Congres. Int. de Ps ychiat. Paris, 1950. Hermann et Cie.

have theoretical values. They have to be determined by observation; but all

76 THE EUGENICS REVIEW REGRESSION OF I.Q. OF RELATIVES ON
30 1. Q. OF SUBJECTS

120~
110-

OS Sibs, Parents.Children

0-25

Grandporents,Grandchildren,
ncles,Aunts, Nephcws,Nkces

0-125 First Cousins

0
C. so/

70

6060

_ 70

60

90

100 110

120 130 140

1. Q. of Subjects

FIG. 3

experience shows that they are in fact pretty I.Q. of their other sibs should be about the

close to those shown in Fig. 3 and these same as in the general population-that is,

are the fiures I shall use.

about ioo. The regression is zero. Nor should

Let us see what we should expect in the there be any regression within the group.

way of regressions if our hypothesis is Here are some results: first those of our

correct. If we select a sample of defectives Bath Survey.* We made a special study of

belonging to the feeble-minded group and test the 8 per cent of children having the lowest

their sibs on the Binet scale, we should find a I.Q.s, and tested all their sibs of sch6ol age.

regression of about 0o5. We can estimate it There were only I3 idiots and imbeciles and

in two ways. First, we can compare the they had I7 sibs between them, whose

average I.Q. of our subjects taken as a whole average I.Q. was, indeed, almost exactly IOO.

with their sibs taken as a whole. If, say, the There was little difficulty about where to

mean I.Q. of subjects is 6o, then the expected divide the two groups in this sample, for it

mean I.Q. of their sibs will be about 8o. so happened that no child with an I.Q. of

Secondly, we can examine the regression from 44 to 53 inclusive happened to have

within the sample. Say our defectives range any sibs of school age. The number of

from I.Q. 50 to I.Q. 70. As the I.Q.s of subjects in this second group, the very back-

subjects rise by these 20 points, we shall ward, was 269 and they had between them

expect the I.Q. of their sibs to rise by about 367 sibs of school age. After making a neces-

half as much, that is, by about io points. sary adjustment to allow for a difference in

With the imbecile group the result is age at test, the average I.Q. of the subjects

totally different. We expect to find a few, a was 77-4 and of their sibs 88'i. So the

very few, low-grade sibs like the subjects; regression turned out to be o053, a figure

but leaving these on one side, the average

* Annals of Eugenics, 1940. 10, 293.'

THE GENETICS OF MENTAL DEFICIENCY

77

almost identical with that found for the whole of the sibs of all intelligences included in the main sample. Within the sample the
regression was again almost the same, 0-49.
Only one of the 367 sibs was an imbecile, so as about one child of school age in 250 is an idiot or imbecile, this sample of sibs of the feeble-minded and the dull contained no excess of imbeciles. So far then the evidence supports our hypothesis.
At the same time as we were carrying out this work, Penrose was conducting his Colchester survey. He published in 1939* a very similar analysis on those who had been given a Binet test. I did not see his paper till after ours had been published; if I had, I should have made the methods used more strictly comparable. Still,, they were very similar. Taking first the defectives in his group with I.Q.s of 50 plus, his regression was similar to ours, though a little lower, namely o044. His sample of idiots and imbeciles was, naturally, much larger than ours and here we do get a marked departure from hypothesis. It is true that there was clear evidence that there were, as expected, two kinds of sibs, the idiots and imbeciles and the relatively normal. But the relatively normal were definitely below IOO on the average. The figure for all sibs was 87*4. Even if we try to make the figures fit as well as possible by omitting borderline subjects and sibs, the mean I.Q. of the remaining sibs is only 9i-2.
Leaving this last result for the moment, the correspondence between our findings and those of Penrose is, I think, sufficiently remarkable. Our sample was a complete sample from the general population; his was composed of certified defectives only -and many potential defectives are not certified. His sample carries the group farther into the very tail of the distribution of
intelligence, but no new speqial factor seems
to emerge. Penrose also examined some other relatives and again found a reasonable correspondence with the expected regressions. His figure and ours for first cousins turned out to be very similar.
* Brit. Jour. Psychol, 1939. 80, I.

A New Survey: The Borderline
After the war we decided to carry out a new survey, the main purpose of which was
to subject the hypothesis to a more searching test, and I want to devote the rest of the time to giving you the results of the analyses carried out so far. We chose areas centred on Bristol and on Colchester and tried to find within those areas all the children with Terman-Merrill I.Q.s ranging from 35 to 6o. We hoped in this way to cover more fully the critical level at which the two groups overlap. Once again, all the sibs of school age were tested. The work was carried out by my colleagues-at Colchester by Dr. Mellone, Miss Newlyn and Miss Davidson; at Bristol by Mrs. Jenner and Mrs. Sedgley. The number of defectives was 27I and the number of sibs tested was 562. By selecting these particular subjects we were, of course, makiDg things as difficult for ourselves as we could. This is the very part of the rangewhere the twogroups are likelytobemuddledup; thisistheregion where, if anywhere, families will obstinately refuse to fall neatly into one group or the other.
An Attempted Division: Frequency Distribu-
tions and Regressions
When we looked at the results we found that we had succeeded only too well in making things verv complicated indeed. We had rather hoped that the subjects of I.Q. nearest 35 would fall clearly into the imbecile group and those of I.Q. nearest 6o equally ineatly into the feeble-minded group, though leaving, of course, a mixed-up group in the middle, for, to mention one point alone, the errors of individual measurements are considerable. But the overlap was much greater than we had expected. A separation by I.Q. of subjects did indeed show that the sample could not be homogeneous, but that added little to what we knew before and it was difficult to get any farther. My colleagues and I were distinctly shaken. Was the hypothesis only very partially true after all ? We felt that this might indeed be so. No doubt it is interesting and stimulating to find that one has been wrong for twenty years, but it takes a little effort to square the shoulders.
We then tried an experiment. Looking at

78
30
_
20
E I1o-

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
DISTRIBUTION OF l.Q's.OF 562 SIBS OF
M E N TA L DE FEC T I V ES (OF 1. Q. 35-60)
ALL FAMILIES

30-
c
v

Z:

FEEBLE MINDED

,

#---~~~~~;

~\

FAMILIES
IMBECILE FAMILIES

I 1-
o20-w~~~~~~~~~~

0 4 s 6 76 sb 9b i6 \bIi t 11 I3

l.2Q.

FIG. 4

a two-way table showing the 27I subjects Table II shows, very broadly, the result of

arranged in order of I.Q., with the I.Q.s of the division in terms of I.Q. of subjects. The

their sibs alongside them, I divided the original I.Q.s, incidentaUy, as well as those

families by brute force into two groups, of the sibs, have had to be adjusted in order

doing the job quickly and ruthlessly, with as to secure comparability at different ages at

little juggling as possible. I should mention test.* This has widened the range of I.Q.s of

that quite a number of families were ascer- subjects to 30 to 68 and raised them by an

tained through two defective children, and average of about 6 points. On the whole the

two or three through three, and so both lower I.Q.s do tend to fall into the imbicile

subjects, or all three, had, of course, to be group and the higher I.Q.s into the feeble-

allotted either to the imbecile group or to the minded group, but there is considerable

feeble-minded group.

modification and overlapping due to taking

TABLE II

I.Q.S (ADJUSTED) OF SUBJECTS FALLING INTO THE Two GROUPS

I.Q.

Imbecile

Feeble-minded

Group

Group

Under 53 ...

66

21

53-60 ... ... Over 6o ...

40
I6

54
74

122 I49

NOTE.-Effect of adjustment is to raise I.Q.s by about 6 points on the average.

the I.Q.s of sibs into consideration also. Now what about the first test, the effect
on the distribution of I.Q.s of the sibs ? This is shown in Fig. 4.
The. top curve shows the total distribution of sibs and is a very peculiar curve indeed. It might do as a silhouette of the Matterhorn,
* Roberts and Mellone. British Jour. Psvchol.
(Statistical Section). In the press.

THE GENETICS OF MENTAL DEFICIENCY

79

but as the frequency distribution of a self- I00

respecting biological measurement it is quite

horrible. The lower curves show separately U)

the sibs of the two arbitrary groups. They o \

WHOLE GROUP

are very different and are in fact quite reasonable. You will see that the arbitrary 0

feeble-minded group has sibs givng a fairly

normal curve centred on about I.Q. 8o; the

imbecile group also yields a reasonably

normal curve, with the expected hump at'the

lower end, which represents the sibs who are also imbeciles.
Needless to say, the most difficult families to classify were those with only one tested
U)o8sib. If these single sibs, io8 in number, are

0-9
890 0L

omitted, the silhouette of the Matterhorn, as

0f,fir 42IMBECILE GROUP

O'21

would be expected, is practically unchanged,

but the'lower curves are appreciably im-

proved; in particular, the skewness, or

tilting, is reduced.

What about the regressions? These are

shown in Fig. 5.

Taking the 562 sibs as a whole, once again 7qo 40 so 60 70

the regression is hopeless; it is not worth

1. Q. of Defectives

while trying to fit a curve. But the two Both lower regressions are linear. Imbecile group

arbitrary groups give very different results.

regression non-significant.

The feeble-minded group yields a regression

FIG. 5

of o042, quite close to the expected figure, and there is no significant departure from the thing right, then with an effort, a second

expected straight line. This is the regression thing perhaps, but you cannot quite manage

within the sample-that of I.Q. of sibs on the third, while the fourth andfifth obstinately I.Q. of subjects. Taking the feeble-minded remain hopeless. You try again, but once subjects as a whole and their sibs as a whole, more you can only get one or two things the regression is o05I, very close to expecta- right at a time. In this sample, however,

tion. The imbecile group yields the much everything came more or less right at the lower regression of 02I, which does not first attempt.

differ significantly from the expected figure of zero. (If anyone should wonder how it is Tests Using Social Criteria

possible to get two regressions which are Some of you might say, however, that the

going up from one which seems to be going tests I have mentioned are not enough.

down, the answer is that the numbers in the Even granting the difficulty of getting so

arrays are very unequal).

many things right all at once, nevertheless

Now it seems to me that this forcible the two groups were separated by looking at

arbitrary separation must correspond the same figures which were subsequently

approximately to an underlying reality. I analysed. So I am glad to say that there is

have not mentioned certain other tests some further evidence of a stronger kind

time does not allow it. The point is that which is quite independent of the method of

I do not think that it is possible to separate separation. It depends upon social data. If

a body of material into quite unreal groups our hypothesis is right there should be a big

that will satisfy all the criteria. It is like difference in social background. The imbecile

those exasperating puzzles: you get one group, by and large, should not differ greatly

8o THE EUGENICS REVIEW

from the average of the general population, whereas the families contributing the feebleminded subjects should fail much below that
average. First, occupation of father. This was classified on a 7-point scale for which we are indebted to Mr. Hall, of the London
School of Economics. There is indeed a big difference between the two arbitrary groups, whereas the division of subjects by I.Q. alone yields a much smaller difference. The
mean figures for grade of father's occupation
show this very clearly.

TABLE III

COMPARISON OF SOCIAL BACKGROUND

A. By Father's Occupation

Division by Groups

Division by I.Q. of

Feeble-

Subjects

Grade Imbecile minded 59- 6o+

1-4 ... 5 ... 6 ... 7 ...
Mean ...

15 47 7 31
5.4'

2
3I59
44
602

II 4 37 45 12 15
40 36
572 5.79

Grade
I ...
2 ...
3 ... 4 ...

B. By Assessment of Home

%%
50 30
30 23 8 32 12 15

%
4I
29 I8 I2

%
36 22 26
I6

Mean ... I.83

2'30

2,0I 2.23

Notes: I. I is highest grade. 2. Division at I.Q. 59/60 is most favourable for maximising difference.

Next, the condition of the home, assessed on a 4-point scale. Here, for example, it will be seen that 8o per cent of the imbecile
families fail into grades i and 2, but only
52 per cent of the feeble-minded families. Turning to division byI.Q. the corresponding figures are 70 and 58, a much smaller difference.
The results of Table IV are, I think, even
more striking. Owing to the marked negative association between intelligence and fertility, and to a lesser degree between social class and fertility, the fertility of mothers is a
very sensitive social index. One reason for this is that it is a measurement which, unlike many others, can be made with almost complete accuracy. The difference between the two arbitrary groups is remarkably large.

The mothers of the subjects in the feebleminded group are 40 per cent more fertile than the mothers of those in the imbecile

TABLE IV

COMPARISON OF FERTILITY OF MOTHERS

Division by Groups Division by I.Q. of

Feeble-

Subjects

Imbecile minded 59- 60+

(Mean No.) (Mean No.) (Mean No.) (Mean No.)

Lving ... 2-6I 3.31

2-93 3.o8

Dead ... o 24
Stillborn... 0o05 Miscarnage o-I6

0 45 03I
0oO-IS2
0.39 0o23

04I o-o8
0°37

Total preg- 3 o6 nancies Ratio ... I

4 30
P4I

3-59 3'94 I I0Io

Notes: I. Ratio of total pregnancies will be unchanged when all mothers have passed reproductive
age. 2. Mothers were ascertained by having subject
plus minimum of one tested sib: hence these two children ae omitted from all calculations.

group. Once again, the difference is much

smaller when the separation is made in

terms of I.Q. of subjects; it is only io per

cent.

Finally, for fertility there are fortunately

some excellent figures for the general popula-

tion, with which ours can be compared

directly. They are those of the Scottish

survey, carried out in I947,* just about the

time we were doing our survey and referring,

moreover, to subjects, and hence to mothers,

of just about the same, mean age. The

figures for ling children in our imbecile

group and for Scottish children of median

intelligence are very similar, which is what

ought to be found. The difference between

our two groups is 70 per cent of the difference

between average and dullest children in

Scotland.

TABLE V

COMPARISON WITH ScoTTIsH SURVEY-NUMBER OF

LIVING SIBS

Present Survey

Scottish Survey

Imbecile group ... 2-6I '.Nledian children ... 2-72 Feeble-minded group 3-31 Dullest children

(II3%) *- ... 3'72

Difference 0.o.7.o

Difference ... iToo

Note: Present survey sibs calculated as before; subject through whom family was ascertained omitted in Scottish figures.

* The Trend of Scottish Intelligence. ig49. Univ. of
London Press.

THE GENETICS OF MENTAL DEFICIENCY

8I

Conclusion and the Next Step

Summary

So I think that taking all the evidence The most important single point in

together, it is fairly safe to conclude that the attempting to unravel the causation of

arbitrary separation has indeed hit off rather mental deficiency is to determine whether

closely an underlying reality; and that it or not there are two kinds: first, those who

was so easy to do shows that even at the most shade off into the very dull and represent the

difficult part of the range, the region of the tail of the normal curve of the distribution of

overlap, there are good indications that we intelligence; secondly, those who are quali-

are dealing with two groups of families, even tatively different from the normal. Broadly,

if we cannot always decide from the I.Q. of the firstJlind are the feeble-minded and the
an individual defective, or indeed by any seconrthe idiots and imbeciles. To the

further examination of him, or perhaps of extent that causation is gefnetic, inheritance

his family, which group he belongs to. There in the first kind is muUEa_ctorial and in the

is an overlap, due to errors of measurement second depends on single genes. Similarly,

and to real overlapping of I.Q.s, including with non-genetic caistation the contrast is

occasional really high-grade deficiency due to between the combined action of many

single major causes. The high-grade mongol influences on the one hand and single major

or phenylketonuric is very rare; neverthe- accidents of development on the other.

less he exists; but it would seem that the This hypothesis, in all essentials, was put

contribution of these single major causes to forward by Pearson and Jaederholm in 1914.

the total bulk of feeble-mindedness is The genetic basis of the distinction was not,

probably relatively small.

however, formulated at that time; it had to

e I should like to end with a word on the one wait for Fisher's synthesis of the treatment

anomalous finding: that the average I.Q. of of quantitative and qualitative variation,

the relatively normal sibs of idiots and published in I9I8. During the last twenty-

imbeciles seems to be lower than 1oo. This five years many workers have contributed

does not contradict the reality of the differ- evidence, the work ofJ,wis being especially

ence between the two groups, but it is a noteworthy as a turning-point in the history

complication and a result that would not be of the subject. Nevertheless, the hypothesis

foreseen on theoretical grounds. There are remains an hypothesis, and more 7Mejis

a number of possibilities, some of which, I neede rei can be a ted as fully

hope, we can explore on the data we already proved. One difficulty is at the presumed

have. Part may be due to the inadvertent two types cannot be separated efficiently on

inclusion of what are really high-grade clinical grounds, and so it is necessary to fall

families. A small part is certainly due to back on mental tests. These measurements

single causes now and then producing no are subject to considerable error, and even if

more than feeble-mindedness. Part is un- they were not there is no reason why there

doubtedly an artefact, due to bias, some of should not be a real overlapping. And human

which can, I think, be allowed for. But I hope families are small. So it is often impossible

that some of it proves to be real; the more to assign a defective unequivocally to one

the better; and for this reason. If it is real group or the other, even after the fullest

it is probably an indication that idiocy and examination of him and of his family.

imbecility are somewhat commoner under _ A reviewtdhet.oidence shows that in

poorer social conditions. If this is so, there is gene+aift is in favour of the hypothesis. Jhe

a hope of effecting some reduction. My own frequency curve of the distribution of I..s

guess is that the evidence may lead us to is normal down to a level which iI7ThdeiSimost'

birth injury and prematurity as causes of of the feeble-minded. The re-'essions are of

considerable importance. Anyway it is a the exp ehd order: thusteib regression

'possibility that is wellworthexamining; and in the feeble-minded group-is abouto5, which

this, if our plans go right, is to be the subject is the VIiue found in the general population;

of our next main survey.

with low-grade defectives it is sufficiently

V%

82 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

close to zero (within the group), the sibs tending to fall into two classes, a few of lowgrade like the subjects and the majority of relatively normal intelligence. Nevertheless, it is known that those major influences which usually cause idiocy or imbecility may occasionally produce no more than feeblemindedness, as is seen for example, though rarely, in mongolism or phenylketonuria. An important point is to discover whether such families make any substantial contribution numerically in the region of the overlap.
The results of a new survey designed to cover this difficult reglon are briefly reported. As complete an ascertainment as possible was made of defectives within the I.Q. range 35-6o and all their brotleis anDd7isters of school age were also tested. Separating these
~Z~families by the I.Q. of the defective
provedonly moderately efficient. An attempt to divide the faniliis into two groups in a somewhat arbitrary fashion, which is described, gave- better results. An ana4ysis of independent 1ocia criteria in particular did appear to indicate that the families were indeed composed of two quite different
grqps. Hence it seems ilkely that even in
the region of overlapping I.Q.s there are still two contrasting types of causation in the great majority of instances, and that the contribution of truly mixed families is numerically small in relation to the total amount of mental deficiency in the population.
Discussion
The lecture was followed by a short discussion opened by DR. ELIOT SLATER, who said that if Dr. Fraser Roberts's theory, that there were two qualitatively distinct classes of defectives, was correct, it was a matter of the greatest importance. To establish or rebut its truth he had made a critical experiment. The terms of the experiment had made the results rather difficult to handle, but he thought that Dr. Roberts had received a fairly clear and unequivocal answer that his theory was right.
Some people might have doubts whether, in investigating the heredity of mental deficiency, it was justifiable to work with intelligence quotients, which were an abstraction and only a partial expression of the totality of what was meant by mental defect. Some information was, no doubt, lost by this procedure, but Dr. Slater thought that

it was essentially irrelevant information and that
its exclusion clarified the genetical problem.
Dr. Fraser Roberts had divided his material into
two classes " by brute force "; having made his
two groups by reference to certain criteria, it is not
surprising that they differed from one another in
these criteria after the division. There was an element of circularity in the argument, but did this really matter ? If a man, faced with a heap of jig-
saw pieces, developed the theory that they were pieces from two different puzzles, differing in a colour tone, separated them according to his theory, and then found not only two heaps of different colour, but pieces which at last began to fit into two distinct pictures, was his proceeding
circular ? Dr. Fraser Roberts's two groups differed, not only in the criteria by which he had separated
them but also in a number of quite different qualities.
The significance of this theory, Dr. Slater continued, could not be overestimated, since problems were raised by mental deficiency in the fields of biology, sociology, the study of delinquency and, finally, eugenics. The eugenic problems raised by the idiots and imbeciles on one side, and by the feeble-minded on the other, were quite different. Eugenic measures were not likely to be of great assistance with the first class, but offered much
stronger hopes with the second more numerous and important class. But, he said, it was also a consequence of the theory that a eugenic programme should be related to the whole population and not
concentrated on the feeble-minded.
SIR GODFREY THOMSON said that he was pleased that Dr. Roberts had found the Scottish survey
results useful. In Scotland they were following up the 1,200 children of the six-day sample, testing sibs with individual Terman-Merrill tests as they reached the age of eleven, thus avoiding any adjustment for age, the same part of the test being used for each child. The results, which were accumulating slowly, would be helpful not only for examining birth order effect but also for the further
study of Dr. Fraser Roberts's hypothesis.
He added that he would like to ask Dr. Roberts what was the nature of the " brute force " that he
used to separate his two groups. PROFESSOR P. E. VERNON said that this study
showed all the clarity and statistical ingenuity we had come to expect of Dr. Roberts. There were two questions he would like to put. First, would one not expect the amount of regression for first-
degree relatives to be greater than o*5 because of assortative mating and a common environment ?
Second, how could it be determined whether Mendelian inheritance was operating in the idiot and imbecile group, or whether most of these cases
were not due to pathological conditions ? DR. C. D. DARLINGTON asked if he was right in
concluding that the least intelligent defectives have the more intelligent mothers. The lecturer replied in the affirmative.

THE GENETICS OF MENTAL DEFICIENCY

83

Dr. Darlington also said that an absolute dis-
tinction between major genes and polygenes was
not based on much experimental evidence. It was
possible that the genes themselves had a normal
distribution with relatively few having very large
or very small effects. Dr. Fraser Roberts's observa-
tions had general significance. They favoured this
distinction since there was no intermediate group and his observations provided evidence which is not yet to be had from ordinary animal or plant
experiments. DR. H. J. EYSENCK wished to make two points.
The first was that he thought that Thorndike, shortly before his death, had shown that a regression of children's I.Q. on their parents' I.Q. was o 7 and not o 5 when adjustments were made for hetero-
geneity and so on. The second was that he did not feel that the Binet test was a happy one to have chosen, its " g " variance being only 40-50 per cent. He thought that analysis had been made more difficult by choosing this test, which measures complex factors.
In replying to the discussion DR. ROBERTS said that he wished to thank Dr. Slater for making a number of points clearer and to thank him and the other speakers for their kind remarks. In reply to Sir Godfrey Thomson, he said that the data of the Scottish survey would be a gold mine for years to come. He fully appreciated that some of the argument about the separation of the two groups appeared circular. The " brute force " consisted in looking at a two-way table, down the left-hand margin of which were arranged individually the 271 subjects in order of I.Q. and opposite to each the I.Q.s of the tested sibs. He went quickly down the table, assigning each family to one of the two
groups, giving weight to two things simultaneously -namely, the subject's I.Q. and the distribution of the I.Q.s of its sibs. He realized that the division was far from objective and so had applied other tests, such as those based on social data.

He was grateful to Professor Vernon for mentioning points that had, perhaps, not been made sufficiently clear in the lecture. He thought it a coincidence that the regressions with first-degree relatives should turn out to be about o*5; assortative mating and the effects of a similar environment were in fact about balancing the lowering due to a substantial fraction of non-hereditary determination. In reply to the second point, apart from definite hereditary entities such as amaurotic idiocy or phenylketonuria, the evidence for Mendelian inheritance in a small proportion of undifferentiated imbeciles and idiots depended on such considerations as a raised consanguinity rate in the parents and on detailed pedigree studies, like those of Sjogren.
Dr. Roberts agreed with Dr. Eysenck that some of Thorndike's regressions were appreciably higher
than o-5, but thought that some of this might be due to the samples being selected rather than being random samples of the whole population. The use of the Binet test might, perhaps, be criticised, but
it had very great advantages. First, it was a wellstandardized single scale applicable to children of of all school ages; for in a survey of this kind tests which applied to a narrower range were of little use. Secondly, it was familiar to all educational psychologists and so could be used in a co-operative scheme by workers in different parts of the country.
Acknowledgments
The survey briefly reported in the lecture was made possible by the generous cooperation of many individuals and official bodies. My colleagues and I will make full acknowledgrnents of the help we received when we prepare a complete account for publication. I am indebted to Mrs. M. G. Young for drawing the figures.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLIV, No. 2

