DIVORCE AND MARRIAGE REFORM

The Address at the Annual General Meeting, 1931, of the Eugenics Society
By the Right Honourable LORD SALVESEN, P.C., K.C., LL.D.

T HE above subject has been chosen As it stands, the law is open to grave

for my address to this Society, be- objections. Married persons who have

cause I believe there is profound lapsed from virtue are often debarred from

dissatisfaction with the law of divorce as it seeking divorce, however great the delin-

at present exists in England.

quency of the other spouse, by having to

Ever since the Reformation infidelity has proclaim their own shortcomings. If they

been regarded as a ground sanctioned by do, and the judge considers that he is not

Scripture for the dissolution of a marriage, entitled to exercise his discretion in their

although until I857 the remedy was only favour, the petition is dismissed and two

available to those who had sufficient means persons whose association as married per-

(£500 was the minimum cost) to obtain a pri- sons has become unendurable remain tied vate Act of Parliament. Since I857 the High together for life. Further, the law gives no

Court sitting in London has been open to suits of divorce which could be presented by persons of moderate means. An isolated act of infidelity was a sufficient ground for
divorcing a wife at the husband's instance, but a wife who sought the same remedy had
to prove in addition cruelty or desertion by the husband. Since the report of the Royal

remedy to those who have been deserted. Such cases chiefly occur amongst the working classes. The typical case is that of the husband who has tired of supporting his wife and children, suddenly emigrating to one of the Dominions or to a different district under an assumed name and leaving his

Commission of Divorce in 19I2 two impor- wife and children to starve. She cannot

tant changes have been made. The woman trace his whereabouts-does not know

is now in exactly the same position as the whether he is alive or dead-but until either

man in obtaining divorce, and facilities have she can establish his adultery or the fact of

been given both in the High Court and in his death she must perforce remain celibate

certain provincial courts for poor persons to or contract an illicit alliance.

bring their petitions without undue Other cases equally hard occur more

expense. The judge who tries the case
is, however, still vested with a discretion to refuse divorce to the complaining petitioner
if he or she has been guilty of adultery.
According to, a recent decision of Lord Merrivale, in order to get the benefit of this discretion the petitioner must frankly state the circumstances under which he or she has been unfaithful to the marriage tie; and if a full disclosure is not made after a decree

rarely amongst the middle classes. A Church of England clergyman wrote to me that for twenty years his wife had refused to live with him and he had been compelled to live celibate without hope of children. Again, as infidelity is the only ground of divorce, evidence real or simulated has to
be manufactured sufficient to satisfy the Court, and a dissolution of a marriage which

nisi has been obtained, and this is subse- both parties ardently desire may thus be

quently ascertained, the Court refuses to secured. No wonder that in these circum-

make the decree absolute. Such, in a nut- stances collusion and perjury have become

shell, is the existing law.

rife in the Probate and Divorce Division.

107

io8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

SEPARATIONS IN ENGLAND

instance of a wife on the ground of her

It is impossible, of course, to ascertain husband's adultery are brought into court

statistically how many such cases in the than those which are brought by the hus-

aggregate occur. But as regards desertion band for his wife's adultery. This physio-

some guidance may be got from Scottish logical difference explains why in the

statistics. Since I560 malicious desertion former English law of divorce the wife's

for four years has been a recognized ground infidelity was treated as on a different plane

of divorce in Scotland. In 1924, of the 449 to that of the husband's. Even that old

decrees pronounced in the Court of Session- moralist, Samuel Johnson, declared that

the one Court where actions of divorce are there was a boundless difference between the

competent-2II were for desertion, substan- two.

tially all of them in favour of poor women For my part, I think that it is right that

of the working class. If anything like the the woman should be entitled to obtain

same ratio of desertions occurs in England, divorce for her husband's infidelity, be-

where in I929 3,496 decrees of divorce were cause, apart from equality (which makes so

granted, from 1,500 to 2,ooo persons must strong an appeal to feminist societies), for

annually be in this position.

one reason it puts in her hands a weapon by

While I accept the view that infidelity is which she may curb her husband's inconti-

a valid ground for the dissolution of a mar- nence-for the penalties of divorce in Scot-

riage, it does not appear to me to be neces- land amongst the propertied classes are

sarily the only, or in many cases the most very heavy indeed upon the delinquent

cogent, reason for divorce. In the early party. But that infidelity itself is not

Christian Church it was recognized and necessarily disruptive of the home is demon-

has always been so in the Greek Church. strated by the fact that it is very frequently

That Church discriminates, as the English condoned by the injured wife and not infre-

Church formerly did, between the infidelity quently by the husband when the erring

of the husband and infidelity of the wife. wife is genuinely repentant. The law is

In all Protestant countries infidelity has right in not making any distinction between

been regarded as a ground for dissolving a the sexes, for it leaves it open to the injured

matriage. In many cases it has been the spouse to use the remedy which it provides

most potent factor in the disruption of the or not to use it, as in the circumstances he

home, and, even in our times, there are or she may see fit. Experience shows that

probably more murders committed from the majority of women do not do so unless

jealousy than from any other specific cause. their affectioiis have been permanently

At the same time it cannot be denied that alienated from their husbands, or the con-

there are infinitely varied degrees of obli- duct of the latter in other respects has made

quity in the character of this- offence-like marriage unendurable. There is no other

the crime of manslaughter, which may be way of accounting for the relative infre-

punished with a fine, when it arises from a quency of divorces for infidelity at the

mere trivial act of negligence, or with a long instance of wives in Scotland, for there

term of penal servitude when the degree can be no doubt that the general morality of

approaches to murder. There is in the married women in this respect is higher

degrees of infidelity the same distinction as than that of men.

between weakness and wickedness. Man is naturally a polygynous animal,

ROYAL COMMISSION'S REPORT

and a wife who is otherwise on good terms I have already referred to the Royal Com-

with her husband will readily condone an mission of Divorce which sat from I908 to

occasional lapse of virtue if he declares him- I9I2, when its report was issued. That

self repentant and thoroughly ashamed of Commission was one of the most remark-

himself. This is proved by the fact that in able in the history of the country. A very

Scotland far fewer cases of divorce at the large number of witnesses were examined

DIVORCE AND MARRIAGE REFORM

I09

and the report of the Commission is con- strongly against increasing the number of

tained in three huge folio volumes. The persons living as if single, and yet not free

report of the majority, which was no doubt to marry: husbands without wives and

written by Lord Gorell, is a masterly ex- wives without husbands." The Majority

position of the whole field that it covers. Report sums up the position in these words:

In the end the Commissioners came to the " Our conclusion is that the remedy of

conclusion that five other grounds for dis- judicial separation is an unnatural and un-

solving marriage should be added to that satisfactory remedy, leading to evil conse-

already existing, namely: wilful desertion quences, and that it is inadequate, in cases

for three years and upwards, crueltv, in- where married life has become practically

curable insanity for five years and upwards, impossible."

habitual dr-ankenness found incurable after

three years from first order, and imprison- ARREARS OF SEPARATED PERSONS

ment under a commuted death sentence.
The intolerable situation to the innocent
spouse arising from any of these causes need
scarcely be stressed. I have also already referred to desertion
in Scotland where, I believe, it has been a ground of divorce for longer than in any other country in the world. After three and
a half centuries there has never been a suggestion that the law with regard to divorce for desertion in Scotland should be repealed. Its beneficial action in promoting morality is known to all. Indeed, it does not really extend the existing ground of divorce, because I have never known of a man who was
capable of leaving his wife and children to starve, leading a chaste life thereafter.
We have not yet added to our Scotch grounds of divorce the others referred to in the Majority Report, but if any legislation in England should be enacted, it should be made equally applicable to Scotland. Cruelty, no doubt, is in both countries a ground of separation. That is necessary for the protection of the life or health of the injured woman. But the status created by

I have already adverted to the fact that
assuming that 2oo is the number of divorces for desertion granted in Scotland annually, there are probably I,500 to 2,000 such cases in England annually demanding a remedy. The arrears of similar cases must run into
very large figures. Possibly from 30,000 to 5o,ooo are in the position in England today of having been deserted for more than three years. It would not be fair in such cases to inquire into the life that they have since been leading. For too often the poverty to which a wife is reduced by a deserting husband almost compels her to live with any man who is willing to support
her and her children. Her infidelity, where it exists, has resulted from the grievous
wrong done her by the husband. In my own
experience it is the decent poor who come before the courts to seek divorce for desertion. When they have the opportunity of marrying again, they come to court so that they may enter into a legal union, and any children that may be born may be legiti-
mate.

separation is almost universally condemned by every lay witness examined

DIVORCE OF THE INSANE

before the Royal Commission. Mr. Jus- The case for adding insanity as a reason

tice Bargrave Deane, speaking of sepa- for divorce rests on different grounds. The

ration, said: " I would not have sepa- insane person is not necessarily responsible

ration, it is a living death. That is for his physical and mental condition,

the way I look at separation. It is wrong though it must not be overlooked that a

altogether. Either they must live together very large proportion of those who become

or live apart, and that means be divorced." permanently insane are drunkards or syphi-

A leading authority on the law of husband litics. An eminent doctor on whom the

and wife in Scotland, Professor Walton, Majority Report placed great reliance thus

states the position thus : " Public feeling is summed up the situation:

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

" A person united in the bonds of For the first seven centuries of Christian

matrimony to a chronic and incurable faith divorces were allowed on various

lunatic, is for all practical as well as grounds. It was not until the eighth cen-

legal purposes one united to a dead per- tury that the doctrine of marriage, being a

son. For, by the nature of his physical sacrament, was incorporated in the law of

condition, he is not only unable to direct Christian states. It spread over all the

the life of another, but is unable even to countries subjected to the Western Church

control his own."

and finally received the solemn sanction of

" Evidence given before us " (says the Report) " and the communications received
by us prove the disastrous moral effects inseparable from the present state of the law."
In I908, there were I50,000 registered in-
sane persons in the United Kingdom, and of these some 6o,ooo or 70,000 were married. The number now is probably much larger.
Those who recover after five or even three years' confinement constitute only a negligible fraction. It is not infrequently found that
insane persons who are discharged as recovered are, within a short period, again confined. In a Society such as this it is unnecessary to emphasize the disastrous eugenic results which may be expected in marriages between persons one of whom has a hereditary taint of insanity. Habitual drunkenness and criminality are, probably,
in practice, more rare. Neither of them, unless accompanied by cruelty, is a cause for separation. The misery of a person who is condemned to live with a drunken spouse or with a serious criminal, can scarcely be
exaggerated.

the Roman Catholic Church by the decree of the Council of Trent. Anyone who reads
the history of that council in the article published in the British Encyclopaedia, will not be favourably impressed by the
authority of that council, especially those
who are not prepared to submit to this infallible rule of the Pope. The Anglo-
Catholic clergy of the Church of England rely for authority especially on the words of
our Lord: " Whom God hath joined let not man put asunder." It is not consistent with my conception of the Deity that He is responsible for every ill-assorted marriage. If what is meant is " Whom the Church hath joined let no man divorce," it is really an assertion that every marriage celebrated
in church should be assumed to be an act of the Deity. It is dangerous to take too literally the words of a great moral teacher. If we did we should find ourselves in great difficulties. In the Sermon on the Mount, one finds the words: " Judge not that ye be not judged," which, if literally interpreted, would abolish all courts of justice.
Again, what warrant is there for inter-

RELIGIOUS OPPOSITION CRITICIZED

preting the words " put asunder," as meaning divorce and not separation? The Roman

At the present day the main opposition to Church has always recognized the right of

an extension of the existing ground of a spouse to be separated from another on the

divorce comes from the Roman Catholic ground of infidelity and on other grounds.

Church, and from a certain proportion of The decree of separation sunders as effec-

the priesthood of the Church of England. tually the relationship between husband and

The former Church is inflexible in its oppo- wife as a decree of divorce. From a legal

sition to the dissolution of any marriage point of view, apart from authority and

celebrated in church, whilst the priesthood tradition, the matter is scarcely open to

of the Anglican Church is divided. The argument. It is mere assertion to say, even

opposition is founded on the alleged sacra- if the words were construed as one would a

mental character of marriage, a view which statute, that our Lord meant separation and

is not shared by the majority of the lay not divorce, for divorce is expressly sanc-

population belonging to the Church of Eng- tioned elsewhere for fornication. Taken

land, nor by the large body who constitute literally and bv themselves the words

the remainder of the Protestant population. prohibit both.

DIVORCE AND MARRIAGE REFORM

III

CHRISTIAN UNFORGIVINGNESS

ences of opinion. With few exceptions the

Before the Commission, some thirty per- lay witnesses pass them by, as if they con-

sons, representative of all branches of the cern theologians rather than practical legis-

Christian Church in the United Kingdom, lation." In the early Christian Church

gave evidence. Some leading Anglican under the Western and Eastern Emperors

clerics expressed the view that marriage there were the same acute differences of

was a sacrament and that marriages were opinion on the theological aspect, but the

therefore indissoluble, although this does legislation of the day permitted divorce, not

not necessarily seem to follow. Some went merely for infidelity but for many other

so far as to regard an innocent person who causes.

had divorced his wife or husband, as the case might be, as guilty of adultery if he

ROMAN CATHOLIC EVASIONS

or she entered into a second marriage. As I While the Roman Catholic Church since

understand their evidence, they would re- the eighth century has more or less con-

fuse to perform the marriage ceremony in sistently maintained that marriage was in-

such a case, and they would also refuse dissoluble, various devices have been re-

to receive a person, who had married a sorted to for putting an end to the marriage

second time after divorcing a guilty spouse, tie on the ground of the invalidity of the

into communion. This attitude appears to marriage itself, even when contracted in

me to be more unforgiving than the Founder church. In his Medicwval Church in Scot-

of the Christian religion took up towards land, Bishop Dowden, who was the Epis-

the woman taken in adultery-which might copal Bishop of Edinburgh, describes the

well be kept in view by those who profess state of matters immediately preceding the

His religion. Representatives of even Pres- Reformation:

byterian Churches differed fundamentally " A man might be living happily in

as to the proper construction, or application, wedlock for a score of years before some

of the words of Christ. The general conclu- accident revealed to him that his reputed

sion of the Majority Report is thus ex- wife was a third cousin, and therefore no

pressed:

real wife in the eye of the Church, and

" The result is that we are unable to that his children were illegitimate. But

find any general consensus of Christian the doctrine that affinity up to and in-

opiliion, which would exclude any of the cluding the fourth degree was an impedi-

questions stated above from being freely ment to marriage vastly increased the

considered. In view of the conflict of uncertainty whether a marriage was valid

opinion which has existed in all ages and or not. According to the Church, affinity

in all branches of the Christian Church, was created equally by illicit intercourse

among scholars and divines equally quali- and by marriage. An act of pre-nuptial

fied to judge, and the fact that the State unchastity, let us suppose, on the part

must deal with all its citizens, whether of the man with a woman related to his

Christian, nominally Christian, or non- future wife in the fourth degree of consan-

Christian, our conclusion is that we must guinity invalidated his marriage. It was

proceed to recommend the Legislature to obviously possible for a man, by keeping

act upon an unfettered consideration of the evil secrets of his early life to himself,

what is best for the interest of the State, to contract a marriage which he would be

society, and morality, and for that of able at any time to get declared null in

parties to suits and their families."

the consistorial court. Nor was it always

The Report also states that theological differences had weighedl little with the great

the man who took advantage of the ecclesiastical law in this respect.

mass of the lay witnesses, and that amongst The Council of Trent modified to some

those " who feel them there are great dlffer- extent the prohibitions of intermarriage,

II2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

but on the evidence of Monsignor Moyes, section of them at present do not even recog-

Prelate of the Roman Court, there are still nize the validity of a decree of divorce

fifteen grounds upon which a marriage can obtained on the sole ground of infidelity.

be dedlared null, even wlhen regularly This appears to me to be all the more inde-

entered into. Needless to say, only a very fensible, as the 39 Articles, which still

few of these are recognized by the law of constitute the creed of the Church of Eng-

England. Those not so recognized include land, expressly negative the view that mar-

consanguinity in the third degree, affinity, riage is to " be conducted as a Sacrament

duress or violence affecting the liberty of of the Gospel." The 25th Article then pro-

the consort, public decorum (if one or other ceeds, " There are two Sacraments ordained

of the parties has been formally betrothed of Christ our Lord in the Gospel, that is to

to another), disparity of worship-e.g. the say Baptism and the Supper of our Lord."

marriage of a Christian and a non-Christian Nor, on the other hand, do these priests

-to mention only a few.

admit as valid more than a fraction of the

A modern instance of the. application of fifteen causes on which a marriage can be

the impediment of duress is that of Miss annulled in those Roman Catholic countries

Vanderbilt, who married the Duke of Marl- where no divorce is allowed by law. They are

borough, and, after twenty-five years of even less liberal than the predominantly

married life, divorced him in the American Catholic country of Austria, which permits

Courts, and subsequently married a retired divorces as between Protestants on various

French officer. Neither of the marriages grounds, although, as between Catholics, it

was celebrated in a Roman Catholic Church, prohibits divorce. Christian communities

but as the lady wished to enter that which are independent of the State can, of

communion she brought a suit of annul- course, make any rules they please to regu-

ment before the Roman Catholic Bishop of late the conduct of their own members. Such

Southwark. He granted an annulment on regulations have no force or effect in law.

the ground that the Duchess had been mar- But it is intolerable that a section of a

ried under compulsion from her family, and Church which draws its revenues from the

not of her own free will. The sacred Roman State and is subject to its jurisdiction in

Rota confirmed his judgment. Of course, ecclesiastical matters should refuse to marry

in law, the lady had been married quite couples to whose union there is no legal

validly to her second husband, but the impediment. I recognize, of course, that

Roman Church which she desired to enter you cannot constrain consciences, but it is

conisidered that she was, in fact, living in part of the duty of a parish minister to offi-

adultery if her first marriage was a legal ciate at marriages which parishioners desire

one, and this annulment was the only solu- to take place in the parish church.

tion to her being received into their com- I am satisfied that a large majority of the

munion. In Catholic countries like Italy, laity belonging to the Church of England

where there is no divorce, recourse is no do not share the view that marriages are

doubt often had to these fifteen methods of indissoluble-nor was this the view of the

setting aside a marriage, just as in the Reformers who founded it-and I feel sure

mediaeval times to which Bishop Dowden that still fewer of them subscribe to the

referred.

view that an act which has been sanctioned

by the law of the country constitutes a sin,

PRIEST-RIDDEN ENGLAND

and apparently one which the Church in
their view should treat as unforgiveable.

On this question of marriage reform Eng- Even in predominantly Catholic countries

land is, perhaps, the most priest-ridden of divorce is recognized, not merely for infi-

all the existing States of Europe and it is delity, but for other conjugal offences that

the clergy of her State Church that have they consider equally grave. France, Bel-

proved the chief obstacle to reform. A gium, and even Portugal, are in this cate-

DIVORCE AND MARRIAGE REFORM

II3

gory. It is surely time that England should permitting marriages to be annulled on
be brought abreast of all other civilized grounds which Protestants everywhere reStates except the two or three which reso- gard as quite unsubstantial and grossly
lutely refuse to sanction divorce, while unjust.

WHAT IS EUGENICS ?
LEONARD DARWIN
This "very admirable" and "authoritative little book," 88 pages (Eugenics Review, Jan., I929), which " is the best brief answer yet published to the question the title asks" (Nature, Nov., I929) is now published in six different editions.
The three editions in English are published by: WATTS & CO., Johnson's Court, London, E.C.4. GALTON PUBLISHING CO., ii West 42nd St., New York. LOTHIAN PUBLISHING CO., Melbourne, Australia. Spanish edition: Que es la Eugenesia?
Introduction by Prof. EugEne Pittard. Translated by Juan Comas Camps and Margarita Dellenbach. (Javier Morata, Tudescos 39, Madrid.) German edition: Was ist Eugenik? Introduction and translation by Dr. Felix Tietze. (Alfred Metzner, Gitschiner Strasse IO9, Berlin.) French edition: Qu 'est-ce que L'Eugenique? Introduction by Prof. Eug6ne Pittard. Translated by Miss M. Vanderstichele.
(Librarie Felix Alcan, io8 Rue Saint Germain, Paris.)
Contents. I. Domestic Animals. II. Man's Ancestors. III. Our Surroundings. IV. Hereditary Qualities. V. Eugenic Methods. VI. The Men We Want. VII. Inferior Stocks. VIII. Birth Control. IX. Sterilization. X. Feeblemindedness. XI. The Habitual Criminal. XII. Who Pays the Bill. XIII. The Deterioration of Our Breed. XIV. Eugenics in the Future. XV. Bigger Families in Good Stocks. XVI. Financial Aids to Parent Stocks. XVII. Selection in Marriage.
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 2.

