GLANVILLE WILLIAMS
LL.D., F.B.A.
The Legalization of Medical Abortion*

T HE HISTORY OF our legislative efforts which of course had not then happened, and

to reform the law of abortion goes back cases where there is grave danger of foetal

to 1952, when Mr. Joseph Reeves intro- abnormality because the mother contracts

duced into the Commons a Bill which would have German measles in the early stages of pregnancy,

given statutory force to the judge-made rule that and various other eugenic cases.

an abortion is legal if done to protect the wo- Mr. Robinson prepared the ground for his

man's life or health. We were doubtful whether Bill with scrupulous care, and introduced it to a

there was much advantage in such a limited mea- discreditably thin House on second reading with

sure as this. It might have given reassurance to- a most persuasive speech. What happened we

some members ofthe medical profession, causing all know. The debate under the rules of the -

them to terminate pregnancies on health grounds House had to be finished at four o'clock, and the

when they would otherwise have been too doubt- Speaker could not put it to the vote unless

ful about the state of the law. But certainly the satisfied that members had had a fair say. When

measure, even if it had passed, would have done it was moved just before four o'clock that the

little to diminish the tide of illegal terminations. question be now put, a group of Roman Catholic

Anyway, it did not pass, because Mr. Reeves Members, who had not before tried to speak,

did not have a sufficiently lucky number in the stood up as if wishing to speak. The Speaker

ballot for private members to be allowed then refused to put the question, and the

enough Parliamentary time for the proposal to measure was lost. Had it passed second reading

be debated. The experience we gained was this. there were some prospects that the measure

We were so bitterly attacked in the Roman would have received enough Government bene-

Catholic press for our timid little Bill that we volence to have had time allocated to it for a

became satisfied that we could not be more full debate.

severely criticized whatever measure we pro- The fact that so many Members of Parliament

posed. Accordingly, when our second oppor- did not think the debate worth attending is a

tunity came along with Mr. Kenneth Robinson's measure of the apathy and ignorance upon this

success in the ballot for time in 1961, the Bill grave social issue. We cannot make progress

that we worked out in collaboration with Mr. until we have awakened people more fully to the

Robinson included a number of other grounds evils of the present abortion law.

for termination. Under it, doctors could termi- If Mr. Robinson's Bill hact passed, it would

nate a pregnancy where the woman had been have eased matters very greatly for the medical

raped-humanly speaking, one of the strongest profession, and would also have had the im-

grounds for termination-or on eugenic grounds portant effect of-allowing termination of preg-

where there was grave risk of the child being nancy on the eugenic indication. Yet it would

born grossly deformed or with such an abnor- not have solved all the doctor's legal problems.

mality that he would require constant hospital One of the difficult questions under the present

treatment or special care throughout life. law is whether a doctor is legally justified in

That would have covered the thalidomide cases, terminating or advising the termination of -a

pregnancy because he has reason to think that

* The text of the address given by Dr. Williams, the woman will otherwise commit suicide, or

President of the Abortion Law Reform Association, at the Annual General Meeting of the Association on October 30th, 1963.

undergo a dangerous illegal abortion. If it appears to the psychiatrist, perhaps from pre-

19
THIE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1964, 56, 1.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

vious suicide attempts, that there is a real risk The question is often muddled by Roman

of suicide, the welfare of the patient surely Catholics who assert that "life" begins at the

suggests that the operation should be performed. fertilization of the ovum. Of course, the ovum

Yet it is not at all clear that termination would be- was alive before it was fertilized, and so was the

permissible on these grounds under the present sperm. Both cells, before they met, had a life-

law, and it would have been no clearer under Mr. history of their own in the bodies of the respec-

Robinson's Bill. Also, Mr. Robinson's Bill tive parents. The mistake is perhaps a legacy of

would certainly not have put an end to the the fact that animus in Latin means life, while

illegal operator.

anima in medieval Latin means the soul. What

Last August I was in New York for a Con- the controversy is really about is not the time

ference of Professors of Criminal Law, and one when the foetus becomes alive-it is always

of the subjects we discussed was abortion. The alive-but the time when it becomes infused

American Law Institute has proposed that with a soul. Historically, it is bound up with the

abortion should be legalized in that country very fear that if the foetus having a soul dies without

much on the lines of Mr. Robinson's Bill. At being baptized, it will face eternal torment.

the conference I supported this solution, but I At the present day, Roman Catholics who take

pointed out that no measure of limited legaliza- part in public controversy on abortion do not

tion will get rid of dangerous abortions by un- speak of the soul; they try to put their belief into

qualified people; to do that, you have to legalize secular terms by speaking in a rather vague way

completely the operation for the medical of "the right to life". This is what Dr. St.John-

profession

Stevas does in his recent book under that title.

One member of our Conference was a Priest The right to life, he says, begins at conception,

of the Roman Catholic Church who was also a but when one looks more closely one finds that

Professor of Law, a deeply sincere and warm- this assertion is supported by the religious

hearted person. He took the usual Catholic argument, which runs as follows. Formerly, it

view on abortion, and made it clear that in his was thought that some qualitative change took

view his Church could never accept a list of place in the embryo during its development;

indications for medical abortion in which the this qualitative change was supposed to be

operation could be regarded as proper. He did, accompanied by the infusion of the soul:

however, hint at one respect in which rethinking might possibly take place in Romanist circles. This was in respect of the time of animationthe time when human personality is supposed to

To-day, and indeed for a very considerable period, it has been accepted by biologists that there is no qualitative difference between the embryo at the moment of conception and at the

begin. If it could be agreed that human personality does not begin at the time of conception,
but only at some later time, then the way might be opened for tolerating abortion before this period.

moment of quickening. Life is fully present from the moment of conception. It follows that if there be a soul it too must be present from the time of conception.

Since this question of the beginning of human personality is, in my view, the key to the whole question of abortion law reform, I make no apology for reopening it.
For centuries theologians have debated two

This looks like a compelling argument, until one begins to apply the same type of reasoning
to this supposed moment of conception. What is the moment of conception? It is not a moment at all. Like the development of the embryo, it is

rival theories, that human personality begins at a process. I believe that the latest biological

conception, when the ovum is fertilized-this is account is as follows. The sperm meets and joins

called the immediate animation theory-and with the ovum. Two structures called asters

that human personality begins at some later appear, and a spindle forms between them. The

time during gestation-this is called the mediate chromosomes from the egg nucleus and the

animation theory. The strong majority view in sperm nucleus collect around the equator of the

the Roman Catholic Church supports immediate spindle before dividing longitudinally into

animation.

halves which move towards the asters, forming

20

THE LEGALIZATION OF MEDICAL ABORTION

two daughter nuclei. Finally the cytoplasm of of the foetus. One in three, and possibly one in

the egg cell divides, and two new cells result.* two, of all fertilized human ova are destined to

Now Dr. Stevas says that "life is fully present be lost by spontaneous abortion or reabsorp-

from the moment of conception." So it is, but tion.t We do not regard these natural mis-

life is just as fully present before the moment of carriages as equivalent to the death of a child-

conception; and "moment of conception" is a even the mdther herself does not do so. She

figment of the imagination, since conception like regards it only as the loss of a potential child.

everything else is a process which takes time. At least in the very early stages of pregnancy,

The argument that life begins with conception therefore, we do not consider that a human

is just as unbiological as the old notion that life being is in existence, but only a potential human

begins some time after conception.

being. It is true that law and religious belief

To this the reply will certainly be made: "We generally look upon induced abortion as wrongare not speaking just of life, but of human life." ful, but this hardly reflects popular attitudes.

Here, I think, we have arrived at the real Neither the law nor the Church has succeeded

question; and when one asks it in this form it in persuading the ordinary woman that it is

becomes evident that the answer depends upon a wrongful for her to endeavour to terminate a

somewhat arbitrary choice of language. Do you pregnancy in the early stages, if having a child

wish to regard the microscopic fertilized ovum would be a serious burden for her.

as a human being? You can if you want to, and Recent advances in the control of fertility

if there were no social consequences of doing so, emphasize the arbitrary nature of the line

there might be no reason why you should not. between contraception and abortion. For ex-

But there are most important social arguments ample, success has recently been achieved with

for not adopting this language. Moreover, if IUCDs (intra-uterine contraceptive devices) for

you look at actual beliefs and behaviour, you will the purpose of birth control, but it is still not

find almost unanimous rejection of it.

known whether their effect is contraceptive (by

The law does not look upon a natural mis- preventing the fusion of the male and female

carriage as the death of a human being. A foetus cells) or abortifacient (by preventing the

that is spontaneously aborted before the end of fertilized ovum from lodging in the womb). I find

the seventh month can be buried in the back it hard to believe that those who accept chemical

garden, or put in a hospital incinerator. No and mechanical methods of birth control will

statutory notice of birth need be given. No attach importance to the question whether the

religious community performs a funeral service device operates just before the fusion of the two

for an aborted embryo. No one attempts to cells or just after. It is a totally unrealistic point

baptize the microscopic ovum. A Roman on which to hinge a discussion. No one really

Catholic priest will, if called upon, attempt to believes that detaching the fertilized ovum is

baptize an aborted foetus that has attained such equivalent to the murder of a human being.

a size that it can be recognized as such; but Protestant theologians and doctors have come

Catholic doctrine is still not finally settled on the to accept the fact that the foetus does not have

time of entry of the soul, so Catholics do not the same moral status and claim to consideration

recognize it as certain that baptism can be effec- as the mother. In the well-known Bourne case,

tive if it is administered too early in the develop- the judge directed the jury that the life of "the

ment ofthe foetus. Ifthebaptism is administered, unborn child" could be ended to save "the yet

therefore, it is just to be on the safe side.

more precious life of the mother." If they were

Only in our own time have embryologists of equal moral status this automatic preference

discovered the immense rate of natural wastage could hardly be made.

What is needed, therefore, is a more explicit

*Experimental Cell Research, 1962, 28, 323.

recognition of the fact that it does not accord

t George W. Corner, 1944, Ourselves Unborn: An with the mores of our secular society to regard

Embryologist's Essay on Man, 93 (Based on the HertigRock series of human embryos of the second and third week.)

the early foetus as an ordinary human being. There are signs that even religious opinion may

21

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

be prepared to take this view. A statement by the It is not only the Roman Catholics who object

Bishop of Exeter, Dr. R. C. Mortimer, would to our list of medical indications for terminating

give us all we want in the matter of abortion law pregnancy. At the time of Mr. Robinson's Bill,

reform, and in some ways more than all we want: Canon G. B. Bentley wrote to The Times

he supposed, he said, that a case could be made objecting to the Bill on the ground that

out that human-life began at that moment at which the unborn baby, if surgically separated-

It would further muddle and mislead the public conscience. People would inevitably be encouraged

from its mother's womb, was capable of survival to suppose that abortion in the circumstances

as a separate entity. "If that were accepted as an answer, then abortion would be permissible up to that moment."*
Reasoning along these lines, I have been led

mentioned in the Bill was morally superior to abortion in other circumstances. But the supposition would be unfounded: for, as far as I can see, any ethical theory capable of justifying abortion in the situations described would justify it in other

to wonder whether we were right in sponsoring a situations as well-not to mention permitting

Bill that would have legalized abortion only on child destruction and infanticide.

given medical indications. As for the Roman Canon Bentley's letter proceeded as follows:

Catholics, it is clear that they will never accept If then the legislature is going to draw a new

such legislation. They are obsessed by the legal line in this matter of abortion, let it draw it

dogma that you can never do evil so that good
may come; if aborting the foetus is evil, no medical or social or eugenic or moral argument can make it good in their view. The only

where it will at least not make ethical nonsense. The best place would be between therapeutic abortion and abortion for other ends; for here is an intelligible distinction between terminating a pregnancy because you believe it to be a present

possibility I see of any change of mind on their part-and, ifit comes, it is still a long time off-is in relation to the time when human life or
human personality begins. On this, as I have

danger to the woman concerned and terminating a pregnancy because for some reason or other you would rather the child did not see the light of day . . . Should drawing the line here be considered insufficiently "progressive", it is hard to see any

said, Roman Catholic doctrine is still not finally reasonable alternative to removing the legal ban

settled. Dr. St.John-Stevas says it was settled in favour of immediate animation by a constitution of Pius IX in 1869, but, on my understanding of the matter, that constitution merely pronounced

from medical termination altogether and leaving it to the medical conscience to determine each case as best it can. Admittedly this would expose incipient human life to considerable risk; but even that would be preferable to making the law of

the punishment of excommunication for those England explicitly sanction killing an unborn

who caused an abortion, without regard to the question whether the foetus was endowed with

child for fear that, if it were permitted to live, it would become a burden to its mother or to the state,4

a human soul. The theory behind the present Canon Bentley's proposal to restrict the mea-

Catholic doctrine is that even if the abortion sure to the therapeutic abortion would not

occurs before the advent of the soul, it is still an satisfy us. This is not merely on the highly

"anticipated homicide". Some Catholic theo- abstract ground that it would not be sufficiently

logians continue to dispute the doctrine of "progressive"; no one thinks in uchw absurd

immediate animation, though they agree that terms. It is because it would be too limited a

abortion before the entry of the soul is sinful, - measure to satisfy a demand for medical

because, they say, it is a crime against nature.f abortion on grounds of conscience, for example

In effect this is merely part of the general where the child is likely to be deformed, and

Roman Catholic objection to birth control.

also because it would be far too limited to get

* Exeter Express and Echo, November 13th, 1962. The rid of the evil of unskilled abortions. This brings Bishop added: "and impermissible afterwards;" but this me to Canon Bentley's other suggestion, that

was surely a mistake. There would be no objection to inducing the premature birth of a viable infant. Deliberately killing such an infant, for any purpose other than

the legal ban should be removed from medical termination altogether. With one qualification,

saving the life of the mother, would of course be a crime. this is the step that I should like to see taken, and

t E. C. Messenger (Ed.), 1949, Theology and Evolution,
p. 306.
i The Times, February 6th, 1961.

I believe it is one that would be supported by most members of this Society. The qualification

22

THE LEGALIZATION OF MEDICAL ABORTION

relates to the period of pregnancy during which problem of illegal abortions, because in practice

the operation is to be permissible.

they rarely take place after the first three months.

Mr. Robinson's Bill incorporated a time- Thus, at a stroke, we should have achieved our

limit for the operation which we settled after full objective, instead ofjust nibbling at it.

much thought. Under the Bill, it was not to be I have given reasons for supposing that a

performed after the end of the thirteenth week of simple measure along these lines might even

pregnancy, which allowed three months plus a have more support from some Church people

week. If you are going to provide for abortion at than the Bill that Mr. Robinson put forward.

all, you must give the woman time to realize If the Bishop of Exeter is prepared to contem-

that she is pregnant and to make arrangements. plate unrestricted abortion for the medical

The longer you can give her the better, because a profession up to the time of viability, the end of

woman who starts by wanting an abortion the seventh month, surely he would support a

sometimes changes her mind later on; if the measure that would only cover the first four

operation is postponed, therefore, there is a months plus one week. Those who, like Canon

chance that it will not be needed. On the other Bentley, object to an act of Parliament appearing

hand, the longer the operation is put offthe more to give its blessing to particular grounds of

serious it becomes from the medical point of medical termination would also be satisfied, or

view; and if it is postponed so long that the baby at any rate less dissatisfied than they were with

is fully formed, it needs serious grounds in Mr. Robinson's Bill. Such a measure would also

order to overcome the natural repugnance to make more sense for the medical profession,

undertaking it. These opposing considerations because it is not the practice to prescribe.

mean that some practical compromise must be medical considerations by Act of Parliament.

reached. When drafting Mr. Robinson's Bill, Once that we decide that it is better for an

thirteen weeks seemed to be the narrowest limit operation to be performed by the medical

that we could reasonably adopt, and, because profession than by illegal operators, there is no

we wished to be as moderate in our proposal as point in imposing a limiting list of conditions.

we could, we took that. Recent advances in Indeed, such a list is self-defeating, because it

obstetric practice suggest that-Atwould be safe brings back the illegal operator.

to take a somewhat more extended period, say The measure that I have in mind, therefore,

seventeen weeks. If this seventeen weeks were would be a simple one. It would provide that a

reckoned according to the usual medical method registered medical practitioner may lawfully

of dating pregnancy, it would mean that the terminate pregnancy, except that such termina-

foetus would on average be only fifteen weeks tion shall not be performed after the end of the

old, not seventeen.

seventeenth week of pregnancy save for the

The important thing is to fix a time-limit purpose of preserving the life of the mother.

making it clear that we are not attacking the If such a measure were passed, this Associa-

sanctity ofhuman life in any reasonable meaning tion could happily go out of existence. Until

of that expression. If the foetus has recognisably such a measure is passed we cannot go out of

become a baby, you could not operate under our existence, because until then we shall still have

Bill, except for the single purpose of preserving illegal operators.

the mother's life. Up to about mid term, on the In my book called The Sanctity ofLife and the

other hand, the psychological objections to the Criminal Law I devoted two chapters to the

operation are minimal. Abortion before this problem of abortion, in one sentence of which I

time was legal under the old common law, which remarked that the legislation in Sweden and

allowed abortion before quickening; this re- Denmark allowing medical abortion on stated

mained the position in England till 1803, when grounds had not, unhappily, substantially

misguided legislation first made abortion before reduced the number of illegal abortions.

quickening a crime.

Commentators upon my book who were critical

If we could only get the law back substantially of my point of view seized upon this one

to what it was before 1803, we should solve the sentence as destructive of the argument for

23

ER-E

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

legalizing abortion. For example, Dr. St.John- other hand, if the Bill I have just outlined were

Stevas in his book The Right to Life passed the social problem would be solved. No

thinks it enough to deal with the matter as woman would go to a quack if she could get a

follows. He first recognizes that

proper operation performed without formality

a powerful argument for extending legal abortion is that this is the only way to curb the

and in the usual way. The law as I have suggested it is purely

trade of the back street abortionists. Legalized permissive. It would not compel any medical

abortion, it is said, would put them out of business.... If it could be established that a change in the law really would get rid of dangerous abortions there would be a case for its alteration.

man to act, but would merely free him from the
constraints of the criminal law. At present, the doctor in considering an abortion cannot confine

The state would not be approving abortion but himself to deciding what is in the interest of the

merely removing a penal sanction in the interests- patient, as he normally can; he must consider

of public health.

whether he can get an acquittal by judge and

Having expressed this apparent interest in the jury if he operates. This is an intolerable impo-

argument, how does the author deal with it? sition upon the medical profession, and for the

He thinks it sufficient to say:

more timid members it means that the decision

Such evidence as there is, however, suggests that legalized abortion does not reduce the illegal

tends to be against operating even when it would legally be allowed.

rate. In Sweden for example where a legal abor- Two utilitarian arguments are commonly

tion may be obtained under a variety ofconditions including a situation where it can be assumed
that bearing and rearing a child would apprediab1y
overtax a mother's bodily and mental powers,

advanced against proposals to legalize the termination of pregnancy by medical men. The first is that the operation is harmful. To discuss

legal abortions have increased sharply but so have this at length would take considerable time, but

illegal ones.

the short answer is that although abortion is far

To the unwary reader, this passage might
convey that the law hampering medical men from terminating pregnancy has positively no
connection with the existence of the back-street
abortionists, except that in some mysterious way it keeps their number down. Of course that is nonsense. The law which outlaws this operation for the medical profession is directly the cause of the existence of back-street abortionists. How is it, then, that in Sweden with its liberal laws there are still illegal abortions? The answer
is obvious: their law is not sufficiently liberal. We are told that in Sweden the special hospital boards which hear applications for abortions allow only 40 per cent of the applications. In addition to the 60 per cent who are turned down, there is the unknown number of women who

from being an ideal method of family planning,
the question whether a particular abortion is the best solution of a particular medical or medico-
social problem is not for Parliament to decide in the abstract but for the woman's medical adviser to decide in the actual case. Moreover, if the
termination of pregnancy were put within the ordinary course of medical practice, with all
fears of the Old Bailey removed, a woman would go to her doctor in her trouble, knowing that he will do his best for her; and the doctor would then be able, if he thought fit, to try to
dissuade her from the operation. At present, too often, the woman goes straight to a charlatan, who gives her no advice, and who will sometimes operate on her even when in fact she is not
pregnant.

do not apply for legal abortions, either because Although no one proposes abortion as a

they realize that their case does not fall within substitute for an adequate system of contracep-

the rules, or because they cannot tolerate the tive advice (which we do not possess at present), formality and even humiliation of applying to a we cannot yet foresee a timewhen contraception hospital board in a matter which they regard as will be completely reliable. Moreover, there will being uniquely their own affair. These are the always be some people so thoughtless, improvi-

women who go to illegal abortionists; and dent or clumsy that they cannot use contracep-

illegal abortion would still flourish in England if tive techniques. These people cannot achieve

Mr. Robinson's Bill had been passed. On the family planning except by voluntary sterilization

24

THE LEGALIZATION OF MEDICAL ABORTION

or, in the last resort, abortion. I need hardly stress the eugenic argument for extending family planning to all groups, not merely to those who are the most intelligent and socially responsible.
The second utilitarian argument against us is that legalization of the operation would swamp the maternity hospitals. In itself this is a strange argument-that we should continue to send doctors to prison for performing an operation because if we did not the operation would be

too popular. It is also erroneous: no obstetric surgeon would be compellable to perform the
operation, and naturally he would continue to give priority to those maternity cases of all kinds that he considered the most urgent. It is also to be noticed that an abortion if properly performed results in a considerable saving of hospital time; whereas a woman who gives birth to a child spends about ten days in hospital, between two and four days are enough for a
medical abortion.

2s

