A NOTE ON THE CALCULATION OF THE NET REPRODUCTION RATE FOR
MARRIED WOMEN
By K. T. LIM, Ph.D.

T HE measure of the balance of births ages of reproduction for this purpose) un-

and deaths now generally accepted affected by mortality, but subject to the

is the net reproduction rate usually constant specific fertility rates appropriate

associated with the name of Dr. Kuczynski. to a given place and date, and if we suppose

This rate shows how many girls-future that by the time they are 50 they have given

potential mothers-might be expected in due birth to g, new girls, the gross reproduction

course to be born to I,OOO infant girls born rate of the given place at the given date is

at a given place and time, according to defined as gl/f,ooo.

fertility and mortality experienced at that
place and time. To get a better understanding of the balance it is possible to compute

I,000 I,000 0 I5

g1

I,000 50

separate reproduction rates for married and

for single women. Dr. Kuczynski has worked Definition of Net Reproduction Rate

out examples to illustrate the procedure to If, now, we suppose that the original I,OOO be followed, and the purpose of the present newly-born girls are subject also to the

note is to consider the validity of the method specific mortality rates appropriate to the

at one point in the computation.

same place at the same date, by the time the

In order to bring out the nature of the survivors reach the age of 50 the total

point that is in doubt it may be well to begin number of girls to which the original I,OOO

by attempting to define the rates that are relevant to the discussion, in so far as the writer understands Dr. Kuczynski's work.

will have given birth will be g2, where g, is less than g,, because x of the original I,OOO
baby girls will not even live to be I5 and

The first two of the four definitions which x + y will not live to be 50. The net reprofollow are included merely to show the duction rate of the given place at the given

parallel between the determination of the reproduction rates of women in general and of married women in particular. It is

date is accordingly defined as g./i,ooo.
I,OOO (I,OOO-X) g2 (I,OOO- x -y)

desirable to recall them because Dr. Kuc- 0 I5

50

zynski himself, in his book The Measurement

of Population Growth,* offers no precise Definition of Grvoss Reproduction Rate for

definition of the rates applicable to married Married Women

women. The reader is left to infer the meanings to be attached to the latter from the
illustrative examples he gives.

If, next, we suppose that of the I,OOO
original newly-born girls not subject to mortality, ml marry once or oftener, and

Definition of Gross Reproduction Rate

that they give birth to 11 legitimately-born baby girls before they reach the age of 50,

If we suppose that I,ooo randomly chosen assuming the specific nuptiality and fertility

newly-born girls could live to be 50 years of rates proper to the given place and date, the

age (I5 and 50 assumed to be the limiting gross reproduction rate for married women of

* Sidgwick & Jackson Ltd., I935 Edition.
12S. 6d.

Price

that place at that date may be defined as
11/ml.

179

i8o THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Definition of Net Reproduction Rate for have been married, this is the appropriate

Married Women

number to take as the denominator in the

Finally, if we suppose that the original 1,000 newly-born girls are also subject to the specific mortality rates proper to the given place and date, it is clear that both 11 and ml will on that account be reduced to, say, 12 and M2, because a number of the I,000 girl babies will not live to be married or, having married, will die before they produce their full complement of children. Thus the
net reproduction rate for married women of the given place and date may be defined as
12/m2.

calculation of the gross reproduction rate for
married women.
When, in the same country at the same period, mortality is also taken into account, it is found that I,OI9 girls are born to I,ooo
females, 9I8 being legitimate. Dr. Kuc-
zynski then proceeds thus: " Since according to the nuptiality table 837 out of I,000 females reaching the age of 50 years had
married (while I63 had remained single) the net reproduction rate of women who married (once or oftener), if measured by legitimate

Criticism of Kuczynski's Method

births only, was 00o*3893i78 _ I'097." In other

It should be observed that the first three of these definitions are strictly in line with Dr. Kuczynski's own definitions as inferred from his calculations of the rates concerned. It is only in regard to the fourth that there is a difference of opinion.
We proceed now to give, largely in his own words, the results of Dr. Kuczynski's calculation of the gross and net reproduction rates for married women in Denmark,
I926-30. (See The Measurement ofPopulation
Growth, pp. I56-9 and 220-I.) The gross

words, reverting to the notation of the defini-
tions already given, accepting his ll and 12 as
correct, he appears to have taken both ml and m2 to be equal to 837; whereas, if the proposed definitions are acknowledged to be
reasonable, m2 must be less than ml. The
births in each case should in short be related to the appropriate number of mothers, and
since mortality is taken into account in the
one case and not in the other, the number of mothers in the former case must be less than
in the latter.

reproduction rate computed on the basis of

fertility and nuptiality in I926-30 is found

NoTE BY D. CARADOG JONES

to be I.I75. But of the I,175 girls borne by
1,000 females passing through the ages I5 to 50, only i,o6o were legitimate. And, since according to the nuptiality table 837 out of I,000 females reaching the age of 50 years had married (while I63 had remained single), the gross reproduction rate of women

My late tutor, Mr. D. Caradog Jones of the University of Liverpool, to whom I submitted this note before venturing to publish it, has sent me the following communication
and I have his permission to add it to my
paper.

who married (once or oftener), measured by

legitimate

births

only,

is

i

=6
837

i -267.

" While I agree with your criticism of Dr. Kuczynski's method, as to the measurement of the reproduction rates of married and un-

No exception need be taken to the pro- married women, I am disposed to go farther

cedure up to this point. It is true that we and to suggest other definitions which appear

cannot be sure that, in the purely hypo- to me to conform more closely to the

thetical event of i,ooo girl infants being born accepted definitions of the gross and net

and all escaping death until after they had reproduction rates for all women. Alterna-

passed the age of 50, 837 of them would have tive definitions, A and B, might in fact be

married. On the other hand, no better proposed, both of which I think have some-

assumption can be made than that if, out thing to commend them.

of I,000 women living at the age of 50 (at the A. Adopting your notation, and starting

place and date under discussion), 837 are or as you do with i,ooo gilI babies who are

REPRODUCTION RATE FOR MARRIED WOMEN

replaced in effect a generation hence (assum- legitimate rate as 1L/lo and the gross illegiti-

ing certain constant fertility conditions) by mate rate as il/io.

g, new girl babies, it would not be unreason- Again, by an obvious extension of your

able to break up g1 into 11, legitimate girls notation, the net legitimate and illegitimate

and i4, illegitimate girls, and to define the rates, taking mortality into account, could

gross legitimate rate (mortality neglected) be defined as 12/10 and i2/iO, respectively.

as 14/i,ooo and the gross illegitimate rate as The point I wish to emphasize is that it

i,/i,ooo, where

seems to me unnecessary and somewhat

g1II.000 =11Ii,000 + /I,oo000

confusing to bring the potential mothers of

Similarly, with an obvious extension of the legitimate (or illegitimate) babies into

your notation, the net legitimate and the picture, as Dr. Kuczynski does. I mean

illegitimate rates, taking mortality into by 'potential' mothers the married women

account, could be defined as 12/i,ooo and (m) who are available to give birth to the

i2/I,ooo respectively, where

legitimate babies (though they may not all

g2/I,OOO = 12/1,000 + $21t,000

function effectively) and the unmarried

B. But a definition which follows more women (u)-or the married who consort with

strictly along the lines of that accepted for men who are not their husbands-who are

all women (as opposed to married women) available to give birth to illegitimate babies.

can be formulated by breaking up the original But, if it be considered desirable to relate

I,OOO girl babies in A into l0 legitimate and the babies to their potential mothers, I fail

io illegitimate girls, who in effect are replaced to see how the M2 that is relevant to 12, when

a generation hence (neglecting mortality mortality has had free play, could equal the

and assuming certain constant fertility and ml that is relevant to 11 when mortality is

nuptiality conditions) by 11 legitimate and neglected. That, put quite simply, is why

4, illegitimate girls. Hence it would be a I think your criticism of Dr. Kuczynski's

natural development to define the gross method is justified."

c Eugenics Review, Vol. m4XI No. 3.

