THE INHERITANCE OF MENTAL DISORDER*

By ELIOT SLATER, M.B.

ABOUT five years ago Dr. Lewis was of the constitutional make-up, the genotypic

addressing this Society on almost the milieu as it is called. And finally there is the

same subject as my present one. On influence of the environment. Different

that occasion he directed your attention to genes differ in their capacity for being

the wide horizons, the principles of research influenced by these other two factors. Some

and the general sum of our knowledge. I show their presence fully and at once under

have reread his papert recently and it practically all circumstances, others only

remains almost as accurate a summary now in time, with varying degrees of complete-

as it was then, so that I have been surprised ness and in varying percentages of. their

to see how little our general position has carriers. The extent to which a gene does

altered in the last five years. To allow our eventually show itself is called its manifesta-

increase in knowledge to make any im- tion rate. It seems probable that in most

pression on you, I must direct your atten- psychiatric conditions where heredity is

tion away from the horizon to the ground important this manifestation rate is far

under our feet, where every step, however from IOO per cent., i.e. that quite a high

small or difficult, makes its impression of proportion of the carriers of the abnormal

space and speed.

gene never develop the abnormal condition.

It is my aim this aftemoon to present a short account of some of the recent work on

Huntington's Chorea

the inheritance of the individual mental Let us turn now to the individual mental

disorders. In this field the last five years disorders. Huntington's chorea is an inter-

have been very fruitful. Of the comparative- esting example showing that establishing the

ly small amount of work, in relation to its method of inheritance does not mean the

enormous total mass, that I have had the end of all interest in the subject. Huntington

occasion, the time and the inclination to himself, when he first described the disease,

examne with any closeness, I shall make laid stress on its direct inheritance. For

mention only of those few pieces of work many years subsequently this view was

that seem to me of especial interest. In this attacked. A polymorphic theory of inheri-

way much excellent and important work tance, which still seems to linger on in a

will inevitably remain neglected. For this dead-alive state to the present time, was

inadequacy I must ask your indulgence. then the order of the day. It was insisted

For the sake of the clarity and comprehensi- that the direct inheritance of Huntington's

bility of what follows I should like to remind chorea was by no means the rule, that it

you of the three factors that play a part in showed family relationships to other forms

the appearance of any inheritable anomaly. of chorea, athetosis, epilepsy, and even to

First there is the mutant gene itself, without insanity and psychopathy in general. Only

which the condition does not appear. This a general tendency to all forms of neurolo-

is more in the nature of a working hypothesis gical and psychiatric abnormality, it was

than a statement of fact, as purely exogenous held, could be inherited. It was the great

conditions may be clinically indistinguish- service of Entres* in i92i to clear the dead-

able from hereditary ones. Then there is the wood away from the subject, and to show

furthering or inhibiting influence of the rest that in practically every true case of Hunt-

ington's chorea, one or other of the parents,

*A lecture delivered before the Eugenics Society on

October 20th, 1936.

* Entres, J. L.: Zur Klinik und Vererbung der

t Lewis, A. J.: EUGENICS REVIEW, 25, 79, 1933. Hutntingtomschen Chorea, Berlin, 1921.

277

278 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

if they had lived long enough, had shown, these carriers as early as possible in life;

not epilepsy or insanity or other neuro- but from work done hitherto these persons

pathic condition, but Huntington's chorea do not show any particular abnormality

itself. In an exhaustive collection of the before the onset of the illness. Drs. Gutt-

literature in I934, Julia Bell* in a series of mann and Minski have found in a close

744 cases was only able to find six in which neurological and psychiatric examination of

both parents had reached old age without a series of children of Huntington cases a

one developing the disease. Inheritance is considerable frequency of certain distur-

then direct, dominant, entirely specific and bances of movement. It is possible that it is

due to the presence of a single mutant the children who show these abnormalities

autosomal gene.

who are the ones subsequently doomed to

Since then Sjogrent in Sweden in I935 has the illness. By an investigation of the

published an analysis of forty Huntington Mendelian ratios and by careful history

families, embracing eighty-eight cases of the taking in the case of tije original propositi,

disease and involving the investigation of these workers are attempting to discover the

6oo persons. All these families, it seems, real significance of their interesting finding.

were related in the recent or remote past, so that it is quite likely that the point of origin

Schizophrenia

of all these cases was one single person in Of all mental disorders schizophrenia has

whom the mutation originally occurred. undergone the most inten4ve investigation

Sjogren shows by mathematical analysis from the hereditary point of view, but in this

that the Mendelian relations of normal to as in other fields has offered the thorniest

abnormal follow closely the figure expected problems to solve. One of the most funda-

on a theory of simple dominance. He mental is the question whether schizo-

calculates the expectation of developing the phrenia is to be regarded as a single bio-

disease for a child of a Huntington case to logical entity or not. Till recently all attacks

be 35 per cent., which is certainly not the on its unity have failed. Kolle, indeed, has

same as the 50 per cent. demanded by brought evidence to show that paranoia,*

theory. The difference, he shows, is not to usually considered a quite separate disease,

be explained by more complicated theories and paranoid psychopathst are not really

of inheritance, but by an incomplete mani- separate entities but are hereditarily at

festation. It seems that even here, where least related to schizophrenia. The attempt

everything seems so simple, the environment of M. Bleuler in I93IT to single out a group

and the genotypic milieu play a part. The of rapidly dementing schizophrenics as

establishment of the relative importance of biologically different and probably of exo-

these will require the collection of a series genous causation has not been confirmed by

of Huntington twins, a work that is not recent work of Smith.§ Brugger¶ in I927

likely to be accomplished in the near future. made a family investigation of Pfropfschizo-

At the present time Drs. Guttmann and phrenia-that is, schizophrenia appearing

Minski are doing some work that may prove in mental defectives. Many authors, includ-

of the greatest interest. A special difficulty ing Kraepelin, regarded this as a special and

of practical eugenics when concerned with very early form of schizophrenia, appearing

Huntington's chorea is that the affected in early infancy or even embryonic life and

persons seldom show any morbid change producing at first a picture of mental

much before the age of thirty, often not defect. The work of Brugger has shown that

until well on into the fifties. It would be of in the sibs of Pfropfschizophrenics there were

the greatest value to be able to recognize * Kolle, K.: Die Prim4re Verrikcktheit, Leipzig,

* Bell, J.: Treasury of Human Inheritance, Vol. IV,
Pt. I, Huntington's Chorca, Cambridge, 1934. t Sjogren, T.: Z. f. menschl. Vererb. u. Konstitutions-
Jhre, 19, 131, 1935.

'93'.
t Kolle, K.: Z. Neurol., I36, 97, 1931.
Bleuler, M.: J. Nerv. and Ment, Dis., 74, 393,'1931. § Smith, J. C.: Hosp. tid., 437, 1934.
¶ Brugger, C.: Z. Neur., 113, 348, 1928.

THE INHERITANCE OF MENTAL DISORDER

279

as many mental defectives to be found as if the propositi had been merely mentally defective, as many schizophrenics as if the propositi had been only schizophrenic, and
-he number of Pfropfschizophrenics found
was explicable if the combination were only
a matter of chance. It cannot be assumed from this that there is no connection between
mental defect and schizophrenia. Kallmann in the relatives of his schizophrenics found
a considerably raised frequency of mental
defect. Four years ago Schulz* published an
important work on schizophrenia. He examined the families of 66o cases whose whole
life history was known in great detail. He divided his material up, according to the old Kraepelinian classification, into hebe-
phrenic, catatonic and paranoid types, with
the four possible varieties of mixed cases,
seven in all. Firstly, he found a striking difference in the sex ratios in the different clinical groups. Of the hebephrenic type
there were three males to one female; the catatonics were about evenly divided; and there were about two paranoid females to
every male. This confirms a similar finding of Bumke, based on smaller material. There was a different social distribution, the hebe-
phrenics tending to come more than the
others from the upper classes. The hebe-
phrenics showed the lowest age of onset and the highest percentage of complete or nearly complete recovery (22 6 per cent.). Among the sibs of the hebephrenics there was a much higher percentage of schizophrenia than in those of the other groups, I8-20 per
cent. as compared with 5-7 - 5 per cent. Finally, the type of illness shown by a sib tended to some extent to be of the same type as that of the propositus. This was to a greater extent true of the pure than of the mixed groups. Schulz is inclined to regard these interesting and important findings with the greatest caution. He is far from suggesting that the concept of the unity of schizophrenia has suffered any serious blow. Indeed, the fact that practically all forms of schizophrenia were represented in the sibs of

propositi of practically all types, and of the
forty-nine possible combinations of illness of propositus and illness of sib only five were not represented, speaks with considerable
force against the assumption that these different types of clinical picture are so
many different biological unities. It seems
more probable that the differences are
caused by differences in the internal environ-
ment, the genotypic milieu, which would, of course, also show hereditary relations.
This does not exhaust the interest of Schulz's work. Out of his total of 66o cases
he separated out fifty-five where there was
a history of head injury before the onset of
the psychosis. These cases showed a much lower percentage, 2 '9 per cent., of schizo-
phrenia among their sibs than did the cases
where there was no suggestion of any " cause " for the illness (8.3 per cent.). Among these fifty-five cases were thirty-
three where the head injury seems a some-
what more plausible precipitating factor than in the rest. Among their sibs the frequency of schizophrenia was less than 2 per cent. Clinically these cases showed no striking difference from the others. There are two
possible explanations for this. First, that some of these cases were truly exogenous, i.e. without possessing the gene or genes for schizophrenia they developed a clinically indistinguishable symptomatic psychosis; secondly, that in these cases there was a comparatively unfavourable genotypic milieu, which tended to reduce the amount of schizophrenia among their sibs, but in the propositi themselves was negatived by the favourable environment, i.e. that resulting in a head injury.
In a subsequent paper,* Schulz examines his material with- more complicated statistical methods. Although his clinical material was extremely typical and carefully controlled by follow-up histories, the results of this examination are to show its genetic heterogeneity. Using the assumption of simple recessive inheritance, he finds that his material includes an unduly large number of families with only one case, that

*Schulz, B.: Z. Neur., I43, 175, I932.

* Schulz, B.: Z. Neur., 15I, 145, 1934.

280 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of the propositus. Again the competitive frequency of mental disorders in the families

explanations of contamination with exo- of tuberculous propositi. Kallmann also

genous psychoses or important variations in gives interesting figures of the frequency of

the effect of the genotypic milieu suggest schizophrenia in families according to the

themselves. Schulz, however, is now able constitution of the parents. The children of

to show that the first is unsatisfactory, as two schizophrenics in his material developed

even if it were true the second hypothesis schizophrenia in 63 per cent. of cases, a

would have to be called in, which by itself higher finding than that of Luxenburger and

is capable of explaining all the facts.

Schulz, which was 53 per cent. Kallmann

The rest of the genetic constitution may comes to the conclusion that a dimeric or

then be taken as having an important polymeric inheritance of schizophrenia can

influence on the penetrative power of the be excluded, although the numerical rela-

schizophrenic gene. Further evidence on tions to be expected on a theory of simple

this point has been brought in recent papers recessivity are not exactly filled.

of Luxenburger* and Kallmann.t Kall- Luxenburger comes to exactly the same

mann's findings are of especial interest to conclusion. Clear evidence of the effect of

eugenists, and have the advantage of being the genotypic milieu is found in the much

worked out on the very large material of greater concordance in point of age of onset

I,087 propositi. He shows that 62 per cent. in the concordant uniovular as compared

of the children of his schizophrenics were with the concordant binovular twins. On

born before the onset of the illness, 70 per the basis of combined twin and family

cent. before the first admission to hospital. research Luxenburger estimates that only

Sterilization of schizophrenics is, then, likely 63.4 per cent. of the carriers of a homo-

to have little positive effect in any measur- zygotic schizophrenic gene may actually

able space of time. They do, however, tend develop the disease. The effect of the geno-

of their own accord to have fewer children typic milieu is to be estimated as I7-6 per

than the average, the more severe types cent., that of the environment at I9 per

averaging little more than one child per cent. He says that taking into consideration

patient. Kallmann divides his material into all the disturbing factors, which are shown

a central group (I) of hebephrenics and to be so important, and a margin for statis-

catatonics and a peripheral group (II) of tical error, the proportion of abnormals

paranoid cases and cases of recurrent among the children of a heterozygotic

schizophrenia with little permanent damage crossing is calculated as 22 per cent., which

to the personality. The former show a is very little removed from the 25 per cent.

higher percentage of schizophrenia both in of theory. He, too, comes to the conclusion

children and sibs, confirming Schulz's find- that a theory of inheritance by simple

ing (sibs: Group I i2 9 per cent, Group II recessivity is at present the most likely.

8 9 per cent.; children: Group I 20o9 per

cent., Group II Io-4 per cent.). The very Epilepsy

high tuberculosis rate in all the groups of In the past year important work has been

propositi, children and sibs, ran parallel to published by Conrad* on the inheritance of

the schizophrenia figures, a very remarkable epilepsy, attacking the subject by means of

finding. That there is a relation between twin research. The difficulty and expense

schizophrenia and tuberculosis seems clear. of this method of attack is well brought out

Its exact nature is, however, not clear. by Conrad's attempt to investigate all the

Bleuler and Rappaportl found no special institutionalized epileptic twins in Germany.

Starting with an epileptic population of some

* Luxenburger, H.: Allg. Z. Psychiatr., 104, 107, I7,000 persons, he was able to find 253 pairs
1936. of twins, but of these only twenty-five pairs

t Kallmann, F.: Allg. Z. Psychiatr., 104, II9, I936. t Bleuler, M., and Rappaport, L.: Z. Neur., 153,

* Conrad, K.: Z. Neur., 153, 271, 1935; ibid., 155,

649, I935.

254 and 509, 1936.

THE INHERITANCE OF MENTAL DISORDER

28I

of uniovular ones of a useful age, who are concordance figure of 86 per cent. As the

the crucial part of the experiment. The result of calculations of whose validity I am

material must be of great value to justify doubtful, Conrad increases this figure to

such a large expense of energy to obtain 96 per cent. As he, however, himself points

such a quantitatively meagre result. The out, by this proceeding he is excluding the

method is, indeed, of great value, but its cases where environment is important, a

importance may be overestimated, as Conrad procedure calculated to put the manifesta-

does when he says: " In the comparison of tion rate at its highest possible level. Con-

the concordance as regards phenotypic rad's figures are to some extent in conflict

character in binovular and uniovular twins with those of previous authors. Rosanoff*

we have a direct measure of the degree to found only 6i per cent. concordance in

which it is hereditarily determined." This is uniovular epileptic twins. As Conrad points

not true. The concordance in binovular out, however, there are many criticisms to

twins is very largely dependent on the be made of Rosanoff's work. The work of

method of inheritance, dominant or reces- Schulte,t however, seems to me sounder, and

sive, mono- or polymeric. The concordance a possible selective bias for uniovularity, and

in uniovular twins is independent of this. concordance does not affect the value of his

The finding of a very low concordance in very high discordance-he found only two

both sets of twins is not proof that the concordant twins in ten uniovulars. Schulte's

character is not determined by a hereditary cases were from an out-patient department,

factor, if the manifestation rate of this and it seems possible that the hereditary

factor is low enough. Further, the finding-of element may not be so important in these

a high concordance in uniovular twins and milder cases.

of a low concordance in binovular ones is Conrad's most striking evidence in proof

not final proof of hereditary transmission. of a hereditary form of epilepsy is given in

In epilepsy, for instance, it is possible that his clinical section. Among the concordant

there is no hereditary factor for epilepsy, uniovular twins, the degree of concordance

but that all mankind are equally liable under in respect of clinical form, course and age of

favourable circumstances to develop the onset of the illness is in the majority of

disease.

cases extremely striking. For instance, the

Let us suppose that the majority of cases age of onset of propositus and twin shows

of so-called idiopathic epilepsy are caused a correlation coefficient of 0o9I, and itself

by encephalitic processes accompanying the must be regarded in these cases as principally

infections of childhood. Then, if there are dependent on the hereditary factor. It must,

hereditary factors governing the liability of then, be regarded as practically proved that

the individual, given the infection, to develop there is a form of epilepsy which is to a great

a suitable encephalitic process, uniovular extent determined by the hereditary con-

twins would show a much higher percentage stitution. How large this group is is not so

of concordance in regard to epilepsy than easy to determine. Of his material Conrad

binovular. This is not mere quibbling, as a calculates that almost three-fourths were

consideration of the eugenic problem pre- idiopathic. Nor is it easy to say whether

sented under these different circumstances the so-called symptomatic epilepsies are to

shows. In the case of epilepsy, however, I ,any extent also hereditarily determined or

think Conrad has brought sufficient evidence whether they are of purely environmental

to prove his point.

origin.

Five of his twenty-five uniovular twins Among other problems Conrad deals in

had to be counted twice, for statistical detail with the possibility of birth trauma as

reasons, making thirty pairs. Of these

twenty were concordant. Excluding eight symptomatic epilepsies, Conrad finds nine-
teen of twenty-two pairs concordant-a

* Rosanoff, A. I., Handy, L. M., and Rosanoff, I. A.:
Arch. Neur. and Psychiatr., 3I, II65, I934. t Schulte, H.: Ref. Zbl. Neur., 73, 25!, 1934.

282 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a cause of epilepsy. Unlike Russell Brain* have never shown any particular " schi-

he finds no preponderance of first and early zoid" traits are a commonplace of clinical

births in epileptics. Instead he finds a slight practice. In Schulz's series the patients with

preponderance of last births, which is to be a normal prepsychotic personality showed no

associated with the tendency of twins to difference from the others in clinical out-

occur late in a series of pregnancies, and has come or hereditary relationships.

apparently nothing to do with epilepsy. Out of the kaleidoscopic variety of psycho-

Conrad's epileptics show a considerable pathic personalities two types distinguish

excess of twins, according to his calculations, themselves by being related to different

however, of the binovular type only. This types of illness-the obsessional and the

would point to a tendency of persons with hysterical. In both it is uncertain whether

the epileptic gene also having a tendency to we have the accumulation of characteristics

polyovularity. This conclusion must, I think, of the normal individual to an abnormal

be regarded with the greatest caution for the degree or whether there is something

present.

peculiar and specific. Luxenburger in I930

Psychopathic Personality Let us now leave the mental disorders

found in the sibs of 6bsessional neurotics
46 per cent. of abnormal personalities. Dr. Lewis,* in a paper published this year, found

proper for a short review of the work that
has been done on the psychopathic personality. This is a subject of especial diffi-
culty. How are we to analyse the concept of personality, when we may guess that it is controlled by some thousands or tens of

among the parents of his fifty obsessionals 37 per cent. of personalities showing marked obsessional traits, in the sibs something over 20 per cent. of mildly or severely obsessional characters. I am looking forward
very much to seeing this part of his paper

thousands of different genes? The infant published in full, as he has promised. His

science of psychology can give us at present little help. The only method of attack is by
the analysis of what is recognizably abnormal.
Even here the greatest caution is necessary.

results at first glance suggest that there is
something specific, that it is in large part hereditarily determined, and that some dominant factor is at work. Dr. Lewis,

It seems possible that in schizophrenia or
manic-depressive insanity we have unitary abnormalities like Huntington's chorea.
Even here we are faced with difficult problems of relation of illness to personality. In the families of manic-depressives we find

however, may find that other explanations are better.
The results of investigations into the' hysterical type of personahty are more
difficult to estimate. Kraulist investigated
two groups; the first consisted of socially

with great frequency the so-called syntonic or cycloid type of personality,Owhose structure

abnormal personalities showing the hysterical type of reaction, the second of persons un-

is strongly reminiscent of the psychosis itself. It seems very possible that many of

remarkable in ordinary circumstances but having episodic hysterical reactions. Of the

these cyclic personalities are born manic-
depressives that never develop a degree of abnormality sufficient to secure their isolation and diagnosis. In the families of schizophrenics we find with unusual frequency

first group 28 per cent. were to a slight or severe degree mentally defective, 63 per
cent. had come into conflict with the law, 86 per cent. had shown abnormal character traits from childhood. They were of a lower

types of personality from the faintly to the strikingly abnormal often labelled schizoid. On the other hand, while manic-depressives

social level than the average, showed a definite tendency towards preferential mating with psychopathic partners, and married

who do not show the syntonic personality practically do not exist, cases of schizophrenia who before the onset of the psychosis

life was unhappy or disastrous in the majority of cases. The second group showed

* Lewis, A. J.: Proc. R.S.M., 29, 325, 1936.

* Brain, R.: Quart. J. Med., I9, 299, 1926.

t Kraulis, W. : Z. Neur., 136, 174, 1931.

THE INHERITANCE OF MENTAL DISORDER

283

the same features, but in less marked degree. Of the sibs 35 5 per cent. were abnormal, numbering I2 * 5 per cent. of hysterical
personalities. Pure hyperthymic, depressive
or obsessional personalities were not found. No significant increase in the frequency of
manic-depressive or schizophrenic psychoses was noted, but there was a raised percentage
of epileptics, I * 5 per cent. While this investigation does not take us very far, it seems to indicate that hereditary factors play a part in the development of the hysteric and
that these factors are of some degree of specificity.
A psychopathic personality may call attention to itself not only by falling into illness but into another form of social abnormality-crime. It is from this latter
angle that the remaining investigations I
wish to discuss have been directed. Von Baeyer* investigated the families of psychopathic swindlers and liars. His attention was particularly directed to the psychiatric type known as pseudologia phantastica. These are the natural actors and actresses
who go to remarkable lengths in the fabrication of often complicated deceptions, who display a surprising wealth of fantasy, often with a play-like quality, like that of the day-dreams of a child, whose suggestibility is such that they deceive not only their natural victims, but often to a considerable extent themselves. Von Baeyer's investigations disclose no relation of this group to any of the psychoses. Among the sibs the percentage of psychopathy was very high, 35 per cent., leading, as in the propositi, to a high degree of criminality, 23 per cent. The psychopathic personalities among the sibs showed, as might be expected, strong family resemblances to the propositi, but were seldom exactly of the same type. A particularly interesting finding was the high proportion of personalities of the hyperthymic and cyclothymic type. These are usually considered to belong to the same family group as manic-depressive insanity, but there was no increased incidence of the psychosis. Nevertheless von Baeyer is of
* von Baeyer, W.: Zur Genealogie psychopathischer Schwindler und Liigner, Leipzig, I935.

the opinion that " probably in every true psychopathic swindler a constitutional hyperthymic or cyclothymic factor lies hid." The majority of the psychopathic personalities were of the hysterical type. Von Baeyer tries to separate out a quality of " Ungebundenheit," or irresponsibility and lack of control by sense of reality or ordinary social values, and to show that this tends to recur in the relatives of his propositi, and to be specially frequent among the children of parents of the same type. He very sensibly makes the point that this quality and others shown by his propositi are not of solely evil social significance. They represent tendencies which may in certain circumstances be of the greatest value-as a part of the artistic equipment of the actor or writer, for instance.
Two important recent studies of criminal twins have disclosed the necessity for a modification of Lange's views expressed in his famous book, Crime as Destiny. Both based on larger material than Lange's, the
work of Kranz* and Stumpflt shows that
Lange overestimated the importance of the hereditary component as the main cause of criminal behaviour. While they agree with him in finding a high concordance in uniovular twins, it is in both cases less than the very high figure of 77 per cent. found by Lange. Kranz finds 66 per cent., Stumpfl only 6o per cent. But the striking difference is in the findings in the same-sexed binovular twins. In these Lange found only i} per cent. concordance, Stumpfl the much higher figure of 4I per cent., and Kranz a still higher concordance of 54 per cent. In these more recent works, the difference between uniovular and binovular twins sinks from a very high figure to a comparatively low one. This finding is very suggestive of the importance of early environmental influences in leading to criminal behaviour. On closer clinical examination the picture becomes clarified. The studies in personality and
* Kranz, H.: Lebensschicksale krimineller Zwillinge,
Berlin, I936. t Stumpfl, F.: Die Urspriinge des Verbrechens
dargestellt am Lebenslauf von Zwillingen, Leipzig, I936.

284 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

heredity in criminals made by Riedl,*
Stumpflt and others have shown that a
fundamental distinction must be drawn between two types, the type that shows abnormal tendencies early in life and develops in time into a recidivist and habitual criminal and the type that under environmental stress in later life falls once, and with great frequency once only, to a single criminal act. Of Stumpfl's uniovular twins, the recidivists and habitual criminals showed almost complete concordance. The nonhabitual uniovular twins were five times as often discordant as concordant. All of the same-sexed binovular twins of the habitual criminals were concordant in having come into conflict with the law, but showed striking differences in their criminal careers, the type of crime, frequency and length of punishment being very different, as well as the underlying personalities. Further clinical analysis leads Stumpfl to a series of conclusions. He considers that there are forms of criminality largely determined by environmental circumstances and arising under the influence of internal conffict. They are associated usually with comparatively normal type of personality, and are not of bad prognostic omen. There are, on the other hand, types of criminals in whom the criminality is the expression of a hereditarily determined abnormal personality, recognizable in early
* Riedl, M.: Arch. Kriminol, 93, I933, quoted by
Stumpfl. t Stumpfl, F.: Erbanlage und Verbrechen, Berlin,
1935.

years, and of a most refractory nature to
treatment or punishment. Analysis of the uniovular twins of all kinds shows a con-
cordance of personality make-up extending
down to the finest details of character.
Stumpfl emphasizes the fact that the environment of twins, as far as it concems their education and development, is much
more alike in the case of uniovular than binovular twins. Having the same constitution, and starting from the same starting
point, they find or make for themselves,
apart from the operations of chance, a similar environment in later life. Further,
they frequently remain bound to one another by emotional ties, and, as Kranz points out, tend to identify their twin with themselves,
their actions with his. The conclusion to be
drawn is that some forms of criminality are
the expression of an abnormal personality, whose character is determined almost solely by heredity. Others are the result of environ-
mental stress. The role of the environment is in the translation of a tendency into an accomplished act, of " Fihigkeit " into " Fertigkeit." Though the importance of heredity in determining the make-up of the personality may be regarded as established, the analysis of its method of operation is likely to prove a thorny problem for many generations. So far we may agree with von Baeyer, that it is indeed not the psychopathic personalities as such that are inherited, but at most particular characteristics, which in certain combinations dispose to psychopathic behaviour.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVIm, No. 4.

