SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC FACTORS IN PSYCHIATRY*

By W. LINDESAY NEUSTATTER, M.D., M.R.C.P.
(Physician in charge of the Dept. of Psychological Medicine, Queen Mary's Hospital for the East End)

T HE environment in which we live is from bad Glasgow slums to good housing

so intertwined with our reactions to it, estates. But these results are open to the

that it is no easy matter to determiune
how far it may be playing a causal role. Clinical instances of psychiatric disorders at times of external stress there are in plenty.

objection that such moves, entailing extra rent, may mean that there is less money for food, and thus a reduction in the total
standard of living.

But the difficult question always arises as Cattell is of the opinion that although good

to how far such circumstances are the cause nourishment may favour muscular develop-

of the disorder, how far coincidental, and ment, happiness, activity and freedom from

how far actually made by the patient. Only fatigue, it does not influence mentality. But

large scale studies on the incidence of he draws attention to the fact that mal-

neurosis and psychosis in relation to the nutrition and low I.Q. may be correlated,

social and economic environment can hope because in families of low intelligence both

effectively to answer these questions. This father and mother are likely to be of poor

is a study which has been surprisingly intellect, and malnutrition results from the

neglected, especially in this country. More poor earnings of the one and the unwise

attention appears to have been paid to spending of the other.

mental defect and delinquency. The latter is

not dealt with here but poor economic
conditions are considered in relation to
mental defect, psychosis and neurosis.

Backwardness Although the weight of evidence is against
sociological conditions influencing innate

Mental Defect
It is generally held that intelligence is an innate quality, uninfluenced by circumstances. Cattell draws attention to the fact that the I.Q. remains constant irrespective of environment or learning. A series of observations, taken several years apart, on the same children showed only a 4 to 5 point difference either up or down. Nor does the I.Q. vary in a change from elementary to secondary
schools. Rogers, Darling and McBride tested and
retested 62 girls committed to good institutional care after living in bad surroundings, but found no change in their intelligence, although changes in personality occurred. Similar findings obtained for children moved

intelligence, Burt states that backwardness in performance can be definitely influenced by a poor environment. He does not believe it is due to bad feeding, but draws attention to the effects of lack of sleep. Anyone who
has worked in the slums knows how late most of the children go to bed and how drawn and tired they often look. And as poor children often have to work at home as well as at school this causes additional fatigue. The lack of sleep is of course directly depend-
ent on the conditions in which poor families live. I remember vividly one case of a little girl whose sleep was disturbed because the family lived in one room and slept in one bed. Being the youngest, she had to sleep across the foot of the bed, and was wakened by each member of the family in turn as they

* A paper read at the Royal Society of Medicine. came to bed. Although this is an exception-

55

56 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ally bad case, the sharing of bedrooms and the desire to " make the firm pay," in both

beds is extremely common.

senses of the word.

Burt cites an interesting experiment on

two groups of children. One group was cared American Survey

for so that it had adequate sleep, the other Interesting and able investigations have

was given special coaching. The results been made in Chicago and Providence, R.I.,

showed that the former group did consider- on the distribution of mental disorders in

ably better at their work than the controls. relation to the sociological districts into which

Nutrition only affects backward children these towns can be divided. The psychoses

indirectly.

-excepting cyclothymia which is distri-

buted at random and tends to come from

Neurosis aid Psychosis.

the higher cultural levels-have their great-

Before turning to the wider aspects of the est incidence in the poor disorganised part of

subject, a word may be said about the the communities. So have the psycho-

compensation neuroses. Mapother and Lewis neuroses, but the figures for the latter may

draw attention to the paradox that many of be invalidated, for neurotics are found more

these neuroses have resulted from the in private than in public mental hospitals.

humane legislation designed to deal with In regard to manic-depressive insanity the

industrial accidents. I take it they refer to authors, though admitting the possibility of

the working of the legislation rather than the diagnostic errors as high as 40 per cent, claim

principle; for my impression is that all that they had enough cases for their findings

compensation cases are not necessarily so to be valid. The remaining psychoses follow

simple as the desire to get " something for the same distribution as unemployment,

nothing," which some seem to regard as the infantile mortality, juvenile delinquency,

sole motive. Some of the occupations involve -adult crime, suicide and general mortality,

very real anxiety. I recall two cases of rail- for all of which the rates are highest in the

way employees who were receiving benefit poorest areas.

for neurosis. One, aged 55, who became That organic psychoses should follow this

anxious after an accident, had worked for pattern perhaps requires comment. Alcohol-

many years on a siding where he had seen ism might be expected to occur in such com-

several men killed, and was genuinely afraid munities, as might the spread of venereal

to return to work. The other drove a train, diseases. But senile and arteriosclerotic dis-

had a slight accident and became anxious, orders are harder to explain unless they are

and had a perfectly comprehensible fear of the result of wear and tear. Alternately they

returning to such responsible work. In both may find their way into institutions more

these cases the receipt of compensation readily where care is difficult to obtain.

appeared to be only a subsidiary factor.

It is in regard to the greater prevalence of

Social insecurity is a powerful factor in schizophrenia, in the poor districts, that the

making men prefer illness-even on a small problem becomes most interesting. To begin

allowance-to the risk of unemployment. with, different types have an odd distribution.

The behaviour of some firms is also a factor, The paranoid variety is commonest in the

for they will take a man back if he says he boarding-house districts, whereas the cata-

is fit, employ him for a week, and then dismiss tonic mainly affects the foreign-born, negroes,

him if he shows any incapacity, after which and newcomers. The authors think that the

he has lost all legal redress for compensation. development of a catatonic reaction in these

Undoubtedly other than purely economic groups can be explained on the assumption

factors enter into the matter. The nature of that it is more likely to occur in the un-

the work, a grudge against the foreman or intelligent and the ignorant, a certain degree

firm (sometimes with justification, e.g. of intelligence being needed to construct a

believing that they have not taken adequate paranoid system.

precautions against accidents) also influence Be this as it may, what is interesting is the

SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC FACTORS IN PSYCHIATRY

57

correlation of schizophrenia with the other that case, why not those who develop general

factors enumerated, especially juvenile paralysis, who are also frequently assertive

delinquency. For it is the opinion of C. individuals ?

Shaw, Dunbar, etc., that juvenile delin- This briefly summarises some of the main

quency in this environment is not to be points of these workers' findings. I will next

regarded as pathological, but as a more or turn to my own, derived from three investi-

less normal response of healthy adolescents. gations made from Guy's Hospital.

In fact, a study by Dunbar of Court records

in Chicago shows that schizophrenics have London Investigations

rarely appeared more than once before the
Courts; and in the majority of these cases
acts of violence have been the beginning of a
catatonic episode, with no previous delinquencies. There is, then, in the same area, an apposition of the largest number of an extremely " tough " element with the largest number of those who are characteristically opposite, i.e. the schizophrenics, and the possible explanation of this may be that the introverted, solitary type of character, so frequently found in the pre-schizophrenic, is driven more and more into himself by having to mix with more than usually aggressive associates. That is to say, the hostile environment makes the normal more aggressive, and, in contrast, the solitary, shy individual, is driven even farther into himself. This is further accentuated where there is little or only casual work, necessitating the development of a thrustful technique for securing
employment, the introverted type being not only unsuited to such exertions but driven further into himself by his failures.
Another important question is: does the schizophrenic get into the poorest area

In all these I adopted a procedure which
was much the same throughout. Either a
social worker or myself interviewed the mother of the child, and obtained a full
history of the size of the family, the income,
housing conditions and health of the parents, and whether they were intemperate, bad tempered, anxious or depressed, and whether concemed about their social conditions.
In regard to the children, I inquired into (I) irritability in the first year of life and difficulties at school age; (2) anxiety symptoms, i.e. fears, night terrors, restless sleep; (3) instability of mood, depression and listlessness; and (4) personality traits in the way of timidity, shyness, unusual aggressiveness or obstinacy or behaviour problems. Subsequently, without the parental history in front of me, I saw the child alone and enquired into fears of the dark, noise, teacher, parents, punishment, and worries, particularly about work or examinations. I also asked the child whether it noticed if the parents were'depressed or worried. These were the main questions.

because he sinks, or does he fail to rise ? Finally, as a result of the history obtained

The latter appears to be the case; at least in from the parents and my interview with the

the investigation referred to the schizo- child, I classified children as " definitely

phrenics appear to have been born in the nervous " or " definitely not nervous." or,

area. In that case, have these economic if in doubt, as " partially nervous." Of the

factors brought out a latent schizophrenia three categories, the " definitely not nervor is it a " process " which has run its inevit- ous" struck me as the most accurately able course ? To postulate this exclusively classified. It indicated either an entire would be to ignore all external precipitating absence of nervous features, or the presence

factors, and to omit any explanation of why of only some minor symptom, such as

schizophrenia concentrates in these areas. transient fear of the dark.

Finally, why do manic-depressive psycho- In my first investigation, concerned prim-

tics alone escape the general distribution ? arily with nervousness in rheumatic children,

One explanation is that these are more I found that there was far less nervousness

assertive individuals, who are likely to have in a control group of children of good

done well and risen in the social scale. In physique than in another control group of

58 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

poor physique. (I return to this in connec- poor group compared to 36 per cent in the

tion with my third investigation.)

latter. Therefore, poor social conditions

This finding made me wonder whether were not in themselves a direct determinant

poor social conditions generally and neurosis of nervousness in children.

were related, and in what -way. I therefore 2. Even very bad social conditions left

investigated three groups composed as children unaffected psychologically, provided

follows, using the same questionnaire already that the psychological home situation was

described.

good. It follows that such conditions had

Groufp i was composed of 50 poor working- no direct psychological effect.

class families in South-East London, picked 3. At times, however, social conditions at random. Of these, 4I had-less than Ios. affected the children indirectly, by making

per head per week, and the other 9 less than life difficult for the parents, but this generally

I5s. per week gross income; 35 of the 50 had occurred when the parents were also nerv-

not enough money for the B.M.A. minimum ously predisposed.

dietary requirements, and I9 out of 20 of
these (selected at random) had not the minimum caloric requirements ;- 20 of the
50 were badly housed. Grourp 2 was drawn from the parents of
children attending two council schoolsserving " better " areas in South-East London. The families mainly comprised artisan
workers whose gross income fell between
55s. and £5 per week.*
Group 3 was a group of " well-to-do" families from a North-West London suburb. The parents were " middle-class "-i.e. professional workers, in business, etc.
The following is a summary of the results of the investigations.
i. In the poor group only 20 per cent of
the children were nervous, compared to 38 per cent nervous in the well-to-do group,
while 56 per cent were not nervous in the

4. Irrespective of class there was a statistically valid relationship between nervousness in the children and nervous parents.
But the puzzling feature was that there was a greater prevalence of bad physique among the poor children, and yet a greater freedom from nervousness, which was in contrast to the findings of the first investigation.
I therefore investigated a further 50 elementary schoolchildren of the very worst physique but without any definite malady, in conjunction with 30 of the very best. The
object of the inquiry was (i) to seek further
evidence of a relationship between nervousness and physique, and (2) to see how far poor physique was related to social conditions and to bad nutrition.

The first part of the investigation was

* I shall not deal further with the second group. It completed, with the results as shown in

did not sufficiently suit my purpose, for instead of getting into the small professional group as I had wished, I found myself dealing with the artisan class,

Tables I to 4. Table i. The " unequal " results are

which did not furnish the desired sociological contrasts. rather as one would expect. Most noticeable

The latter are described by Stephen Taylor, in his paper on the " Suburban Neurosis," in which he

are (a) the differences in average size of

discusses the effects of insufficient interests, resulting in family between those of good and bad

boredom, and financial and other worries in maintaining a home on small means, and the gradual disillusion which overtakes women living under conditions which

physique, which I also found in my rheumatism investigation, (b) the difference in

do not correspond to a false and glamorous set of values. incomes of the two groups.

In regard to children,.we all know from clinical experience that the need for the black-coated worker to

Difficult to explain is why the parents of

maintain his faVade of respectability tends to make an children of poor physique should be more

atmosphere of " don'ts," " hush," and " what will the people next door think." But this constitutes a different social problem to those resulting from poverty. Stephen

anxious and irritable than those of good physique, and yet both suffer equally from

Taylor's paper draws attention to the danger of overlooling the difficulty of the black-coated worker, who, while not earning very much more than the labourer, has to keep up appearances.

depression ? And why financial worries should differ so in the fathers and not the
mothers ?

SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC FACTORS IN PSYCHIATRY

59

TABLE I

TABLE II

FINDINGS IN 50 POOR PHYSIQUE AND 30 GoOD

PHYSIQUE CHILDREN

Poor Physique Good Physique

Size of Family

6 4,3

Gross Income per Head gs. Id.

i5s.

Approximately

Unequal Equal

Poor Good Poor Good

Physique Physique

Percentages

Father

Unemployed ... ... 52 30

Anxious and Irritable ... 52 20

Worries about Money ... 24 3

Depressed ... ...

22 17

Mother

Anxious and Irritable ... 82 64

Big and Fit ... ... 24 66

Tired 36... ... ...

7

Ill-health ... ...

67

Worries Generally ...

48 47

Depression .... ...

50 44

Worries about Money ...

40 44

Table 2. The two groups showed little difference in early development, except that poor health (which was comparatively rare in both groups) and " various manifestations before 5" were about twice as common in

Findings

approx. Approx.

unequal

equal

Percentages

Poor Good Poor Good

Physique Physique

Early Development of Child

Poor Health ... ... i8* 7*

"Various Manifesta- .

tions" before 5 years 82* 40*

Feeding Difficulties ...

8o

Restless in Ist Year ...

i8 I3

Physical Ailments before

5 years ... ...

28* 23*

Nervous Manifestations

before i year ... ...

30 20

Parental Description of Child

Timid ... ...

40 4

Obstinate

... ... 40 13

Depressed ... ... 30 13

Swings of Mood

... 48 13

Fears ... ... ...

32 23

Night Terrors and Rest-

less Sleep ... ...

58 40

Interview with Child

Worries ... ... ... 20

0

Fears Dark

... 20

7

Fears Teacher ...

50 40

Fears Punishment ... 20 9

Estimated nervous 28 28 I3

Not nervous

i8 63

the " poor physique " as in the " good physique " group. Under this latter heading

4On basis of 8o Remainder on basis of 40

I have included a variety of findings which reactions of normal persons to difficult

cannot be classified, but which show that something was wrong, e.g., " premature, D. & V.," "contented till bronchitis at 3 months-never recovered good temper," "miserable, ailing till 2."
Most striking is i8 per cent not nervous in the children of poor physique compared to 63 per cent in those of good physique.
I tried as a matter of interest to analyse my results, relating income, size of family and parental characteristics to the nervous and not nervous children, but the results
were negative.

situations, -e.g. depression and worry, with specific disorders, e.g. agorophobia or schizophrenia, which are essentially determined by
intrinsic causes, though they may be precipitated by external circumstances. A reaction may be considered to be within normal limits when it has the following attributes: (i) it is brought about by situations which are acknowledged to produce it in
persons who show no outstanding peculiarities, e.g. worry due to financial difficulties; (2) it disappears when the causal situation is
removed; (3) it does not tend to increase,

Table 3. This shows the totals for the and may even diminish, in the presence of the

present investigation and the previous one causal situation, as the individual becomes

on rheumatic children, comprising in all 90 adapted to it, e.g. settling down in the Army.

of poor and 70 of good physique. Here again An abnormal reaction, on the other hand,

it will be noticed that certain nervous is one which (i) has no apparently rational

symptoms predominate in those of poor basis, e.g. a manic-depressive attack or

physique, while complete absence is higher, claustrophobia; or (2) if caused by an outside

though not so markedly higher as before, in stimulus, outlasts it considerably, and/or is

those of good physique.

disproportionately severe.

Before proceeding farther, I should like to It is of considerable importance in studying

discuss a frequent tendency to confuse the the reactions to environment to separate the

6o THE EUGENICS REVIEW

two. To include the former as evidence of Discussion. The findings of my second

neurosis resulting from environment is investigation, namely the lower incidence of

clearly fallacious, and information about the nervousness in the poorest group of children,

former is primarily of sociological, about the are, as already pointed out, difficult to recon-

latter essentially of psychiatric interest. cile with the findings of my other investiga-

Unfortunately at the time of the investiga- tions, which showed a higher incidence of

tion I did not have these ideas in mind, but nervous features in those of poor than in

what information I have on what might be those of good physique. The only explana-

termed commonplace disagreeable reactions, tion I can offer is that I got children of

I have collected in table 4.

particularly bad physique in the first and

TABLE III

third investigations, where I was deliberately selecting them. However, even here there

SYMPTOMS IN 90 CHILDREN OF POOR PHYSIQUE AND 70 OF GOOD PHYSIQUE
(From Investigations i and 3) Poor Physique Good Physique

are anomalies, for some of the children of the very worst physique were completely devoid of nervousness.

Timid

...

Restless Sleep ...

Night Terrors ...

...
... ...

Percentages
35* 10-
33* 20 22 I5

Really poor physique being so rare m children of the well-to-do classes, perhaps one should only compare this group with a

Swings of Mood Wormes ... ...
Nervous ...
Not Nervous

... ...
...
...

55*
57*
30 30

IO group of children of good physique in the

5 15

poor-which would still further accentuate

50 the difference in nervousness. The explanation

* On basis of 8o Remainder on basis of 40

of this difference is possibly a combination of heredity and'the over attention which the

Table 4. Most noticeable is the prevalence children of the well-to-do are apt to receive.

of worry about money among poor mothers, The association of nervousness and frailty

i.e. 40 per cent as against i8 per cent, in poor children may be due to the weakly

though among the fathers it is about the child feeling inferior and timid; a more

same. The difference between the mothers likely explanation is that there is a conlstitu-

in the two groups possibly results from more tional factor common to both, -producing

household money being regularly available both nervousness and poor physique, especi-

in the well-to-do group.

ally where nutrition is marginal.

The fact that 2I out of 7I children felt There is also the difficulty of accounting

there was not enough to eat, and ii worried for the difference between my results and

lest there should not be enough to eat, may those in Chicago, where the poor social

be allowed to speak for itself.

environment definitely appeared to have

produced more mental disorder. Possib'ly

TABLE IV

personality disorders (a term under which

Father Mother Child schizophrenia can be included) are more

Poor Well- Poor Wellto-do to-do
Worried about Social

likely to result from environmental difficulties than symptoms of anxiety, which were

Conditions ... 12 Depressed by Social
Conditions ... I4 Resentful of Social

6 I6 40

most conspicuous amongst my cases. (At
school medical inspections, of which I have done large numbers, I saw few personality

Conditions ... 4 0 6

Worried about

Money

12(20*) 24 14(40*)

disorders compared to anxiety states.) The question also arises whether there is

Worried about Debts 0 0 0
Felt there was not enough to eat ...
Worried lest there

not a great difference between the social 21 conditions in London slums and those in
Chicago. Poor though conditions in some of

might not be
enough to eat ...1.1I * On basis of 8o Remainder on basis of 40

our slums are, there is in them an element of stability which is probably lacking in Chicago. Farris and Dunham refer to the

SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC FACTORS IN PSYCHIATRY

6i

social isolation which occurs there. The child, being brought up in two cultures-one at school and the other at home-becomes unsettled, and ultimately often comes to despise its parents. It may acquire a feeling of inferiority on account of its race, the more so if it has racial characteristics which draw attention to itself; and any kind of organisation of the mind in the highly mobile " hobohouse" districts of Chicago is most difficult. All this would fit in with my findings, namely, that poverty alone is not enough,

but that it is only where bad social conditions are productive of a difficult psychological situation that they are important in causing neurosis. And as none of the above factors are operative in London, this may account for the difference.
[These researches were carried out with funds
from the Rockefeller Foundation and York Trust, received through the Department of Psychological Medicine at Guy's Hospital, and I wish to thank Dr. R. D. Gillespie for his permission to make use of the material.]

C. B.C.
CONSTRUCTIVE BIRTH CONTROL
SOCIErY AN CuNC FOUNDED BY DR. MARIE STOPES IN I921 The oldest Birth Control Clinic, the first to establish Birth Control Case Sheets and collect scientific data; C.B.C. Clinics are still the only free clinics: the only birth control clinics dealing from the first with all aspects of birth control, i.e. prevention of detrimental births,
spacmg of healthy births and inducing potentially desirable pregnancy
n sterile women, and general marital help.
THE PIONEERS OF THE CLINIC MOVEMENT
Libraty, Museum and Clinics open daily, io-6 (except Sats.) Books and Racial supplies may be obtained direct.
TECHNICAL DEMONSTRATIONS for MEMBERS of the MEDICAL PROFESSION First Thursday each month
Applications to The Hon. Secretary, Headquarters Clinic,
io6 Whitfield Street, W.i
Eugenics Rview, Vol. lmv, No. 2.

