THE EUGENICS REVIEW
fertility can be reduced only if birth control is started early-within the first few years of marriage.
The birth rate in India is continuing at a high level of about 42 per thousand population, while the death rate has come down to about 19 per thousand, resulting in a great increase in population. So far, family planning has been accepted by a very few couples, and there has been no reduction in the birth rate. Though there are about 15,000 family planning clinics in the country, of which about 12,000 are in the rural areas, the attendance is poor. The motivation for family limitation is low, and very intensive family planning education is needed to increase it.
The Government of India plans to intensify family planning efforts to reduce the birth rate by half in the shortest possible time. With every Five Year Plan, the money allocated for family planning has been increased: Rs. 6 5 million in the First Five Year Plan (1951-56), Rs. 49 5 million in the Second, Rs. 250 million in the Third (with a ceiling of Rs. 500 million) and Rs. 950 million in the Fourth Five Year Plan (1966-71). The earlier plans could not be implemented fully, as only 25 per cent of money allocated was spent during the First, and 30 per cent during the Second Plan.
With an unprecedented increase in population obstructing the implementation of programmes of economic development, family planning work must be treated as a national emergency programme. The author suggests that its success depends on the effective co-operation of Universities, demographic research organizations and workers in the Community development blocks for family planning educational talks to the villagers.
The book draws upon the existing census material, and also upon a large number of demographic surveys, some of which are not published, and makes a valuable contribution in throwing light on some of the important population problems facing the country to-day.
SAVITRI THAPAR
GENETICS
Sutton, H. Eldon. An Introduction to Human Genetics. New York and London, 1965. Holt, Rinehart & Winston. Pp. x+262. Price 48s.
IT IS THE author's wish that this introduction should serve students in general rather than those following a particular discipline. To this end he has kept "nongenetic material" to a minimum, supplied a genetic text which should be acceptable to students of whatever following, and has left the instructor to supplement it with examples appropriate to each class.
Starting in classical style with a tribute to Mendel, Professor Sutton introduces the reader to such basic genetic terms as "dominant", "recessive" and "gene" in the context ot their earliest usage. He can then show how original concepts are modified as the subjecf unfolds, avoiding the tedium of a list of definitions so early in the work as to be meaningless. The care in introducing new terms (in italics) is notable in this work, although occasional words or phrases are met before their meaning has been explained. For instance "chromosome" slips in on page 7, and on page 39 "identical twins" has to be defined sketchily in brackets since, unlike many textbooks on human genetics, the section on twins comes late in the text.
The chapters on cell division and chromosomes are illustrated with good uncluttered diagrams (a general feature of this book) and Chapter 5 on Human Chromosomal Abnormalities includes the main clinical features of the established syndromes. In discussing the possible offspring of a balanced 21/D translocation carrier, this author remembers all six possibilities, where often the tri-D and mono-D are left out. One point which is not made
116

REVIEWS OF BOOKS

here is that translocation-type Down's syndrome is probably more often than not a new

mutation in the affected child. Thus, to quote from page 55, "Parents of a translocation

patient, on the other hand, may wish to discontinue having children in the face of a high

risk of recurrence", might be altered to suggest that, on finding a translocation patient, the

parents' own chromosomes should be studied and genetic counselling given accordingly.

Many other chapters are admirable, notably those dealing with the basic chemistry of

chromosomes and genes (here the author wisely refrains from listing the base-sequence codes

for amino acids before they have been properly worked out); the relation between genes and

protein synthesis; and linkage. The mathematics is sufficient for the needs of most field

workers without being too advanced. The reader is taught something of probability and

how to assess the significance of his results. It is nice to find a section devoted to the chi-

square analysis, and another to the effect of ascertainment on tests for recessive inheritance.

Standard error too is explained in the chapter on Population Genetics under "Accuracy of

Gene Frequency Estimates".

Twin studies are dealt with briefly and with more emphasis on their disadvantages than

their uses. One is reluctant to accept the conclusion that, "In practice, the type of informa-

tion to be gained from twins is very limited in scope" since careful twin studies have made

major contributions in deciding the extent to which both normal characters and disease are

genetically determined, schizophrenia is just one example of many.

For single gene effects, there is no systematic consideration of family pattern, relation

between incidence, mutation rate and fitness (the equation is given only for autosomal

recessives), and implications for the family for the three major types of inheritance. In-

stead, different aspects are considered under "Mutations", "Tests of Genetic Hypothesis",

"Population Genetics" and "Analysis of Pedigrees". Genetic counselling is occasionally

mentioned but some important points are not well brought out. For instance, when con-

sidering dominant inheritance, the author stipulates that "Every affected person must have

at least one affected parent", and goes on later to mention genetic counselling in such a

family without stressing that the faulty gene must start somewhere as a new mutation,

when both parents and all the sibs will be normal. Also, in "Recessive Inheritance" he works

out the probabilities that various relatives of an affected homozygote are heterozygous

carriers (accounting for the rather unwieldy diagram on the cover) but in practice this has

little application in medical genetics, where most recessive conditions are rare. Hetero-

zygote detection by biochemical tests is much more applicable in genetic counselling and

could have followed the paragraph on galactosaemia on page 162.

In general, however, this book can be recommended as a good up-to-date introductory

work. No student should find it difficult; the print is clear and the style-with short phrases

and economy of words-easy to follow.

H. B.

Winchester, A. M. Genetics: A Survey of the Principles of Heredity. Third edition. Boston, 1966. Houghton Mifflin (London, Constable). Pp. viii+504. Price 60s. Gottlieb, F. J. Developmental Genetics. Selected Topics in Modern Biology Series. London, 1966. Chapman and Hall. Pp. x+118. Price lOs. 6d.
THE FACT THAT it has been considered worth while to produce a third edition of Professor Winchester's textbook is a commendation in itself. The first edition was published in 1951 in the days before genetics went "modern", i.e. two years before Watson and Crick produced their model of DNA. The new edition has been brought up to date to include such topics as the genetic code with its codons, mutons and recons; the structure of haemoglobin with its opathies; the mapping of bacterial chromosomes; and so on.
The first fifteen or sixteen chapters cover the ground of classical genetics (particulate inheritance, the physical basis of inheritance, segregation, linkage) adequately and well.
117

