The Danger of Degeneracy.

BY PROFESSOR HERMAN LUNDBORG, M.D.

II. Eugeni- theses and guliide-lines.

(Conclusion to the paper appearing in Vol. XIII, No 4).

A.

1. A good national-material is the greatest riches a couintry can

possess. The material of the people depends in the highest degree upon

the quality of the hereditary mass. This is different in different

nations.

-

-I

2 Heredity and selection are the chief influences which govern life

in this world. Environmnent is certainlv also of significance, although

it cannot develop new qualities but can only modify those already

present, in the one or the other direction.

3. Families and nations are gJowerned by strikt laws in the same way

as the private individual. One of the first tasks laid upon every

civilized nation is the careful investigation of these biological laws of

nature, and afterwards the regulation and arrangement of the condi-

tions of society to suit these laws. If we break them we must ourselves

bear the consequences: we degenerate and go under. These laws,

however, are not altogether and only stern avengers. Riahtly under-

stood and obeyed they form a richly yielding source or imnprovement

and progress. *W'WN i 3p # bIp S1
4. A glaring waste of the national-material is to be found at

present among manv of tle civilized nations and even with us. Material

of great, and to a large extent irreplaceable, value is being lost with

alarming rapidity. And it cannot be recovered in the same hasty

manner as it is being thrown away.

5. AMany reasons co-operate in bringing this about. The principal

seem to be: (a) the sinking birthrate among the middle classes (among

the peasant population) who possess stronger race energy than the other

strata of society; (b) great industrial activity; (c) hasty race-

mixture between nations, who from a race-biological point of view,

stand too far apart; (e) luxury and the worship of mammon with the

destruction of moral worth, which accompanies it, etc.

6. The system of htwina none, one or tzvo children practised by the

more valuable strata of the people, while at the same time the lower

and inferior strata increase relatively quickly, must lead to the deteriora-

tion of the race and the degeneration of the nation. The better off

classes, esp)ecially the women of these classes, withouit anv valid reason,
show an increasing disposition to withdraw from parenthood. Bv so

doing they shirk their duty and betray their own people. The

decided individualism of our time, the great claims made on ife,

together with the decided over-estimation of the power of environment

and education, are important reasons leading in this direction. The

42 EUGENICS REVIEW.
public opinion in a country and the authorities of the State have also a heavy burden ol guilt to bear in this respect.
7. Industrial and agricultural occul)7tiofns demand, at least at
times, increased and new energy. Partly for this reason and partly to defend the country from otutward foes, owing to a low birth-rate in a
country, foreigners belonging to an inferior race must he called in. In ancient Ronme durina its -decline and fall the circunmstances were exactlv the sanme. Race-mixtuires arise in stuch cases cauising a mixed nation of inferior quality. This must sooner or later overthrow the
ancient ciN ilisation of the countrv. Chaos and anarchy beconme the ruling powers. Other nations force their way in and grraduallv the
older civilisation is obliterated. 8. It certainly lies within the boundaries of possibility to take up
seriously the strtuggle against these threateninq and destructive factors. Such a couirse implies, however, that all good citizens within a country,
irrespective of their social, l)olitieal and religious views, shouldlunite their forces and work together for a common goal, rich in promise. the defence of their own nation against internal revolu-tionary and race-
degenerative tendencies. Fcr this is demanded: good will and combination, financial self-
sacrifice, greater mnorality anld real love of hutmanitjy.
**
B.
1. An energetic work of enlivhtenrnent on the subject ouight to be carried on. Beginning with the Univrersities, Hioh Schlools and Training Colleges as the starting point, public opinion ought to be worked upon by means of both lectures and writing. Medical men and teachers oualgt to be s-pecially educated in the science of heredity and race-culture. The feeling of responsibility towards the coming generations must be aroused. No fiull-grown person otught to- be -ignorant concerning the great significance of l)arenthood. and all must learn to understand the meaning of well-born from a biological 1oint of view.
2. Race-biological institutes for investigation wyith the object of studying lhereditary questions and eugenic problems on all sides otight to be established in every cifilized couintry as soon as possible. This has already been done in Sweden. The institute ouight to be g(uided by genealogical, niedical -biological. and social -economical principles. The instinct of self-preservation ouight now, after the world war, to drive the civilized nations towards startina this work without delay.
8. Severe diseases among the people such as alcoholism, sex diseases and tuberculosis nmust be fought against strenuoulsly.
.4. A sim)le and industrious manner of life must be inculcated
among all classes of the popu!ation, at the same tinme that due exercise of the body and sound sport are striven after. LuxurV and an unchecked desire for pleasujre do not bring honour to anv nation; they counteract the developnient of race in a favouirable direction.
5. Sucial "swamrps " ought to be drained by means of wise reforms and far-sighted law-making. The necessary supervision and

THE DANGER OF DEGENERACY.

48

care is not vet given to individuals who are really degenerate-and such are to be found in lar(ge numbers.b1oth in ouir own land and in other civilized countries- hut they are allowed to inf!uence the race in an obstructive and dangerous manner. We ought to pay the greatest
attention to political qluestions regarding the pop)ulation and allow the
eugenic point of view always to have ftill conisideration.
6. The State and priNvate persons ought to unite in building
pattern homes out in the country as a counter-balance to the indm,s-
trialism which so often proves an enemv to the race and to the health
of the people. A sound agricultuiral population with a high birth-rate
is a necessary condition of life for a nation that does not wish to
degenerate. An independent peasant class makes the groundwork, "backbone" of a nation. This clhss ottuht therefore to be helped and
cherished as mujch as possible. The dc-population of the countrvside muist be sternly opposed. but not bv the introduetion of industrialism there also. Homre colonization ought to be encotiragcd.
7. Enmigration. which has caused a considerable drain on the life-blood of the nationi, oulght, if possible, to be regulated and kept within proper bou-inds.
8. We must also pav great attention to immigration so that inferior individuals belonging to foreign races cannot enter the country
and settle without any h-iindranice. A midtutre between nations who.
from a race-bioloaical. point of x iew. stand hiah and others containing lower race-elements, sutch as gipsies, Galicians, certain Russian tribes, etc., is certainlv to he condemned.
9. The science of eugrenics. which is a real patriotic movement according to the truie meaning of the words, has for its object the strengtherning and improvement of our people both bodily and mentallv, and ouiaht therefore to be able to reckon on hav ing the support of all classes of society.
10. Widely spread national societies ought to be formed in all the civilized countries with the object of working for race-culture. the health of the people end the improvement of m'-,rnlitfu.
Rich citizens within the countrv couild hasten the spread of eugenic ideas in a high degree bv means of financial and moral support. These ideas ought not to remain in the long run only futile desires.

