EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE MERSEYSIDE SURVEY*
By D. CARADOG JONES, M.A.
From the Department of Social Science, University of Liverpool

IN the Survey of Merseyside an attempt

" Few social phenomena have excited

has been made to present a picture of so much public interest and claimed so

social and economic conditions in three much of the attention of students in recent

volumes. The first volume describes the times as the decline of the birth-rate

general population, its composition by sex, throughout the civilized world. The rate

age and marital condition, its accommodation of the fall has varied from one country to

by families in houses, leading on to a dis- another and that has added to the excite-

cussion of overcrowding and poverty. The ment of the event. But it is a curious

second volume then proceeds to an analysis fact that, when so much has been written

of the earning part of the population, bring- and said upon the subject, its qualitative

ing out the industrial character of the area aspect is seldom stressed. The comparison

and examining in some detail the chief between one country and another is nearly

occupations by which people make a living. always discussed in terms merely numeri-

The non-earning or dependent part of the cal. It is proposed in this chapter to ask

population is left for discussion in the third from what sections of the community the

volume, which gives also an account of future population of Merseyside is being

various public and social services provided recruited. Are all sections equally fertile ?

for these and other sections of the community. And, if not, are we producing from the

Although these volumes describe existing best stock ? "

conditions, the picture is not a picture of still life. All life is a flux: we cannot exist
without changing. Yet the change that is
constantly taking place is not a pure matter of chance; the harvest to be reaped in the future is largely determined by the seeds

My intention in this paper is to put before you some figures which I think are an answer, although it is not suggested that they are a complete answer, to these questions.

planted to-day. For that reason eugenists Method of Inquiry Adopted

try to take the long view in their judgment of any social phenomenon. They recognize that, if conditions are not what they should
be, the most radical way of altering the
conditions is to alter the people who create

Merseyside, as defined for the purpose of
the survey, includes in addition to Liverpool three other county boroughs and a few neighbouring urban districts. We may begin by noting the extent of the fall in the rate of

them and that is not done in a day. It is natural increase of the population of the four

not without reason, therefore, that, after finishing our survey of things as they are on

boroughs, measuring from the period I88I-5 which was not far from the time when the

Merseyside, we should look forward, in the final chapter of the third volume, and raise
certain vital questions as to differential fertility and the future trend of population.

birth-rate began to decline generally. The figures are such as might be expected when we bear in mind that there is a large Catholic element in Liverpool and Bootle, while

The first paragraph of that chapter will perhaps serve as my introduction.

Wallasey is predominantly the home of clerical and other black-coated workers who

* A lecture delivered before the Eugenics Society on
March 17th, I936.

cross the Mersey daily to and from their work.

I03

104

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE I
MEAN ANNUAL RATE OF NATURAL INCREASE PER 1,000 OF THE POPULATION

Eng. & Wales
I88I-5 14-.1 I930-4 3.3

Liverpool
iIO* 6 7.3

Bootle Birken- Wallasey head
I6*9 17.1 I5.5 8e6 5.3 1.7

Information about the rate of growth of
population is based on figures obtained from
official sources and, whenever possible, such sources were used in the survey; but, in addition, a large number of special investigations were designed. One of the most fruitful
took the form of a kind of household census
-every thirtieth house in every street
throughout Merseyside being visited if the
occupation of the head of the family was believed to be such that he would fall within
the field of national insurance. School
attendance officers were remarkably successful in obtaining answers to a fairly detailed questionnaire as to the composition of these
families in regard to such matters as age, sex, occupation, earnings, housing accommodation, birth-place and size of family. In this way particulars, more or less completesome more complete than others-were obtained concerning a random sample of nearly 7,000 families of the working-class
population.
Having collected our matenral, the pro-
cedure in general was to apply similar methods to different groups of individuals, families, or other entities so as to obtain more or less comparable results. Care was
taken at the start to formulate definitions
of terms such as overcrowding and poverty, which are commonly used but to which
people attach meanings that differ or, more frequently perhaps, no precise meaning at all. The random household census supplied us then with norms of various kinds-it
told us, for instance, what proportion of families in each area in Merseyside as a whole was living in overcrowded conditions
or in poverty, according to the definitions laid down; it told us what proportion of
adult males was unemployed, what proportion ranked as skilled workers, and so forth.

Any family or individual found to be definitely below the average of its class in some chosen respect, in housing accommodation, in income, in employment, could then be labelled sub-normal in that particular respect.
The data collected were recorded on cards, one card to each family when the family was the unit of investigation, as in the household census, or one card to each individual when the individual was the unit. After the particulars on the cards had been checked, and confirmed or corrected if necessary, the first step in any analysis usually consisted in sorting the cards according to the object in mind. The illustrations which follow will make the procedure clear.
Fertility in Relation to Occupational SkiU
All occupied males were graded according to the nature of their normal occupations. It will suffice if we consider three grades only: non-manual workers, skilled artisans, and unskilled workers. While the occupation of the head of the household determined whether or not a particular family should be investigated, all members of the same family were included no matter what their occupations might be. Since also the earnings of minor officials, clerks, shop assistants and others of the same class, are not infrequently below £250 a year, it follows that nonmanual workers are represented in the survey although their proportion is not high. Cards of married couples could thus be sorted into groups on the above basis according to the occupational grade of the husband. It was possible further to- pick out within each group cards relating to wives who were between 40 and 50 years of age, and to sub-divide these according to the number of their children, living and dead. By taking only wives over 40 we could be sure that the families were not far from completion. We have then the result shown in the initial columns of Table II. The direction of the trend is familiar from other researches in the same field, but the gradation in the proportion of families with a small and a large number of lving and dead children is none the less striking.
The numerical importance in the sample

EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE MERSEYSIDE SURVEY

IO5

TABLE II
FERTILITY OF DIFFERENT GROUPS COMPARED (Mothers 40 to 50 years of age)
Percentages of Families with Children to the Number Shown

Number of
children

Fathers engaged in

Fathers

Position in relation to Poverty Line

Non-manual Skilled Unskilled In Regular

50 per cent. Below the

Work Manual Work Manual Work Employment Unemployed or more above line

Alive:

[

0 to 2 ...

58.4

42 5

30.2

39 4

34 8

43.3

3O.I

6ormore

6-8

I9.0

26-8

20o0

30°3

17.8

26-5

Dead:

O ... 74 6 65. o 43.8 6I 9 33.0 60 7 37.0

3 or more

2.5

6*o 2I*5

9 O 25 .0 110 27-0

No. of Fam.

II8

367

523

596

89

753

i89

Mean No. of

Children:

Alive 2.4I 3.38 3.93 3v44 3.97 3 24 4o02

Dead 0844

O*6I

I49 39

80

I *85

o488

1 .77

Born 2 -85 3 99 5 '42 4124 5 -82 4-12 5 79

of the three groups concerned may be average. In point of fact, about 27 per cent. gauged by noting the number of families of of the children born in the unskilled group each type represented. The least satisfactory had died as compared with only I5 per cent. group is not only the most prolific: it- in the other two groups; and, generally, a contributes also the largest number of similar difference will be discovered between families to the total sampled. The net other groups to be presently contrasted. effect, expressed as the number of living and The main intention here, however, was dead children per family in each group, is simply to show that families of the unskilled shown at the foot of the table. The unskilled class have an exceptionally high mortality
manual worker produces on the average a experience. Whatever be the cause, it is an family of about 5j children as compared with expensive experience to the community.
4 produced by the skilled artisan and rather less than 3 by the non-manual worker. But Fertility in Relation to Regularity of Work
death takes a higher toll from the unskilled Let us introduce now another measurable
worker, so that the average number of character, namely regularity of employment. living children in his family is reduced to A skilled engineer who is only employed about 4, as compared with about 24 in the intermittently may be worse off than an family of the non-manual worker. It should unskilled labourer with a regular job. There be carefully noted that the purpose of this are others in worse plight who lack both part of the table is not to compare the skill and work. All male heads of families chances of death in the different groups. sampled in the survey were placed in three Clearly, large families stand a greater chance classes according to the character of their than small families of having some dead employment at the time of the inquiry: children to record, for the simple reason that (i) in regular work; (2) casually employed;
in the former there is a larger number of (3) unemployed. If we confine our attention
children at risk of death; although this may to the two extreme classes and pick out as not be-and most likely is not-the only before the cards relating to wives of 40 to 50 reason why the number of deaths in the years of age, sorted as to size of family, we families of unskilled labourers is above the have the result shown in the middle columns

io6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of Table II. It should be observed that the Assistance Authority in Liverpool, informa-

families comprising these groups are obtained tion concerning a random sample of rather

by a cross classification of the population exceptional sub-normality: namely, un-

previously considered, being drawn from all employed men, between 22 and 50 years of

occupational grades. The difference between age, who at the time of the inquiry had been

the two groups in child mortality is par- in receipt of out-door relief practically con-

ticularly well defined. The less satisfactory tinuously for a period of two or more years.

group of the two is in this case relatively The intention was to secure a group of able-

small in size.

bodied men who might fairly be said to be

unemployable or verging on unemploya-

Fertility in Relation to Income

bility, and whose condition could, in all

When the occupational grade is low and reasonable likelihood, be attributed to per-

work is irregular the income coming into the sonal deficiencies of one kind or another.

home is precarious. This suggests another Men who were disabled from work by acci-

comparison obtained by grouping families dent or sickness and men over 50 whose

with wives of 40 to 50 years of age according disabilities might be put down to the

to their position in relation to a poverty infirmities of advancing age were accordingly

line. A poverty line is defined by estimating excluded from the inquiry.

the minimum income required to provide a Confining ourselves to married men of the

household of given composition with the unskilled labouring class in this sample,

bare necessaries of life. The actual income is they can be divided into three groups

then measured against this theoretical mini- according to the age of the wife, as follows:

mum standard, in order to see whether it is under 30, 30 and under 40, 40 and under 50.

above it or below and by how much. The Further, within each age group they can be

Merseyside poverty scale, incidentally, was sub-divided as before according to the

closely modelled on that used in the London number of children recorded as alive and

survey. In the last columns of Table II dead. The fertility and mortality of these

two groups of families are compared: in families, labelled sub-normal, is compared in

the one each family is 50 per cent. or more Table 3 with the fertility and mortality of

above the poverty line; in the other each the relatively normal families of the same

family is below the line. The former group occupational grade obtained in the course

is about four times the size of the latter. of the random household census. The con-

Again the contrast in fertility is clearly trast is quite as remarkable as any observed

marked. Also, in 27 per cent. of the destitute in the earlier tables.

families there were 3 or more children dead;
in fact, in this class the number of dead Occupational Class of Existing and Future

children per family is double that among Population

families in a better position.

So far attention has been directed to the

fertility of different classes of the population.

Fertility in Relation to Dependence

I pass next to an investigation which sums

Families may exist for some time below up effectively the net result of such tenden-

the poverty line without help from an outside cies as we have been considering for the

source, but sooner or later they will be population as a whole. A random sample of

dependent upon others. The next step down rather more than 700 births in Liverpool

the scale, therefore, is to examine the fertility was obtained by taking all infants whose

of families in receipt of public assistance. births were notified in the first fortnight of

Hitherto we have been discussing results February I930. This number was equivalent

obtained from analyses of the random to an annual total of I8,642 births, whereas

household sample. We proceed now to an the number registered in that year turned out

independent investigation designed to pro- to be i8,88i and in the following year I8,626.

vide, with the co-operation of the Public Thus, there seems little doubt that the sample

EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE MERSEYSIDE SURVEY

I07

TABLE III FERTILITY OF FAMILIES OF UNSKILLED LABOURERS Percentage of Families with Children to the Number Shown

Number of
Children
Alive: o to 2 ... 6 or more
Dead: |...
3or more
No. of Fam.
Mean No. of Children:
Alive Dead
Born

Wives of Age under 30

Normal

Sub-normal

721I
27 .9*

65 7 34.3*

84-7 58 7 I5'3t 4I'3t
390 143

1-76 2-24 *24 52
200 | 276

Wives of Age 30 to 40

Normal

Sub-normal

47 3 2I-6 ii-8 I5 8

63*o 43.9
7.7 I3.4 584 246

Wives of Age 40 to 50

Normal

Sub-normal

30 2 2I 9 26-8 35 6

438 356
215 30-1 523 73

2-95 3 79 3.93 5.53 *69 I*II I.49 I.77
3.64 4 90 5 42 7'30

* 3 or more alive.

t i or more dead.

includes the great majority of the births which actually occurred during the chosen fortnight. It therefore gives us a very good idea of the classes from which the future population is drawn. The random household sample, on the other hand, provides a fair picture of a large section of the existing population; and it was possible to estimate roughly the size of the unsampled section, which can be classed occupationally as non-manual, from a knowledge of the total private family population in Liverpool given in the last census. When these two groups, each sub-divided according to the occupational grades of the heads of the families concerned, are placed side by side, we have the following significant result:
TABLE IV
PERCENTAGE OCCUPATIONAL DISTRIBUTION OF THE EXISTING AND FUTURE POPULATION

Manual

Group Un- Semi-

Non- Total

Headsoffami- skilled skilled Skilled Manual

Headsoffami-

lies in exist-

ing Populn. 30 20 20 30 100

Fathers of

Future Pop-

ulation

44 22 15 I9 IOO

Dual Influence of Heredity and Environment
All the tables hitherto examined converge
to the same familiar conclusion: the lower a man is in the social scale, the larger in general is the number of his children, living and dead. So long as these conditions persist, the scales become increasingly weighted in favour of the socially lower classes generation by generation. Those who regret to see the inevitable day coming when the population of Great Britain will begin to decline may argue that it is better to have babies born in the slums than no babies born at all. Although this puts the case in an extreme form, we might agree to the implied principle if it could be proved that such
infants have the same chance as others of
starting life well endowed in mind and body and of subsequently growing up to be capable men and women. But have they? Most of the available evidence unfortunately points in the opposite direction and there are two a priori reasons why this should be so. It may be laid down as an axiom or self-
evident truth that, as a general rule, persons who are sub-normal-meaning by subnormal, definitely below the average of their class-in skill and in the amount of employment they get are likely to be sub-normal also in physique or intelligence or both.

io8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Accordingly, if heredity counts for anything, are other defects which may be equally

we cannot be more than moderately hopeful crippling. Some children are subject to

that such parents will beget strong and epileptic fits, or they suffer from congenital

intelligent children. And, if environment heart trouble or congenital paralysis; others

counts for anything, there is equal room for have an acquired disability, it may be

doubt whether the sort of home weakly and rickets, rheumatism, or tuberculous glands.

dull-witted parents are capable of providing Then there are a host of ailments, major or

for their children is calculated to promote minor, which may be classed under the

their wise development. We need not decide general heading of " poor health." All these

with any degree of nicety, even if we could, in some degree must act as obstacles to any

how far heredity and how far environment great personal attainment, and only heroic

each contribute to the conditions we observe. characters of the Helen Keller or Roosevelt

It is well to remind ourselves, however, that type can surmount them. An attempt was

one can never completely compensate for a made therefore in the course of the Mersey-

poor endowment, but that even a good side survey to collect parallel information

endowment may fail to come to perfect over the same pex*od of time about all such

fruition in an inferior environment. When defective or disabled classes in the com-

a growing proportion of children are being munity. For our present purpose interest

born and bred in families at the bottom of centres in the children, and the chief source

the social scale it is not necessary, therefore, of information concerning those who might

to prove that they all start life stunted in be described as sub-normal in sight or

body or weak in intellect in order to establish hearing, mind or body, was the Special

the fact that we are not as a nation making Schools Department of the Local Education

the best use of our human resources.

Authority. In regard to feeble-minded

children, whose defect was of too grave a

Defect at Birth in Relation to Parent's Class nature for them to be educable in Special

Let us see how far these considerations are Schools, the case papers of the West Lanca-

borne out by statistical evidence. We make shire Association for Mental Welfare were

contact with one another and with the consulted. There were 84I defective children

outside world by the eye, by the ear, by the of 5 to i6 in the Special Schools group and,

intelligence. It follows that anyone who is 257 in the Mental Welfare group. The blind

blind, or deaf, or mentally deficient must find numbered 69, the deaf I50, the epileptics 48,

it difficult, if not impossible, to live a full life. and the physically disabled 662. In the last-

If such an affliction be present at birth, as named group about I50 children were under

it is in the mentally deficient, the handicap 5 years of age, and information about some

is vastly increased, because it is impossible of the cases came from Tuberculosis Insti-

to acquire any store of early impressions of tutes and a Child Welfare Association.

the world of light, of sound, or of learning to Information as to ill-health was given on

assist the imagination in later years. There the random household sample cards.

TABLE V
SOCIAL CLASS OF FAMILIES CONTAINING DEFECTIVE CHILDREN

Percent. of Unskilled Percentage of Fathers recorded as Unskilled in Families with one or more Children

Fathers in RandomI

Sample of Working-

Class Families*

Blind

Deaf M.D. (MW)t M.D. (SS)t Epil. Phys. Def. Sick

40 53 43 43 63 70 55 44

* Since all families containing a sub-normal child must have at least one child, the families in the random sample
were for this purpose also restricted to those containing at least one living child. t The Mental Defectives are divided into two groups, those under the care of a Mental Welfare Association and
those attending Special Schools.

EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE MERSEYSIDE SURVEY

IO9

The result is shown in Table V. In every already been made in this paper, led to

case the percentage of the unskilled fathers the following broad conclusion-I will not

is higher in families with a defective or sick trouble you with the details of the inquiry:

child than among working-class families in "There is a close association between the

general. The excess is large in families with progress an infant makes and the social and

a child who is blind, physically defective, economic status of the family into which it

epileptic, or a higher grade mental defective. happens to be born. In general, the lower

In the other cases the difference, though the status, the less satisfactory the progress

consistent in direction, may be the result of the infant. The impression of this deter-

of random sampling; but, judging from the mining factor is to be found upon the health

table as a whole, it can be accepted as a of the parents, the attention the mother

conservative statement that, the more receives at her confinement and the prospect

children there are born in families of the of the infant being properly fed, if not

unskilled class, the greater is the chance breast-fed, all of which react upon the

that they will be in some respect sub-normal progress made."

or born with a predisposition to sub-

normality. I do not wish to be misunderstood Influence of Parent's Class on Child's Success

here. I am not suggesting that the chance at School

of any of the grosser defects appearing is necessarily a high one. We shall be in a

Although the social status of the parents

better position to say what the chance precisely is when we have discovered how to identify the carriers of defect. What I do
venture to say is that there seems to be a

may tell against the child in infancy, the prospect may possibly grow brighter later in life. For most working-class children education ceases at I4. Some, more favoured

greater chance of sub-normality appearing than others, get scholarships to secondary

in some classes than in others.

schools. Who are these favoured children ? Has the social status of the parent any

Influence ofParent's Class on Infant's Progress

influence here or has the child of the unskilled labourer the same chance as any

But whether the child of the unskilled other child ? One good index of social status

labourer be well-born or ill-born, in the is housing accommodation and Table VI

eugenic sense of the term, can we look throws some light on the position. In this

forward at all hopefully to its future ? That table all the wards of Liverpool are arranged

is the next question to examine. In the first in groups of five, in the order of scholarships

place it is relevant to point out that the gained by pupils in elementary schools

incidence of death, as the earlier tables have within the several wards, taking into account

shown, is definitely higher in this class than the total number of pupils attending such

in others. What of the survivors ? A careful schools in each area. The result is shown in

analysis of records kept over a period of two the second row of the table. In the third row

years of the health and progress of a random the percentage of families found to be over-

sample of infants born in Liverpool in crowded in the same wards in the random

February I930, to which reference has household census is recorded. The closeness

TABLE VI ASSOCIATION BETWEEN HOUSING CONDITIONS AND SUCCESS IN GAINING SCHOLARSHIPS

Wards grouped in order of success I 2 3 4 5 6
Mean No. of Scholarships perl
1,000 pupils ... ... ... II*3 6 2 4*3 3 . 2 2 * 2 I*

78
o 6 o.o

Percent.ofFamiliesovercrowded 4 5 6-4 7'5 9 9 II2 13 2 i9 6 27 8

B

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of the connection between housing condi- division into different social classes on this

tions and success in gaining scholarships is account begins quite early in life, being

striking. How far it is due to the influence decided by the kind of school the child first

of the conditions under which the children enters; but it is worthy of mention that the

in the poorer neighbourhoods are living, exceptional child of poor parents, once he

how far to the poorer intelligence of these gains admission to a secondary school, has

children, and how far to inferior teaching in as fair a chance as the average child of

the schools they attend it is impossible to parents in a better position to make a good

say. My own opinion is that each factor is start in life. An independent inquiry showed

in part responsible. However that may be, that the percentage of boys entering blind-

the net result is that the children of lower alley occupations rose significantly as the

social status find themselves handicapped at father's occupational grade declined, with

this stage again in competition with their the result that two out of every three of the

fellow pupils,- in that fewer of them find sons of unskilled labourers had no settled

their way into secondary schools.

employment to look forward to in the future.

Further, the majority of the boys who were

Influence of Parent's Class on Industrial Career

out of work at the time this inquiry was made were recorded as below the average in
intelligence.

But perhaps this makes no difference when One slender hope remains. Is there any

they begin their real life-work after school. chance for those who start perhaps as

If they are not quick at their books they may errand boys to rise to better positions later ?

be sharper in other ways and able to use In order to discover whether this ever

their hands to better purpose. The results happens, and, if so, to what extent the

of an analysis of a random sample of over general situation is thereby improved, an

I,700 children leaving secondary schools in analysis was made, using the random

the Merseyside area have a bearing upon household material, of the occupations of all

this discussion, for although it is true to say fathers in the sample having sons who were

that only a small proportion of elementary also occupied. Incidentally, this necessarily

school children find their way to secondary restricted the inquiry to sons who were

schools-about I4 per cent. in England and fairly young, some of whom may not have

Wales at the time our inquiry was made- secured permanent work in the sense in

nearly three out of every four children which any such work can be called perma-

admitted to secondary schools are ex- nent. It was discovered that, of all sons

elementary school pupils. Here are some of whose fathers were unskilled workers, about

the conclusions reached. The better the ii per cent. were classed as non-manual

previous examination record, the higher workers and I3 per cent. each as skilled and

the occupational grade entered by the child semi-skilled workers. 'But the net result is

on leaving school; but more than half the less satisfactory than it at first appears;

children sampled had either never entered for, whereas the proportion classed as

or had failed to pass any recognized external unskilled labourers among the fathers was

examination while attending secondary roughly 40 per cent., the proportion so

schools. The record of examinations passed, classed among the sons had risen to 50 per

however, is not only evidence of the mental cent. This increase is explained in part by

ability of the child. It is closely related to the high proportion of the sons of unskilled

the length of stay in school and this is workers who remain in the class into which

largely determined by the social class (or they are born, and in part by'an addition to

occupational grade) of the parent. In short, their number from the ranks of skilled and

the occupational grade of the parent has semi-skilled workers. Thus, although a little

considerable weight in the determination of is gained on the swings, more is lost on the

the occupational grade of the child. The roundabouts.

EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE MERSEYSIDE SURVEY

III

We have sought in vain a way of escape Further, whether their roots are single or

from the conclusion which common sense multiple, associated or otherwise, it is

warned us we might expect. If we continue clearly of the first importance to discover

to people this island increasingly with the which types of disability originate after

offspring of unskilled labourers, it will be conception, being merely the progeny of a

exceptional, not according to rule, if they poor environment, and which necessitate a

turn out to be much above the average of digging farther back if they are to be

their class either at birth or afterwards. eradicated. A third possibility remains:

the seeds of certain defects may be trans-

Are Mental Deficiency and Other Types of mitted from parent to child only as unpleas-

Sub-normality Related?

ant potentialities; they remain quiescent

I should like at this stage to make an unless the soil in which they are planted is

apparent digression by recalling Dr. E. 0. favourable to their appearance. In other

Lewis' discovery that a large proportion of words, it is only by the co-operation of

high-grade defectives are to be found in a heredity and environment that the un-

restricted group of families, which include desired result is produced.

also more than the average number of insane

persons, epileptics, paupers, criminals, un- Frequency of Sub-normality in Certain

employables, slum dwellers, prostitutes, Families and Houses

inebriates, and other social inefficients. Such questions, however, will require long

Later, in evidence submitted to the Brock and detailed research before they can be

Committee, it was reported that at least settled. But, looking at the matter broadly

30 per cent. of the parents of such defectives, from the standpoint of the social student

though not actually certifiable as defective and not that of the medical specialist, Table

themselves, are persons of sub-normal in- VII is not without interest. It shows the

telligence. In other words, to all outward proportion of each of certain defects found

appearance they are indistinguishable from under the same roof or in the same family

the type of parent frequently found in the as one or more of a group of selected defects.

unskilled labouring class which we have For instance, about I5 per cent. of all the

been discussing at such length. Moreover, sub-normal cases investigated were known

figures from the Merseyside Survey have to have a relative also sub-normal in one or

been produced which at least suggest that more of the senses listed in the table. Also,

other defects and disabilities are more likely about one out of every five sub-normal cases

to originate in this same class than in others. was not found alone in the same house;

That leads us to ask how far there may be where, for instance, mental defect occurred,

common factors at work which encourage physical defect, intemperance, destitution,

the appearance of sub-normality. It is or some other sub-normality was not in-

difficult to believe that all such defects as frequently also present. Incidentally, the

we have been considering are quite unrelated high figures under deafness are attributable

and that consequently they present problems to the marked tendency for the deaf to

which must be tackled independently. intermarry.

TABLE VII PERCENTAGE OF DEFECTS OCCURRING MORE THAN ONE TO A FAMILY OR HousE,

Defects occurring
more than one to a Blind

Family

... 13*8

House ... ...i 91

Deaf
39-0
45I

Nature of Defect or Disability

Epil. M.D. Tb. Phys.Def. Im. Cr., Al.* Dest'n.

7.9 I8-4 IO5 20 5

6 8 8*2 4.9 IO6 -

9 2 II 5 1 II

1I8.5 11 2

* The heading here indicates some record of immorality, crime or alcoholism.

All
14.8
19*3

II2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Concentration of Sub-normality in Certain in occupational skill and employability, and

Districts

in families which are below the poverty line

Sub-normality thus frequents certain and frequently dependent on public assist-

families and certain houses; it is natural ance. The question was then raised as to

that we should find it more concentrated whether the increasing swing left resulting

also in some districts than in others. Table from this higher rate of parenthood among

VIII contrasts conditions in two districts of the unskilled than the skilled was necessarily

much the same size, Exchange, one of the to be deplored. If the parents are sub-

inner areas of Liverpool, and Walton, a normal does it follow that the children also

neighbouring area which stretches out to- will be sub-normal?

wards the boundaries of the city. Not only As evidence on this matter figures were

are the rates of defect considerably higher given which indicated that, the more parent-

in Exchange than in Walton, but other hood is confined to the unskilled, the greater

social indices-the proportions of families is the probability that among the offspring

overcrowded, below the poverty line, and in will be children who are sub-normal in

receipt of public assistance-point in pre- physique and intelligence. Those who hold

cisely the same direction. Moreover, the heredity to be of little account may make

more sub-normal district has an exceptionally light of such evidence. Some would fain

high birth-rate coupled, perhaps fortunately, believe that, although all men are not born

with high rates of mortality. As a measure equal, the chance of being well-born is

of the direction in which things are moving, nevertheless much the same in all classes.

and the rate of the movement, it may be But, granted that the unskilled labourer's

added that, if the mean birth-rate for I930 child is, at least potentially, sound of head

to I934 be compared with that in I906 to and strong of limb, can it be assumed that

i910, a short generation ago, it is found that he stands as good a chance as others of

the fall in the Exchange district is only from doing well after birth ? On this point the

34 to 3I per I,000, or I0 per cent., whereas result of investigations during infancy, in

the fall in Walton is from 32 to I4 per I,000, school, on entrance into industry and later

or 56 per cent. This brings us back to the in life were quoted. The impression they

point from which the paper started and it gave was that the children of the unskilled,

may be helpful if I now pick up the thread if they survive at all, are in general handi-

of the argument which holds the tables capped throughout life by the dual influence

together and briefly traverse its course of their heredity and their environment, the

again.

two prime factors which are always so

Summary and Conclusion

difficult to disentangle. A clear dividing line cannot be drawn, for instance, between those

I started by showing that a relatively who suffer a disadvantage on account of poor

high fertility is present among families health and apparent dullness of intelligence,

where the husband and father is sub-normal in part the effect of unsatisfactory home

TABLE VIII LOCALIZATION OF SUB-NORMALITY

District Exchange Walton

(Poopons
75 g9

Birth- Death- Inf.

rate rateMort.

rate rate (ooo's)

Mor

Mean 1930-4

30(6 18-5 I:9 I442 II17 8o

Defects per io,ooo of Population

Percentage of

_

~~~~~~~~~~Families
~I~m~.~, |I ~ ~~~I~nIm.,BBeolo_w Over-

B., D. E., M. Tb. Def., Cr., Des. Rect. Pov. crowd-

Al. of P.A. Line ed

24 30 II 6.6 40 26 33 29 15 15 5.5 21I 7.3 3 2 9 3 4 8

EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE MERSEYSIDE SURVEY

II3

conditions and lack of proper education, and the eugenically well-endowed and by the

those who can be certified as definitely discouragement of so high a rate among the

defective at birth. In this connection it was eugenically inferior-we are inevitably piling

pointed out-and the fact is not without up for ourselves trouble in time to come.

significance-that higher-grade mental defec- We may, with an equanimity for which I

tives are- known to be largely recruited from believe there is little justification, shut our

-a class which is sub-normal in intelligence eyes to the risk we run of increasing the

and which is the chief source of other sub- number of those who are definitely sub-

normalities; and tables were submitted normal in mind or body at birth; but we

suggesting the existence of common influ- can hardly escape the fear that the propor-

ences linking together the various groups tion of young people brought up under sub-

which, if not sub-normal, might be described normal conditions is steadily growing.

as on the border-land of sub-normality. Something may be done to stay the tide by

Finally, two districts were contrasted to the provision of improved education, sub-

illustrate and further emphasize the inti- sidized houses, free maintenance and school

mate interaction between environment and meals, and other forms of public assistance

heredity in the production of sub-normal in money or kind. It will be difficult, how-

conditions.

ever, notwithstanding all our social services,

If it may be assumed that the picture to prevent a decline in the average level of

drawn is as true in some degree of other parts physique, intelligence and culture of the

of the country as it is of Merseyside, it must nation. Its arrest, in so far as it is arrested,

follow that, unless the present differential is accounted for by our ever-expanding

class fertility can be reversed-r-by the social heritage-each generation begins to

encouragement of a higher birth-rate among build where the last left off.

Important to Students of Eugenics, Sociology, Sex-Education, etc.
MARRIAGE HYGIENE
a Quarterly journal published in August, November, February and May
Editor-in-Chief: A. P. PILLAY, O.B.E., M.B., B.S.), Editor for England: E. F. GRIFFITH, M.R.C.S.
Subscription: I8S. per annum, post free
Single Numbers: 4S. 6d. net, postage 4d.
London Agents: H. K. LEWIS & Co. Ltd.,
136 Gower Street, W.C.1

iLEWISS
MEDICAL & SCIENTIFIC
LENDING LIBRARY
Annual Subscription: from One Guinea
Prospectus on application
BOOKSELLING DEPARTMENT: LScairegnecesst,oicnkcolfudbionogk"s EoUnGMEedNiIcCinSe,a"ndetAcl.lied
Cog on aplcton H. K. LEWIS & Co. Ltd., 136 Gower Street,
W.C.1
Eugenics Review,Voi. XXYU No. 2.

