The Reduction of the Birth Rate as a Necessary
Instrument for the Improvement of the Race.
BY Alr. HAIROLD Cox, M.A.
The Eugenics Education Society is one of the few societies in this or any country that deliberately sets out to consider the well-being of future generations. We nearly all of us tend, especially when acting collectively, to think only of the present, of its interests, of its fancies, of its passions. And when we take action on ideas thus formed we may easily do infinite mischief to those who come after us. Whereas if we had looked further ahead we might perhaps have fully reconciled our passing interests with the more enduring interests of future generations. As its name implies, the Eugenics Education Societv is specially concerned with the inmprovenment of the race throuigh good breeding. That this is a tremendouslv important aspect of the problemn of population everyone is bound to admit. But it is not the only aspect that has to be considered. Even the most whele-hearted eugenist will assent to the proposition that parenthood is not the onlv factor in the
production of a fine race, whetber of plants or of animals or of human
beings. The offspring of ideal parents may be brought up in such conditions that they are unable to develop the qualities implanted in them, and may grow up weak in body and mind. Should they also
produce children, it is at least possible that they will pass on not in-
herited strength, but acquired weakness. Reciprocally, the children of unpromising parents may, if they are fortunate enough to be brought up under specially good conditions, greatly surpass their fathers and mothers in physical and mental qualities. Indeed except on this hypothesis it is hard to explain how the human race could have succeeded in lifting itself out of primitive savagery. I need not however elaborate the point, for I am sure that everyone here will agree with me that however important good parentage may be, good environment is also a necessary condition of racial progress.
At present a very large part of our population has the advantage neither of good parentage nor of gcod environment. During the war, and for some nmonths after it, public opinion was much concerned about the extent of our C3 population, as revealed by the army examinations of potential recruits. The only novelty in these revelations was their magnitude. For nmany years past the armny medical officers have found it necessarv to reject a very large percentage of would-be recruits. Dr. Brend in his striking book "Health and the State" (Constable & Co. 1917) quotes the figures of recruits rejected in the year ending Sept. 30, 1912. The total number examnined was 47,000, and223 out of every thousand were rejected.
The evidence collected by the military auithorities during the war

84 EUGENICS REVIEW.
necessarily covered a much wider area. In the year ending Nov. 1st, 1918, the last year of the war, no fewer than 2,425,000 men were examined. The army medical authorities were naturally anxious to pass every man they could, yet they reported that only 36 per cent. were fit to be included in Grade I comprising "those who attain the full normal standard of health and strength. " Another 23 per cent. were
moderately good, but as many as 31 per cent. were only fit for clerical or sedentary labour, and 10 per cent. were "totally and permanently
unfit for any form of military service." Doubtless these bad figures were partlv due to the previouis enlistment of a large proportion of the best men of the nation. Nevertheless it remains significant that out of nearlv two-and-a-half million men examined, not much more than a third were found to have attained the "ftull normal standard of health and strength." Since the war we have returned to voluntary recruiting. In the year ending Sept. 25th, 1920, the number of men offering themselves for enlistment was 120 ,000. and nearly a third were rejected for physical reasons.
These figuires are sufficient to show what a lono way our population is removed from a high standard of physical fitness. As to its mental fitness no similar record is by anv nteans attainable; but incidentally the ariy does throw some light also on this problem. If anyone will
watch a regiment of troops marching through the streets, he will hardly fail to notice that the officers' faces are on the average finer cui and more intellectual in appearance than the face of the men
who follow. The contrast is so striking that it cannot be mnisunderstood. It can only mean that the officers belong to a higher mental type than the rank and file.
This contrast is not confined to the army; it runs through our social life. We have in fact developed a small minority of men of an undoubtedly good physical and menta-l type. Their existence shows what racial possibilities lie before us. But neither in mind nor in body has the large majority of our population yet attained to the standards which are evidently within the capacity of our race.
I contend that it is impossible appreciably to raise the physical and intellectual standards of the mass of our people so long as the present conditions of life continue, and I further contend that the only practicable method of greatly improving present conditions is to reduce the population.
The way in which an excessive population lowers the standard of life in purely agricultural communities is obvious to everyone. The resources of the soil are limited. We can, it is true, in certain cases by improved methods of cultivation make two blades of grass grow where one grew before, but we cannot continue that process indefinitely. Very soon a point is reached where the additional yield in response to still more intensive cultivation is only an extra half blade, and then perhaps only an extra tenth, and after a time no additional yield at all, perhaps even a retrogression. And if the people who live on that land continue to multiply they will presently find that there is not enough food for all of them; some stomachs will be only half filled, a lower standard of life will result, and the ensuing high death rate will begin to balance the birth rate.

THE REDUCTION OF THE BIRTH RATE.

85

Throughout the East this process is in constant evidence. At the bidding of religion or as the result of mere recklessness, the peasant
poptulations of India and China produce children without regard to the available means of maintenance. As a result the masses are condemned to exist ever on the verge of starvation. Their fate would be even worse than it is, but for the cruel kindness of Nature who cuts off in
infancy the children who ought never to have been born. In these
dense peasant populations roughly one in four of the children born die
before they are twelve months old. When the harvests fail and famine comes, Nature's cruel kindness is aided by the parents themselves, who kill their children to save them from further suffering.
In England the relationship between the means of subsistence and the volume of the population is less easily visible. More than half of
our food is drawn from countries across the water, countries which most of us have never seen and which we vaguely imagine to have an
unlimited capacity and willingness to supply us with all the food we want. Perhaps they have the capacity, so far as acreage goes, but
we shall not get that food unless we can in exchange provide'the people
of those countries with something which they want and at a lower price than they can buy it elsewhere. During the greater part of the
nineteenth century we were able to do this successfully. England was the first country to, develop steam machinery, and as a result we were able to win markets all over the world fcr our manufactured goods. But what then amounted almost to an industrial monopoly has now passed from us. Other couintries have learnt to use the machines which we invented and to practise the manufacturing arts which we developed. Moreorver the peculiar advantage which we enjoyed for many years in the possession of cheaper sources of power than our foreign competitors is no longer ours. Not only are foreign countries now working coal seams of their own, or alternatively utilising the advantages they possess in the natural supply of water power, but our own supply of cheap fuel is failing. It is failing for two reasons, first because in many cases we are compelled to work deeper seams than a generation ago, and secondly because our coal miners refuse to be satisfied with the low wages for which their fathers worked. The miners want a higher standard of life; they want shorter hours of labour and they want larger weekly pay bills. These demands may be fully justified from the miners' point of view, but they are absolutely inconsistent with the maintenance of a large population in this little island. Cheap coal is essential not only to our manufacturing industries, but also to our shipping industry. Unless we can continue to produce large quantities of coal at a low price we must curtail many of our manufacturing and shipping activities, and in addition our poorer classes will have to curtail their domestic comforts. In other words either the miners must content themselves with a low standard of life, or our national industries dependent upon cheap coal must be cut down.
Similar considerations arise in every other important industry. Largelv as the result of the war, which temporarily created an unlimited demand for mere muscle, manual workers throughout the country have formned the idea that they ought no longer to be content with the low standard of life which they previously accepted. I think

se UEUGENICS REVIEW.
thev are right, not only fronm their own point of view, but also from the point of view of the ultimate well-being of the nation. But few of them have yet realised the necessary consequences of their new ideals. Our population, I repeat, is dependent upon the maintenance of an immense overseas trade; that trade has to be carried on in competition with all the world, and therefore can only be maintained if we sell more cheaply than our rivals. They can purchase practically all the mechanical advantages which we possess , and except in a few special industries their skill is not appreciably less than ours. It is onlv bv reducing the cost of labour that we can hope to retain a large export trade. In other words if we are to find employment in this country for a large popuilation the bulk of otur people will have to be content with a low standard of life.
Moreover the problem, which is sufficiently serious to-day, tenlds to get rapidly more serious. For judging by the figures of 1921, the excess of births over deaths in England and Wales alone is now well over 1000 a day. Each day our little countrv is being called Uponi to provide food and shelter and clothing for a thousand new persons. It can noly be done by a further expansion of trade, and that is impossible without a reduction of labour costs, which must mean, if the populhLion continues to grow, a progressive reduction of the general standard of living.
That seems to me an appalling prospect and absolutely at variance with our national traditions and our true national ideals. The rapid growth of population of England and Wales is quite a modern pheno-
menon. During many centuries our popuilation was almost stationary
vet some of those centuries will stand out for all time in the history of England. It was only towards the end of the eighteenth century that our population began rapidly to expand . It was then, according to present standards, extremely small. At the beginning of the nineteenth century the total population of England and Wales was still under 9,000,000; in 1921 it was very nearly 38,000,000, a more than fourfold increase in 120 years. I believe we should be a stronger as well as a happier nation if we cotuld halve our present figures.
This however is certain, that we cannot secure a general high standard of comfort unless we reduce our numbers. If we attempt to maintain a large population in this country with its lirmited natural resources the bulk of that population will have to work very hard and to live verv meagrely, in order to meet the competition of rivals who have now caught up the industrial start which we enjoved for nearly a century.
That is the problem of population as its presents itself to the whole nation. The same problem faces every individual family much in the same manner. An income that would suffice to maintain a small family in an adequate standard of comfort would mean poverty to a large family. This elementary truth is fully appreciated by our tipper and middle classes; it is also appreciated by the more intelligent and more thoughtful members of the artisan class and by agricultural labourers in many counties. In all these classes, either marriage is postponed till the prospective parents are in possession of a sufficient
income to bring uip a family under decent conditions of life, or the young couple marry and take measures to avoid having children.

THE REDUCTION OF THE BIRTH RATE.

87

The practice of consciouis birth control in this country may he said to date from abouit the year 1876. for in that year we had the highest birth rate on record, and in that year also Charles Bradlauigh and Annie
Besant started a movement for the dissemination of knowledge oif the
metho(is of preventing conception. At anyv rate since that date there had
been an almost continuous decline in the birth rate, and this was
emphasized during the war. Even in 1920, when we had what may
be called a post-war boom in marriage and maternity, the birth rate
was only 25 per thousand as compared with 36 per thousand in the
record year of 1876. It inust not however be assumed that there was a
corresponding decline in the actual number of births, for the lower rate was takeni over a larger volume. There were actually 70,000 more
births in 1920 than in 1876. In 1921 there was a further fall in the
birth rate, but, broadlv speaking, the low birth rates of to-day are
producing as many childrein per annum as the high rates of a generation
ago. But these children are spread over a larger number of families;
consequently they are able to receive rnore parental care and are brought up in greater comfort. As a result the rate of mortality and especially
of infantile mnortalitv has been greatly reduced.
On the connection between a low birth rate and low infantile
mortality there is a wealth of statistical evidence from almost every country in the world. It will here suffice if I refer to some figures which were laid before the Birth Rate Commission by Dr. Stevenson,
Superintendent of Statistics at the General Register Office. These figures show the relative fertility and the relative infantile mortality in different classes of the conimunity in England and Wales. One striking comparison drawni is between unskilled workmeni on the one hand and the upper and middle classes onl the other. The fertility *of the unskilled worknmen class is very nearly double that of the upper and middle classes; the infantile mortality is exactly double. Taking
particular classes it is initeresting to compare clergymen of the Church of England, who have long abandonied tl-e practice of having large families, with dock labourers, who still maintain the practice. The dock labourers prodtuce two childreni and a third of a child for every
one child produced by an equal number of clergymen; but the infantile mortality in the dock labouirer's familv is three and a half times as great as in the clergyman's family. And yet the bishops condemn
birth control!
Nor is it only in the first twelve months of life that the death dealing results of a high birth rate are visible. Among the poorer classes it is impossible for large families to be brought up under conditions which will ensure to the children a fair chance of reaching manhood. Even if born healthy--and many of the babies in the poorest
classes are born with apparently excellent physique-they fail to acquire strength and either die young or grow up to be weaklings. Investigations into the prevalence of tuberculosis made by an American physician, Dr. Knopf, in 1916, bring out the interesting fact that in large families the later born children are more liable to this disease and to other diseases than the earlier bom. The explanation is obvious. The mother is weakened by rapidly repeated pregnancies; her power to -take care of her children is lessened as the number grows, and the

88 EUGENICS REVIEW.
family income rarely expands to meet the increasing number of mouths dependent upon it.
These considerations by themselves suffice to condemn the big families that are still common among the poorer classes in our large towns. In addition we have to realise that a very large proportion of our urban population is living under conditions which render almost impossible the rearing of healthy children. Take for example the description given of the slum districts of Birmingham in the report of the Ministry of National Service for 1917-18:
"In parts of Birmingham there are not only too many houses per acre without open spaces, but the houses are badly arrangedhuddled together in obscure unventilated courts, where the sun scarcely penetrates, and in which it is impossible to obtain fresh air. The houises in themselves, damp and dirty, are made worse by insanitary conveniences ventilating into them. The filth of years is stored between the floors and ceilings, ready to take advantage of the many cracks to spread all sorts of disease.' The report goes on: "It is stated that the death rate in such 'black spots' is from 70 to 100 per cent. higher than that of other working class districts in the city. In this connection it is worth note that during a very hot summer some years ago the irfantile mortality rate in some of the principal quarters of the city was almost 500 per 1000. "
It may be argued that these slums ought to be swept away and replaced by decent houses, or alternatively that the population should be moved to garden cities. But how is it to be done? Three years ago, when the mental balance of everybody was still upset by the strain of the great war, our politicians launched a gigantic scheme for building houses for the poorer classes at the expense of the State. The whole scheme has now been thrown upon the scrap heap, after involving the national exchequer in a loss of 210,000,000, a year, which will continue for 60 years. Yet the number of houses built is insignificant compared with the needs of our present population.
It is in fact economically impossible to provide enough good houses for all the people in England and Wales who are badly housed. To undertake even a quarter of the work that is needed would involve a charge upon the taxpayer that would ruin many of our industries and would drive abroad people who were able to transfer their capital to other countries. The result would be an intensification of the evil of poverty, which itself is the main cause of the low standard of life among such a large proportion of our population. This delusive remedy miust therefore be rejected. What remains?-The very obvious altemative that, instead of trying to produce enough new houses to provide comfortable accommodation for an unlimited supplv of children, we should encourage the dwellers in these insanitarv slums to refrain from producing more children.
After all, is that an unreasonable proposition? In the middle and upper classes meni and women assume as a matter of course that they have no right to bring children into the world except under conditions which will give those children a fair chance of healthy life. Why should the poorer classes be assumed to have the right to claim exemption from

THE REDUCTION OF THE BIRTH RATE.

8

this moral obligation? A man has no right merely because he is poor to inflict upon his wife the needless suffering of bringing into the world a child that is doomed to die before it has ceased to be a child. Nor has a man, merely because he is poor, the right to saddle his fellow citizens with the cost of maintaining children of his that nobody wants-not
even their own mother. These elementary considerations would be instantly realised by
everybody if, instead of living under the inequalities of circumstance that necessarily result from the institution of private property, we were all brought to one dead level of economic status by the establishment of communism. It would then become apparent that only those people must be allowed to breed whose offspring were likely to be of service to the State. The control of parenthood is one of the first duties that a communistic society finds itself compelled to undertake. In the numerous communistic societies that sprang into being in the United States in the middle of last century this problem was faced without hesitation. In all of these societies, except one, rigid celibacy was imposed upon the members of the society; the societies were recruited solely from the outside world. In the one societv-the Perfectionistswhich permitted intercourse between the sexes, the governing body selected couples whom it considered best fitted to add new members to the society, and these alone were allowed to produce children. It will be remembered that more than two thousand years ago Plato in sketching his ideal republic insisted on the importance of breeding only from the best stock, and advocated abortion and infanticide as necessary measures to prevent the multiplication of the unfit. If we were ever to abandon, as the socialists desire, the system of private property and individual liberty upon which our present civilisation is based, -the socialist legislature would find itself compelled within a very brief period to pass drastic laws to limit the population.
The need for limitation springs in fact not from any defects in our social organisation-numerous as they may be-but from the economic and physical impossibility of maintaining an unlimited population on a limited area. It is sufficient to point out that if we were to maintain in this country the rate of increase recorded for the decade ended 1911 the population of England and Wales alone would in 360 years largely exceed the present population of the whole globe.
Of course it will not continue to increase at that rate. Nature if necessary will take care of that. But her methods are unpleasant. She corrects a high birth rate by creating a higher death rate, and incidentally she lowers the standard of life for most of those whom she permits to survive. Her processes can be observed in any garden patch.
If seeds are sown too thickly the resulting plants are stunted in growth and onlv a few survive. Space and good nourishment are as much needed for the production of fine human beings as for the production of fine flowers and with human beings as with flowers the only finally effective means of improving the type is to limit the numbers.
Some people imagine that the present problem of over-crowding in England can be met by organising vast schemes of emigration to the untenanted areas of our oversea empire. Anyone who will look at the facts will see that the thing is impossible. One of the latest Australian

90 90EUGHENICS R EVIE W.

schemes for empire settlement provides for the raising of a loan of

f£o,1r20t0he0p,u00r0poisne

three annual instalments by the
of establishing British farmers

Victorian Government on irrigation farms in

Victoria. It is estimated that with this sum of money ten thousand

farmers can be moved from Great Britain and established in Australia

familyin the course of three years. Suppose that each British farmer who is

enlisted under this scheme represents a

of five. The total num-

ber of persons moved would then be 50,000. But as I pointed out just

now the excess of births over deaths in England and Wales alone is

£12,000,000over 1000 a dav. So that the expenditure of

spread over

three years would merely cover the normal increase in our population

for about seven weeks. Obviously such schemes as these can do

nothing to reduce our present excessive population; they will not even

appeciably diminish its continued rapid expansion. Moreover it is not

farmers that we want to remove from this country. We have not many

undermmiolrleiotnhsanthaoturarhneeeerddserdeqtuoirgee.therThien

people that we our great towns,

an spare living

are the con-

ditions that forbid the development of a healthy life. Their numbers

are
urbaning

eovrersitnactrieoansairnyg.,

while the population of our rural In the last thirty years the

districts is declinpopulation of

urban3tE0hn,eg0lp0ar0ne7sd0e0an0tn;dmmoWeamalenenwshtii8ln0ecrpeteahrseecdreufnrtra.olmofpjouosputurluapntodipeournla2t1sli,io0gn0h0t,ils0y0l0idveitcnolgijnuiesndt.

over At

districts, dependent for a livelihood on urban industries, and these

industries are
grasp. That

dependent on is the problem

fwohriecighnImbaergkaentsbv

Therethat is the problem to which I come back.

that are slipping from our
wavpointing out to you, and is no of dealing

with it effectivelv except by a reduction of the birth rate.

controlThat the results of voluntary birth

have so far been felt

conmmunityonly in the better classes of the

is true, and if the practice

of birth control were confined to those classes I admit that the effects

would tend to be dysgenic by reducing the proportion of well-born

children in the nation and increasing the proportion of the ill-born.

But birth control need not remain dysgenic. If we are to secure any

appreciable mitigation of the evils, economic, social and physical,

adoptedproduced by the over-crowding of our country, it is essential that the

practice of birth control should be

by the whole of the popula-

abletttiiiononun.eoftoaTnhpiermroaedluicsiennscothirinecltadssr.oennmweHhruyemlaaynnyasbseteichntegiasocnicnoifdeetvnheterayloucrrleaspsueslotopuolgfehtsthhetoousalbtdeiscfoanc--

tctiontreilsleigaebnotvceontshiadteraantiimoanl

standard, and regulate their families by an
of the means which will be available for the

rearing of healthy children. It may be answered that at present some

sections of our population are not morally or mentally capable of this

amount of forethought. That may be so, but at least the nation might

abstain from encouraging their carelessness by relieving them of

financial responsibility for their conduct. In recent years instead of

siunfsfiesrtinignctohnavtenpiaerennctes

must provide for
and dishonour if

the wants
they fail

of to

their do

children, or so, we have

organised a system by which self-supporting and self-respecting

parents are taxed in order to maintain the unwanted children of the im-

THE REDUCTION OF THE BIRTH RATE.

91

provident classes. In acting thus the State gives a premium to
animal carelessness and lays a penalty on human prudence. I believe
this process is called "social reform."
If it be asked how the whole of the population is to be induced to foll1w the example set by the more prudent classes I answer that the first requisite is the wide dissemination of the necessary knowledge. I
have been permitted to see many of the letters received by tte
Malthusian League from poor parents in different parts of the country. These letters show how eagerly knowledge is souight and how widely the need for it is felt. One man writes:-"'We are very anxious to limit our family andc not only us but a great many of our friends, but it is getting the informiation as regards the methods that is the trouble." Another man writes to say that he is in poor circumstances and his wife is consumptive. He begs for informnation, "as we have no desire to bring suffering children into the world." A woman writes to say "I am about ten years married and have four of a family, and find it hard enough to maintain thenm as my husband is only a labourer, and if he could have prevented it we should have been content with only two. "
These are samples of thousands of letters that the Malthusian League receives. If its operations, or the operations of similar bodies, could be extenided a considerable part of the problem would
solve itself.
In addition it is desirable that the knowledge of how to prevent conception should be presented to persons, and especially to women, who have not the energy to write and ask for it. This could be easily done through the agency of the maternity centres which have been established in most of our large townis. Women come to these clinics for advice in all matters connected with maternity. Many of them pitifully ask for information as to how to prevent future pregnancies. But I amn informed that the persons who manage these clinics are afraid to give this information, even in the case of women suffering from disease, for fear that the Ministry of Health should take away the grant allotted to the clinic. I do not know whether there is any real ground for this fear. If so, I can only say that it appears to me extraordinary that a government department which professes to have for its special ainm the improvement of the health of the nation should in effect be encouraging unhealthy parents to multiply their offspring. It ought to be one of the recognised duties of every maternity centre to teach the women who take advantage of these State-aided institutions the best means of preventing the production of unwanted children. Only a verv small minority of women would refuse to take advantage of that knowledge. No woman wants to have a rapid succession of pregnancies, and to grow old before her time by being forced to give birth to children she does not want. The woman's interest in the matter is so direct and keen that the immense majority, even in the poorest. classes could be relied upon to take steps to limit their families if provided with the necessary information. In this way the danger of birth control proving dysgenie can be effectively obviated.
There remains one special problem of racial improvement with which we in this country have not yet had the courage to deal, though much has been done in the United States, namely, the problem of how to

92 EUGXZNICS REVIIMT.
prevent the multiplication of the feeble-minded. In earlier generations
mentally defective persons were treated with scant consideration and often with sheer barbaritv. As a result they died early. To-day an immense amount of public and private monev is spent in keeping them alive and making them comfortable. We even spend large sums of money on the literarv education of feeble-minded children. People who are engaged in the care of the feeble-minded, and who devote their lives to this work with an enthusiasm which is admirable to witness, will confess frankly that it is wasted effort, and declare that the only reallv satisfactory treatment for most of the feeble-minded would be to send them to a lethal chamber. That is an impossible solution of the problem. In practice even those who by long experience are most convinced of the futility of preserving the lives of mentally defeCtive persons would shrink from deciding to bring those lives forciblv to an end. But while the sentiment of kindliness rightly compels tus to keep these uinfortuinates alive, nothing justifies the nation in permitting them to pass on their defects to another generation. The Americans have realised this and in many States laws have been passed authorising the compulsory sterilisation of the feeble-minded. In some States, as
often happens in America, these laws remain a dead letter on the Statute Book; in others they have been put into operation, but I am informed that compuilsion has rarely bcen resorted to. If the person has too little intelligence to understand the meaning of the proposed operation, his or her relatives are censulted before it is done. Altogether several thousand operations of this character have been performed in the United States, on children and on adults. Both for men and women the operation is very simple and recoverv is rapid; in the case of men the general health is actually improved. This is a matter
to which immediate attention ought to be given in this country. At
present the percentage of mental defectives in our populcrtion is markedly increasing. Feeble-minded girls are easily seduced; they go t the workhouse for their confinement; after a few months they are discharged, and within a year they are back again to be delivered of another baby. To keep them imprisoned for life would be cruelly unjust, for often they are quite harmless. The obvious remedy is to render them incapable of procreation. And the same consideration applies to feeble-minded men. Here again I may remark on the curious fact that though we have a Ministry of Health in this country, spending over £20,000,000 a year of public money, it has not even touched this
problem. In conclusion may I insist once more on the duty that we of this
generation owe to posterity. OaLr individual span of life is short; the world is ours only for a tiny scrap of its long historv. But our race goes on, and out of gratitude for the many good things we have inherited from the past, it is our duty to improve the inheritance of the future.

