WARNINGS FROM NATURE
Or Seven Red Flats from Biology
(The Galton Lecture, 1931.)

By PROFESSOR SIR J. ARTHUR THOMSON, M.A., LL.D. (Edin.; McGill; et Calif.)

G ALTON has told us that his domi- preoccupation with heredity, for thus we

nant impression on reading The understand better why he laid so much

Origin of Species was a feeling of emphasis on one side of the biological

freedom. This liberation, acting like a prism-the inborn qualities of the organ-

ferment on his own genius, led him to think ism-and relatively little on the influence of

of applying evolutionist principles to human environment or on the modifications due to

evolution-and this became the ruling idea functioning. He was, of course, far too

of his many-sided life. If man can breed shrewd not to recognize that Place and Work

stock, he said, why should he not learn to are potent factors in life, as well as the

breed himself? Why, with all his know- Inheritance of the Folk, to shift from bio-

ledge should he not breed better, and why logical to sociological terms; but he was per-

should he not cease mixing good seed with suaded that what counted for most in the

bad? Galton was a pioneer in the applica- long run, was what was inbred in the bone

tion of the idea, still only dawning, that one and imbued in the blood. Thus in his ideal

of the surest lines of progress is to apply for mankind what stood out most promi-

science in general, and biology in particular, nently was an improved breed-eugenics-

to the practical problems of human life. and thus the application of biology that he

On a different path, but imbued with the most believed in was based on a study of

same idea, was Pasteur, who had the vision human heredity.

of Homo sapiens not only as an evolved, but In a fine passage in the third volume of

as an evolving species, whose health could the great Life, for the completion of which

be improved, whose kingdom could be the biographer deserves our hearty con-

extended by the application of biology- gratulations, Karl Pearson speaks of the

more biology. Galton and Pasteur were to way in which Galton's thought and work

Darwin as works to faith.

were unified and inspired from I864 to I9II

A fine outcome of a distinguished lineage, Francis Galton naturally thought much of heredity; and, as everyone knows, he was one of the first to realize the potency of

by the aim of studying human heredity so as to control the evolution of racial qualities; and he sums up Galton's hope for man in the graphic sentence: " to tame by science

statistics as an organon in studying the racial mass-changes in man, thus laying

the nescient waywardness that lays waste his stock."

one of the foundation-stones not only of genetics, but of sociology. It is also to be

There will be general agreement, especially in an audience and on an occasion

remembered that independently of Weismann, Galton enunciated the idea of the continuity of the germplasm, which explains why like begets like, and proclaimed scepticism as to the transmission of acquired characters or modifications. We should remember Galton's natural and acquired

such as this, that Galton's lifework was of high importance in the history of science, and that it will be appraised more and more highly as its significance for civilization is even more actively appreciated; but it is a mistaken homage to speak as if this pioneer was able to take a perfectly balanced and

7

8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

perfectly synoptic view of the problems of tionary contrast as floral and vegetative),

human evolution. Thus we deem it no dis- from the foxes and birds (even from their

loyalty to express our judgment that Galton eugamics)? For hundreds of millions of

did not adequately take account of the in- vears there have been experiments with life,

fluences of environmental and functional novelties far more original and daring than

nurture, both biological and psychological; any ingenuity of the eugenics laboratories-

that he looked for guidance too exclusively all honour to these none the less. Would

to the study of human heredity; that he did you then argue from mice to men, we are

not sufficiently appreciate the ethical factor, asked; and we answer that it may be more

which he deliberately ruled out of court; and fallacious to leave out animals altogether.

that he did not allow enough for society and Man, so often maimed in the struggle for

the science thereof.

existence, so often the worse as well as the

A BROAD BASIS FOR EUGENICS

better of his society, has he nothing to learn from the exuberant positive health charac-

The years pass and the scientific survey teristic of animals, from their almost univer-

becomes more and more all round or synoptic. sal beauty, from their courage and affection

Thus, if eugenics means the application of and joie de vivre?

biological certainties to the control of man's Galton seldom referred to animals as of

hereditary qualities, we are bound to ask any significance in eugenics; and yet in

how many of these biological certainties are addition to their practical suggestiveness,

being given the consideration they deserve. we have even as students of heredity to recog-

Heredity is most important, because most nize pre-human strands, for good and ill, that

relevant; but it is only for the analytic pur- enter into the fabric of human life, for Man

poses of investigation that it can be con- cannot be thought of as a mental and moral-

sidered by itself. Environment and function still less protoplasmic-Melchisedec " with-

are potent factors in development and to out descent."

some extent in evolution. Selection is a So in our tribute to the founder of euge-

subtler evolution-factor than even Galton nics, we venture in this address to turn our

knew, as Dr. Fisher has recently been show- face to the animal kingdom, and since he

ing. The psychological and sociological included in the scope of his study the

aspects have a eugenic importance not yet agencies that impair our racial qualities, we

sufficiently appreciated. And how can we are restricting our attention to the warnings

leave ethical qualities out of consideration -the red flags-that we find here and there

because they are so relative, when even the in the varied field of animal life. Eugenics

cattle-breeders are careful to take account of means biology applied towards a particular

the moral qualities of their cows!

end; we have not nearly finished our biology

But my purpose here and now is to show yet; and we cannot finish even the relevant

that the tactics of eugenics are gratuitously parts of it if we confine our attention to our

wveakened if the suggestiveness of Animate own species.

Nature is ignored. Man has been on the

stage for perhaps half a million years-what EXTREME DIVISION OF LABOUR

a short Jehovan day- compared with the five i.-From among the red flags for eugen-

hundred million years or more since the ists I shall select seven, and first of all the

Drama of Life began ! Man is at present risk of carrying division of labour too far. In

the climax of evolution, head and shoulders the underground nests of the Honey-ants

above the creation with which he is solidarv, (Myrmecocystus), frequenting the Garden

an emergent mutation with a distinctively of the Gods in Colorado, there is a specia-

new note that made all things new; but has lization of workers to become animated

he not something to learn from the gamut honey-pots-not so animated either, for they

of Orzanic Life-from the lilies and the hailg motionless by their clenched claws to

grasses (even from their meaningful evolu- the rough rafters, month after month; and

WARNINGS FROM NATURE

9

if they tumble off they cannot get up again. They look a little like white currants with their swollen crops, and there may be three hundred on the roof of one nest. They are technically called ' rotunds ' or ' repletes,' and Professor WV. M. Wheeler has succeeded in making them by feeding callow workers with maple sugar. Some details are very interesting. The repletes begin as normal young workers and they have to begin young; they are fed by their sisters, who collect a sweet exudation from certain oakgalls; the store of food is not utilized by the honey-pots themselves, for it does not go past the crop; there are many different kinds and the habit is an adaptation to dry countries where long periods of scarcity have to be faced. The living bags regurgitate their sweetness to all applicants who are fellowmembers of the communitv. They have been called " reservoirs of temperamental as well as liquid sweetness," but nothing is known of their psychological aspects, except that they behave amiably. They are red flags telling the eugenist that no degree of good breeding will counteract extremes of division of labour. It is perhaps better to be a plebeian than a replete.
SOCIETY OFTEN A DANGEROUS SHIELD
2.-The second red flag is the danger of the society shield in permitting exaggerations which would be impracticable in more individualistic conditions-an idea familiar to readers of Dr. Trotter's Instincts of the Herd. There are many new departures or variations of a desirable type which have
more chance to survive under the regis of a society-artists and poets and mathematicians, for instance-but on the other hand the social shelter may work detrimentally by securing not only the survival, but the multiplication of biologically undesirable types. This danger is familiar to the naturalist, and the red flags recall the notice often seen on the modernly moralized highway: " You have been warned."
Under the eais of a society many exaggerations flourish. Think of the short life of the summer bee, almost maniacally industrious, wearing out its brain with unre-

cuperated fatigue, as has been proved up to the hilt. The worker-bee's cerebral nervecells go steadily out of gear, and in six weeks or so it is usually all over with the busy bee. What socially-sheltered exaggeration one sees in the big-jawed soldier termites, who are very effective in warfare, yet have to be spoon-fed by the workers! They have very small brains and their compound eyes are vestigial. There is also the caste of small-jawed na.suti, who eject from the front of their heads a colourless liquid which entangles the feelers and limbs of their enemies, and sometimes paralyzes them like poison-gas. Neither big-jawed nor smalljawed soldiers can forage or even chew their food; neither could live for a week outside society. Nor could the members of a masterspecies of ants who have to be mouth-fed by their slaves. Exaggerations these, viable only under the oegis of a society. How the red flags wave!
STRANGLING THE INDIVIDUAL
3.-One of Galton's great services is condensed in his contrast of phrase between
man's " natural inheritance," carried in the germplasm, and the " social heritage" enregistered in the society's institutions and laws, traditions and customs, literature and art. Part of the importance of the contrast is that it puts its finger on one of the differentiating features of the sociological as transcending the biological. But the social heritage, without wrhich man is unthinkable, is not wholly on the plus side. It is taxed, often heavily, as we have just illustrated by referring to the exaggerations which it may tolerate. But another tax is that the social heritage may enmesh the individual, so that his personal development is hindered. The traditions, the institutions, the organization
continuing from the past, may handicap, even shackle, the individual's progress. In short, the hand of the past, so steadying and beneficent, is sometimes strangling.
WATe ourselves are partly in the net of the feudal svstem, still more in that of the paleotechnic or early industrial age, and
there are many other nets. But we cannot sav that we have not been warned, for in

Io THE EUGENICS REVIEW

animal societies the red flags are sometimes workers have better brains than the queen,

conspicuous, as in a few species of ants but these brains die away from over-fatigue,

that have become dependent on slaves or and the attractive " Robots " pass off the

auxiliaries, often in a huge majority. In stage. Behold the busy bee, certainly not

unpropitious weather, when food is scarce, improved by every shining hour. We shud-

the slaves may be much troubled by their der when non-biological social reformers

master's demands for regurgitation and by refer to the human hive. Heaven help us

other taxes on their temper. The impulse from going to the bees or to the ants!

to revolt must be strong, yet in most cases

the social conventions under which they have SEX-AND HYPER-MATERNITY

grown up are too powerful for them; and 4.-It is characteristic of the animal world

though they could easily break their chains, that there is very little pathology of sex-

they rarely try. No doubt there are records except where man has disturbed the natural

of occasional revolts-Forel gives a fine regime by domestication, as in the case of

description of one-but they seem to be very dogs. In many cases the sex urge is severely

rare. The social organization is too strong periodic; in many cases the love-making is

for the individual-too strong for his good. artistic; in higher forms, like birds, there

THE RED FLAGS OF THE HIVE

is, as Julian Huxley has well shown, a development of psychical attractions so that

The bee-hive, like the ant-hill, is a sug- physical fondness is raised to the level of

gestive climax of social organization on in- affection, occasionally monogamous. Yet we

stinctive lines, from which man has some- cannot deny the occasional presence of red

thing to learn; but it is spotted with red flags, especially of the nature of exaggera-

flags. There is exemplary, though prob- tions.

ably entirely non-ethical, self-subordination; Thus the queen of a termitarv, the mother

there is admirable maternal care on the part of the whole community, is an extraordinary

of workers who are not usually mothers; martyr to maternity. After her winged

apart from a few diseases, probably due to youth is over, she settles down to be an egg-

man's interference, there is a high standard laying machine-not much more. In some

of health, though a very short life; and the species she is four inches long, with a

honeycomb is one of the most beautiful volume 20,000 times that of a worker. She

forms of wealth in the world. The bee-hive has lost her wings and become bloated by

is a marvel that angels might desire to look the enormous exaggeration of ovaries and

into ! fatty body; and she is marked by that rare

Yet from a human point of view- ugliness which is the stigma of disturbed

admittedly irrelevant for the bees-how bodily harmony. She may lay an egg every

repellent is the seamy side. In the first place, there is the specialization of a repro-

second for hours on end, perhaps 30,000 in a day, and ten millions in a year. She may

ductive queen, whose tongue is too short to live for ten years, the most fecund of all

reach almost any floral nectary, who has no terrestrial animals. Far be it from us to

pollen baskets or wax-glands, but who can
lay 3,0oo eggs in a day. In the second place

criticize her, or the process of evolution of which she is a tangential product; she adds

there is the reproductive caste of non-pro- to the success of the termite race, but she is

ductive, though not idle, drones, wastefully a red flag of hyper-maternity.

numerous, usually futile even in their

masculinity, who are cold-shouldered or -AND PARASITIC MALES

worse when the pinch of autumn begins to
be felt. Thirdly, the whole economy of the
hive rests on the vast multitude of arrested females, usually non-reproductive. How

5.-A fifth red flag, of an almost deeper dye, marks the occurrence of parasitic males. The extremest case is that of the worm Bonellia, not uncommon in the Mediter-

unthinkable in a human society! The ranean and occasionally occurring in the

WARNINGS FROM NATURE

II

North Sea. The female is like a green plum, circumstances, and the creature, so effective

but with a long food-catching proboscis; the in ninety-nine case out of a hundred, is non-

male is difficult to find, for he may be only plussed, it may be fatally. When the school-

one-sixteenth of an inch in length, and hides boy moves the Indian file of Procession

about the mouth, or eventually in the repro- Caterpillars so that the head of A touches

ductive duct, of the female. The male is not the tail of Z, the march continues for hours

only a pygmy, he is an over-sexed degene- of futile circumambulation until something,

rate; even his food-canal is closed. The certainly not intelligence, breaks the spell.

creature starts as a free-swimming larva, like But let us select an instance of automatiza-

the female; but if it settles down on an tion from among the higher animals where

adult female it seems to be poisoned and intelligent behaviour, implying perceptual

arrested in development-except as regards inference, has in the main replaced instinct.

sex. The California Woodpecker has developed

Very striking is Dr. Tate Regan's des- the ploy of fixing acorns by the hundred in

cription of the pygmy parasitic males found holes which have been bored in the stems of

in a few Angler-Fishes from the thinly- trees. One sees rows of these acorns, each

peopled mid-waters of the Ocean. The well-fitted in its hole, and the neat method

female fish may carry her mate like a little of storage for hard times seems to be very

tassel on the front of her head, 'well in eye' profitable for the particular species that

so to speak, or in other species on the under practises it. But the habit grows on the

surface of the body, or again under her arm- birds; more acorns are stored than are

pit-if fishes have an armpit! The extra- needed; pebbles and pieces of fat are stored

ordinary fact is that the male is entirely as well as acorns; and hundreds of acorns

dependent for sustenance on the female, for are dropped through bored holes into places

his mouth becomes fixed on some slight pro- from which there is no chance of recovering

jection, and the two sets of tissues and blood- them. The ploy is often so automatic that

vessels coalesce. The two become of one it has become a sort of obsession. How

flesh, and no divorce is possible. Dwarf thankful man should be that " noble in rea-

males occur among many animals, and in son, infinite in faculty, in apprehension how

this case the pygmy becomes a parasite- like a god," he is safe from all risks of

indispensable, however, for the fertilization automatization !

of the eggs. As we look at this rather ugly

red flag, how thankful we are that man, VICTIMS OF HOSPITALITY

made a little lower than the angels, knows 7.-The seventh red flag has a particu-

nothing of male parasitism!

larly repellent colour; it is the label of a

RISKS OF AUTOMATIZATION

remarkable condition called ' physogastry ' -an ugly word for an ugly thing. The

6.-The sixth red flag waves more airily; worst illustrations are found among the

it is concerned with the risks of automatiza- insect-guests of certain termites, but there

tion. Throughout vast stretches of the are approaches to it among some forms of

animal kingdom there is a prevalence of in- termites themselves, and among true ants as

stinctive behaviour, the unlearned outcome well. But let us keep to the physogastry

of an inborn racial enregistration of neuro- of guests. It is one of the few instances

muscular linkages, in many cases probably of a pathological or diseased state among

suffused with dim awareness and backed by animals living in natural conditions, and

endeavour. As man has vTery little of this apart from parasitism.

instinctive behaviour in the zoological sense, What is the phenomenon? Certain

there is little red flag for him in the fact beetles or two-winged flies or other insects

that children of instinct, like ants, bees, and have become accustomed to live in the hills

wasps, often illustrate the tyranny of this of certain termites, and some of them

engrained routine. Some slight change in deserve to be called guests because they

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

make themselves pleasant. They exude a of man, for animals have no ideals nor more

secretion which their hosts greatly appre- thanl adumbrations of a social heritage.

ciate. Others that have no secretion are When a man deliberately becomes a parasite,

simply tolerated. They are hospitably fed he signs his own damnation; but when an

and sheltered by their hosts, and they suffer animal enters the open door, it is in most

for it. The posterior body becomes bloated, cases merely discovering a comfortable and

mainly because of the great increase of the sheltered home, where food is abundant and

fat-body. There is a decrease in the size of the struggle for existence lenient, where it

the head and thorax, and a reduction or can enjoy complete material well-being and

actual loss of the eyes and wings. The guest get more than something for nothing.

insects become very sluggish and very ugly. There is more than this in cases where one

According to Professor W. M. Wheeler, species of ants becomes parasitic on another,

these changes are modifications due to the but even here there is, of course, no ethical

darkness, the stuffiness, the lack of exercise note. Our proposition is simply that certain

in the narrow galleries, and to the over- ways of living among animals turn out to be

abundant supplies of carbohydrate food. very detrimental, and their consequences

The phvsogastric guests are victims of the may have a suggestive value to man, if, in

'too-kindness ' of their hosts; and it is his endless experimenting, he should adopt

very significant that the one that is best ways of living which are more or less ana-

known starts in life as an ordinary little logous. When organisms give up the

beetle. Our point is simply that there is not struggle for existence, including the endea-

much use in having a eugenic insect pedi- vour after well-being, the drifting life is

gree, if the end is a physogaster. Happily, certain to have retrogressive consequences,

however, man does not know anything whether the organisms are mites or men.

about physogastry!

No one will even for a moment suppose

that the Red Flags were evolved as warn-

IN CONCLUSION

ings to man; that would be a terribly anthropomorphic teleology. They are tangen-

There are three considerations that wre tial departures from the main spiral of pro-

wish to submit in conclusion. Galton's work gressive evolution, which arose in certain

leaves in one's mind an impression of singu- conditions of momentum and circumstance,

lar perfection, so far as it goes, an impres- illustrating perhaps the tax that evolution

sion confirmed by the great Life, Labours has had fromn time to time to pay for keep-

anid Letters. But perfection along particular ing open the door of freedom-including

lines is not the same as completeness, and freedom to err. Galton seems to have

we have ventured to suggest some need of thought of a recondite purpose wirorking,

supplementing.

sometimes against difficulties, in animate

(i) It seems unwise to base eugenics on evolution, working towards ever-heightened

the study of heredity exclusively, since vigour of body and mind. If man is an

place ' and ' work ' must be considered as instalment of the realization of that pur-

well as the hereditarily determined ' folk '; pose, he may look on the Red Flags with a

biology is not nearly finished yet, and its twinge of gratitude.

suggestions must be garnered from the whole (3) B3y means of seven illustrations w-e

field of the animate, especially from the have tried to suggest that Organic Nature

drama of animal life which shows a diversity has some useful warnings for man. But the

even greater than that of the human drama. collection of these is apt to give an erroneous (2) It must be recognized that the exag- impression-as if Animate Nature was

gerations, extravagances, and exerescences dotted all over with red flags. That this is

which we have illustrated, are not so startling the very reverse of the truth is our conclud-

or even repulsive in the realm of organisms ing remark, for Nature is much more of an

as their analogues would be in the kingdom inspiration than a warning.

WARNINGS FROM NATURE
Apart from parasites, most of which as courage and affection. In many cases establish a live-and-let-live modus vivendi there is enough sex selection to secure with their hosts, and apart from human eugamics, and enough of natural selection to interferences, there is hardly any environ- secure more than an elementary eugenics. mental, functional, or constitutional disease The better families survive. In this vein we in Nature. The general statement is safe might long continue; we find patterns and that Nature is all for health-positive health. inspiration in Animate Nature. Natural selection, except for parasites, Galton was one of the pioneers of the works persistently in that direction. Apart dawning biological era, when there will be from parasites and a few exceptions like more deliberate and widespread appeal to domesticated animals and physogasters, biology for man's guidance in regard to Nature is all for beauty-which is often the many of the practical problems of life; and outcome of orderly growth, harmonious liv- we honour him no less when we seek to ing, and strenuous eurhythmic endeavours. broaden the biology and bio-psychology and Even if we keep to birds and mammals, we bio-sociology which have to be applied if our see that there has been persistent selection evolution, is to become more all-roundly of nimble wits and of such primary virtues progressive.

