LINKAGE IN HUMAN GENETICS*

By J. H. RENWICK, M.B., Ch.B., M.R.C.P. Galton Laboratory, University ColleAe, London

TT has been known since the early years of this century that the chance of inheriting
one characteristic is not always inde-
pendent of the chance of inheriting another one from the same parent. This was a fundamental discovery and gave rise to the concept of inheritance of blocks of genes later found to correspond to segments of the microscopically visible chromosomes in the cell nucleus. It was shown that, in both animals and plants, the genes were arranged in a linear
order on the chromosome, that order being, in the main, constant for any species, and sometimes showing remarkable similarities even from one species to another. The position of a gene on a chromosome is called its
locus.

in the biochemical processes which they control and therefore to resemble one another in the type of visible product or " phenotype" of the individual.
There is little doubt that when a number of such gene loci have been charted on linkagt maps in man, these maps will prove to be just as useful as research tools as they have been in other organisms.
Linkage of the A.B.O.- Locus and that for the Nail-Patella Syndrome
The pedigree in Figure i illustrates the linkage recently demonstrated between the ABO locus and that for the nail-patella syndrome. In the large sibship, eleven
9

Chromosome Maps

Maps showing the relative positions of genes on the chromosomes have been made for several animals and plants and, in the study of the fundamental genetics of these organisms, such maps have been of value in numerous and often unexpected ways.
With their help, it has become possible in
Drosophila in a few cises to pinpoint a
specific gene as being in a specific band of a chromosome as seen under the microscope. Unfortunately the technique of making good preparations* of human chromosomes, so that they can be seen clearly under the microscope, is not yet very satisfactory but we do know that the chromosomes are of differing lengths and staining properties and that there are two of every type of chromosome. Every gene on one chromosome has a corresponding but often not identical gene on its partner chromosome and all such gene variants or alleles at the same locus are thought usually to resemble one another
* A paper read at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics Society on March 2ISt. IQ56.

IB {

O AAA A Al

B A, B

A I A,B Al

Al 0

FAMILY E

Figure i.-Pedigree of nail-patella syndrome showing ABO phenotypes, to illustrate the linkage between the ABO and nail-patella loci.

individuals were blood-grouped and it is
seen that all those who have inherited the A1 gene from the father are normal, whereas
those who have inherited the B gene have
also inherited the defective nails, small patellae, and dislocated elbows characteristic of the nail-patella syndrome.
It appears then that the father had, on one
of his forty-six chromosomes, a B blood group gene at one locus and a nail-patella
gene at a neighbouring locus. On the partner chromosome, he must have had an A1 gene at the ABO locus: and, because the nailpatella gene (Np) is so rare, we can be sure

'49 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October, 1956. 48, 3.

I50 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

that he must have had a normal gene (np) opposite the nail-patella gene. One of his chromosome pairs must therefore be as
B Np

follows:

Each child has

i A1 np inherited either one or the other chromo-
some unchanged. Figure 2 shows a similar pedigree except
that, in this family, the nail-patella gene appears to be usually on the same chromo-
some as the 0 gene. The syndrome has, in

FAMILY B

A01 A

are together, the less frequently will the point of interchange lie between them. Hence, the frequency of recombination of the genes gives a rough measure of their distance apart.
In the family shown in Figure i there was probably no crossing-over, but in several others there has been a varying amount, which raises the question of homogeneity. Are all these families carrying an abnormal gene at the same locus or is there another locus not near the ABO locus controlling a similar-in fact, indistinguishable-syndrome?
Figure 3 shows the counts of recombinants in the different families as estimated by an iteration method of Dr. C. A. B. Smith's. The estimated recombination fraction
Counts of recombinants by family
NON- OBSERVED
FAMILY FMMNANTS FECOMBINANTS TOTAL REC. FRAtC

00lAAl~l~~6+ 4V& I, 50 50 50

0

Figure 2.-Pedigree of nail-patella syndrome. The ABO groups are given and in the case of the A10 and BO genotypes, the presence of the inferred 0 gene has been recorded for the sake of clarity in five individuals.

fact, nothing to do with the A, B or 0 genes except that the gene causing the syndrome happens to be carried on the same chromosome. This is, therefore, an entirely different situation from the association between blood group A and carcinoma of the stomach, for example (Aird, Bentall & Roberts I953).
Returning to linkage, Figure 2 also demonstrates crossing-over. The last child in the youngest generation has inherited the 0 gene but not the nail-patella gene from his affected parent. During the meiotic division therefore of one of the cells in the mother's ovary, the two members of this particular chromosome pair must have interchanged
segments and the point of interchange must have occurred somewhere between the ABO
locus and the nail-patella locus. From simple mechanical considerations it is easy to see that on the whole, the nearer the loci

A 1.0 B 2.2 C 4.6 D 2.2 E 0.14 G 2.2 H 2.0
TOTAL 14.4

12.9 13.9 7 23.5 25.7 8 11.9 16.5 28 13.6 15.8 14
23.3 23.4 0.6 21.0 23.2 9 6.9 8.9 23
113.1 1 27.5 11.3 ±3.0

Figure 3.-Counts of recombinants respecting the ABO and nail-patella linkage. No evidence of heterogeneity between families (see text). + Family G from Jameson et al. (I956).

(which would be the same as the cross-over frequency but for multiple crossing-over)
ranges from practically zero in family E up to 28 per cent in the smaller family C. The heterogeneity x2 appropriate to this iteration method demonstrates that the variations
could well be due to chance (X2=Io 3 for
6 d.f., I < P <-2) so these linkage data show us that we have no need at present to question the singularity of the nail-patella
locus.
As another illustration of the sort of way

LINKAGE IN HUMAN GENETICS

I51.

in which linkage information may contribute to our knowledge of genetical processes, we can consider the way in which the degree of severity is controlled, in the nail-patella syndrome.
When the nail defect in over IOO cases was scored according to the number of nails affected and the severity in each, there was a striking similarity between sibs (correlation coefficient of o046 on forty-three sib pairs) but no correlation between the severity in the parent and that in the child (correlation 0o03 ± OI3 on fifty-seven pairs). In other words, the severity in the child was apparently independent of whether or not the affected parent was severely or mildly affected. Similar results were found as regards patellar size as measured on X-rays.
Modifying Genes at same Locus: A Hypothesis
Professor Penrose pointed out that these findings could be explained on the assumption that the degree of severity in any individual depended mainly on a modifying gene at the same locus as the main gene. Such a gene would be indistinguishable from normal in the absence of the main gene. Figure 4 shows the situation diagrammati-

another and we do not in fact know how
many alternative variants there are. On the allelic modifier hypothesis, an affected individual, in handing on the main gene to
an affected child, would be automatically
excluded from transmitting the modifying allele and there would therefore be no
correlation expected between parent and child in the degree of severity of the syndrome. Similarly, since the normal parent would carry two of these modifying genes each affected child would receive one or the other, and the expected correlation between
affected sibs can be shown to be o*5, as was
observed.
This hypothesis of modifying genes at the
main locus could theoretically be tested
using our knowledge that the main nail-
patella' locus is closely linked with the ABO

E 11 8 -~

9

BO A,O

E III
ABO genotypes A,B BO

Affected

Normal

parpenrt NLp~!J. JnPp, nPp,~'ln3pspreanrtn'

Gene from normal parent

gene Ogene

Nail score

17*6 109

Figure 5.-Example of use of linkage to test allelism of main and modifying genes in the nail-patella syndrome.

E nP2 np, np, t P2 r4h np

Affected

Normal

Figure 4.-Diagram illustrating the hypothesis of allelism of main gene (Np) and modifying genes
(npp: np2: np3) in the nail-patella syndrome.

cally. All the modifiers, npl, np2 and np3, have been depicted as different from one

locus. We should, in fact, be able to observe
linkage between the modifiers and the ABO locus. So far the data on such a rare
condition are quite insufficient but Figure 5, showing some actual observations, gives an idea of the sort of family one would expect if the hypothesis were true. a
In this family, it appears that the normal parent has two different modifying genes: One of them has been transmitted to one
affected child (intensifying the nail defect)
and the other has been transmitted to the

152 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

other child (alleviating the severity of the syndrome). At the same time each child has received a different blood group gene from the normal parent, as would be expected on the hypothesis of linkage between the modifier locus and the ABO locus. It will
take a long time before we can accumulate sufficient data like these to strengthen or discountenance the allelic modifier hypo-
thesis, but this is the sort of unexpected way in which linkage information could be useful.
It has often been claimed that there might in the future be opportunities to use linkage more directly in the field of medicine, and it
is actually possible that some pathological gene with late manifestation could be traced through a family and prediction could be made with the help of a normal " visible "
gene carried very close to it on the same chromosome. It is however unlikely that circumstances would permit such a use
except on very rare occasions.

Othler Linkages
As regards other linkages there are not many that one can accept with any great confidence. Of course all the sex-linked genes are necessarily on the same chromosome, the X-chromosome. In the case of haemophilia and colour blindness we know that the loci are close to each other on the X-chromosome, with an approximately ten per cent recombination frequency as estima-
ted by Haldane and Smith (I947). The locus

A r6

Qir* RJR4RIR

Rlr(5

R,1Q Rr( Rib Frb) Rl 1R2 R RI rr211R

R2 RI RrQRI

Rlr

mole. cliptocytosis omale unaffected
9 fer'lo eiliptocytosis
9 femole. unaffected.
Figure 6.-Pedigree showing linkage between the loci for elliptocytosis and for the Rhesus complex. (After Goodall, Hendry, Lawler and Stephens, I953).

for pseudo-hypertrophic muscular dystrophy
of young boys is probably slightly further
away from the colour blindness locus but
whether it is on the same side of it as the
haemophilia locus or on the opposite side
is not known. Walton, Race and Philip
(1955) have recently been responsible for
our information on this linkage distance.
To return to the other (autosomal) chromo-
somes, Figure 6 illustrates the linkage
between the elliptocytosis locus and the Rhesus, or Rh, blood group locus. Ellipto-
cytosis produces elliptical red cells instead of round ones and in this particular family, the gene is coupled with the R2 or cDE gene
complex. This linkage, which was demonstrated by Dr. Lawler and her various collaborators, has a very high level of
significance. Next, Mohr (I954) has shown convincingly
that the Lutheran locus is definitely linked with some locus that has an influence on the Lewis blood groups and further work should soon define this locus more precisely. Some other linkages have been described but these are on less firm ground at the
moment.
Looking now to the future, the most valuable contribution to speed up the slow rate of discovery of new linkages would be the indentification of new " marker " loci
such as further blood group loci at which gene differences are common in the normal
population. At present there are several blood group loci available and one could also use the locus controlling ability to taste phenylthiourea, or PTC, and probably the recently described locus controlling the serum
proteins as found by Smithies (I955) in
Canada. In many foreign countries one also has the loci of the abnormal haemoglobins, but, so far, no haemoglobin variants have been found which occur commonly in this country. We need to discover more normal or near-normal characters of this type.
An average human chromosome probably bears along its length a few thousand genes, so it is clear that the very few linkages so far established are only the prelude to the enormous mass of work which has still to be
undertaken.

LINKAGE IN HUMAN GENETICS

I53

REFERENCES
Aird, R. B., Bentall, H. H. and Roberts, J. A. F. (1953), A relationship between cancer of stomach
and ABO blood groups. Brit. Med. J., 1, 799.
Goodall, H. B., Hendry, D. W. W., Lawler, S. D. and
Stevens, S. A. (I953), Data on linkage in man:
elliptocytosis and blood groups. II, Family 3 Ann. Eugen., Lond., 17, 272.
Haldane, J. B. S. and Smith, C. A. B. (I947), A new
estimate for the linkage between the genes for colour blindness and haemophilia in man. Ann. Eugen., Lond., 14, io.

Jameson, R. J., Lawler, S. D, and Renwick, J. H. (1956), Nail-patella syndrome: clinical and linkage data on family G. Ann. hum. Genet., Lond., 20, 348.
Mohr, J. (I954), A Study ofLinkage in Man. Copenhagen:
E. Munksgaard.
Renwick, J. H. and Lawler, S. D. (I955), Genetical
linkage between the ABO and nail-patella loci. Ann. hum. Genet., Lond., 19, 312.
Smithies, 0. (I955), Grouped variations in the occurrence of new serum protein components in normal human serum. Nature, 175, 307.
Walton, J. N., Race, R. R. and Philip, U. (I955), On
the inheritance of muscular dystrophy. Ann. hum. Genet., Lond., 20, i.

THE ECONOMIC\ JOURNAL

The Quarterly ournal of the Royal Economic Society

No. 263

SEPTEMBER 1956

Vol. LXVI

I. ARTICLES

COMPETITION IN TRANSPORT AS AN INSTRUMENT OF POLICY

G. WALKER

MEASURABLE UTILITY AND PROBABILITY: A SIMPLIFIED RENDERING

S. A. OZGA

WAGE POLICY AND A LABOUR STANDARD

J. H. RICHARDSON

INPUT-OUTPUT ANALYSIS: AN APPLICATION

A. A. ADAMS AND I. G. STEWART

INNOVATIONS AND EQUILIBRIUM GROWTH

H. J. BRUTON

THE REGIONAL LOCATION OF INDUSTRY

R. J. NICHOLSON

KEYNES AND SUPPLY FUNCTIONS: A NOTE

SIR R. HAWTREY

A FURTHER COMMENT

SIR D. ROBERTSON

THIRD REJOINDER

F. J. DE JONG

II. REVIEWS

III. NOTES A ND MEMORA NDA

IV. RECENT PERIODICALS AND NEW BOOKS

MACMILLAN & CO., LTD., LONDON, W.C.2

Application for Fellowship to

ROYAL ECONOMIC SOCIETY, 2 I Bentinck Street, London, W. I

Annual Subscription CI ios.

Single Copy Ten Shillings

