REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.
SOME RECENT BOOKS ON EDUCATION.
1. Adams, JOHN, M.A., B.Sc., LL.D. The Evolution of Educational Theory. Macmillan and Co.; Ios. net.
2 Thorndike, E. L., Professor of Educational Psychology, Columbia
University. Education: A First Book. Macmilian and Co.; 6s. net.
&. Rusk, ROBERT R., M.A., Ph.D. Introduction to Experimental Educa-
tion. Longmans, Green and Co.; 4s. 6d. net. (z.) To eugenists the main interest of this work will be in the concluding
chapter, called " The Educational Outlook," where it is laid down that since the eugenist is concerned with the improvement of the quality of the educator's raw material-the scholar, or " educand," to use Professor Adams's useful term-therefore future developments of educational theory can only be studied in the light of this new point of view. The establishment of the science of eugenics z gives proof that the human race has reached a point at which it has definitely proposed to take itself in hand, and do its best to further its own development by deliberate and self-conscious effort." The present, therefore, marks the beginning of a period when educational progress is likely to be more rapid than in any previous one.
The general standpoint of the author is sufficiently broad to satisfy
eugenists: " The educational theorist is not by any means confined to the here and now. His work is the study of the moulding of men, and anything that helps him in his work must be regarded as part of his subject. He must therefore look backward in order to understand the nature of the educand here and now before him, and forward in order to see how his present action is likely to affect the future development of the educand's descendants." He agrees with Richter that for practical purposes the educational process begins with the first breath of the infant, but he keeps in mind the eugenist's view that education ought to have begun aons ago.
Professor Adams is frankly optimistic. He emphasises the immense value of the psychological and pedagogical research that is growing up on all hands, and which is seeking to evolve an objective standard by which subjective processes may be evaluated. He asserts that soon it will be possible to classify objectively the different mental powers of the educand, and this knowledge will enable the teacher to decide what kind of life work is the best for individual pupils.
The main part of the book deals-as the title indicates-with the different streams of thought which have contributed to educational theory, and these are handled with great philosophical insight and balanced judgment. The author has wisely avoided being bound by chronological order, and has succeeded in giving us a wholly fresh treatment of the material at his disposal. At the same time he has maintained a unity of development which bears eloquent testimony to his knowledge of detail and grasp of principles.
The book, as was to be expected from Professor Adams, is delightfully human both in illustration and in phraseology. Discussing the different theories held as to what the child himself brings to the process of education, he says: " The educand is neither angel nor

398 EUGENICS REVIEW

devil, nor is he mere clay in the hands of the potter. He counts

for something individual in the educational process." Evolution is

not the faultless system we sometimes read into it: " Nature

scatters her material broadcast on the hit-or-miss principle." There

is an interesting discussion on education as an instinct, though it is

hardly conclusive. The whole book is enriched by freshness of view-

point, and happy choice of illustrations.

It is a work to read and ponder. On the philosophical side it is

the most capable treatment of educational principles we have had in

English. On the prophetical side it is wisely daring and scientifically

careful. It will have great influence on educational thought.

(2.) Professor Thorndike's book has the virtue of simple phraseology

and the strength of logical arrangement, but it loses something of its

force in that the first chapters treat of education as a whole, whilst

the remaining chapters apply to school procedure only. It is thus

likely to be too specific for the general reader and yet incomplete for

the professional student. But it is full of wise things, and marks

the ever-increasing tendency to widen the influence of the school

beyond mere lessons. He rightly places a knowledge of the " ori-

ginal stuff of human nature " as the basis of education, but he makes

only one brief reference to the claims of eugenics.

There are some interesting facts included about American educa-

tion, and the author, as we should expect from his scientific work,

shows himself open to an unbiassed study of all the influences that

are moulding education.

(3.) " The Introduction to Experimental Education " is a striking proof

of the reality of the claim that educational theory has now entered

upon a new stage-the appeal to experiment. That such an excellent

book can be written indicates' how much good work has already been

done. The author summarises the experimental results of many in-

vestigators with great skill and discrimination, resisting'the tempta-

tion to dogmatise, and reviewing the evidence with commendable

absence of bias. The volume should prove an excellent stimulus to

many hitherto working without definite aim, and the wealth of refer-

ences given for further reading will be of great value to those who

desire more complete knowledge.

FRANK SMITH.

Castle, W. E., Coulter, J. M., Davenport, C. B., East, E. M.,
Tower, W. L. Heredity and Eugenics. A course of lectures summarising recent advances in knowledge in variation, heredity, and evolution and its relation to plant, animal, and human improvement and welfare. Chicago, 19I2. (London, Cambridge
University Press). Price Ios. net. THIS book consists in a course of lectures delivered at Chicago in I9II. The five lecturers each treated their special branch in their own way, with the result that there is some repetition, but this is not sufficiently serious to call for adverse comment. The book is intended for those who have made no very thorough study of the subjects dealt with, and in its general simplicity of style, the interest and suitability of the cases chosen, and the excellence of its illustrations it is, well adapted to its purpose. Each writer deals especially with his own investigations, and the field covered is a wide one; the student of human heredity in particular may find that more space than he quite approves is given to guinea pigs, beetles, and maize. None of these things, however, can be neglected, even by those whose interests are concerned with only one part of the subject, and the plan of the book as a whole appears to us to be excellent. The matter, of course, is not new, in the sense of being previously unpublished, but a far-reaching series of summaries of the work of wellknown investigators, such as the book contains, is of value to the reader who has made some study of the subject, as well as to the novice.

