REVIEWS OF BOOKS
same Department involving rehabilitative and preventative psychiatric programmes. The latter will include genetic counselling and a comprehensive psychiatric programme for deaf children.
JOHN C. DENMARK
Etzioni, Amitai. Studies in Social Change. New York, 1966. Holt, Rinehart and Winston. Pp. xii + 226. Price 32s. Paperback.
AMITAI ETZIONI is well known for his stimulating contributions to sociological theory, particularly in the field of social organizations. In this book he has brought together a number of studies, all, with one exception, published previously in various journals. By adding introductory comments he uses them as case-studies for theoretical arguments on social change. In the first section he offers two illustrations of biologically derived models for sociological analysis. In one case (the formation of elites in a Kibbutz) a process of differentiation is demonstrated to show that a social unit contains in its simplest or rudimentary form all the structureswhich, in thecourse of development, will becomedifferentiated until the unit achieves the complexity of an advanced system. A second model is suggested in another study (the formation of international unions) where a social unit is shown to acquire new parts, not previously present in rudimentary form. For such a process Etzioni uses the concept of epigenesis. The second part of the book deals with "the differences among strategies that seek peaceful change" (p. 54) and is illustrated by a study of the formation of the European Economic Community and by a particularly interesting analysis of the American-USSR detente in 1963. In the third section Etzioni deals with the problem of consensus formation and this is supported by two more international studies. In a final part we are offered three case studies of social change, two dealing with Israel and one with the religious organisations of American Jewry.
Those who have learned to accept the often heavy and clumsy American sociological style of writing in the tradition of Talcot Parsons will welcome this book even though one is not convinced that the various theoretical formulations are fully supported by the material offered. Two small criticisms are the relatively high price for a paperback and the author's failure, in his last chapter, to provide explanations for Hebrew and Jewish religious terms which are used in a paper originally addressed to a Jewish readership.
JULIUS CARLEBACH
ECONOMICS
Stassart, Joseph. Les avantages et les inconvenients economiques d'une population stationnaire. Collection Scientifique de la Faculte de Droit de L'Universite de Liege 20. Liege and The Hague, 1965. Faculte de Droit, Liege, and Martinus Nijhoff. Pp. 256. Price 18 guilders; 36s.
THE OBJECT OF this book is to review the strictly economic issues concerning population growth in a developed economy. In this, it succeeds admirably. The discussion is set against a background of slow demographic growth in Belgium, where for a period the net rate of reproduction fell below one, and where population trends have caused a great deal of alarm. The book is not concerned, however, with the problems of a declining population, but with the economic effects of having a higher level of fertility rather than a lower one. The arguments in favour of lower fertility are first presented and every possible objection is assessed. Then the same process is adopted for the arguments favouring higher fertility. Each issue is treated lengthily but clearly, and the book should be easily understandable by those without a prior knowledge of economics.
277

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
Dr. Stassart has read widely in the literature of several countries while preparing this
book, and the views of an enormous variety of authors are taken into consideration. He is most anxious to be fair to both sides, and even in his conclusions is very reluctant to come down at all heavily in favour of either position. This is being unnecessarily cautious. On the evidence of this book, the arguments which associate lower fertility with faster growth of per capita income appear overwhelming. The arguments presented are familiar ones. A society with a lower fertility will have, other things being equal, a higher proportion of the population of working age. Women in such a society will have a greater opportunity to work. A society with a growing labour force will have to devote a higher proportion of its investment to maintaining the capital stock per head than one with a stationary labour force. Against this it can only be argued, at least from a purely economic point of view, first, that the burden of dependency is not simply a question of numbers and that a retired person has a larger consumption than a child, and, second, that a labour force with an older age structure is for that reason less productive. This book makes no attempt to break new empirical ground, and existing studies are evidently inadequate to say anything very definite about the extent to which these last two points might in practice offset the other arguments. They are not here given very much weight.
The remaining arguments in favour of higher fertility are basically sociological. Unless economies of scale are so exceptionally important as to outweigh the costs of population growth-which is not the case with already developed economies participating in international trade-then there is nothing which can be achieved by an economy with high fertility that cannot be equally achieved by one with low fertility. It may well be found that the rate of technical progress is more closely related to gross than to per capita investment. It may then be the case that a society with high fertility, forced to devote a higher proportion of its resources to investment to maintain per capita income than a low fertility society, has faster technical progress and faster per capita growth. In the low fertility society, dominated by old men, with a more rigid structure of its labour force, technical progress may be slow. But potentially this society can devote as much of its resources to gross investment, including research and training, and still enjoy more per capita current consumption or leisure.
Once such sociological arguments are introduced, the issues become vaguer and empirical research more scanty, but the debate becomes more interesting and more important. This book hardly attempts to tackle these, however. The influence of a growing labour force on the distribution of income and the social and economic problems of congestion are only briefly mentioned. The book does not venture into world problems or the problems of less developed countries.
From time to time, reference is made to actual experience, usually in Belgium. It becomes very clear from such references that the strictly economic effects of lower fertility are not in practice very influential. For example, lower fertility must release resources from child-rearing for other uses. But in Belgium, the proportion of married women at work outside the home fell steadily with fertility until the Second World War, and rose with fertility after the War. A host of other economic and social factors obviously outweighed the influence of fertility. The experience of other developed countries, discussed at the end of this book, shows, if anything, a slight but positive correlation between the growth rate of population and of output per head. This does not mean that the economic arguments which establish that a rise in fertility reduces potential growth are incorrect. It suggests, however, that in the vast complex of factors determining the relative rates of growth of already developed countries, small differences in fertility are not very significant.
TIMOTHY KING
278

