GALTON ON EUGENICS AS SCIENCE AND PRACTICE*

By C. P. BLACKER, M.D., F.R.C.P.

G ALTON concerned himself with
eugenics during three phases of his
long life. The first of these periods
has, as its most outstanding event, the publication of Hereditary Genius in I869. But the chain of thought which culminated in this book was first forged ten years before, when Galton began, as he puts it, " to interest myself in the human side of Geography." It was then that began Galton's transition,
well described by Karl Pearson, from
geography to anthropology. We can regard
the two papers published during I865 in Macmillan's Magazine as preliminary
announcements of the theme of Hereditary Genius. Indeed the articles and the book have certain passages in common.
The second period during which Galton sounded his theme was marked by the publication in I883 of his Inquiries into Human Faculty. It was in this book that the word eugenics was first used. A glance at the list of his publications will show that, between I883 and I889 (when a later book Natural Inheritance, dealing with a cognate theme, appeared), Galton was much occupied with anthropological and psychological questions.
The third and last period was the terminal decade of Galton's life between I9OI and I9II. Galton was then an old man and his
physical powers were failing. It is remarkable how constant Galton's
views on eugenics remained during the halfcentury that his mind played over the subject. Some interesting remarks are made on this topic in the Memories (I908).
Galton says: " In accordance with one principal pur-
pose of these pages, which is to show the fundamental coherence of most of my many

inquiries, I will quote several passages from
the above-mentioned articles [the articles in
Macmillan's Magazine] written in i865.
They expressed then, as clearly as I can do now, the leading principles of eugenics.
They will each be followed by a remark as
to how I should wish to modify-them."
Galton then proceeds to quote extracts from these two early papers; and he adds
short commentaries which are the fruits of
forty-five years' subsequent experience. The
commentaries, which are more in the nature of qualifications than of re-statements (there
is nowhere any trace of recantation*), bear witness to the remarkable stability of
Galton's essential ideas. Summing up the quotations and the commentaries, he writes:
" These views published by me forty-five years ago are still up to date. . . . My fault in other parts of these articles was a tendency to overrate the speed with which a great improvement of the race of mankind might, theoretically, be effected. I had not then made out the law of Regression. With this qualification the above extracts express my present views."
The stability of Galton's ideas throughout
his life facilitates our exposition: the writings of I869 and of I883 will have the same authenticity as those of I908.
Galton's views on eugenics were mainly shaped by his reactions to the evolution theory. They were also fashioned by the singularities of his character-his independence of spirit, his developed critical powers, his love of measuring and assessing things, his essential trustfulness and benevolence. In the present study, some further comments will be made on Galton's general conception of eugenics. In particular, atten-

* From a new study of Galton's life and work to * Except in respect of the theory of pangenesis

be published later in book form. The chapter on which, in a preface written in I892 of Hereditary

Galton's religious views was published in THE: Genius, first published in I869, Galton declares " would

EUGENICS REVIzW, July 1946.

require revision.

I68

GALTON ON EUGENICS AS SCIENCE AND PRACTICE

I69

tion will be drawn to the practical steps how he conceived it as science and as social-

which he thought might be taken at the policy.

time he was alive, and also later, when the

principles of eugenics had been generally

EUGENICS AS A SCIENCE

accepted.

Galton's statistical bent, his inventive-

Galton thought of eugenics as containing ness, his love of measuring things, his passion

at one and the same time the elements of for reducing his observations to quantitative

science, religion and social practice. " There terms admitting of direct comparisons, have

are," he wrote,* " three stages to be passed been mentioned above. The idea that living

through. Firstly it [eugenics] must be made things can be measured and that their

familiar as an academic question until its measurement can become a science is em-

exact importance has been understood and bodied in such words as biometry, psycho-

accepted as a fact; secondly it must be metry and anthropometry. We are now

recognized as a subject whose practical beginning to hear of sociometry. Galton's

development deserves serious consideration; biographer, Karl Pearson, was professor of

and thirdly it must be introduced into the biometry at University College when the

national consciousness as a new religion." first number of a new periodical, Biometrica,

If we change the order of the second and was published in i9oi under Galton's con-

third of these stages, so that we have science; sulting editorship. Biometry- (which in-

religion; social practice in that order, the cludes anthropometry and psychometry)

phases can be compared to those of the forms the scientific basis of eugenics. In

elementary nervous reflex which consists of the year I905 a Research Fellowship was

sensory, central and motor processes. We established in eugenics, first held by Edgar

are here applying to a social phenomenon Schuster; and in I907 was founded a Re-

the analogy which McDougall gave to an search Scholarship. A Eugenics Laboratory,

instinctive reaction. (The sensory, central now called the Galton Laboratory, was

and motor components of the reflex were established at University College in I909.

translated by McDougall into the cognitive, An abundance of valuable work has flowed

affective and conative components of the from this source before Galton's death and

instinct.) Eugenics must first be established since.

on a firm basis of science; the facts must be In two popular expositions of eugenics

collected and organized. This process of delivered in the last decade of his life (the

investigation or " ascertainment" corre- Huxley Lecture delivered in I9OI and the

sponds to the sensory phase of the reflex and Herbert Spencer Lecture given in I9o7),

the cognitive phase ofthe instinct. There must Galton lays much stress on the statistical

be an internal response of the organism to basis of the subject. The reader is intro-

this stimulus-central in the reflex, emo- duced to the " Normal Law of Frequency,"

tional or affective in the instinct, and which, under the title of " the law of

affective also in the sphere of eugenics; deviation from an average," had been dis-

eugenic principles must be incorporated into cussed at some length in an early chapter

social tradition and even in religion before of Hereditary Genius. The principle cannot

they can become operative. Lastly the here be described in detail. Suffice it that

motor arc of the reflex and the conative the " law " expresses quantitatively the fact

phase of the instinct correspond to that stage that, in respect of any common measurable

of eugenics when it becomes social policy. performance, circumstance or feature, most

I have already tried to show what was in people will be.placed near the average on

Galton's mind when he described eugenics one side or the other, and that- the further

as a religion.t It now remains to outline we proceed to extremes the rarer do the

instances become. This is a matter of

* Essays in Eugenics, 1go9, p. 42. t " Galton's Outlook on Religion,"' EUGENICS REVIEW,
1946. 88, 69.

common observation and is generally appreciated; but few people grasp how precisely

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the distributions of these numerical devia- liberally interpreted, and Galton acknow-

tions from the mean can be computed. In ledges in a preface written in I892 that the

the Huxley Lecture (I9OI) Galton gives an title was apt to mislead and that " if it

example of the application of this " law " could be altered now it would appear as

to the grading of human beings in terms of Hereditary Ability."

what he calls " civic worth." Charles The first fifty pages of the book are con-

Booth's classification of Londoners provides cerned with an examination of two standards

the data. Booth's table of findings, when according to which natural ability could be

slightly rearranged, agrees sufficiently with classified-i.e. men's reputations and their

the statistical expectations to enable Galton natural gifts. The conclusion is that re-

to say: "So far . . . as these figures go, putation (the opinion of contemporaries

civic worth is distributed in fair approxi- revised by posterity; the favourable result

mation to the normal law of frequency." of a critical analysis of each man's character

Of the Herbert Spencer Lecture, delivered by many biographers) is achieved through

in I907, entitled " Probability, the Founda- the exercise of natural abilities. Of these,

tion of Eugenics,"* the essential part (the three are especially needed to raise men

part, at least, which corresponds to the title) from mediocrity-namely intellect, zeal and

is sandwiched between opening and closing power of work. Youths, Galton argues, very

sections dealing with general subjects. Gal- highly endowed with these qualities are

ton here seeks to demonstrate by a series irrepressible and almost independent of

of Object Lessons " those fundamental ordinary school education. Instances are

principles of the laws of Probability that are given such as d'Alembert, Watt and Julius

chiefly concerned in the newer methods of Cesar Scaliger, of whom the last was

biometry, and consequently of eugenics." entirely unlettered. For purposes of con-

He proposes five such " object lessons," venience Galton classifies as " eminent "

wherein the student would learn the meaning men of the order of intelligence attained by

of such terms as Variability, Variate, Array, 250 in a million or by one in each 4,000;

Curve of Frequency, Standard Deviation, and as " illustrious " men of the order of

Mean, Binomial Series, Correlation, etc. rarity of one in a million. These prodigies

Galton's ideas as to what social measures are next to incomprehensible by ordinary

would be eugenically beneficial are much persons, among whom Galton modestly

influenced by his views on the distribution counted himself.

throughout the population of desirable and "I have been conscious," he writes,*

undesirable types-in other words by the "of no slight misgiving that I was commit-

implications of his " law of deviation from ting a kind of sacrilege whenever, in- the

an average." According to this law, some preparation of this book, I had occasion to

half of the population clusters around the take the measurements of modern intellects

mean or average of any character which is vastly superior to my own, or to criticize

determined by multiple causes and is at the the genius of the most magnificent historical

same time measurable, such as stature, the specimens of our race. It was a process that

circumference of the chest, etc.; and constantly recalled to me a once familiar

the more pronounced the deviation from the sentiment in bygone days of African travel,

average or mean the rarer the incidence. when I used to take altitudes of the huge

The principle is applied to those qualities cliffs that domineered above me as I tra-

which are the expression of natural gifts. velled along their bases, or to map the

His book Hereditary Genius is concerned with mountainous landmarks of unvisited tribes,

men highly endowed with various kinds of that loomed in faint grandeur beyond my

natural ability (thirteen in all) ranging from actual horizon."

the Judges of England to wrestlers of the It was the main purpose of Hereditary

North Country. The word " genius " is thus Genius to show that these exceptional

* Essays in Eugenics, p. 73.

* Hereditary Genius, p. 21.

GALTON ON EUGENICS AS SCIENCE AND PRACTICE

abilities are, together with all natural if every man resembled the highly estimable

abilities, inherited " under exactly the same Marcus Aurelius or Adam Bede."

limitations as are the form and physical " A considerable list of qualities can be

features of the whole organic world."*

easily compiled that nearly everyone except

From these considerations there emerges a ' cranks' would take into account when

practical conclusion which Galton clearly picking out the best-specimens of his class.

states in the following words: " We may It would include health, energy, ability,

divide newly-married couples in three classes, manliness and courteous disposition....

with respect to the probable civic worth of Let us for a moment suppose that the

their offspring. There would be a small class practice of eugenics should hereafter raise

of ' desirables,' a large class of ' passables' the .average quality of our nation to that

of whom nothing more will be said here, of its better moiety at the present day and

and a small class of 'undesirables.' It consider the gain. The general tone of

would clearly be advantageous to the domestic, social and political life would be

country if social and moral support as well higher. The race as a whole would be less

as timely material help were extended to- foolish, less frivolous, less excitable and

the desirables, and not monopolized as it is politically more provident than now. Its

now apt to be by the undesirables."

demagogues who 'played to the gallery'

But the effects of encouraging the fertility would play to a more sensible gallery than

of the class of " desirables " would be at present. We should be better fitted to

limited by the working of a process upon fulfil our vast imperial opportunities.

which Galton laid much stress, namely that Lastly, men of an order of ability which

of " Regression to the Mean." The children is now very rare, would become more

of exceptional parents are on average less frequent, because the level out of which

exceptional than their parents. The " filial they rose would itself have risen."

centre " or average is always more mediocre " Speaking for myself, if I had to classify

than the parental centre. There is a casting persons according to worth, I should con-

back towards the average, a regression to sider each of them under the three heads

the mean.t But this regressive tendency of physique, ability and character.... I

does not neutralize the beneficent effect of rank physique first, because it is not only

breeding from the " desirables." A com- very valuable in itself and allied to many

munity which encourages this kind of re- other good qualities, but has the additional

placement will be most abundantly repaid merit of being easily rated. Ability I should

in the richest conceivable dividends.

place second on similar grounds, and

Here are some short passages which character last, though in real importance it

illustrate Galton's ideas about the aims of stands first of all. It is very difficult to rate

eugenics:

character justly; the tenure of a position

" The aim of eugenics is to represent each of trust is only a partial test of it, though a

class or sect by its best specimens; that good one so far as it goes."

done, to leave them to work out their The education of the public to think of

common civilization- in their own way." human affairs in statistical terms Galton

Variety, not uniformity of type, should regarded as of the first importance. It is

be the goal. "Society would be very dull a common human weakness, by no means

* First sentence of Hereditary Genius. t Karl Pearson sees some minor fallacies in Galton's
assumptions as to how this process operates, and in

confined to persons of meagre intelligence,
to generalize from single events. However enlightened eugenically the marriage customs

Volume IIIA of his Life (p. 230) he presents a modified version of Galton's standard scheme of descent as shown in the Huxley Lecture, I9OI. But the main argument of the lecture-that it would pay a community to encourage the fertility of its " desirable" classes-is not weakened. It is rather strengthened in Pearson's re-statement.

and however favourable eugenically the
differential fertility of a community, there would be exceptional occurrences running
counter to expectations. Low-grade defectives would continue to be born here and

I72 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

there; some marriages would founder; some children would disappoint their parents. These events would attract notice and would bring eugenics into disrepute. But a judgment which failed to balance the unfavourable results against the favourable would be superficial and misleading. It is only by the collection and proper analysis of numerically adequate data that a fair evaluation of
results is possible. In other words, our ascertainment and assessment must be statistical. Galton was never tired of
reiterating this fundamental principle. We may perhaps epitomize Galton's view
of eugenics as science by repeating the familiar definition which was drawn up by
a committee, of which Galton was a consenting member, for embodiment in a scheme
for the endowment of a Research Fellowship:
" The term National Eugenics is here
defined as the study of the agencies under social control that may improve or impair
the racial qualities of future generations either physically or mentally."
In some respects this is an unsatisfactory definition. It needs to be closely scrutinized before its full implications are understood.
Three of its features, however, are note-
worthy. The first is that eugenics is defined as a study. The definition is of eugenics as
a science and as nothing else. The second
feature is the strain which is placed on the key-word racial. The term has the same
meaning as "inborn" or "genetic." The third feature is the mention of social control.
Taken as a whole, then, the definition would
require us to study such questions as these:
What human qualities, physical and
mental, are inborn or genetic in character ? How are these qualities transmitted ? How
can they be detected and assessed ? Which
of these qualities are desirable and which
undesirable ? Whereabouts in the community are they found; how are they distributed ? By what means of social control can the desirable qualities be propagated and the undesirable checked ?
These are all enormous questions and it is with some of their aspects the Galton Laboratory has concerned itself since its foundation.

EUGENICS AS A SOCIAL PRACTICE It is upon eugenics as a social practice
that the interest of the man in the street is mainly focused. What do eugenists want to do with us ? It is upon the social or political proposals that the limelight of an
unwelcome publicity is commonly thrown. The average newspaper reader is little
interested in the law of deviation from the average, in regression, in the correlation coefficient, or even in the principles of Mendelism, or the circumstances of differential fertility. But he pricks up his ears when told that eugenists want to sterilize the unfit, organize eugenic matings, practise artificial insemination, or treat human beings like animals on a stud farm. Such themes
are sadly apt to be advertised in newspaper
headlines, with the result that eugenists come
to be thought of as eccentrics, and eugenics
is treated with ribaldry. It was upon eugenics as a social practice
rather than as a science that Galton's views
most changed during his lifetime. In the early articles in Macmillan's Magazine (I865) and in Hereditary Genius (I869)
Garton announced his theme with the enthusiasm which comes from what is felt
to be a momentous discovery. Darwin's
writings had shown that a great power was to hand wherewith man could transform
his nature and destiny. In Hereditary Genius Galton developed this argument in inspired
passages. It is indeed possible that the
mental excitement caused by the disclosure of these immense vistas had something to do with the serious nervous breakdown fronm which he suffered in the year i866. But his message was unheard and Galton put the subject aside for some twenty years. He returned to it in his Human Faculty (I883),
and again put it aside. But in the last decade of his life (i9oi-Ii) it became his main and continuing preoccupation. It was during this period that the Eugenics Society (then called the Eugenics Education Society) was founded; and it was then that Galton seems to have recognized fully how difficult it was to translate the principles he had formulated into social measures which would yield the results he sought. The Eugenics

GALTON ON EUGENICS AS SCIENCE AND PRACTICE

I73

"iucation Society was open to any inter- take the present opportunity of submitting

ested person to join. And among these were some views of my own relating to that large

to be found, in the expected proportions, province of eugenics which is concerned with

various types of prQpagandists, misguided favouring the families of those who are

enthusiasts, and cranks. A most unfortu- exceptionally fit for citizenship. Conse-

nate series of differences, fully recorded by quently, little or nothing will be said re-

Karl Pearson in his Life of Galton, developed lating to what has been well termed by Dr.

between the Galton Laboratory and the Saleeby 'negative' eugenics, namely the

Education Society. During these last years, hindrance of the marriages and the pro-

Galton was in very close touch with Pearson, duction of offspring by the exceptionally

who has clearly shown how these schisms unfit. The latter is unquestionably the more

pained Galton, and made him realize, as pressing subject of the two." (My italics.)

he had not done before, how fraught with The statement made in I9OI says that posi-

difficulty was the conversion of scientific tive eugenics is more important than nega-

theory into social practice.

tive; that made in I908 declares that

Eight papers on eugenics written by negative eugenics is more pressing than

Galton during the last ten years of his life positive. The two statements are comhave been assembled in a small booklet patible, for it does not follow that the most

entitled Essays on Eugenics, published in important things are the most pressing;

9gog. For this volume Galton wrote a
preface which is among the last of his public

but the rest of the context of the later statement suggests that Galton's views had

utterances. He there says that the essays been modified by the recently published

help to explain his own views," which often Report of the Royal Commission on the have been, and still sometimes are, absurdly Feebleminded.

misrepresented." He goes on to say: "It Galton moreover gave priority to negative

is above all things needful for the successful eugenics in the last paragraph of his

progress of eugenics that its advocates memories (I908), where he writes that the

should move discreetly and claim no more first object of eugenics " is to check the birth-

efficacy on its behalf than the future will rate of the unfit, instead of allowing them

confirm; otherwise a reaction will be in- to come into being, though doomed in large

vited." One of Galton's last pronounce- numbers to perish prematurely. The second

ments was therefore a note of caution.

object is the improvement of the race by

But Galton not only recognized that the furthering the productivity of the fit by

transition from theory to practice would be early marriages and healthful rearing of

slower than he first thought; he also their children."

changed his views on an important matter of emphasis. I refer to the comparative importance of positive and negative eugenic measures. In I90I he wrote :* " The
possibility of improving the race of a nation depends on the power of increasing the productivity of the best stock. This is far more important than that of repressing the

Upon eugenics as social policy Galton had short- and long-term views. With the first, he concerned himself in his Huxley Lecture delivered in October I9OI and entitled " The Possible Improvement of the
Human Breed under the Existing Conditions of Law and Sentiment." Short-term

productivity of the worst." (My italics.) measures are also discussed in other popular

But the opening paragraph of a paper given lectures delivered in I904, I905, I907 and

in i908t reads as follows: " I propose to I908. But in 19IO, the last year of his life,

he developed his long-term views in an

* "The Possible Improvement of the Human account of a eugenically organized Utopia,

Bred," Essays in Eugenics, p. 24. t "Local Associations for Promoting Eugenics,"
Essays in Eugenics, p. Ioo.

which he called Kantsaywhere. further described below.

This will be

I74 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

SHORT-TERM POLICIES

well endowed and to give to them some

Of the short-term programme it can, I think, be said that the more carefully Galton thought over it the more hesitant and uncertain he became. " It is difficult," he said

sort of hall-mark. In I873 he wrote*
" My object is to build up, by the mere process of extensive inquiry and publication
of results, a sentiment of caste among those

in an address in I908, " while explaining what I have in view, to steer a course that shall keep clear of the mudflats of platitude
on the one hand, and not come to grief against the rocks of over-precision on the
other. There is no clear issue out of mere platitudes, while there is great danger in entering into details. A good scheme may be entirely compromised merely on account .of public opinion not being ripe to receive it in the proposed form, or through a discovered flaw in some non-essential part of it. Experience shows that the safest course in a new undertaking is to proceed warily to-

who are naturally gifted." This guiding principle was developed in the two lectures
which he gave to the newly founded Socio-
logical Society in I904 and i905.t He
wished to see systematically collected facts
relating to large and thriving families. He
suggested that a Biographicg Index should be prepared of gifted families; also biographies of capable families, who do not
rank as gifted; also biographies of families
who, as a whole, are distinctly below the average in health, mind, or physique. (" These include the families of persons in
asylums of all kinds, hospitals and prisons.")

wards the desired end, rather than freely and rashly along a predetermined route, however carefully it may have been elaborated on paper."*

These two lectures to the Sociological Society were very carefully organized. Upon the first, delivered on May i6th, 1904, written expressions of opimions were ob-

But Galton believed that public opinion
was malleable; indeed, he 'devoted a
lecturet to showing how diverse are the

tained from several persons highly distinguished in the worlds of science and literature. Henry Maudsley, H. G. Wells

mores relating to the institution of marriage, though these are " hallowed by religion, -accepted by custom and enforced by law.?'

and Bernard Shaw were among them. Galton's proposals had a mixed reception, and it is, I think, clear that Galton himself

In other words he believed that the " existing hoped that the Sociological Society might

conditions of law and sentiment," to which all practical eugenic proposals should be conformable, could themselves be gradually changed. Once the importance of eugenics was grasped, once its principles had " been accepted as a quasi-religion, the result will be manifested in sundry and very effective modes of action which are as yet untried, and many of them unforeseen."

itself be induced to undertake the- " ascertainment" of exceptional families which he
advocated. The importance which Galton attached to the discovery of gifted families is shown by the fact that, in his second lecture delivered on February i4th, I905, he announced that Mr. Edgar Schuster had recently been appointed to a Francis Galton
Research Fellowship in Eugenics and that Mr. Schuster " will in particular carry out

Family Records

investigations into the history of classes and families." This research had the

How far, then, did Galton think it was safe ambitious aim of producing a Register of

to go during his lifetime ? On what lines "Able Families," of which only the portion

could progress be made ? Throughout his dealing with Fellows of the Royal Society

life a train of thought is detectable. He was completed. The volume was written

believed that active steps should be taken jointly by Galton and Schuster and pub-

to discover families which were eugenically

* Essays in Eugenics, p. iox.

* Fraser's Magazine, I873, p. I I6. t "Eugenics: Its Definition, Scope and Aims"

t J' Restrictions in Marriage," reproduced in Essays and " Studies in Material Eugenics." Both are re-

in Eugenics.

produced in Essays in Eugenics, I909.

GALTON ON EUGENICS AS SCIENCE AND PRACTICE

175

lished in 1906 under the title Noteworthy "as it would probably be assessed by*.

Families (Modern Science).

fellow workers. . . . Thus, the worth of

Galton pictured to himself the ultimate soldiers would be such as it would be rated

outcome of these labours as a "golden by respected soldiers, students by students,

book " of thriving families.

business men by business men, artists by

He returned to this theme in an address artists and so on."+ These gatherings have

given in October I908 to the Eugenics something in common with Rotary Clubs.

Education Society on the subject of " Local Galton proceeds to say that physique,

Association for Promoting Eugenics."

ability and character should in his view

"The successful establishment," he wrote, enter into our assessment of " worth," and

"of any general system of constructive that in real importance character should

eugenics will, in my view (which I put stand first of the three.

forward with diffidence), depends largely Through the activities of local associations,

upon the efforts of local associations acting Galton continues, " family histories would

in close harmony with a central society like become familiar topics, the existence of

our own... . Such a central society would good stocks would be discovered, and many

tend to bring about a general uniformity of persons of 'worth' -would be appreciated

administration the value of which is so and made acquainted with each other who

obvious that I do not stop to insist on it." were formerly known only to a very re-

(My italics.) The "central society" to stricted circle." By such means " a strong

which he referred was the Eugenics Educa- local eugenic opinion might easily be

tion Society, which he was addressing at the formed," and persons who became acquainted

time. The local associations, Galton went through the local eugenic association could

on, should form themselves into provisional help one another to obtain appointments.

executive committees, and elect honorary Galton thus thought that local- associa-

officers. They should then provide " a few tions would be useful in the process of

sane and sensible lectures . . . on eugenics, " ascertaining " families of eugenic worth

including the. A B C of heredity," and should and in fostering a local eugenic conscience;

enlist the co-operation of local medical men, and that the members of the associations

clergy, lawyers, public health authorities and might assist each other in various ways,

other officials who make contact with the among which he counted the obtaining of

different grades of society. Meetings should public appointments.

then be organized. The committee might The last-mentioned feature of Galton's

issue " invitations to guests at their social programme for local eugenic associations-

gatherings, where differences of rank should the clubbing together of eugenically favoured

be studiously ignored."

people for mutual assistance-provides the

" The inquiries made by the committee main principle of the long-term programme

when they were considering the names of which Galton outlined in his eugenic Utopia,

strangers to whom invitations ought to be. which will be considered below.

sent, would put them in possession of a But there were certain other features of

large fund of information concerning the a short-term programme which Galton

qualities of many notable individuals in propounded. These will be briefly con-

their district, and their family histories. sidered under the headings of certificates,

These family histories should be utilized for adoptions, immigration and marriage laws.

eugenic studies, and it should be the duty

of the local council to cause them to be

Certificates

tabulated in an orderly way, and to com- "In some future time,"' wrote Galton in

municate. the more significant of them to the central society." The notable qualities,

I905,* " dependent on circumstances, I look forward to a suitable authority issuing

Galton goes on to say, consist in the posses-

sion of " worth" or " civic worthiness "

* Essays in Eugenics, p. 63.

ix6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

eugenic certificates to can-ddates for them. ship between befriender and befriended is

They would imply a more than average hardly to be expressed in English by a

share of the several qualities of at least single word that does not connote more

goodness of constitution, of physique and of than is intended." This was " a kindly and

mental capacity." As to how far in the honourable relation between a wealthy man

future the time would, be ripe for this who had made his position in the world and

measure, nor what the " circumrstances" a youth who is avowedly his equal in natural

were upon which the matter would depend, gifts, but who still has to make it. Many

we do not know; that Galton thought the degrees may be imagined between mere

time might come in his lifetime is suggested befriendment and actual adoption, which

by the fact that he himself devised the draft would be more or less effective in freeing

of such a certificate and circulated it for capable youths from the hindranos of

comment to at least two people, one being narrow circumstances, in enabling girls to

Mr. Havelock Ellis.* Professor Pearson marry early and suitably, and in securing

reproduces in his Life a copy of Galton's favour for their subsequent offspring. Some-

draft (Life, Vol. IIIA, pp. 292-6). There thing in this direction is commonly but half

is nothing remarkable about this pro forma. unconsciously done by many great land-

It asks nine personal questions designed to owners whose employments for man and

throw light on the applicant's physical con- wife, together with good cottages, are.given

stitution, on his athletic and academic to exceptionally deserving couples. The

distinctions, and on his character as re- advantage of being connected with a great

flected by the tenure of appointments or of and liberally managed estate being widely

positions of trust; and it asks for parti- appreciated, there are usually more appli-

culars of the applicant's fraternity and of cants than vacancies, so selection can be

those of his father and rmother.

exercised. The consequence is that the

It is not clear what standards were to be class of men found upon these properties is

applied by the authorities who were to issue markedly superior to those in similar posi-

these documents. How stgently were tions elsewhere," The virtues of this scheme

the recipients of certificates to be seleted? are two. Firstly, it would help promising

In one passage Galton suggests that only young men and women to make the most of

about one in twenty-seven persons should their natural abilities, and from this fulfilb

be eligible. And it is not evident from the ment the nation would benefit. Secondly,

pro forma what the authorities or examiners it might enable the young people to marry

were supposed to certify after having made earlier than they might otherwise do; and

a favourable assessment.

this is the more relevant of the two effects.

Adoption or Befriendment

Galton's proposals for befriendment would serve a eugenic purpose only if they resulted

Galton declares that there is no satis- in earlier marriage and more children than

factory word in the language to denote the would otherwise have occurred.

relationship he here proposes. The word " befriendment " partly conveyed his mean-

Immigration

ing; the term " patron " was odious. Throughout his life Galton wrote about

Galton had in mnind " that wholesome the debt owed by Britain to immigrants.

practice during all ages of wealthy persons But for some reason unexplained he does

interesting themselves in and befriending not develop the argument that we should

poor but promising lads. The number of encourage judicious immngration as part of

men who have owed their start in a successful a practical eugenic programme. I will

life to help of this kind must have struck quote two passages illustrating his views.

every reader of biographies. This relation- "Whatever other countries may or may

not have lost," wrote Galton in i869,*

* See Havelock Ellis, The Task of Social Hygiene,

Constable, 1927, p. 203, footnote.

* Hereditary Genius, p. xxiii.

GALTON ON EUGENICS AS SCIENCE AND PRACTICE

" ours has certainly gained on more -than of a gold rush, or that of carpet-baggers one occasion by the infusion of the breed of -into the Southern States of the U.S.A. after selected sub-races, especially of that of the the civil war, was enacted by different types Protestant refugees from religious persecu- of people and prompted by different motives tion on the continent. It seems reasonable than was a flight from religious persecution. to look upon the Huguenots as men who, The example of the Huguenots was often on the whole, had inborn qualities of a dis- used by Galton to illustrate the advantages
tinctive kind from the majority of their of selective immigration. He used it in a
countrymen, and who may, therefore, be presidential address to the Demographic spoken of as a sub-type-that is to say Congress in I891 and in an article in the capable, when isolated, of continuing their Jewish Chronicle as late as July I910. race without showing any strong tendency

to revert to the form of the earlier type from which it was a well-defined departure. It proved also that the cross-breed between them and our ancestors was a singularly
successful mixture. Consequently, England has been largely indebted to the natural refiement and to the solid worth of the
Huguenot breed, as well as to the culture and technical knowledge thait the Huguenots brought with them."
Fourteen years later Galton wrote :* "The debt that most countries owe to the race of men that they received from one another as immigrants, whether leaving their native country of their own free will, or as exiles on political or religious grounds, has been often pointed out, and may, I think, be accounted for as follows: The fact of a man leaving his compatriots, or so irritating them that they compel him to go, is fair evidence that either he, or they, or both, feel that his character is alien to theirs. Exiles are also on the whole men of considerable force of character; a quiet
man would endure and succumb, he would not have the energy to transplant himself
or to become so conspicuous as to become
an object of general attack. We may justly claim for this, that exiles are on the whole
men of exceptional and energetic natures, and it is especially from such men as these that new strains of men are likely to
proceed." Another passage could be quoted showing
that Galton's estimate of the effects of immigration depended on what was the impulse that caused it. The immigration

Marriage Laws
Though to my knowledge Galton never specified any definite feature of the existimg marriage laws of this country which he regards as dysgenic and therefore desired
to see altered, he was much preoccupied
with the customs which, throughout the
world, regulate marriage. In I905 he read a paper* to the Sociological Society on "Restrictions in Marriage," the general argument of which was that diverse traditions, limiting and directing the choice of marriage partners, had at different times and places become " hallowed by religion, accepted as custom and enforced by law." From such considerations, Galton argued, eugenic principles should receive the sanction of religion.
Of the conventions sanctioned or demanded by Christianity, one was especially singled out by Galton for condemnation on eugenic grounds, namely celibacy. " During the fifty or so generations," he wrote in I905, " that have elapsed since the establishment of Christianity, the nunneries and monasteries, and the celibate lives of Catholic priests, have had vast social effects." That he regarded these effects as almost wholly
bad Galton had made clear in i869.t
" The long period of the dark ages," Galton then wrote, " under which Europe has lain is due, I believe, in very considerable degree, to the celibacy enjoined by religious orders on their votaries. Whenever a man or woman was possessed by a gentle nature that fitted him or her -to deeds of charity,

* ITquies. p. 200.

* Essays in Eugenics, p. 44. t Hereditary Genus, p. 343.

I78 THE EUGENICS REVIEW-

to meditation, to literature, to art, the all was the education of the public in such

social condition of the time was such that principles of eugenics as the laws governing

they had no refuge elsewhere than in the variability of human beings, the laws of

bosom of the Church. But the Church heredity, and the processes of differential

chose to preach and exact celibacy. The fertility. By such education, the " con-

consequence was that these gentle natures ditions of law and sentiment" would be

had no continuance, and thus, by a policy changed; we would learn to see our way

so singularly unwise and suicidal that I more clearly and to define more precisely

am hardly able to speak about it without the immediate goals of policy.

impatience, the Church brutalized the breed

of our forefathers. She acted precisely as

A LONG-TERM POLICY

if she- had aimed at selecting the rudest
portion of the community to be, alone, the parents of future generations. She practised
the arts which breeders would use, who
aimed at creating ferocious, currish and stupid natures. No wonder that club law prevailed for centuries over Europe; the
wonder rather is that enough good remained in the veins of Europeans to enable their race to rise- to its very moderate level of natural morality."
But celibacy is not enjoined by the Protestant Churches, and I do not know of
any evidence that Galton would have altered any specific ordinance governing
marriage in these churches. We may sum up Galton's short-term
views: The social practice of eugenics must be subject to the existing conditions of law and sentiment, but these conditions are more malleable than might be supposed. We should collect information about large and thriving families with a view to assessig- how and in what degree they are gifted; also about families below the average. Local associations should be formed to promote these qualitative family studies; Galton thought that we were sufficiently near the time when eugenic certificates might be issued by a suitable authority, to prepare,
himself, a draft of such a certificate. He faryoured a process of adoption or befriendment of eugenically favoured boys and girls by persons of means. He believed in
encouraging the immigration of selected groups, including political refugees. He wished to see eugenic considerations applied
to marriage laws and customs so that the early marnrage of eugenically favoured

In the last year of his life Galton wrote a Utopia. He gave to his fantasia the title
of " Kantsaywhere," and the form of "Extracts from the Journal of the late
Professor I. Donoghue,* revised and edited in accordance with his request by Sir
Francis Galton, F.R.S." Galton began writing this work in May or June I9IO (he died on January I7th, I9iI), and submitted it to a publisher in December of that year-a few weeks *before he died.
The publisher refused it. Galton was sensitive to such criticism and decided to
destroy the MS. "Kantsaywhere," he wrote to his niece, " must be smothered or be suspended. It has been an amusement and it has cleared my thoughts to write it. So now let it go to ' Won't-say-where.'"
But a fragment was most fortunately preserved, and we owe a debt to Professor Karl Pearson for having given us the most
important passages (Life, IIIA, PP. 4II-
25). With certain reservations, we can treat this work as expressing Galton's vision
of a long-term policy. Kantsaywhere is a small state or country
with a seaboard. In i8io-a century before Galton wrote-it had a population of only 200. About that time a wealthy benefactor
left all his property to a council which was charged with improving the stock of the place, especially its human stock. A Eugenic College was established which flourished to such an extent that its trustees became " the sole proprietors of almost all the territory of Kantsaywhere, and they
exercise a correspondihg influence over the
whole population." Kantsaywhere con-

couples was encouraged. Most important of

* I don't know you.

GALTON ON EUGENICS AS SCIENCE AND PRACTICE

tained a town; but " the families of the Candidates who obtained high marks might

College and those of the town were connected obtain valuable advantages. If they later

by numerous marriages and common inter- married persons who had scored sufficient

ests, so that the relation between them is marks to raise the joint total to 200, the

more like that between the Fellows of a wedding was celebrated with special cere-

college and the undergraduates than between mony and was known as a " College Mar-

the town and gown of an English Univer- riage." The children of such marriages were

sity." In the hundred years since its regarded as foster-children of the College

founaation the population had increased during their childhood, and they and their

from 200 to I0,000. The original 200 in- " College parents " were helped in many

habitants accounted for I,000, and immi- important ways. Those persons who gained

gration had provided the rest.

more than seventy marks had their names in-

The form of government of the country is scribed in the Calendar of Kantsaywhere,

not described, but most of its functions where the record of their doings was detailed.

seem to be carried out by the Council of the It corresponded in length to the paragraphs

College.

of Debrett's- or Burke's Peerages, but

Immigrants to the country, most of whom differed from them in containing anthro-

seem to come by sea, have to be passed as pological facts and little else. It was a mine

fit to enter by registered medical men at the of information for inquirers into heredity.

principal ports from which they -embark.. The College was richly endowed and had

By the certificates of these 'practitioners four sources of income, of which one was a

immigrants are exempted from a more eugenic rate of I5S. a year per head. There

severe and tedious examination at the port was thus obtained from the io,ooo inhabi-

of e'ntry. But they are required later to tants of Kantsaywhere a total from the

pass the Poll examination which allows them annual eugenic rate of £7,500. About half

to become citizens of Kantsaywhere. In of the income from this rate and also from

this Poll examination, marks are awarded gifts to the College went to the Examminig,

to husband and wife; the number of Inspecting and Registering Departments of

children (if any) they are permitted to have the College. The other half went to Col-

depends on their joint marks. Galton legiates who needed help for the proper

devotes some space to the system of mark- nurture of their large families.

ing. If the marks exceed + 20, the re- It would appear that the country was

striction on child-bearing is nil and large governed by the University, for there is no

families are encouraged. If between + I0 mention of universal or any other kind of

and + 20 they are restricted by public suffrage. The Senate (presumably of the

sentiment to about three children. If over University and the country) consisted of all

o and under + I0 they are restricted to two residentcollegiatesofeithersexwhohadgained

children. If between o and -10 they are at least seventy marks or were the parents

restricted by law as well as sentiment to of children whose average marks exceeded

one child. If below - io offspring are seventy. The Senate was the supreme

wholly prohibited to them.

authority. But in quiet times three high

But the Poll examination is not the only officials, together with a council annually

one. There is in addition the Honours elected at a general meeting, managed

examination, which is taken by about eighty matters very much in their own way.

candidates a year. It consists of four parts An important committee of this Council

or divisions. The first is mainly anthropo- was charged with the care of those who

metric, the second is aesthetic and literary, failed to pass the Poll examination in

the third is medical and the fourth is eugenics. Such are undesirable as indi-

ancestral. Thirty marks was the highest viduals and dangerous to the community

obtainable in each of the divisions, giving a because of the likelihood of their propa-

possible total maximum of I20 marks. gating. These persons were encouraged to

i80 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

emigrate, but if they refused were subject lated by an oligarchy selected by tests.

to surveillance. The small number of insane Social status was decided by four tests which

and mentally defective were suitably segre- together took only four hours. The Senate

gated for life.

consisted of people who had gained high

Accounts are given of the physical appear- marks in these tests-seventy marks or

ances, social mores and religious convictions more. Supplementary marks might, under

of the inhabitants of Kantsaywhere which exceptional conditions, be awarded for

need not be mentioned.

"especially good service to the community

It would be a mistake to treat this fan- subsequent to the examination." But such

tasia too seriously, more especially as services were not taken into account as a

Galton decided twenty-four days before his routine. Galton had a bent for measuring

death to commit it to oblivion. Nor do we things. He was a pioneer in anthropometry

know how seriously Galton himself took it. and psychometry. It was natural for him

We are told that most of the essay was to believe that with future experience tests

dictated to his secretary and not written; would be evolved of high predictive value

also that the plot became entangled and that and that general confidence would be placed

one of the characters who had earlier been in their accuracy and reliability.

killed off had to be resuscitated. Neverthe- Galton's Utopia was amiably paterna-

less we are justified in thinking that the listic. He compared its working to that of

institutions Galton described reflected the i university wherein a relation of affection

general trend of his thought. Throughout and confidence existed between under-

his life he seems to have played with the graduates and dons; wherein the former

idea that power should finally lie with a never doubted the good intentions, the

eugenic corps d'tlito or caste. He spoke of honesty, the competence or the capacity to

a "golden book of thriving families" in legislate of their preceptors; and wherein

1904; and thirty years earlier, in 1873, he they willingly paid rates to support the

had the same idea in mind. He then wrote university's institutions and to endow the

of a "golden book of natural nobility," and children of their teachers. Some to-day

discussed' the consequences which might might see in Galton's fantasy something

ensue from a eugenic. caste becoming un- more sinister than paternalism: they might

popular. They might even be forced to discern the rudiments of a system of dic-

emigrate. ,And in I864 he was asking us to tatorship comparable to the travesty of

"give rein to our fancy and imagine a eugenics later evolved by the Nazis. But

Utopia-or a Laputa if you will-in which they would be wrong. Galton's other writings

a system of competitive examination for disclose in the most explicit language his

girls, as well as for youths, had been so dislike of tyrannies. But if any doubts linger

developed as to embrace every important in the reader's mind, let him consider the

quality of mind and body, and where a con- following passage:

siderable sum was yearly allotted to the " Our present ignorance of the conditions

endowment of such marriages as promised by which the level of humanity may be

to yield children who would grow into raised is so gross, that I believe that if we

eminent servants of the State."

had some dictator of the Spartan type, who

The ideas set out in Kantsaywhere had exercised absolute power over marriages,

been germinating in Galton's mind for nearly assigning A to be the wife of B, and C to

half a century. They probably expressed be the wife of D, and who acted with the

his speculation as to how a eugenically best intentions, he might possibly do even

organized state might be administered after more harm than good to the race."*

appropriate changes had been brought about If we were in search of an adjective to

in "existing conditions of law and senti- describe Galton's Utopia, we would not

ment." Reproductive functions were to be regu-

* From Galton's Record of Family Faculties, quoted
from Pearson's Life, Vol. II, p. 365.

DANISH EXPERIENCES IN NEGATIVE EUGENICS

choos such words as authoritarian or dic. scientific methods (expressed in anthro-

tatorial; we should select, rather, the pometric procedures) have not only been

epithet " naive." The desire for wealth, for statistically validated but publicly recog-

power, for social status and honours-nearly nized and universally accepted. The Senate

all the motives which, throughout history, of Kantsaywhere constitutes an oligarchy;

have contributed to political strife-have but the powers with which it is invested and

apparently beccme extinct. In Kantsay- which it freely exercises are no more re-

where. there are no rival political parties, garded by the country's imaginary inhabi-

no pressure groups, no caucuses, no in- tants as dictatorial than are the powers to-

trigue. What had become of these disturb- day wielded by an examinlng board so

ing yet formative movements ? Apparently regarded by the candidates who sit for the

the citizens had become as oblivious of them examination which it arbitrates. The man

as Galton had heen during the whole of his who is ploughed may be disappointed; he

life. They had shed them much as a snake may even feel bitterly aggrieved; but he

sheds its outgrown skin.

does not, if he is sane, regard himself as a

Galton's " Kantsaywhere " is projected victim of Fascism or as the slave of a

into a distant and visionary future when dictatorship.

DANISH EXPERIENCES IN NEGATIVE EUGENICS, 192945*

By TAGE KEMP
University Institute for Human Genetics, Copenhaten

IN 1883, when Francis Galton first formukted the principles of eugenics, the
possibilities of putting these pnnciples into practice were only slight, for but very little was yet known about human heredity. Long before a scientific foundation for eugenic theories had been provided, however, they were taken up by others, often with more enthusiasm than wisdom.
Eugenics soon spread to other countries, often under new names and, in some degree, with changes in content. In Denmark the term "hereditary hygiene " is now usually employed. In Germany, where eugenic ideas were introduced in the early 'nineties, the
* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on November x9th, 1946.

designation adopted was " race hygiene "- a concept which later was to be so grossly abused in the Third Reich. More recently
the term " eugenics " has been attached to any application of biology to social hygiene
in the widest sense of the term.
During the first epoch of eugenics towards the end of the past century and in the
beginning of this century, however, the whole subject was markedly speculative, for at that
time the study of heredity, which was to
form the scientific foundation of eugenics, was still in its infancy. Indeed, this essential basis of eugenics did not exist until the second and third decades of this century.
A distinction has been made between quantitative and qualitative eugenics, the

