THE EUGENICS REVIEW.
THE EUGENICS POLICY OF THE SOCIETY.
At the Annual Meeting of the Society, which was held by kind permissiotn at the rooms of the Royal Society on June 9th, M1kajor Darmin, the President, spoke as follows:
For a long time the need has beeni felt for some more definite pronouncenient of the aims of our Society, and during the last few months this question has occupied the close attention of your Council.
Personally I had always felt that any move in this directioni was not witlhout its dangers; for I feared it might reveal some serious differences within our ranks arid therefore do more harm than good. In presenting to you the results of our labours, though I am glad to say that my dismal forebodings have been falsified, yet I do wish to call your attention to the opening words of this document, namely, those slhowin betweeni brackets. If I may put the same thought in more familiar language it is that everv member of our Society is not expected to toe the line with regard to every item of this statement of our policy. In a new and progressive movement, I believe that great and lasting lharm would result from the promulgation of a programme
beyond which there was to be no advance and from which there could be no retreat. In social matters the choice before us often lies between
advancinig in a somewhat tentative manner and not advancing at all; and, when faced witlh suchl a choice, we should remember that the world will progress most rapidly if we decline to be checked by every doubt which may arise in our minds, whilst remaining ready to own that we have taken a false step. Those of you who, like myself, are prepared to agree with every item in this statement of policy ought not, therefore, to be surprised or even to regret to learn that a few of our most honoured members are inclined to think we have gone too far in certain directions, whilst others have no doubt that we have not gone far enough. Whlat we have tried to do is to state in general terms and in broad outline the lines of advance which meet with the approval of the great majority of the Council.
As you read througlh this programme several questions are likely
to present themselves to you for consideration. In certain respects you mav perhaps feel that we have gone into too great detail. On
that point I will only say that in any popular exposition of our policy

'9.2 EUGENICS REVIEW.
it might be wise to cut out several items, whilst expressiing the otlhers in more homely language. Writh regard to certain- reforms, yon will
probably enquire whetlher what is prol)osed does really come withlinl
the region of practical politics. Oni this subject I may perhaps call your attentioni to the concludinig words of the second paragrapl, where it is stated that to promote a change in public opinion must often be
a prelimillary step before attempting actually to initroduice the refori
in question. Grave harm has ofteni beeni donie in the 1east by the endeavour to
force on a reform for wihich the country was not prelared; and for a
long time to come our efforts in certaini directionis will probably have to be of ani educatioinal character.
Tlhen againi vou miay be inielinied to ask what are the exact imiethods by means of which it is proposed that somle of the reforms suggested should be effected, reforms here onlv inidicated in outline. It would of course be quite useless to propose for adoptioni anv nmeasure wlhich could not possibly be carried ouit eveni in the future; but this
we believe we have Inot done. All the proposals here made have beeni
studied sufficiently to make me feel sture that they are not only justi-
fiable but they are or will in time become practicable, that is if our future is to be one of racial advanicement. There are, however, often mnany ways of reachinig a desired end, anid it is probably wise in the
earlier stages of a controversy to endeavour to concentrate the attenitioni of the pub.ic on the ends ratlher thani oni the exact means. When once the object sought to be attained is acknowledged to be right anid desirable, then and not till theni will it alwavs be possible to discuss the mneans of attaining it in a sane and temperate way.
The necessity of getting the publ c to understand and appreciate our aims before we attempt to make kniowni the exact methods by
means of which we believe they canl be attained may be illustrated by reference to the paragraph headed, "Familv Limitatioin of the Less Fit,'" this being probably the iteni in our programme whlich raises the mllost difficult issues.
In passing I should like to emphasise the statement here made tlhat, abortion being ruled out, the choice of the mnethod of limitation should
rest entirely with the inidividuals concerniled. Contraceptive methlods, as compared with other unobjectionable metlhods of famiily limitation,
should be pressed on no one. The proposal to which I wish to call
especial attention is, however, that wheni the amount of public assistance given to a couple indicates the probability that further parenthood would be immediately injurious to the niationi and ultimately inijurious to the race, the State should be regarded as hiavinig the right to exercise a limited amount of pressure in order to promote famllily limllitation. Suclh pressure might be exercised in mainy ways, but until the right of the State to exercise it is admiitted, it is possible that the discussion of these methods might onilv serve to confuse the issue. Now it has been urged that if eugenics is founded on false assuni-ptionis, by applying any suclh pressure the State miglht be inflicting a grave injustice on millions of persons; and here, as in some other instances,
it may be wise in arguing this part of our case to assume that our

THE EUGENICS POLICY OF THE SOCIETY.

93

opponents are right in holdiing that natuiral inheritance is such an uncertain factor that it should be altogether neglected when discussing social problems. Making this entirely erroneous assumption, as it
seems to us, we can still ask our opponents whether they consider that
a married couple, who have already thrown a considerable burden for the mnaintenance of their family on the State, or in other words on their
neighbouirs, really have the abstract right to increase that burden to
an indefinite extent by the production of more children. In considering this question may I remind our opponents that, if they are right in
holdiiig that natural inheritance counits for nearly nothing in social matters, it follows that the differences between anv two families must depend almost entirely on the effect of their early surroundings, including all that may be described uncder the title of home traditions.
Now the home traditions acquired in a family long in the receipt of
much public assistance must as a general rule be inferior to those
acquired by social contact in the home, for example, of a highly skilled mechanic fully determined to be beholden to no man for the mainten-
ance of his family. Our opponents, if relying entirely on environ-
mental influences, cannot deny that families issuing from homes in
any degree parasitic must on the average exhibit in consequence some inferiority in that qualitv which we English admire so much, namely, in the spirit of determined self help. Can there be an abstract right
to damage the nation of the future by increasing the number of those in its ranks who exhibit any such average inferiority? Let it be
remembered also that the greater the faith placed in the effects of
environiment, the more freely must it be admitted that any acquired inferiority will be passed on to others bv social contact all through
life. The members of a family subject to inferior home influences
become centres from which by social contagion some injurious effects
will continually emanate, whilst the opposite effect is produced with
equal certainty by persons brought up in an atmosphere of higher ideals. Again let it be remembered that the burden of taxation thrown
on the public by the appearance of more dependent children will have
at all events some immediate effect in lessening the output of children from better homes.
The whole tone of the nation must be lowered both by a diminu-
tion iu the production of children from independent homes and by an increase in the issue from dependent homes; and, even if some material inconvenience or restraint is necessary to prevenit national social deterioration of this kind, can such a proceeding be described as unjust ? Our proposals in this respect are, we believe, fully justifiable even if natural inheritance is a figment of our imagination;
whilst if eugenics is based on solid grounds it is my firm conviction that it will only be by proceeding on the lines here broadly laid down
that the ination can be saved from racial deterioration. No doubt this Society has often to discuss topics which make us
liable to be misrepresenited; but this, I hold, should not prevent us fromi boldly facing the truth. I have just been reading an interesting book on Social Development, recently published bv Prof. Hobhouse, in which he criticises the position which he believes to be generally

94 EUGENICS REVIEW.
adopted by Eugcenists. He writes that lhe does "not accept relative poverty as a criterion of unfitness,'" (p. 121)appareiitlyin order to point to what he regards as a common error of Eugenists. My difficulty in dealing with this observation is to ascertain what is the exact scientific meaning initended to be conveyed by the word "criterion," and all I can do is to state mv own1 views in my owIn words. Wages and earnings-I do not say wealth or poverty-are, I hold, in some degree correlated withi valuable inborn qualities, or will become so correlated in the future;abelief rendered probable by a priori arguments and refuted by no facts known to me. But I would, however, rather quote Prof. Hobhouse's opinions when I believe them to be in accord witl our own views. In onie passage his words imply that "if the most justly organised Societv" is to result in the useful citizen being "more likely than the unisocial anid useless to perpetuate his stock," certain conditions must be fulfilled; one of these conditions beinig that Society whould make "it difficult to live except by social service." (p. 122) Taken quite literally the words "make it difficult to live' seein to point to measures far more drastic than any wlhiclh we have dared to propose. Parenthood implies life, and if I may substitute a nmore mildly worded condition covering much tIme same ground, niamely that Society should give no encouragement or sanction to the productionl of a familv excel)t by those wlho are rendering valuable social service to thie State, it appears to me that this is the exact condition which we in our programme are endeavouring to enforce. If Prof. Hobhouse, or anyonie else, will discuss the best way of enisuring the fulfilment of this conditioni, such discussionis will be most lhelpful to us in our future (leliberations.
The last paragraph of our programmie is intenided to nmake it clear that as individuals we are most anixious to play ouir part ini promloting all such social reform as we liold to be calculated to benefit the )resent genieration; for in this respect we have often been misrepresented. Here again I notice that Prof. Hobhouse writes that " it is a fallacy to infer that social progress or deterioration is reducible to racial progress or deterioratioi'' (pp. 112, 113), apparently implyiing that this is a comImionl EugeIic fallacy. Perhaps it has been so in the past, but I have now been for fifteen years the President of the onlv Eugenic Society in thlis country (a state of things, by the bye, whiclh slhould no longer be tolerated) and I am sure that no words of mine uttered during this period can be fairly so inuterpreted. To be Eugenists does not prevent us fronm being human beings and as human beings we are not blind to the social needs of our times or unreadv to play our part in social development. I fear I may have appeared to be very pessimistic in some of miy reiiarks to-day, for I certainly do hold that to march along the downward path of racial decline as I fear our nation is, doing at presenit, is very slowly but very surely to march towards grave disasters of unkniowni kincds. Of the truth of this forecast I am quite certain; but I will conclude by saying that, granted proper social
progress in this respect, I anm equally certain that this disaster can
be avoided bv the introduction of reforms somewhat on the lines suggested in broad outline in our programme.

