NATURAL REGULATION OF NUMBERS IN HUMAN POPULATIONS
By C. B. GOODHART M.A., Ph.D.,
University Museum of Zoology, Cambridge

RECENT discussions on the future of the human race have tended to be
.A..Xrather discouraging.1' 2 Malthus's fears proved to be unfounded under the quite
exceptional conditions of the nineteenth
century but it is usually taken for granted that his basic propositions remain unassail-
able. The population of the world has
certainly been increasing geometrically over the past few generations and if this continues it is bound eventually to outgrow the available food supply, when war,'famine or
pestilence will intervene to limit any'further
increase. It is true that in some animal species there may be other little understood
factors which limit population growth3 but these are not thought to have much relevance
to man, for whom the only solution appears to be the immediate and universal application of a policy of deliberate family limitation,4 and this is not likely to be either practicable or effective in time to save us from the crash. It is, however, important to
remember that the arguments of Malthus, though mathematically sound, are based upon the assumption that the potential rate of population growth in man has some specific and constant value which will be the same in the future as in the past unless it is artificially altered. This assumption remains unproven, and it may be worth while to consider whether there are any possible ways in which it might be falsified by natural as well as by artificial means.
Man has, as a matter of fact, a rather unusually low reproductive rate compared with most other animals. Women are fertile for less than half their normal lives, ovulation is inhibited during lactation and multiple births are rare, so that a woman who rears a dozen children in her lifetime is considered highly fertile. This number

could, however, be greatly increased without requiring any fundamental physical modifica-
tions to the human body, and there is no reason to doubt that these checks to fertility
have arisen in response to natural selection; if there were any real selective advantage in
higher fecundity it could easily have been evolved. Is it possible that the mean fertility of man could be still further lowered by
natural selection? If it were halved during the next five generations that would probably be enough to solve our problems. At first sight this may seem unlikely since evolution is usually thought of as a slow process working through hundreds of generations. There is, however, one exception to this rule; where natural selection is operating in a population already genetically heterogeneous
or polymorphic for the characters involved, and especially where the polymorphism results from a balance between two com-
peting types each having a selective advantage over the other in certain circumstances, any variation in selection pressure will alter the balance and lead quite rapidly to an important change in the mean value by altering the proportions of the two opposing types in the population as a whole. To apply this argument to human populations requires two assumptions; firstly that fecundity in man is under hereditary control, which is more than likely, and secondly that man is genetically heterogeneous for this character, a rather more doubtful suggestion for which however there is some supporting evidence. In man, of course, fertility depends not only on natural fecundity but also on psychological and social factors which may limit the fertility of potentially fecund individuals. Both physiological fecundity and these other factors may well be, at least to some extent, under genetic control.

173

174 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Increase in World Population
The'present rate of increase in the numbers of man is quite exceptional; up to a couple of centuries ago the population of the world was more or less stable or only slowly rising, and it has been estimated at about goo million in i8oo. By I900 it had increased to i,6oo million, at the present day it is estimated at 2,500 million and it seems certain to be 3,000 million before the end of this century. The rate of increase has however not been the same in all races and classes of mankind. Most attention is rightly paid to the peoples of Asia and Africa who are multiplying at such an extraordinary rate, but during the same period many races have had stable or declining numbers and a few seem to be in danger of extinction. The African Bushmen, Australian aborigines, Mongolians and Eskimos should not be forgotten when the present mean rate of increase in the world's population is extrapolated into the, future. A century ago Western Europeans had as high a rate of natural increase as any race before or since, and yet it has been arrested, admittedly partly by artificial means, in four generations. The same could happen to other races as well, and artificial family limitation is not necessarily the only factor involved, even in Europe.
Factors Controlling Fecundity
The selective advantages of fecundity are obvious and they are particularly strong in dense populations living under unhygienic conditions subject to a high rate of infant mortality and to acute epidemic disease. Where only a fraction of the children born can expect to survive to rear families of their own a large family has a better chance of being represented in the next generation than a smaller one, irrespective of the quality of the individuals involved; many of the less fertile families will be completely eliminated. It follows, therefore, that in dense disease-ridden populations selection in favour of fecundity and resistance to disease will be relatively stronger than for most other qualities, and if mortality is lowered by improved conditions there will

be a sudden and rapid rise in numbers.
However, in primitive races of pastoral nomads or hunters, living widely separated
under hygienic conditions, disease may be less important and the principal limiting
factor will be periodical shortages of food. Here fecundity loses much of its selective
advantage compared to other qualities such as strength and intelligence, and it may even become a liability. In a bad year an Eskimo might be able to find just enough food to keep two or three children from starving but if it had to be shared among ten all would die. It is known that in animals fecundity can be altered by natural selection. Lack5 has shown that in some birds clutch size has become genetically adjusted to the supply of food available for feeding the brood. The same effect is found in mammals, for example the fertility of pigs has been greatly increased by domestication; the European wild pig produces a yearly litter of four or five while a Large White sow will farrow ten to twelve piglets twice a year. In man also there is good evidence of inherited differences in fertility between different families, discounting any environmental effects.7
It is perhaps significant that it is just the primitive and usually strong and healthy nomadic peoples that are unable to replenish themselves after they have been reduced by disease. The often unhealthy and apparently less virile races from dense centres of population seem able to recover their numbers almost immediately after the most disastrous epidemics of disease, and to compete successfully with any other races with whom they are brought into contact. In Fiji, for instance, the Indian settlers, who have come from densely populated and disease-ridden areas, are increasing their numbers very much more rapidly than the native Fijians, although both races enjoy much the same conditions of life and it is unlikely that artificial methods of family limitation are of much importance in either group.
These are admittedly rather special cases and the argument does not apply to more civilized races whose declining numbers cannot be explained on the basis of genetical

NATURAL REGULATION OF NUMBERS

I75

selection by famine. It is notorious that the infancy are still those whose mothers do

most successful nations and classes of have an adequate supply of milk. Milk

mankind are seldom able in the long run to yield in cattle has been greatly increased in

maintain their numbers and it has been quite a short time by deliberate selection

suggested that the conditions produced by under domestication; in civilized man the

civilization and a high standard of living opposite has occurred, also probably in quite

may by themselves be unfavourable to a short time, when selection was relaxed.

fertility. It is certainly true that the more The same may have happened in man

or less stable population in North-Western with regard to fecundity. A large family is

Europe at the present time owes much to likely to be represented in the next genera-,

the introduction of artificial methods of tion even though its members are individually

family limitation which are only practicable of low quality, but a man with a single

in relatively advanced and prosperous com- daughter may easily leave no grandchildren

munities, but the almost universal rule of at all if she is ill-favoured, although if she is

declining numbers in advanced civilizations exceptionally good looking and intelligent

dates back before the discovery of artificial she should have no difficulty in finding a

means of bringing it about, apart from husband. A man's choice of a wife is

deliberate abortion, which may at some influenced by her appearance, intelligence,

times have been of importance. The possibil- sympathetic nature, wealth and many other

ity that the qualities leading to success qualities, and these are not necessarily

in man may have become genetically correlated with high fecundity.

a

correlated with relatively low fecundity If there is this tendency in man for the

cannot be disregarded and, although this is more desirable qualities to become associated

another unproven assumption, there are with low fecundity there are mechanisms by

some theoretical reasons for supposing that which it could become fixed in the genotype.

it may be justified.

Continuous selection against low fecundity

Under most conditions high fertility has a without the other compensating qualities will

clear selective advantage in itself, irrespec- favour forms in which these characters

tive of any other qualities with which it may are genetically associated and in the course

be associated, but the less fecund lines will of time the association should become closer.

only survive if they have other hereditary There are many examples of this having

qualities of high survival value to offset the occurred in polymorphic animal species.

disadvantages of low fertility. It has been If therefore man is polymorphic for fertility

suggested8 that where there is rigorous (as to some extent he certainly is, since

selection for one particular genetic character complete sterility is not uncommon) then

there tends. to be a loss of fitness, by a it is likely that the polymorphism is main-

process of " genetical erosion," in all other tained by a balance between high fecundity

characters subject to less intense selection. on the one hand and other qualities of high

There is probably an example of this effect survival value associated with low fecundity

in man with milk yield. Women of primi- on the other. Any such equilibrium will be

tive peoples usually produce a copious flow disturbed if the mortality rate in early life is

of milk, provided they receive adequate altered, and if it is lowered the relative

food, but a considerable proportiorn of more advantage of high fecundity will be dimin-

civilized mothers are unable to feed their ished since a larger proportion of the

own babies. This is not likely to be due population will survive to an age at which

directly to the easier life led by civilized the less fecund can gain the full advantage of

women, but it is true that, since artificial their presumed superiority in competition.

feeding is now perfectly satisfactory, selec- Thus as the numbers grow the proportion of

tion against low milk yield among them has families of high quality and low fertility

ceased, although in less advanced peoples should increase in each generation, which

the only children that are likely to survive will progressively lower the mean fertility of

I76 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the population as a whole. The well-known disturbing the sex ratio equilibrium. There

example of industrial melanism in moths9 has always been a slight excess in the number

shows the effect of an alteration in selection of boy babies born, but their mortality is

pressure on such an equilibrium. Where higher so that by maturity- the balance has

there is predator selection against melanic been restored. A fall in mortality has a

forms .they remain rare, but as soon as greater effect on the survival of boys, whose

selection pressure is relaxed other compensa- mortality was originally higher, than on

ting qualities associated with the gene for girls, and this is leading to an increase

melanism allow it to spread rapidly through- in the proportion of males in the whole

out the population. The relatively higher population.

viability of melanic forms is probably itself a

direct result of past predator selection Population Trends in Ireland

against them, only the most viable will have All this is of course rather speculative, but

survived at all.

it is instructive to consider the population

problems of Ireland which do suggest that

Intelligence and Fertility

selection against fecundity may have had

In advanced human communities it is important results in quite a short period of

recognized that the most fertile families are time.11 Before I750 the Irish lived in

usually below the average in intelligence, and conditions of great poverty and must have

if this character is inherited a progressive had a high rate of infant mortality with

decline in the intelligence of the population correspondingly high selection for fecundity.

as a whole is to be expected. In fact no such The introduction of the potato then raised

decline has been found,'0 and a possible the standard of living of the people and

explanation of the apparent stability of the there was an extraordinary increase in the

mean level of intelligence is that individually population, similar to but greater than that

the less intelligent may have less chance of occurring at the same time in England and

leaving descendants even though a few of elsewhere.'2 In I845 the potatoes became

them have the largest families of all. The infected with blight and, as an inevitable

observed correlation of low intelligence with result of relying on a single food crop, there

high fertility does not necessarily, mean that was widespread famine, disease and emigra-

as a group the less intelligent are the more tion. In the normal course of events the

fecund, the range of family size may be population, which had shown itself to be

greater, but if there is also a higher propor- highly fertile, should have replenished itself

tion of persons who leave few or no surviving rapidly and continued its growth with only a

children, the mean family size may not be slight check. But this did not happen and

above that for people of normal intelligence. the population of Ireland has continued to

The number of great-great-grandchildren decline until it is now less than half what it

rather than the number of children is the was in I840, although most neighbouring

better test of survival value, and a line with nations have doubled themselves during the

a consistently high proportion of smaller same period., The probable explanation of

families of good quality may well be at an this decline is that since the famine there has

advantage, especially when indiscriminate been rather strong selection against large

mortality from disease is low, compared to families, although artificial restriction of

another of lower quality with a few highly numbers has probably been less important in

fertile individuals but with the majority Ireland than elsewhere. In the first place

leaving no descendants at all. The few large families are likely to have been worse

highly fertile families are most conspicuous affected by the famine than smaller ones;

in the pedigree; the aunts and uncles who many small families may have had just

died childless may often be overlooked. This enough food to save themselves from starva-

lowering of the mortality rate in civilized tion, but where there were numerous children

man is having a rather similar effect in to share what little was available all would

NATURAL REGULATION OF NUMBERS

I77

be weakened by hunger and would probably World Population Trends

have died. Secondly, and perhaps even more If this interpretation is correct it suggests

important, emigration is likely to have been that human populations must be geneticaUy selective. An only son who has hopes of heterogeneous for factors determining fer-

inheriting the family property, however tility, for natural selection could only have impoverished, will be reluctant to leave, but produced so rapid a transformation from

if it is to be shared among half a dozen brothers, all will be more inclined to emigrate during bad times. By I850 the population of Ireland would have lost most of its more fecund members leaving the task of replacement to the genetically less fecund who

high to low fertility if it were operating in an already genetically heterogeneous population. The same process may be occurring in other European nations, th6ugh more slowly than in Ireland where it has been encouraged by the special factors that have been

remained. Nearly five millions of people mentioned. Throughout much of Europe the have probably emigrated from Ireland to the very rapid growth of population after the

United States, but the number of Americans Industrial Revolution has now been replaced

of Irish descent at the present time is by stability, and experience suggests that this considerably more than that. The emigrants may soon be followed by a decline in numfrom Ireland must therefore have maintained bers. Some large increase in the population

their fecundity, unlike those left behind, of Asia and Africa in the immediate future

even though it may be true that for social is inevitable, but it may reasonably be

reasons the rate of increase of the Irish in doubted whether the present rate of increase

America is now less than that of some other will be maintained much longer, and the more immigrant groups. For various special that conditions of life can be improved and

reasons this process will have been continued mortality reduced the faster it should fall.

since the famine. A girl's chances of marriage It would indeed be of the greatest importance in Ireland depended largely on the size of her that conditions should be improved since the dowry, which would be inversely related to factors that have been postulated as limiting

the number of sisters who had to share it. the rate of natural increase can only operate The peasant economy required that all when a large proportion of the children born

members of the family should remain on the do survive to maturity, thus lessening the

farm as unpaid workers, and this tended to overriding selective advantage of fecundity

delay the date of marriage and so reduce the compared with all other inherited characters.

number of children born. That in itself was Malthus's predictions proved wrong during an important though not a genetical factor in the nineteenth century because unforeseen

limiting population growth, but it is also likely that the more enterprising and virile
young men and the more highly sexed girls would have refused to accept these restrictions and these are the ones that will have

improvements in production were able to keep pace with the increase in population'. This cannot go on much longer, but Malthus's other assumption of a constant figure for human fecundity is also open to question;

left the country. Nor is the influence of the there are other perfectly possible alternatives

Roman Catholic Church to be neglected; that can be suggested. The present geometricelibate priests and nuns are probably mainly cal increase in the numbers of man certainly

recruited from the larger families where their could be halted by natural selection and it is

departure will not affect the running of the satisfactory to realize that famine, disease and

family farm and will improve the prospects war may not necessarily be the only natural

of inheritance or dowry for those who remain. checks available, however little reliance is to

It would not be surprising to find that the be placed on the efficacy of human wisdom

mean number of brothers and sisters to each and self-restraint.

priest and nun in Ireland is significantly

higher than among married people of the Conclusions

same age.

It is suggested as a hypothesis that human

I78 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

populations may be genetically heterogen-
eous for factors affecting fertility, and that this heterogeneity is maintained by a balance of selective advantage of high fecundity on
the one hand and other qualities of high survival value associated with lower fertility on the other. Such an equilibrium will be unstable and the relative advantage of the superior qualities associated with lower fertility will be greatest when mortality is low. If a large proportion of individuals are killed off indiscriminately by disease at an early age before those with potentially superior qualities are able to benefit from the effects of competition with the rest of the population there is a real danger that the superior but relatively infertile lines will become extinct. It is to be expected that in dense disease-ridden populations the mean fertility should be disproportionately high, so that improvements in hygiene and medicine will lead to a dramatic increase in numbers. As soon as the early indiscriminate deathrate from infective disease is reduced, however, the lower fertility lines will begin to benefit in full from their presumed superior competitive qualities, and so will form an increasing proportion of future generations. As a result of this the mean fertility of the population will fall and the original high rate of natural increase should taper off until a new equilibrium is established at a higher absolute level of numbers with the lower

mortality- offset by lowered fertility, and also
perhaps a higher mean level of inherited quality. This is contrary to expectation on orthodox Malthusian theory, which assumes that human fecundity is invariable. There are, however, reasons for believing that this may not be so and that fecundity in man is subject to alteration by natural selection, like any other character that is genetically inh&rited.
REFERENCES
i. Cragg, J. B. and Pirie, N. W. (Editors). 1955.
The Nutmbers of Man and Animals, Oliver and
Boyd. 2. Shlyapentokh, V. E., Priroda. 1954. 3. II8. 3. Chitty, D., in Cragg and Pirie, 1955, pp. 57-67. 4. Darwin, Charles G., I952. The Next Million Years,
Hart-Davis. 5. Lack, D., I954. The Natural Regulation of Animal
Nuimbers. Clarendon Press, 6. Asdell, S. A., I946. Patterns of Mammalian
Reproduction, Ithaca. 7. Fisher, R. A., 1930. The Genetical Theory of
Natural Selection, Clarendon Press. 8. Harland, S.C., I955. Advancement of Science.
11, 383. 9. Ford, E. B., 1945. Biol. Revs. 20. 73. io. The Trend of Scottish Intelligence, I947. I949.
U.O.L.P. ii. O'Brien, J. A., I954. The Vanishing Irish, W. H.
Allen.
I2. Plumb, J. H., 1950. England in the i8th Century.
Pelican Books.

