RACE AND POLITICS

By PROFESSOR H. J. FLEURE, D.Sc.

Tr9 HE disastrous twisting of anthropo- the major groups. Dr. Haddon has often

logical ideas for political ends which suggested that hair is a better basis of

is doing so much. harm to scientific classification than the common one of colour.

repute in some countries has called forth a It is probably wisest to use hair character

welcome protest from three British authors (kinky, wavy, lank) as the basis of classifica-

in an eminently readable work,* endeavour- tion of main groups, after setting aside

ing " to bring together the chief scientific certain groups that appear to include

facts now available on the subject of 'race' survivors of early drifts of mankind, which

in man-in other words, the genetic differ- retain characteristics of great interest from

ences between human groups-and to present an evolutionary standpoint.

them in the light of established scientific When we come to the smaller groups

principles." They remark that "often a within the three large ones there are diffi-

nation is a society united by a common error culties. Men have moved and mixed again

as to its origin and a common aversion to its and again. What is the result? Some say

neighbours "!

that mixture is so intimate as to give racial

Perhaps it were better to say aversion to homogeneity of an old-established popula-

its neighbours and its minorities, and here tion without marriage-barriers. If so, then a

the sadistic treatment of the Jewish minority graph of the variations of each of the most

in Germany is the worst case in point. It conspicuous characters-head form, stature,

is also astonishingly ill-advised, as the rulers nose fonn, colounrng and so on-is as much

of the country had an unparalleled oppor- as we could hope to get. In following this

tunity for making their position and prestige method we should be describing peoples in

secure had they made their treatment of terms of an average that would usually

minorities an example that might have given be an average for a political area or national

them grounds for claiming good treatment group. We could easily drift in this way in-

for German minorities in other lands. Such to an idea of physical diversities between

wisdom would also have strengthened their nations which would be exaggerated.

plea for a share of the responsibilities that the The outstanding fact of direct observation

white man carries in relation to intertropical is that in each nation we find tall and short,

lands.

dark and fair, long heads and broad heads,

The authors' statement about European and, in spite of centuries of intermarriage,

peoples attempts to be fair, and fully realizes they show little if any tendency to settle

that we are all of rather mixed ancestry; down to an average. Bundles of physical

indeed, it carries the discussion of the prob- characters are apparently very frequently

lems involved as far as is possible in a small handed down through the generations and

book designed for the general reader. While our so-called racial names such as, in Europe,

there is no very serious difficulty in dis- Nordic, Alpine, Mediterranean and others,

criminating between the more typical repre- are convenient designations of such bundles

sentatives of the major groups of mankind, of characters, most of them with a long

whether we call them species, sub-species or history behind them, though we should be

races, this does not imply that there is no careful not to assume too lightly that there

difficulty about a reasonable definition of ever was a group that was entirely and

purely Nordic or Alpine or Mediterranean.

* Huxley, Julian, Haddon, A. C., and Carr-Saunders, A. M. We Europeans. London, 1935. Jonathan Cape.

In studying a population we should therefore

Pp. 299. Price 8s. 6d.

try to see how physical characters are

3I9

320 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

bundled together in different persons, at the mental fatigue which makes men relapse into

same time fully realizing that even a person acceptance of authoritarian decisions more

with a very large bundle of, let us say, Nordic often than is inevitable.

or Mediterranean characters may have had in Outside Sweden and Norway there are

his ancestry people who showed Alpine and sprinklings of the Nordic bundle in various

other traits. This means that we are dealing European lands, a good deal in the British

with something different from the contrasts Isles, a relatively moderate amount in Ger-

between the typical representatives of the many, where the cephalic index is so generally

three great groups, the wavy-, kinky- and too high and the face so generally suggests

lank-haired peoples of the world, in which either the Alpine or the so-called East Baltic or

cases long descent can be traced without some other bundle. France, Hungary, Poland

intermixture outside the great group.

and Russia and so on all show examples of

It is the Nordic bundle of characters that this bundle of characters too, and it could no

has been most called into discussions of a doubt be traced farther still. The fancy that

political character. When we are dealing with cephalic index is modified by various habits

a tall, long-legged, spare-built, blue-eyed, of nursing may be dismissed as unsupported

fair-haired, narrow-nosed, long-faced man by evidence; artificial deformations are

with regular features and a cranial index un- practised in certain lands, but the means

der about 77*5 (ora cephalic index under 78 5) taken are much more severe.

we are on firm ground, and there are indica- Of the contributions to the social life and

tions that the upper limit of value of the intellectual achievements of the various

cephalic index might be raised a little. We peoples which have been made by persons

can, however, only with some difficulty carrying the Nordic bundle of physical

make an effective line between this bundle characters little that is profitable can be said.

and another that the Swedes call East. Pictures and photographs of past and present

Baltic, in which the index is higher, the nose leaders in British and German life at any

is different, the face less regular and, per- rate bring out the great contributions of other

haps, the colouring less blonde and the elements. In the case of Germany neither

stature lower.

Luther nor Kant nor Bismarck was Nordic;

The Nordic bundle of characters is most none of the trio, Hitler, Goebbels, Goering,

characteristically handed down in the now in power, can be put into that class, and

Swedish and Norwegian populations, where that class seems not to have contributed to it is so prevalent as to set the tone. Any the intellectuality which was such a feature

attempt, and all such attempts are hazardous, of Germany until recently in the same proto draw conclusions about mental and moral portion as did the varied Jewish elements.

features associated with particular characters What is such a strange feature of so many should therefore take most serious note of of those who idealize the Nordic type is that

features noticeable among Norwegians and they diverge more and more from the

Swedes, both in their homelands and in lands methods so characteristic of Swedish and

to which they may emigrate.

Norwegian dealings, and seem to copy the

That these populations show valuable ideas that have found favour in post-.

mental and moral qualities will be widely revolutionary Russia. The ravings of Hous-

admitted. How far they are to be considered ton Stewart Chamberlain have brought a

as inherently associated with certain physical sad harvest.

characters, and how far they express results A special note of appreciation of the chap-

of environmental influences, remains to be ter on " Europe Overseas " by Professor

seen; we are far from being able to make a Carr-Saunders must be added. It deals with

statement here.

many problems affecting emigration policies,

It is at any rate clear that sadism is not and draws attention to the large non-Nordic

a character any observer would associate element that went to the original building

with those populations, neither is that up of the United States of America.

Eugeics Review, Vol. XVH, No. 4

