MY OUTLOOK ON EUGENICS
The Galton Lecture, Thursday, February 16th, 1933

By the Honble. MR. JUSTICE McCARDIE

I HAVE been asked to speak to-night on my "Outlook on Eugenics." I chose that title because I am addressing
you not as a lawyer or biologist, but as a British citizen with a deep and abiding interest in the welfare of the nation.
No one can speak at a gathering such as this without paying a tribute to the late

than false modesty, and knowledge is a

nobler thing than ignorance. The certain-

ties of modern science are more than the baseless theories of former centuries. I

hope that before long we shall find that

mere tradition has for the continued

ceased to be an excuse existence of preventable

human misery.

Sir Francis Galton. It was he who first

gave impulse to the eugenic movement and THE BASIS OF EUGENICS

brought home to the minds of thinking people the vital significance of the hereditary factor in each individual life. It was he also who exposed the dangerous fallacy that good environment could of itself restore health and strength to the nation. He loved the truth and he had the courage to proclaim it. His name will live in the social history of this country as a great pioneer in the work of racial improvement.
If Sir Francis Galton could be here to-night he would find that his work and inspiration had produced a rich harvest of results. It is just over sixty years since he published his famous book on Hereditary Genius. It is fifty years since he created the great word ' Eugenics.' What magnificent progress has been made since then. It stirs my heart to know that with

I speak on matters occupied my attention,

which have on which I

long have

collected information and statistics from

mwmiaudsnetylys,pqeauaankrdtietnrhsbo,ruogahodtnoumtwulhciihnc.ehonBlIyu.thYtaovo-eunikgrhnetoawdI

tMmdocGthioaeohesntnrettetrgfirsssaoni,.ugbnnuuoodtiffisanhtaBPBgeiniuadodontnilnesnoesltgolhaftyaniub,is,lodluaorbtnmfscyhdeoeCalMalsoesebfubantirrgldioeuele-Delclseitha,,aoennmtdtoiVhursaeowritnfeoredsyrxkm,pknaeortanwihrooy--eeff

ledge. Eugenics is now a science. It rests

on the excellent is given

rock of established fact. An summary of the results achieved in the recent volume by Dr. Hurst

entitled tion.

The

Mechanism

of

Creative

Evolu-

every decade, aye, with every year, the rate of advance is accelerated and that men and women in all ranks are now demanding that the truth shall no longer be concealed, that the facts of life shall be faced with unswerving courage, and that ignorance and prejudice shall no longer be allowed to menace the happiness and the advance of our race.
You have already captured many outposts, and you will, I hope, soon overcome the citadel of opposition-with the strong weapons of argument, of fact, and of unconquerable truth. For truth is greater

To-night is not an occasion for technical

bdseurtpoapaiold,seo,ubtuwlthooirkca.hthaerTrehefcrolreeargaertneoerasalollmoerfevtuhisie:nwgsa,ndI

First: That many traditions of the nation anti-eugenic and that gravely from centuries

of the habits and are still profoundly we are suffering of false ideas.

mtoo-Ssdetacyo.mnodmlIeyt:nttoTruhasanstciesensudugseeniabclelsformieserietnhefpaoclnitattiitcohanel

controversy. example, is

The problem from the racial

of tariffs, for point of view

a transitory one only. The problem of

7

8 THZ EUGENICS REVIEW

taxation i also a passing one from the like separate the economic and financial life of

point of view. It can be dealt with by a the nation from its eugenic life. The two

few Acts of Parliament. But the sound life are interlinked and they react in the clt

of our nation, not for a decade only, but for fashion. The public of this country will

the long range of years ahead, depeds on soon, I hope, begin to realize the position

the views which the people of this contry as it is to-day. May we not hope that

adopt on the great matter of engenics. statesmen and politicians will in due course

What path shall we choose? National give their thought and their public utter-

strength or national decay? National ances to the grvest evils and problems of

fitness or national inefficiency? Nature all?

cares nothing for the catchwords of poli- Let us glance for a moment round the

ticians. She will always enforce her world. Mark the position of Great Britain.

penalties in the end.

She is ringed round with powerful, with

In my view eugentcs and national welfare splendidly equipped and merciless com-

must stand or fall together.

petitors in every branch of world trade and

For a long time past not only have we industrial activity. She stands at bay.

produced the unfit to an appalling extent, She is struggling not for mere prosperity

but we have preserved them with all the but for the very standards of life. She

ingenious and kindly resources that the has a vast population on a very small

modern humanitarian instinct can com- island. She must fight for her needed

mand. We have already created a burden share in world trade. She must fight for

under which the nation begins to stagger. her commercial existence. By the issue of

Let us face the far-reaching truth that the that struggle we shall stand or fall in the

more we procreate and then preserve those great contest which is taking place before

who are unfit in mind or body, the lower our eyes.

the nation must ultimately sink. The How can the British maintain their place

strength of a people depends, in the final amongst the nations if they are cumbered

result, on the physical and mental quality and weighed down by an ever growing

of its citizens. A nation cannot thrive if mass of the physically and mentally unfit?

the basis of its physical life becomes The back of the nation is bending

increasingly wrong.

beneath the burden. I abstain from statis-

tical detail. It can only emphasize the

THE BURDEN OF THE UNFIT

weight of the load we already carry. A

As I speak to-night I do not trouble with nation can only survive in the world

minor variations of statistical result. The struggle if the units of national life are

actually insane may be I5o,ooo instead of healthy and strong.

200,000. Those who are actually mentally I venture to emphasize that eugenics-

defective may be 300,000 instead of the science and the duty of racial improve-

400,000. But there is still one grave and ment-is the paramount issue at the

predominant fact which no honest investi- present time. He who can awaken a

gator can doubt. It is this: One-tenth of eugenic conscience amongst our people will

those wh6 make up the nation are physi- in very truth be the saviour of the race.

cally or mentally unfitted to be citizens.

It is this terrble aggregate of defective stock which is sapping our life as a people,

THE PRESENT AND THE FUTURE

and which exists and grows like a cancer We have reached a critical period in our

in our midst.

history. The march of science is bringing

It is significant indeed that about one freedom to men and women. The future

in every ten of our people is either too dull of Britain depends on our response to the

or too weakly to earn a living unaided. new knowledge and the new principles, and

Let us remember that we can never on the resolve of all classes to achieve a

MY OUTLOOK ON EUGENICS

g

higher standard of mental and physical to make rapid progress in the eral

efficiency.

adoption of eugenic principles.

We must all be forced to realize the grim In my view the existing divorce law of

facts of heredity. And so I feel that every this country represents in striking degree

member of the Society should be a that narrow vision and erroneous prejudice

crusader. He represents a great cause. He which hinder so greatly the march of social

must not flinch from opposition. He can progress. We can never separate eugenics

ask for the support of all who place the from the question of marriage and we can

welfare of the people above the appeal of never separate the question of marriage

obsolete tradition and ill-founded dogma. itself from the question of the dissolution

There are some broad truths which I of the marriage tie. Marriage is an insti-

wish we could drive home at once to every tution, a great institution, which touches

member of the public.

most closely the main objects of eugenic

First: that the physically unfit usually reformers. The vast majority of the

beget the physically unfit.

physically and mentally deficient are born

Secondly: that the mentally unfit within and not outside the marrage bond.

usually beget the mentally unfit. Thirdly: that mental defectives, whether
low grade or high grade, usually beget

We cannot divide the social and family life of the people into separate compartments,
any more than we can divide that social and

mental defectives.

family life from the grave economic

Fourthly: that we shall never improve problems of to-day.

the general standard of life in this country I need not dwell on the significance, from

until we greatly lessen the proportion of a eugenic point of view, of the vast number

the mentally and physically unfit to the of separation orders made throughout the

general population.

country by Courts of Summary Jurisdic-

THE DEMOCRACY OF EUGENICS

tion. By judicial decree the husband and wife live apart, but the marriage tie

Eugenics is not a science which exists remains. The widespread evils are known to help the well-to-do. It is a science which to every social reformer.

will give its best and noblest results when But there is something graver still when

applied by the poor, the suffering, and the we look with unbiased eyes at the law which

afflicted. It is, in my view, the greatest single instrument which thought could

must be administered by Act of Parliament in the Divorce Division of the High Court.

devise or theology suggest for raising the masses of England to a higher level of life.
I wish that each one of the general public

For over twenty years the report of Lord Gorrell's Commission has been, to a large extent, ignored.

would realize that the birth of each single defective child helps to thrust down the

I can feel no doubt that those who live in Great Britain thirty years hence will

standard of living throughout the whole of the country.

look upon our existing divorce law as
unworthy of the civilization we claim to

DIVORCE REFORM I have spoken of the broader aspects of
eugenics. If I am asked to name the first practical proposal that I make, my answer is that I would at once reform the divorce law of this country. I think that such a reform is desirable for psychological as well as practical reasons. Until we achieve an improvement in the present system of divorce we shall find it the more difficult

possess. It will seem as incredible to them as it is to me that divorce should be granted for a single act of adultery, whilst it should be denied where the whole purpose of marriage has been utterly frustrated by deliberate and permanent desertion.
Equally strange will it seem that the
law should insist on the lifelong con-
tinuance of the marriage tie although one of the spouses should become incurably
insane; and perhaps it will seem even

io THE EUGENICS REVIEW

stranger that divorce should be denied to of the realities of life. The fabric of

a wife who has suffered the most brutal and marriage can only be preserved in good

repeated physical violence from her order by the repair and reform which are

husband.

long overdue. I have long held the opinion

These are only a few of the illustrations. that those who oppose the reform of the

There are others just as cogent. I do not divorce law are in fact the worst enemies

wonder at the indignation expressed by the of the great institution of marriage. They

late Lord Birkenhead in his great speech are undermining the fabric itself.

on divorce reform in the House of Lords

on March 4th, 1920. It seems to me that THE NEED FOR STERILIZATION

when once the principle of dissolution was The eugenist is bound to face the

established by the famous Act of 1857, it question of the sterilization of the

should have been applied long before this mentally defective and of certain types of

in accordance with the rules of obvious the physically unfit.

justice and good sense.

You are familiar, I know, with the litera-

A future generation will also think it ture and statistics on the matter both as

remarkable that in the year 1933 the law to Britain and other countries. The task

still was that if only one of the spouses that lies before you is to make the nation

has committed adultery a divorce would realize the need of measures for steriliza-

be granted, whereas if both spouses had tion. We may take it that there are about

committed adultery (even in pursuance 350,ooo at least of mental defectives scat-

of a permanent attachment on each side to tered throughout Great Britain. Of these

a third person) a divorce would often be only a small percentage are under institu-

refused. I abstain from technical detail. tional treatment; and a certain number are

It is enough to state things broadly. I under supervision, which may or may not

trust the time is not far distant when the be effective. But a vast number of mental

repulsive duties of the King's Proctor will defectives are to be found throughout the

be swept away and when the unhappy country who are not only free to beget

doctrine of collusion as it at present exists children outside the marriage tie, but are

will be reduced to a narrower and more also free to marry at their own will and

reasonable compass. The doctrine of to beget offspring as often as they wish.

collusion is a relic of a deplorable past, and Now heredity is, by far, the largest

it is the ugly concomitant of a code which single cause of mental deficiency. The

is entirely out of date.

hideous taint is transmitted on and on and

The restricted nature of our existing on, and many thousands of innocent

divorce law is, in my view, opposed to the children are thereby brought into the

eugenic interests of this country. I do not world with the doom of misery and degra-

forget that the children of a marriage must dation about them. I need scarcely pause

be considered. But, in ny view, it is never to give illustrations. You will find them

in the true interests of the children that not only in official reports, but in any

a repugnant or worthless marriage tie source of information you care to consult.

should be permanently maintained.

They are appalling. Again and again I

I should like to point out that never have myself come upon cases where a

before has there been so large a body of mentally defective mother has produced

those who criticize our existing marriage seven or eight mentally defective children.

institution. The dissatisfaction grows day I recall one case where a mentally defective

by day. It is gripping the minds of many woman, who was unmarried, had produced

of the ablest amongst the younger writers eight mentally defective children, and

and speakers. The area of resentment is where several of those mentally defective

ever widening owing to the harshness of children had in their turn produced

our present law of divorce and its disdain mentally defective offspring.

MY OUTLOOK ON EUGENICS

xI

This stream of taintd children is still a system of voluntary sterilization which

flowing throughout the ntry. It may would prevent the transmission of heredi-

be said that about one in every I io of the tary taints.

population is a mental defective. public realize what that means?

Do the

ABORTION AND THE LAW

The cost of institutional treatment for I should like (before I speak briefly on

all mental defectives would be gigantic. Birth Control) to say a few words on the

The country cannot afford the burden. disputable subject of abortion.

Hospitals, institutions, schools, organiza- I do not hesitate to repeat to-night what

tions of every sort already sap our I have said before, that in my view the

resources.

existing law of abortion requires amend-

Unless something be done on this and ment. I know that this subject gives rise

on allied eugenic matters we may almost to acute differences of view. But those who

take the view that the democracy of this press for amendment have just as deep a

country is slowly committing suicide. The belief in righteousness and the moral wel-

physically and mentally unfit, together fare of the nation as those who oppose the

with this great army of mental defectives, suggestion of revision.

is indeed one of the greatest problems of I do not propose to deal with the general

to-day. Mere political phrases afford no subject of abortion. It is a wide and

help. Politicians prefer to blame the slums serious matter. But in my own view there for the inefficient (whether certifiable or are clearly some circumstances in which

not) rather than the inefficient for much of abortion, now forbidden, should under

the degradation of the slums.

proper safeguards be allowed.

What is to be done?

May I take some of the illustrations

We are not concerned with political tactics. The truth and the remedy alone are our concerr. Can anyone doubt that sterilization is essential in many cases? What else of a practical nature can be suggested as a first barrier against the terrible output of the tainted?

given by me publicly some time ago. Too often a mentally defective woman
or girl is pregnant either by a normal man or by one who is himself a mental defective. Should the child be born with the horrible taint upon it and with all that the taint implies?

I do not over-estimate the immediate effects of any legislation that may be passed permitting sterilization. I know the points
in dispute and the difficulties that have to
be faced. But if we can only secure legislation which will permit, under proper
safeguards, the voluntary sterilization of

Sometimes a young girl is pregnant by her own father or brother: incest is not uncommon. If a child be actually born, what will be its future, particularly if the girl herself be mentally defective? I speak of cases which you and I know only too well.

those who are either mentally defective or who rightly fear to transmit hereditary taints to their children we shall have made a great advance.
It is necessary to go step by step in the great work of creating a eugenic conscience in the nation at large. I cannot myself see any good reason which can be urged against sterilization in suitable cases, and under adequate safeguards. I believe also that there are many thousands throughout the country who would welcome, not only in the public interest but for themselves,

Not infrequently a man, released from a mental hospital, after a long term of treatment, will return home to make his wife pregnant against her wish. For she knows or suspects that the taint of insanity is still latent within him. What of the child-and what of the wife?
But take two illustrations more-quite apart from the well-known medical aspects of abortion. I remember well the case where a beautiful and delicate girl of fourteen, the daughter of a country gentleman, was raped by a drunken tramp. She

12 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

became pregnant. What of the future of presag an outpouring which may lead to

the child born to her? What of the untold appalling conflict. If the nations cot

misery of the girl, her parents, and of the control their populations they will not be

child itself?

able to control the outbreak of war. Birth

I remember also the case where a young control will, I hope, become in due course

and respectable married woman with a baby one of the greatest agencies for the

five months old, was raped in brutal furtherance of international peace, through

fashion by an epileptic. She became international co-operation.

pregnant. What was the future, after the But I must limit myself to-night to the

child was born, for the woman, her subject of birth control in Great Britain.

husband, and the offspring of the rape? I have long held the view that this country

May I remind you that from time to is heavily, and indeed dangerously, over-

time all over the country there have been populated. The question of birth control is

and are cases where girls of I5, 14, or even not only a matter of health and efficiency.

13 years of age have become pregnant It is interwoven in vital fashion with the

either by grown men or by those who are serious economic problems that confront us.

little more than boys? What is the future As a nation we are at the cross-roads and

of the offspring when once born? In my we must face the question of population

view the law of abortion calls for considera- with resolute minds. The vast extent of

tion and amendment.

unemployment is more than a transitory

BIRTH CONTROL AND POPULATION

thing.

May I be allowed to occupy a few THE MACHINE AGE

minutes only on the subject of birth Let us be under no illusion. The in-

control ?

credible growth in the productive power

In mv view the question of birth control of mechanical apparatus is one of the most

must affect in large measure the future of significant factors in the unemployment

this country. It is now over fifty years problem. The application of science and

since the movement started. In spite of mechanics to industry and agriculture will

opposition from those who should have not cease. It will become more intense

supported it, it has slowly but surely and more widespread. Every year will

gained ground. The common sense of show that less and less manual labour is

many of the nation has been steadily assert- required for many purposes. Wbat is to

ing itself. The instinct of the people is become of those who are not needed for the

turning in the right direction. I am glad tasks of production? And, above all, what

to recognize the great work that has been are we to do with the four or five millions

done in past years by so many devoted of the nation, the submerged tenth, who

women and men. The birth conitrol move- are physically and mentally inefficient?

ment is now seen to be one of international Emigration will not help. The Dominions

importance.

will never take our inefficients.

The future will call on the nations to face Let us grasp the full significance of the

the problems created by the rapid and fact that at the present time a large propor-

perilous increase of populations. When I tion of the nation represents not assets but

look to the East I see, in certain regions, heavy liabilities.

a growth of population so great that it may If birth control had been widely practised

burst the barriers of normal territory and by the poor and inefficient during the last

involve the outbreak of long and terrible thirty years, the national difficulties of

war. Everyone of international vision will to-day would be infinitely less and the

appreciate what I say. When I look at general standards of life would be con-

Europe I see again, in certain regions a siderably higher. It is a matter of regret

growth of population so serious as to that birth control started at the wrong end.

MY OUTLOOK ON EUGENICS

It has developed amongst those who repre- cities. It is, I think, beyond dispute that

sented the best of our racial stock, includ- there are innumerable women who, through ing the strongest sections of wdl-organized ignorance of birth-control methods, are

labour. If it had started at and spread bearing unwanted children under conditions

upward from below we should have been which make for misery and degradation.

saved from the menacing fact that there

is now a larger rate of growth amongst the CHILDREN IN THE SLUMS

physically or mentally inferior than The absence of proper birth spacing is

amongst the mentally and physically fit. responsible for infinite suffering and injury

To get a strong and healthy nation it is to women and children throughout the

essential that we breed from the right country. Every social reformer knows the

stocks. There is no other way. The time facts. Throughout every slum and in all

has surely come when statesmen should depre areas women already exhausted

face the grim realities of the present posi- with child-begetting, already over-burdened

tion and when it should become the duty with many children born in successive

of the State to spread amongst the poor years, are faced with yet another unwanted

and inefficient a knowledge of birth control child to add to the existing wretchedness.

methods which will begin to rectify the Can we wonder that self-abortion is preva-

present deplorable situation.

lent to an extent not realized by the general

Every year will show more acutely the public, and that the demand amongst the

terrible results that flow from the random poor for assisted abortion is so incessant

output of unrestricted breeding. Those and so widespread?

results are with us to-day largely because A woman, however poor she be, should

the knowledge of birth control methods has be taught to realize that she is a responsible

been so harshly and unwisely withheld citizen of the State and not the mere instru-

from those who needed it most.

ment for the reckless begetting of offspring.

A knowledge of birth control methods In my view, it is the duty of every suitable

should not remain as a privilege of the Local Authority throughout the country to

well-to-do. It should become the right, provide for married women the birth-control

yes, the right, of the millions of poor and knowledge they may ask for.

struggling women who seek for a fuller The unwanted child who is born to

measure of well-being and for the oppor- neglect and wretchedness is one of the great

tunity so to limit their families as to permit causes of the misery in our midst. It is

of health and strength not only for their far better that the nation should have a

children but also for themselves.

smaller number of healthy children than

THE ETHICS OF BIRTH CONTROL

a large multitude of neglected and useless weaklings.

Let those who are unfit for maternity Statesmen, I am told, have wept in public

have the opportunity of saving the nation when they have mentioned the slums. I

and themselves from the tragedy of unfit respect their emotion. I share it. But I

offspring. Let those who are fit for profoundly wish that some amongst them

maternity have the opportunity of restrict- would have the courage to announce to the

Ing and spacing the birth of their children public generally the great ameliorating

in order that health may be where misery power of birth-control methods.

aiow exists. As Lord Buckmaster so well The present state of things cannot go on.

said. " To regulate and control birth is
aot to degrade but to elevate human

The instinct of the people is, I believe, awakening to the truth of the present

sature."

situation. I hope, I deeply hope, that the

Everyone of us is deeply concerned with instinct already stirring will soon be

the repulsive conditions which prevail in translated into a widespread demand for

the slums of London and of all the great action.

'4 THE3 EUGENICS REVIEW

I believe that those who now oppose with several subjects. I have abstained,

so strongly the spread of birth-control through pressure of time, from detailed

knowledge amongst the miserable and the arguments and elaborate statistics. I have

distressed will be condemned emphatically used no technical phrases. I have merely

by a future and more enlightened genera- touched on vital matters. I do not forget

tion. In my view they are hostile to social that the world is a place of conflict and

progress, and enemies to the true interests that the pathway of reform is a pathway

of the poor.

of effort. But let us remember that truth

The birth-control movement is, I think, will make its advance in spite of all

the greatest hope yet offered to the multi- obstacles and that it gains its vctory in

tude of women in this country who live not the end.

only in the dark places of poverty, but also I rejoice to think that this Society repre-

under the grim shadow of unwanted preg- sents the ideals of which the future will

nancies. Birth control is one of the sure approve. I believe with all my heart that

foundations of social progress and happy in the coming years the great principles

motherhood, and it is the absolute pre- of eugenics will be adopted and applied by

requisite to national eugenic advance.

the vast majority in this realm as the only

CONCLUSIONS

true guides to national health and national

I have dealt in broad outlines to-night happiness.

Eugenic. Review, VoL XXV, No. 1.

