C. D. DARLINGTON,
M.A., Ph.D., D.Sc., F.R.S., Sherardian Professor of Botany, University of Oxford
Cousin Marriage and Population
Structure

W E HAVE ALL heard from our early such great detail. He wanted to know why these

youth about the dangers of cousin mechanisms were so widespread. The conclusion

marriage. Most of us have probably he came to was that the progeny of cross breed-

associated it with the prohibitions of primitive ing were more vigorous than the progeny of in-

society or perhaps of the Christian Churches. breeding, and this property had favoured the

You may not all know how erratic, how various, development of cross-breeding mechanisms in

these prohibitions are.

the course of evolution.

This view can no longer be sustained. It could

Historical Background

not be sustained by his own son, George Darwin,

In the eleventh century when the Catholic who inquired about the results of cousin mar-

Church reached the peak ofits power it set out to riage in our own population. He tried to find out

prohibit cousin marriage between any kin whether the progeny of cousin marriages were

nearer than what was called the seventh degree less numerous or less viable, and he failed to get

of kinship. Furthermore this seventh degree was any decisive evidence of a difference between the

taken to mean that there must be no common two. It was then, in 1876, that Darwin persuaded

ancestor within seven generations. It was on this Lubbock to try to introduce an inquiry into the

ground that William the Conqueror erred when census as to whether marriages were between

he married Matilda, his fourth or fifth cousin, first cousins or not, but the House of Commons

and that he and she, in order to expiate their sin, rejected the proposal.

built the Abbaye aux Hommes and the Abbaye

aux Dames at Caen. Similarly the Conqueror's Garrod's Study of Alkaptonuria

son, Henry I, was forbidden to marry one of his The next step in the study of cousin marriage

bastard daughters to the Earl of Surrey on the brings us into our own century; it is the study

ground that they were sixth cousins.

by Garrod in 1902, of the disease alkaptonuria,

which occurs in about one in a million of our own

The Nineteenth Century
From these remote and ill-founded rules we can
come to recent times and consider what the
attitude of scientists has been to this problem. Charles Darwin was interested in it, quite apart from his general ideas, owing to the fact that he had married a first cousin himself. But the crisis of his interest came when he was studying the mechanisms of cross-fertilization in flowers, those mechanisms which we now understand in

population. Garrod was led to inquire into this disease by the early work of Bateson on Mendelism. The inheritance of this condition suggested a Mendelian recessive situation. Now cousin marriages, as we know, occur in the population in about 1 per cent and non-cousin marriages in 99 per cent. But Garrod found that from these cousin marriages came 33 per cent of all the alkaptonurics; only 67 per cent came from all the non-cousin marriages. About thirty-three times as many came from the cousin

* A paper read at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics
Society on May 24th, 1961.

mamages as should do. How was this to be explained?

'39 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1961, 53, 3,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

If one in a million people showed this disease distinction between non-cousin marriage and

it would mean one in a thousand of the chromo- cousin marriage has disappeared. So the situa-

somes responsible for the disease were deter- tion is vastly more complicated than Garrod's

mining that recessive character. If the classical assumption would lead us to suppose.

alkaptonuria condition is that of the pure If, in fact, we have groups within which mating

recessive aa it will arise in the population from is at random, but there are small groups in which

crossing two heterozygotes. If a is present in the there is close inbreeding and large groups in

relevant chromosome pairs of the population to which there is little inbreeding, we must find out

the extent of one in a thousand, heterozygotes a good deal about the structure of our society

will be present in one in five hundred individuals. before we investigate cousin marriage. We must

But cousins should have on the average one- find out not only whether the marriage is between

eighth of their chromosomes and genes in first cousins, but also whether the parents or

common. So if you are a heterozygote the grandparents of the cousin marriage were them-

probability is that your spouse, who is your first selves likely to be closely related or unrelated.

cousin, instead of having a one in five hundred Let us now consider a contrast of method. In

chance of being hetero-alkaptonuric will have Mendel's experiments, he began with pure lines

one-eighth of a chance. Instead of being one in which had been inbred. The Mendelian system

two hundred and fifty thousand the chance will was one in which there was inbreeding for an

be one in four thousand. This was the explana- indefinite number of generations, and this was

tion Garrod gave for the very high frequency of followed by his critical act of outbreeding, to

alkaptonuria amongst the progeny of cousin give the Fl; this was followed again by inbreed-

marriages.

ing for an indefinite number of generations. In

This principle has been widely used, and in a the cousin marriage which classical genetics preliminary and provisional sense well used, for considers, there is outbreeding for an indefinite

the study of Mendelian recessive conditions in number of generations, followed by a critical

our population. But in an ultimate sense there are act of inbreeding, the cousin marriage; this objections to that use. These I am now going to again is followed by an indefinite number of

consider because they have a great deal to do generations of outbreeding. In other words,

with the study of cousin marriage. What you are dealing with a reversal of the Mendelian

assumptions have been made in talking about the experimental situation, a reversal provided for

one in five hundred or the one in eight? We us by the customs of our society. But we have to

have assumed that our population is composed be quite sure that it is indeed a reversal and how

of individuals who are mating at random, and much of a reversal.

that this is the difference between the noncousin marriage where the mating is at random
and the cousin marriage where the mating is not random. The fact that cousin marriages occurred fifty years ago in 1 per cent of the population
shows that that assumption is not exactly right.

You might say that is an absurdly difficult task
to set ourselves, we simply have not the records withwhichto do it. I am attempting to show that, in fact, we can construct our situation; we can obtain our records. Look at the question from another point of view. Garrod, and those who

studied Mendelian inheritance, were not dealing

Social Groups and Inbreeding

for the most part with the fundamental pro-

In fact, of course, our population is composed of perties that interest us. They were not dealing

groups. If you like, for convenience, you can say with the fundamental properties of viability,

these are groups within which mating is at fertility or intelligence. Those are not for the most

random. But these groups are of all sizes, small part subject to the simple Mendelian inheritance

and large. If you have a very large group it which is capable of being investigated on their

might be equivalent to having random mating lines. They are not necessarily due to genes

amongst the whole population. But if it is a which operate in the same way. They are often

small group of only half a dozen families all governed by gene arrangements in which the

marriages are first cousin marriages, and the interaction between different genes is as import-

140

COUSIN MARRIAGE AND POPULATION STRUCTURE

ant as the interaction between the forms of the progeny in Pearson and Lee's results of 1899.

same genes. All these systems in human breed- Where the mother came from a family of one,

ing are undefined, unexamined, unanalyzed, and the average number of children was 2'97; from a

so far beyond our correct analysis.

family of four, average number of children 3*41;

from a family of eight, 4 07; where it was in the

Galton and Hereditary Fertility

group from twelve to fifteen the number of

Now there was one man who did think of progeny was 6-44. inheritance in this integrated and non-analytical This not merely shows that fertility in men or

sense, and who did approach this problem of women is hereditary; it also shows something fertility which escapes Mendelian analysis. That which many people nowadays would strongly was Galton. His method he describes in a casual repudiate. They would say the number ofchildren

way in his Hereditary Genius. The question arises people have is a matter of their own free will; in relation to the fertility of heiresses and the it must be something outside genetical control.

extinction of peerages.

The assumption Galton and Pearson made was

I mention one historical fact which does not that there was a strong genetic component in

seem to be realized. It was that his grandfather, the resultant fertility. We do not need to ask Erasmus Darwin, had asked the same question whether it was due to physical sterility or lack of

and had given the same answer that he, Galton desire for children -or incapacity to have them,

gave. Erasmus Darwin asked why heiresses were the result shows the action of a genetic com-

so often infertile and peerages became extinct. ponent popularly called heredity.

He suggested that the mothers of heiresses,

having no sons and fertility being hereditary, Methods used for Present Investigation

the peeresses who were heiresses would have It is on the assumption that this principle

fewer children than the average population; operates that I have been conducting my own

and that is how peerages became extinct. I am investigations. One word about the methods I

sure Galton was unaware of what his grand- used. In the first place, I asked the academic

father had done. He says, "This does not seem world of Oxford, through the Oxford Magazine,

to have occurred to anybody before."

for information about the fertility of the

The actual records Galton used show one odd progenies of cousin marriages: not the number

point. Working from Burke's Peerage he said of children produced by cousin marriages but

100 heiresses had 208 sons and 206 daughters, the number ofchildren produced by the children,

and 100 non-heiresses had 336 sons and 284 and the grandchildren. On the basis of the small

daughters. I cannot understand where those fifty results of this inquiry I was able, through the

or so daughters of non-heiresses got lost. He Observer in London, to appeal to a much larger

does not say anything about it himself and I public and get much larger samples of the

think our statisticians, disciples of Galton, should population of grandchildren ofcousin marriages.

do somethinglto explain how he overlooked this Armed with this information I was able to make

irregularity. Between heiresses and non-heiresses, the inquiry wider still. Through a Swiss multi-

however, we see a great difference. The non-
heiresses are much the more fertile. In fact, too much. There should not be, in my opinion, quite that enormous difference. The reason for it I shall try to explain later.
This kind of study was repeated later by Karl Pearson, and his results have been re-examined by Fisher. They show a regular difference between the women according to the size of the family

lingual publication, Triangle, I was able to appeal to people all over the world for data on cousin marriages, giving more rigorous requirements.
The results of all three inquiries are combined
in what I will tell you now. The observations came from scattered parts ofthe world-Sweden, Holland, Austria, Australia, United States, Canada, and so on. From this I got a representative notion of what happens in our population. I found there were families in which cousin

from which they come. I niight give a short marriage occurred generation after generation,

resume and examples, taking the numbers of or sometimes in alternate generations going back

BR-C

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

*a dozen generations to the beginning of the great-grandsons-these all surviving to maturity

-seventeenth celtury.'There were other families -and ninety great-great-grandsons. Assuming

-in whiich there was no evidence of any cousin that the female line was equally fertile, we' have

mamage previously and then suddenly a cousin to multiply those figures by 2, 4, 8 and 16,

mkrriage occurred. Again it was necessary to giving a total of 1,440 great-great-grandchildren.

make a distinction between different religious or An average of six children per marriage reach

social groups. In dealing with a family of white maturity.

Bermudians, the white population of Bermuda According to studies made in South Dakota,

being exceedingly small, that population is 'the number of Mennonite immigrants which

likely to be inbred; the same applies in a small moved there in 1874 was 300. In 1950 there were

religious community like the Irish Quakers. 9,000 descendants of those 300. They occasion-

Dealing with a Jewish population in Hohen- ally lose a member who cannot face the rigors

zollem we know it is inbred. We know 15 per of the system and deserts to the outer world;

cent of the population marry first cousins and but they never marry outside and never gain

the probability is they have done so for many from outside. Eaton and Mayer, who studied

generations. On the other hand, with Church of this population, found in these families at the

England people, middle class, well educated, present day an average of 10-9 children per

who have no knowledge of any cousin marriage marriage, reaching maturity. So far as I can make

in the family, the probability is that we are deal- out, every child who reaches maturity gets

ing with an outbred population. This can be married, and the number. of children per

confirmed by exhaustive information of ancestry. marriage has slightly increased during the last

Studying the matter in that way I got a general three generations from' 102 to 10-9. That I

indication as to the way in which populations attribute to the fact that this is a communized

breed.

or socialized system in which nobody needs to

worry about the children being cared for if

Inbred Communities

anything happens to the parents. The selective

For example, with the Mennonites, a group of situation is biased in favour of the highest

Anabaptists, observance of the delicate minutiae fertility; consequently the highest fertility is

of '.baptismal- regulation has given us the gradually being approached.

strictest of inbreeding systems. The Mennonites Here is a system giving perfect conditions for

were founded in 1528 in Germany. Being selection for fertility. Fertility is obviously

pacifists, they have found their position in- hereditary and very high and is maintained with

creasingly uncomfortable in all parts of the a'system of close inbreeding in which cousin world. When a war comes and there is con- marriage does not reduce 'the fertility at all.

scription the Mennonites are pushed out. They On the contrary, sterility can arise only by

are an agricultural community who live in small genetic recombination and without outbreeding

settlements, and marriage occurs within those there is no recombination. That is the situation

settlements, usually of less than a hundred with the Mennonites, and I imagine it would be

families. Almost everybody has to marry a first true with other stable inbreeding societies.

or second cousin. As the group grows it splits up Above all, it would be true of stable primitive

into smaller groups which migrate into new tribal societies.

territories, thus continually forming new inbred

communities.

Cousin Marriage in an Outbred Society

I was able to get a pedigree from Vienna of Contrast this situation with the results of a

the descendants of Moses Goring, who married cousin marriage in our own outbred society, in

in 1785. I have only the descendants in the male a family in which there had been very little

line. The female line, not carrying the name, is previous inbreeding, the family of Charles

a matter of general indifference to people who Darwin. It was this family that first called my

maintain pedigrees. Moses Goring in the ma-le attention to the peculiar possibilities of the

line had four sons, nine grandsons, twenty-nine problem. Their dates are important owing to the

142

COUSIN MARRIAGE AND POPULATION STRUCTURE

introduction of birth control and other social ation in the inbred families. The change in the

changes. Darwin was born in 1809. He married, breeding system had produced the depreciation.

in 1839, his first cousin, a year or two older than Now I realized that the grounds on which one

himself; and he died in 1882. The total number distinguishes between outbred and inbredfamilies

of children was ten; the number that survived might be open to dispute, and it was desirable

to maturity seven; the number that married was to get a more rigorous test of the differences

six. The number of those marriages that had between these two types of breeding system. The

issue was three. This is a very different result method of doing it was suggested to me by a

from that found in the Mennonite community. grandson of the third Lord Henley who sent me

But it is typical of our own outbreeding com- the pedigree of his family giving the example of

munity, with the difference that the proportion the kind of marriage that would provide the

that are with issue is smaller than average.

critical test. This I published in THE EUGENICS

Take the grandchildren: the total is nine. Of REvIEW.* His grandfather had married twice;

these there were married eight, with issue seven. one wife was a first cousin and one was un-

At this stage there begins a recovery: the related. He had families by each, and those

proportion of marriages with issue is higher. The families could be traced for the second and third

total number of great-grandchildren born is generations.

twenty-eight. Thus there is also a higher average It was possible to show from the two previous

frequency of children per marriage with issue generations that there had been no inbreeding

than there was. Although the birth rate in the in the families concerned. There were two great-

community has decreased, in that particular grandchildren from the cousin marriage, twenty-

lineage it has increased. This single family is three from the other marriage, a continuation of

not in itself significant. But it was this family the outbreeding system. Armed with this

that put me on to considering the situation in information I appealed for other examples

families at large. It is an example of a cousin throughout the world, and got sixteen different

marriage with inbreeding occurring after out- families in which the same kind of test could be

breeding, and followed again by outbreeding. applied, and it is part of these results I now

Taking my results in general, I have separated want to summarize. I am giving the total

the community, so far as I could, very roughly number of children, grandchildren and great-

and arbitrarily and provisionally, in order to grandchildren.

get some guidance, into inbred and outbred

stocks. I give the summarized data: the cousin

COUSIN UNRELATED

marriages in outbred families are contrasted with the cousin marriages in inbred families

MARRIAGES MARRIAGES INCREASE
C. gc. ggc. C. gc. ggC. Outbred families

belonging to small religious groups and in families with previous cousin marriages authenti-

5 marriages Intermediate
families

17 7 5 12 20 45 03/3 7

cated. I give the children, the grandchildren and 3 marriages 7 10 13 8 8 16 1 9/2 0

the great-grandchildren.

Inbred families 4 marriages 15 27 61 12 13 22 4-1/1'8

COUSIN

G. GG.

MARRIAGES CHILDREN CHILDREN CHILDREN INCREASE

Outbred 39 234 342 499 x 2 1

Inbred 9 57 146 257 x 4-5

In other words, the descendants have multiplied
in the two generations by 2-1 and 4-5. This
seemed to me a prima facie case for concluding the effect of cousin marriages was to depreciate
the fertility of the progeny in families where there had been previous outbreeding. At the same time there was no evidence of such depreci-

The unrelated marriage in the outbred family is the continuation of the normal system of breed-
ing, which gives the 3-7 increase we expect under normal circumstances. The inbred system, the cousin marriage continuing the inbred habit of mating, gives the increase of 41. On the other hand the two systems which represent the break with the past also break the fertility.
Now there seems evidence of something I

* 1958. 50, 177.

143

THB EUGENICS REVIEW

had not dared to consider, because it touches a evolution of our society and of all its innumer-

problem which has baffled people for a very long able little sub-societies.

time, evidence of infertility following wide One word about the big evolutionary implica-

crosses in man. When I say "wide crosses" I tions of the inheritance of fertility and of its

mean race crosses. This is the first evidence I relation to the breeding system. Anthropologists

know (and I should like to know of any other) have been puzzled, have argued incessantly and

of a depreciation of fertility following out- inconclusively ever since Darwin's time, as to the

breeding in an inbred stock.

reason why human beings have outbreeding

systems resting upon incest taboos. I say that the

Assortative Mating and Fertility

evidence we have of this tremendous pressure of

I regard these results as substantiating my selection in favour of fertility is enough to

expectation, but they do much more than account for human races having developed by

substantiate it. I expected, and any reasonable instinct a repugnance for incest. Only this could

Mendelian might expect, that there might well guarantee the habit of outbreeding recombina-

be a depreciation of fertility in the first genera- tion.

tion, but why, he might ask, should it continue Thus man, to whom family life has restored

in the second generation? It is overpowering in the sedentary conditions of a plant, has been

the outbred families who had cousin marriages. compelled to make use of a genetic system

Why should that be?

parallel to that of the incompatibility so well

The explanation is not at all abstruse. It is known in plants.

the result of assortative mating-individuals

with low fertility marry spouses with low fertility. Conclusion

Galton's heiresses of low fertility married peers That is my argument. It is in line with the

of low fertility. The peers who married heiresses assumptions Darwin made but was never able

were not so interested in the things which go to to carry to a conclusion. His suggestion was

make fertility as the peers who did not marry that moral feelings rested upon instincts which

heiresses. Thus it is assortative mating which can, had been derived, encouraged and developed

and I think often does, lead to near extinction by processes of natural selection. To me it

and sometimes actual extinction in later genera- seems that this generalisation can be taken

tions. seriously. And it can be used to put the whole

The effect of fertility is cumulative and the problem of the evolution of society on a new

effect ofinfertility is cumulative. You see what an footing.

enormous scope there is for selection operating

in favour of fertility in our society. People often

REFERENCES

talk as though natural selection had ceased to Darlington, C. D. 1960. Cousin marriage and the evolu-

operate. I should call extinction by infertility tion of the breeding system in man. Heredity. 14,

a form of natural selection, and one of the most potent we have in determining the direction of

297-332. Darlington, C. D. 1961. Introduction to Galton's
Hereditary Genius. Collins (Fontana).

'44

