RECONSTRUCTION AND PUBLIC HEALTH.
By E. J. LIDBETTER.
THERE are those who regard the establishment of a Ministry of Health as in the nature of a novelty, and others who take the view that such a step is a natural consequence of the National Insurance Acts. Neither of these views express the whole truth. The fact is that all public service-both official and unofficial-has for some time past converged upon the co-ordination of the Public Health Service.
The necessities of the time-in some measure due to the War-have emphasised the need and perhaps created the demand sooner than it otherwise would have come. It is astonishing, when one thinks of it, that the Public Health Service in England should until now have been concerned with generalities-such matters as drains, housing, water supply, food and drugs, etc.-and not with the individual; yet this is the case.
It is true that outside the County of London the Public Health Department makes provision for the treatment of infectious diseases, and has powers to provide hospitals, both special and general; but the former touches only the fringe of necessities, and the latter powers are not generally used. In London infectious diseases are provided for by the Metropolitan Asylums Board-a Poor Law authority. In effect the great body of sickness needing hospital treatment, including a large amount of infectious and contagious sickness, is dealt with by the Poor Law.' This is at once the cause and effect of the aloofness of the Public IIealth Service. Public Health
administration is based upon prevention in the economic sense, and is not concerned with the individual. The Poor Law is concerned with the individual sick, and not with prevention. But, indeed, at all times a large part of the sick population
I Out of about i8oo local Health Authorities no more than 700 have hospital provision for
their own infectious diseases; the others rely upon the hospitality of their more provident nelghbours.

308 EUGENICS REVIEW.
so dealt with form no part of the pauper population as such. Treatment in the Poor Law Infirmary is in these cases reluctantly accepted-or refused entirely-and is either degrading to the recipient or, on the other hand, familiarises him with the conditions of Poor Law chargeability, and so becomes the avenue to the pauper condition in general.
Most of the current discussion on this subject is based upon the assumption that the recipients of Poor Law relief-medical as well as destitute relief-are of the same class. This is not the case. If we exclude the aged and bedridden inmates of Infirmaries-who often occupy an Infirmary bed for several years-it will be found that a large proportion of the inmates represent the unsatisfied demand for hospital accommodation, and in some measure are there through the lack of proper co-operation in the Public Health service. These patients are drawn from the normally self-supporting industrial classes, and their treatment as paupers is alien to the spirit and intention of the Poor Law service. It is the recognition of this fact that has led to the present demand for the separation of hospital treatment from the Poor Law.
It must be recognised by those who are opposed to the change that the separation of these cases-so far as they can be identified-from the Poor Law will leave the latter with the problem of destitution relief clarified and outstanding as the separate problem it undoubtedly is.
The problems of pauper relief are to-day essentially what they were in I834. The public attitude has changed, the methods and spirit of administration have changed, but at basis the problems are the same-the same suppression of vagrancy, the repression of public dependence, and the care of the imbecile, the mildly incompetent, with the children of both these classes and the aged and infirm.
The lifting away of the sick of the independent class from this dependent community will be as much to the benefit of legitimate Poor Law service as it must be for the public health.
In passing, it is interesting to note how this position has arisen. Originally the sick inmates of the workhouse were treated in wards specially set apart. It was but a small step

RECONSTRUCTION AND PUBLIC HEALTH.

309

from this stage to the provision of separate infirmary blocks or pavilions within the workhouse grounds, and later the establishment of what is now known as the separate Infirmary.
These are, in fact, large general hospitals, well staffed and equipped, in many cases the equal, and sometimes surpassing, in these particulars the general hospitals maintained by public charity. This system has grown and become vastly important in all urban areas, until to-day it is the recognised service for nearly all the sick in the industrial classes in need of Institution treatment. Those who are disposed to criticise the recipients of this form of relief should bear in mind the growing insistence of medical men upon the value of Institution treatment and the fact that there are few, if any, hospitals for paying patients within the means of the artisan classes. Also that in far too many cases the homes of the poor, if fit to live in, are not fit to die in.
It is at this point that one is struck by the divorce between the Public Health Service and this great organisation for the treatment of individual sickness. In a large number of cases there is a definite relation between the sickness of the individual and his home or industrial conditions. In such cases restorative and preventive treatment should go hand in hand.
In a certain mean street in East London with a very large juvenile population scabies, impetigo, and such-like contagious troubles are almost epidemic. The local health authority no doubt deals with the area on broad general lines. The Health Visitor visits and advises the parents; occasionally fumigation is carried out. Overcrowding is prevented as far as possible, and in short the Department does all that is usual in these cases. Meantime the local Poor Law authority receives into the Infirmary one or more of the children whose condition has become so bad as to require isolation and treatment. The milder cases remain to infect each other and their neighbours, at school or otherwise, and to re-infect the child in due course discharged recovered from the Infirmary. The condition of the street is nothing to the Poor Law authority, and the condition of the inhabitant has little to do with the Public Health Department; and so the merry game goes on.

,310 EUGENICS REVIEW.
This state of things could be multiplied in divers ways and divers conditions, tuberculosis being perhaps the worst. The disastrous consequences of this disseverance in a service essentially one are manifold, and may be thought out by most people interested in the subject.
The main point here to be emphasised is the complete absence of any scheme, or even opportunity, to study the problems involved in any comprehensive way. The Poor Law records begin and end with the treatment of the individual, those of the Public Health with the treatment of the conditions, and but for one or two exceptional cases neither Department has access to the records of the other, and there is no coherence in their respective services.
But the evil does not end there. It is by no means uncommon for some person who has led an independent life (i.e., free from the receipt of relief) and is in urgent need of hospital treatment to refuse to enter the Poor Law Infirmary either altogether or until it is too late. It is useless in such cases to argue the excellence of the treatment or the humane and kindly service available; the proferred assistance is Poor Law assistance, and as such is rejected. The admissions delayed or too late form by far the most important factor in this matter; for it must be remembered that these temperamentally independent persons are exactly the kind that should be preserved.
It will be urged, no doubt, that this refusal of treatment is mere prejudice, and that it would be wrong to discourage this spirit of healthy independence. The latter view is unanswerable so far as it relates to the relief of non-sick people,
but it is a view that cannot now be supported in relation to the sick in need of hospital treatment-particularly in restorative cases. Non-encouragement was perhaps legitimate-if not profitable-'in pre-war days; but the end of the War will find us with a great deal of sickness which it will be in the best interest of the community to promptly and effectively treat.
It could be argued, did space permit, that prompt and efficient treatment will be the most profitable course-witness the instance of scabies above.

RECONSTRUCTION AND PUBLIC HEALTH.

3I I

The prejudice of the independent sick is closely connected with this idea of discouragement, but it also derives from the following facts:-
i. That the Poor Law system commenced as a system
for the suppression of vagrancy. 2. That the suppression of vagrancy is not less neces-
sary to-day than it was in I834.
3. That the pauper community is a distinct element in the population, largely derived from the mentally deficient and mildly incompetent, closely related, and not to any considerable extent recruited from the normal population.
4. That legitimate Poor Law service is necessarily
repressive in character. If all these facts are duly considered it must be recognised that the provision of hospital accommodation for restorative sickness is an outgrowth of the Poor Law system, not contemplated at its inception, made possible only by our haphazard system of local government, and inconsistent with the wellbeing of the community as a whole. This is to say nothing against those excellent and self-sacrificing public representatives under whose direction and guidance the system has
developed with such gratifying results. In truth, the Poor Law Infirmary has been of incalculable benefit to the population, both ordinary and pauper, for many years past, whilst the hospitals handed over to Military Authorities as going concerns on the outbreak of War must have solved acute problems that could not otherwise have been solved.
It is most unfortunate that a question of such vital importance to the general well-being as this should become involved in a discussion as to whether it should be controlled by the Local Government Board or by a new Department.
The efficiency of the organisation will depend far more on its standard of service at the point of application than upon central control. Under the regime of the Local Government Board the Poor Law hospital has developed to wonderful efficiency. It could not be shown that the Department has stood in the way of desirable reform or, on the other hand, has initiated such changes as have taken place. A live service

3I2 EUGENICS REVIEW.
will discover the need for change in the field of its activities, and the utmost that the central department can do is to lend its benevolent support to changes making for efficient service.
Much evil has attended the operation of recent social legislation-as, for instance, old-age pensions-because it has been prompted entirely- by the " social reformer " and provision enacted without calling in consultation those most likely to know how it would operate at the point of application. It is one thing to legislate for a principle and quite another to secure the administrative operation of that principle. The mere desire on the part of the Legislature for the application of a given principle is not likely to secure that object-certainly not without attendant disabilities not contemplated-if those acquainted with the affected social material are not encouraged to assist in the elucidation of the difficulties. What should be aimed at, therefore, is a Central Department holding alike the confidence of its field workers and of the Legislature, so that refqrm from within may be sought and encouraged and reform from without subject to proper critical analysis. In this respect the Local Government Board is not likely to be less favourable than a new authority, and the present Department has the benefit of many years' experience.
Reorganisation of the hospital service under authority other than the Poor Law should achieve three main objects of interest to eugenics:-
I. It should make available the whole accommodation of these Institutions for restorative or recuperative work as against the aged, infirm and chronic bedridden, who need the attention of a valet or nurse rather than a doctor.
Some time ago (pre-War) a record was kept of the admissions to a London Poor Law Infirmary over a period of twenty weeks. In that time there were 1,026 admissions. In this number were found-
420 cases of first admission. 179 cases of second admission. 126 cases of more than 2 and less than 8 admissions. 301 cases classed as chronic.

RECONSTRUCTION AND PUBLIC HEALTH.

313

These would include persons who had been inmates of the workhouse for considerable periods, as well as those who habitually resort to the Poor Law in any difficulty.
These figures relate to a winter period, and although they do not cover a long period they are instructive as showing the extent to which these fine but costly Institutions are used by the habitual pauper and the victims of recurrent disease, both of which classes quite understand the formula by which admission may be secured.
On a particular day in 1913, 36 per cent. of the inmates of a London Infirmary were above the age of 65 years, and the average for four such Institutions was 26 per cent. above that age. These aged and bedridden cases spend many years in these Institutions.
It is to be hoped that some system may be evolved so that the administration and equipment of these fine Institutions shall be devoted to their proper functions of restoring to health the temporarily sick, instead of being largely employed in sheltering the wastrel in intermittent sickness-often brought about by his mode of life-and the permanent care of chronic and infirm persons who cannot respond to restorative treatment and need only quiet and rest.
It may be said that this is a harsh view, but it should be borne in mind that the Institutions are maintained on a presumption of restoration and recuperation, that they are therefore expensive,' and that no Institutions not rate-supported would allow these patients to occupy beds for many years as some of them do.
2. It will create the need to differentiate between the independent member of the community fallen sick and the member of the habitual pauper class. The difficulties of such a distinction would probably not be so great as might at first sight appear, whilst the need and effort to make such distinction will certainly be of great educational value.
In the main such a division would turn upon the recoverability of the patient. This in its turn would depend upon
I Original outlay equals about £300 per bed and maintenance in the neighbourhood of 253.
per head per week.

314 EUGENICS REVIEW.
general as well as special mental and physical conditions. Recurrence would be important, and repeated or prolonged maintenance in hospital should be taken into account; so also should a record of family chargeability, whilst inefficency due to ascertained hereditary defect should inevitably involve a transfer to the Poor Law authority.
By these means it should be possible to make available accommodation for such new demands as the elevation of the service would inevitably bring-the margin of necessities at present unsatisfied-and to relegate and concentrate pauperism as such into that inferior and undesirable position it should occupy in a well-ordered community.
Nothing has been more harmful in recent years in the administration of the Poor Law than the moral support derived by the habitual pauper from his ocial and practical association with the independent sick.
Just as the sick independent member of the community has accepted or refused Poor Law aid with a feeling of revulsion, so correspondingly the chronic pauper has exploited the moral support the system gave him. And why shouldn't he?
And the relegation of pauperism to its proper status will be all to the good in a community struggling to repair the wastage of war and to get the best out of surviving manhood in the stern economic struggle that lies before us.
3. The contemplated change should afford facilities for the collection and arrangement of data more complete and thorough than has been possible under the limitations of parochial boundaries.
If there is any truth in the assertion that certain families or the inhabitants of certain areas are liable to suffer from certain disabilities, then with proper enquiry and a system of tabulation it should be possible to show that this is the case.
The more thoroughly this work was done the more profitable it would become in social economics. Problems of sickness, problems of population, and especially problems of heredity, could be worked out to the unending advantage of the community.

RECONSTRUCTION AND PUBLIC HEALTH.

315

It would need a central bureau in large areas with a card index and a staff (gaining experience from day to day) and field workers in smaller districts-the eyes and the ears of the service-the right of access to non-confidental public records with a power of investigation, a critical faculty, and an irlclination for enquiry and discussion such as has only been attempted on the underside of our city life; only instead of being directed to the laying bare of the undesirable facts of life, it would be directed impartially to the gathering of information of all sorts relative to its subject.
Reconstruction offers opportunities for the recognition of these fundamental principles such as have not been offered in modern times. It also offers scope for the perpetuation of futilities and expedients and evasions-such as the Mental Deficiency Acts and the sanatoria provisions of National Insurance-to a like unlimited extent. Those in authority will doubtless have the final word.
It behoves all who have the social well-being at heart to keep their minds free from the hampering influences of political expedients, from the limitations of that which is merely traditional, and from the false direction of vested interests, to the end that, whilst healthy independence is encouraged and stimulated, no human material shall be wasted that is in any sense recoverable either by isolation, by immediate treatment, or by the application of principles established as our knowledge
grows.

