THE EUGENICS SOCIETY'S JUBILEE DINNER
WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 4th, 1957

T HE fiftieth anniversary of the founding In going through the list of Eugenic

of the Eugenics Sbciety was celebrated Studies there are two, one called Problem

by a dinner at the Savoy Hotel, London, Families and the other called Promising

-on December 4th, I957, as was briefly Families, and I would like in the first place

reported in the January I958 number of- to say that without exception we regard our

THE EUGENICS REVIEW.

guests as members of Promising Families.

After dinner, Sir Charles Darwin proposed There is an old tradition in the Society that

the toast of the Society's guests. This was after it had been in existence for about ten

replied to by Mr. E. M. Nicholson, who years there was an exhibition held in order

kindly deputised at short notice for Lord to convince people of the importance of

Simon of Wythenshawe, who was prevented eugenics, and in those days our interest was

by illness from attending.

rather inclined to be in negative eugenics.

The toast of the Euigenics Society was then In order to reveal the importance of it, they

proposed by Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders; had hung up on the wall a number of family

Mrs. M. A. Pyke, who was to have responded, pedigrees, and one was of a family beloved

was unfortunately unable to be present, and by all eugenists, in which every single

her speech was read for her by Mrs. Nancy member had been in prison or in an asylum.

Raphael.

To avoid the law of libel they did not put

Sir Charles Darwin then presented the the names on the pedigree, but the people

Galton Medal to Dr. C. P. Blacker.

were indicated by those nice little symbols

We print below the full text of the speeches which showed whether they were masculine

at the Eugenics Society's Jubilee Dinner. or feminine. One of the less informed

visitors was not familiar with these symbols,

SIR CHARLES GALTON DARWIN, K.B.E., and read one of them as meaning that the

M.C., Sc.D., F.R.S.

member had been in prison and the other

My LORDS, ladies and gentlemen, I now as his having been in a lunatic asylum.

-have the pleasant task of proposing the After that the visitor went on to the next

health of the guests of the Society. I have one with a different kind of pedigree, gazed

noticed on past occasions when I have at it with rapt attention, and as he walked

attended other dinners that the speaker away he said, " I never had any idea how

sometimes found it difficult to find a unifying many Fellows of the Royal Society ended

thread to cover a rather miscellaneous list, in gaol." That is just to show you that

fbut in our case it is easy to do that because, tonight I am not talking about Problem

as some of you know, we not long ago issued Families, but about Promising Families.

a paper we called our Statement of Aims, Taking the list of our Studies, one of the

so I merely have to take our Statement of first is the study of human genetics. I could

-Aims book and see where they fit in it. not find among our guests this evening any

There are some very august guests whom specialist in that subject. But this allows

we shall not cover by doing- it in that way, me, a little indirectly, to refer to one man

and I must ask their pardon for this, but I whom we were hoping to entertain this

d;o not want to overawe you with a lot of evening. It is Professor Egon Pearson, of

names.

University College, London, who is himself

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1958. 50, i

Io THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a very distinguished statistician, and the son it properly, but we are hoping that soon

of the great Karl Pearson, and Karl Pearson we shall have data before us which will

was the right-hand man of Francis Galton enable us to make up our minds on a great

in the study of the subjects of statistics and many of the policies we shall advocate.

of eugenics. We are much disappointed not Since the subject will evidently involve

to have had Professor Pearson here, but political decisions, we welcome members of

influenza has kept him away.

the House of Lords and House of Commons

The next item in our list of subjects is the tonight; for undoubtedly whenever any-

study of Population. There are a number of thing about this question of inter-Common-

names I could mention, but I shall limit wealth migration is settled there will be

myself to saying how pleased we are to have need for legislation to deal with the

with us Max Nicholson, who was largely subject.

responsible for that extremely important So much for half of our programme, the

labour, the organization of the body known studies; now I will turn to the policies. We

as P E P-Political and Economic Planning welcome here the representatives of many

one of the most important things done in societies with which we have co-operated

recent times to tell us what is happening to under the conviction that they are inter-

the world. Another person I would like to ested in the same kind of things as we are

refer to while on this question of population interested in. These include the International

studies is Colonel Ahuja, who is present PlannedParenthoodFederation-wewelcome

with us from India. India is the country of Mrs. Houghton, the secretary-the Family

the world which is paying the most serious Planning Association, the British Social

attention to this, I think, very grim Biology Council, and the National Marriage

question of population increases.

Guidance Council. All these bodies are

The third name-I hope he is here to-night doing work which we would consider very

-is Professor David Glass, who assisted closely associated with our own interest of

us very much in our Population Investiga- eugenics. In this connection we were

tion Committee. The fourth one-I am expecting to have Mrs. Pyke here to-night,

sorry to say he is not here-is Lord Simon who is one of the members of our Council

of Wythenshawe, who was to have spoken. and who was going to make a speech for us.

He has shown deep interest in a great many She is also an important member of the

aspects of things interesting to our Society. Family Planning Association. Her task in

In particular he undertook a journey to speaking has been delegated to Mrs. Raphael.

Barbados where he was to study what could I have worked through the categories of

be done about the excess population of the these classifications as much as I can, and

West Indies. Unfortunately, influenza has I am not bold enough to place one or two

laid him low, so we should only like to other people who are here to-night. I would

record our gratitude to him for the benevo- hesitate to claim the right to say in which

lent outlook he has adopted to all our category Sir Russell Brain fits, or Sir Henry

policies.

Tizard. On the other hand there are others

The next item on our list is the subject of whom I find it very easy to place, one being

Migration, and here we realize the import- Sir Victor Mallet. His father was for a

ance of this subject every time we walk up number of years President of our Society,

the street and note the colour of the faces of so we welcome him very warmly, as un-

the people whom we meet, which is so doubtedly a member of a Promising Family.

different from what it was twenty years ago. Another one I would like to mention is

We have among us Sir Clifford Heathcote Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders, who preceded

Smith, who has been active in this study of me as President of this Society and who has

Commonwealth migration. Our Society has the distinction of having been our first Galton

not formed any deep opinion on this subject; Medallist, and from whom you are going to

we have not yet had the time to investigate hear a speech later this evening.

JUBILEE DINNER

- II

Ladies and Gentlemen, Members I would record should have turned finally, to the

ask' you to rise and drink the toast of our need for action on the question of population

guests.

as the number one problem of the world

to-day.

Mr. E. M. NICHOLSON, C.B.

You have described only some of the

MR. PRESIDENT, my Lords, Ladies and guests, Mr. President, and if I may say so

Gentlemen, I have previously regretted, on the rare occasions when ill health has over-
taken him, the absence of my friend Lord Simon, and you will believe me when I say I never regretted it so much as I do now. I fear before I have finished you will probably

without offence, I think we, your guests, have no illusions about ourselves. We do realize what an indescribable lot of people we are. We are very grateful to you for asking us here on this Fiftieth Birthday occasion. I cannot help looking back, and

regret it too, but I will take advantage of his forward; back to the First Birthday before

absence by making one or two remarks the first war, when the Society was first

about him which I have been wanting to founded, and when many of the ideas which

make for a long time.

are now commonplace must have seemed as

Not only has Lord Simon given powerful outlandish as space travel. And Mrs.

support, intellectual and material, to the Stocks has reminded me of the Twenty-fifth

cause in which we here are all interested, but Anniversary, at which Mrs. Besant appeared.

he has shown the most extraordinary fore- On that occasion no one could take anything sight and determination and concentration alcoholic until the Prophet of the Movement

in picking out one after another the causes had withdrawn. We may be more fortunate
which were going to be the crucial matters than we realize! One wonders how your of each period over the last twenty-five guests will be chosen for the hundredth

years. Since I have known him, he has anniversary. Not only the height and picked out, first of all, the need for getting physical measurements but all the normal rid of slums. Then at the time when it was mental characteristics of every human being

fashionable to talk about the advantages of will no doubt by then be duly measured and

dictatorships, he made it his business to registered. You will, however, no doubt

examine how democracy could be modern- put your guests of A.D. 2007 through more ized in the light of experience in advanced advanced machines and those who do not

countries such as Sweden and Switzerland make the grade will have to be tactfully

and he was tireless in making the case that disposed of by the secretary. How many of democracy could be superior even in sheer us who have achieved the privilege of being

-efficiency to dictatorships.

your guests to-night would clear that next

Shortly before the war he was a moving hurdle?

spirit of a group studying the then much I have no doubt there will by then have

neglected problems of defence against air been much progress in techniques of im-

raids. Several of their recommendations proving the human race, and that just as

helped to save losses and the group forecast space travel, which was until recently a

very accurately what the weight of bombing subject for the " science pulp " magazines,

would be on this city two or three years has come to the threshold of reality, we will

later. He was also a leader in promoting in the same way in this realm of eugenics

public recognition of the needs of our find that questions still considered simply

,universities and in showing how very much as wild ideas are becoming very practical.

smaller the-university population was here It does strike me that the ordinary man

tha;n in other countries. He anticipated and woman, with whom these things rest,

by many years the current call to action on are often very much more progressive than

;the provision of more technologists. Quite governments. After all, we have in this

lately he went on to population. I think it country a population policy in operation

is 'encouraging to us that a man with that which appears quite favourable and has

3- ER

I2 TUE EUGENICS REVIEW

gone much of the way to solve the problems
anticipated over a hundred years ago which
are still evident in many other countries.
Scandinavia and some other parts of the world have done even better. It is not
governments that have brought these policies into effect. The ordinary man and woman
have a way of taking up these things if they
are convinced that there is something ready
for their private use that does make sense and:does lead to a happier life. I have great confidence that with research and education you will find the ordinary man and woman will show readiness for changes affecting reproduction even if they seem to us revolutionary and shocking.
Most extraordinary things are already going on. The' growth of artificial insemination for example is not encouraged by governments. It is something the ordinary
,man and woman are taking up where they
can get access to it because they think it answers a problem. It does seem to me, that just as Mrs. Besant who was here twenty-five years ago made herself very
unpopular in pioneering birth control, so it is the duty and privilege of this Society to pioneer boldly and to give a lead, not just to authority, but to the ordinary man and woman. Even what seemed far-fetched in eugenics may be accepted as a fact when the Society comes to celebrate its next fifty
years.
We are moving very rapidly into a new age on these matters and we hope to keep touch over a very wide field. I have the privilege of representing P E P, and I would say that the partnership between P E P and the Eugenics Society over the report on British Population ten years ago and over the recent report on World Population has
been amongst the most fruitful that P E P has undertaken. We have found the Eugenics Society one of the most broad-minded and effective bodies with which we have worked. Those two reports have made a real impact on opinion partly because your Society and P E P have been able to reach agreement on a very wide range of objectives.
Many other bodies represented here are linked with the Eugenics Society in various

ways, and we are all aiming for the samethings. We are all, whether- we like it or not, conscripted into the army of the good anid just. Sometimes the army of the good and just is not a very impressive sight. One may be led to wonder whether it frightens the enemy more or less than it frightens us.
However many beatings we may take, and
however difficult it may be, we must never-
theless try and keep the world habitable, and a fit place for human beings to live in. We must take care to conserve natural resources so that we do not eat ourselves off our habitat.
May I, on behalf of the many bodies represented here, say that we celebrate and honour the achievements of the Society during its first fifty years, and we do look to you in this coming fifty years to set the
pace in the advance into these unknowrn territories. We will back you in our own fields, and we look to you for a lead, especi-
ally in this field of quality of population. Although excess quantity of population is a very severe menace just now, quality is at least equally important. If there were a reliable chart which we could look at for changes in quality of population, especially during the first and second world wars, we would see how much of the cream of the population in Western Europe and not least in Britain
has been cut out of those age groups. The quality of population is going to be more and more an important matter, and it is that aspect of quality for which your Societyabove all stands.
We look to-night to your Galton Medallist, who has shown rare courage in so many fields, and I myself have had the good fortune to be with him in many odd and remote places. We do look very much to that courage in leadership from your Society, and I would urge that you should take your. courage in both hands, and we will back you in this. We do feel the best is still to come.
You have great achievements to your credit, but we do look to this Society to show how we may reach an equilibrium between the demands of a proper status for humanity, which are almost overwhelming at the moment, and the application of great intelligence and qualities of character to the

JUBILEE DINNER

'3

equally fundamnental tasks of conservation and pioneering, of seeing old, things in

which are also so necessary if we are not to new lights-all the.marks of genius. There

become the number one pest on this planet was Major Leonard Darwin whom I did

-if we are to become not a pest but an know, and all who knew him retain great

animal which is able to make terms with its admiration and affection for him. May I

habitat and with its long-term future, and say that it is a very fortunate and appropri-

able to live at peace with itself and its ate thing in the Jubilee Year of the Society

neighbours-the plants and animals of this its President should be Sir Charles Galton

world.

Darwin.

We thank you for your hospitality, and I have been thinking about the history of

woulld ask you to accept our good wishes for eugenics, and it does seem to me that the

the next fifty years.

story is a very odd one. The eugenic idea

in the large is no more than this-the

SIR ALEXANDER CARR-SAUNDERS, recognition of the fact that like tends to

K.B.E., M.A., LL.D.

breed like amongst men as well as other

MR. PRESIDENT, my Lords, Ladies and Gentlemen, it is a great honour to propose the toast of the Eugenics Society on the occasion of its Jubilee. I think it is common form on these occasions to say that you
cannot imagine why you were chosen for the honour. I am not going to be so modest, because I can see a very good reason why I

animals, and that this fact needs constant attention in human affairs. Very long ago to the earliest breeders of animals and the earliest agriculturalists the fact that like tends to produce like must have been obvious. Whether they drew the obvious inference
about men we do not know; they could not write; so they left no record. The Greeks

should be chosen. I joined the Society in put two and two together, and all writers on I9I3; I am told that I have paid my eugenics quote the well known remarks of

subscription regularly-that is to say for Plato and others which must be familiar to

forty-six years-so I am almost due for a you.

jubilee myself.

Perhaps it is not surprising that, in the

I suspect, however, that this was not the ages which followed, the eugenic idea was

reason; I suspect the reason was that I am lost sight of. People were not interested in

produced as a sort of antique, who can tell
you about the great men and great deeds of past days. I am getting quite accustomed to being produced in this way nowadays. It is a great year in the mountaineering

that sort of thing. What seems to me odd indeed is that in, let us say, the two hundred
years after the founding of the Royal Societythe eugenic idea did not again see the light of day-not until the i88os or thereabouts.

world, the centenary of the founding of the Scientific men in those days may not have

Alpine Club, and I find myself asked to been in close touch with the breeding of

dinners given by clubs of enthusiastic young animals and plants, but they had before

mountaineers in the hope that I can tell their eyes the best of all examples of the

them something about the great men of the working of heredity in human affairs. They

mountaineering past, the story I heard from could not help observing their own families

Whymper about what happened on the and other families known to them, and could

Matterhom on the occasion of the first not help noticing how children of the same

ascent and so on.

parents, brought up in very similar condi-

I disappoint them, I am afraid, and I must tions in respect of education, social and

disappoint you because I did not know the material surroundings, diverged as they

great man of eugenics, Sir Francis Galton. grew up and came to exhibit extraordinary

To my lasting regret I never met him. The dissimilarity. What could be at work to

more one hears of him, the more one reads produce such contrasts except heredity?

what he wrote, the clearer it becomes what ex- Yet the inference was not drawn.

traordinary powers he had of path breaking I have brought with me Dr. Blacker's

I4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

most valuable Galton Lecture which he gave lead to the end of social evils. Improve

in I945; in it he quotes a letter from Charles conditions as much as you will, and you will

Darwin to Galton written in I869 acknow- still have the feckless, the poorly endowed,

ledging a copy of Hereditary Genius. " You the mentally defective and the intellectually

made a convert " says Darwin, "of an unstable-all sources of social problems.-

opponent in one sense, for I have always The warning was not popular. It was

maintained that, excepting fools, men did thought that eugenists were trying to find

not differ much in intellect, only in zeal and supposedly scientific reasons for holding up

hard work." Thus, until Darwin had read these efforts and depreciating the value of

Hereditary Genius, he had not drawn the what others were trying to do.

inference from facts of common knowledge Another feature of those days was acute

that heredity is powerfully at work in the class consciousness. There was a feeling of

affairs of men. It follows that it is a mistake guilt, and very properly so, about class

to attribute to ecclesiastical dogma as much attitudes. To many in those days eugenists

importance, as has often been attributed to seemed to be looking for pseudo-scientific

it, in accounting for the failure of the eugenic reasons to find justification for class differ-

idea to see the light of day once more. It is ences. This was so because eugenists

also strange that during these two centuries pointed to social mobility; people moved

teachers multiplied, and surely no teacher out of one class into another; in particular,

faced with a dim pupil, and there are many bright and energetic people moved from

such, can really. persuade himself that if the manual to intellectual occupations. They

pupil had had a more stimulating back- pointed to the fact, which could not be

ground, better food and a happier home denied, that the managerial and professional

and so on, he would have been a bright classes were less fertile than the manual

person.

working classes. They asked whether

It was Galton to whom the re-birth of those who " moved up " in the social scale

eugenics is due. He converted Darwin, and might not be better endowed; if that was so,

on that account alone I think he is a man of then unfavourable differential fertility must

great mark in the last century.

be at work. And a very proper question to

It is interesting to remember what recep- ask! The question is important, very im-

tion greeted the re-birth of the eugenic idea portant, and no full answer is yet available.

and what the climate of opinion was like But it mate eugenists unpopular. They

when the Society was founded fifty years ago. seemed to be finding reasons for differences

The idea met with ridicule. How easy to between the social classes which could not

ridicule eugenics! Eugenists wanted to turn be removed by modifying conditions. Social

society into a stockyard. And what did class is indeed a touchy subject. I notice with

they want to breed? Human mastiffs for interest that sociologists no longer speak of

policemen, human greyhounds for postmen? an upper class; there are, it seems, only

As to the climate of opinion, the eugenic upper and lower middle classes and manual

idea was launched into the world at a time workers. Perhaps British Railways are not

when two things were very much features quite up-to-date; they would have been

of the day. It was a time of much concern more in accord with the times if they had

for social reform and of determined efforts degraded first class to second instead of

to mitigate poverty, ignorance, squalor and raising third to second. But let us not be

so on. Efforts in these directions were over- unfair to British Railways. They are doing

due, and eugenists, who are as much their best to diminish class differences.

concerned about social evils, and are as What has the Society done? It has

humane as other people, were not opposed attempted to keep the public mindful of the

to, or lacking in sympathy for, these move- importance of heredity in human affairs,

ments. B3ut they issued a warning that and that is its main task. But is has not

improvement of conditions alone could not confined itself to the reiteration of general

JUBILEE. DINNER

I5

statements. The Society has, in the course of honoured by the Society a little later on, but

its -fifty years, accomplished a great many I must express my warmest admiration for

specific things, and I think it is right that aU he has done for it and my pleasure that

they should be mentioned and recorded. he is to be presented with the Galton Medal,

There are, first, the attempts to influence which will make him a double G.M.

legislation, and not unsuccessfully. The I have no doubt that new opportunities

Mental Deficiency Act of I9I2, which will arise for similar special activities, and I

authorizes segregation of mental defectives, have no doubt that, with Dr. Bertram as

resulted from advocacy by the Society and General Secretary, they will not be missed.

other bodies; the same applied to the amend- There does remain the perpetual task of the

ment to the Finance Act of I928 concerning Society to make people more aware of the

children's allowances for Income Tax. The Society strongly advocated voluntary sterilization, and its proposals were incorporated
in the Brock Report which have, however, not been implemented. Other activities of

importance of heredity in human affairs. That is a task that can never be completed; it calls for continuous activity on the part of the Society so that the importance of heredity will ever become more widely known and

the Society concern the initiation, the appreciated. If I was speaking to a Society encouragement and the financing of inquiries that had as its objective one attainable aim,

and of research into various problems. I it could hardly be appropriate for me to

think that one of the most important has wish that society a long life, but in regard

been referred to by previous speakers- to the Eugenics Society that is not the

social problem families. That the country position. I think it would be too much to

is now aware that there are social problem say of the Society-esto perpetua!-but I

families is, I think, largely due to the think that I may properly express the hope

investigations sponsored by the Society and that fifty years hence the Society will be

the publications that have resulted. There celebrating its centenary, and that it will

is also birth control into which the Society then have a second fifty years, equally

has financed some very important and successful and prosperous years, to its credit.

successful inquiries; this is obviously a most With that may I propose the toast of the

important matter in the whole field in which Society, coupling with it the name of Mrs.

the Society is interested.

Raphael.

There was the foundation of the Population Investigation by the Society; that Committee MRS. RAPHAEL (deputizing for MRS. M. A.

has become autonomous, and the volume of PYKE)

work it has produced is astonishing-much MR. PRESIDENT, Sir Alexander, my Lords,

of it of great eugenic importance. I can only Ladies and Gentlemen, as your President

give a few examples of what the Society has has said, I am deputizing to-night for my

done; one more thing I must mention and Chairman, Mrs. Pyke. Those of us who have

that is the production of a symposium by the pleasure and privilege of working with

medical specialists under the title of The her, who revolve round her, who pant after

Chances of Morbid Inheritance, a guide for her and pick up the pieces, know that she is

doctors who advise those with abnormal really irreplaceable. I am a most inadequate

family histories. I could mention many more second fiddle, but I have the notes she made

of these special activities, but that must for her speech for you to-night, and I hope,

suffice.

Mr. President, I shall play in tune. Here is

I think it is not unknown to the Society her speech:

that the inspirer of -most, if not all, of these I speak to-night in a dual capacity-it is

very useful and very successful activities my duty and privilege to return thanks, on

was the former General Secretary, Dr. behalf of the Eugenics Society, for the toast

Blacker. It is not for me to speak at length you have just drunk-but at the same time

about Dr. Blacker, who is going to be it is also my firm intention to say what I

i6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

think about the Society and about what it has done for other societies.
The aims of the Eugenics Society surely go straight to the root of all our troubles-if
we had better men we- would have a better
world. Of course, a great many well-meaning societies spend much earnest effort on trying to make men better, and everyone can see what an uphill job that is. What the Eugenics Society wants to do is to find out how to breed better men and then help the world to do so. Perhaps it is a pity that our commercial value is so low-if we were cows or pigs or horses or dogs, or even budgerigars, our breeding would very soon cease to be a matter of chance. If we did not become better and better budgerigars we should not stand a chance.
How unlike the dog world is to ours. In Horse and Hound I read the following sentence -" If we firmly and conscientiously avoid small bitches and big dog-hounds, breed our pack for work and get them as goodlooking as we can we shall have done as much for our country as a man may reasonably do." In fact, it may be that it is man's pre-occupation with the survival of himself and his family to the exclusion of any concern for the betterment of the human race which
has led him often to suspect the whole sub-
ject of eugenics. However, that is a digression.
In pursuit of its ideal, the Eugenics Society has maintained always a high scientific standard, as instanced by the
quality of its lectures and investigations, its publications and particularly its excellent REVIEW (so ably edited by Mrs. K. Hodson), and by the nature of the support it has obtained and the high standing of those who have become its officers.
It has another very rare asset almost unique among voluntary organizationsthe Society actually has money and (perhaps even rarer) it has used some of that money to advance its work through other existing organizations. In the Statement of Aims these are called cognate societies. I can assure you that it is a splendid thing to be
regarded as a cognate society by the Eugenics Society. As representing one of these societies to-night, I speak very feelingly on this subject.

During the last twenty-five years the Family Planning Association has been given free premises, donations, grants for research
and to help special ventures-not all at once, of course, the Eugenics Society- is generous but not madly improvident. I think we owe special thanks to the Society's treasurers, both the late Mr. Clinton Chance and (I am glad to say) the very much present Mr. Aird Whyte who we are so glad
to see with us to-night. And of course we never forget what we owe to Dr. Blacker in
this matter. The Eugenics Society has a very elegant badge, but it has no motto. I can certainly suggest one; in fact for the last twenty-six years this should surely have been Quid Blacker Censet, or, for the benefit of those whose education has been purely scientific, " What does Blacker think?"
We are very grateful for Dr. Blacker's thoughts about the F.P.A. I can only remember one occasion on which a request
which he supported was turned down by the Society. I do not know which was the
crosser, he or I-we both scowled for a fortnight. And that was the only time the Society was wrong, because that particular
venture paid hand over fist, and the Society would have had its money back-with interest. However, that slight blotch on the escutcheon only serves to show up an otherwise glorious record. The Family Planning Association, the International Planned Parenthood Federation, the North Kensington Marriage Welfare Centre, the British Social Biology Council-we all have grateful hearts; wO know how much the generosity of the Eugenics Society has lightened the lives of thousands of men and women.
Before ending, I want to take this opportunity of expressing the Council's gratitude to Dr. Carter for the excellent work he did during his five years' sentence as General Secretary which has just ended. But fortunately we shall have the benefit of his ability and experience on the Council. And
I know we would like to thank Miss Scherlk
and the office staff for their tremendous efforts and efficiency in organizing to-night's dinner.
In conclusion, I want on behalf of all the-

JUBILEE DINNER

17

cognate societies to thank the Eugenics Society for its enlightened liberality-and on behalf of the Council of the Eugenics Society, of which I have the honour to be a member, I want to thank you all for coming to-night to celebrate this memorable and happy occasion.
SIR CHARLES GALTON DARWIN, K.B.E.,
M.C.', Sc.D., F.R.S.
MY LORDS, Ladies and Gentlemen, I now come to what I regard as the crowning event of this evening-the presentation to Dr. Blacker of the second Galton Medal. I may say this was agreed unanimously by our Council. Everyone who has taken any part in our Society's activities will know that he has carried the whole Society on his shoulders almost personally for something like twenty years, and this without becoming a tyrant, but with the supreme quality of knowing how to get the willing services of many good men and -true.
I hope this evening he is going to tell us something about what he has done. He will certainly know much more what he has done for our Society than any of the rest of us can, and I shall not attempt to say anything about it, but he adds to his other qualities the besetting virtue of being modest, so that whatever he may tell us will be an under-statement, and in hearing it you must do whatever is the opposite of discounting it.
I will not talk about his actions for the Society for that reason, but I think we have to import eugenic colour into the proceedings, and in awarding him this medal we have examined him on the eugenic principle. In one of his writings Francis Galton describes certain qualities which constitute good eugenic standards-health, energy, ability, manliness and a courteous disposition-so let us see how Blacker measures up to classification on those five points.
Health: You have only to look at him to judge of this, and I may mention in addition that a good long time ago he captained the Oxford University boxing team. I should have thought that was a sufficient guarantee of health.

Energy: Another quality he has, whether under the category of health or energy I do not know. Blacker, in addition to having
been a boxer in his youth, is a runner. I should not be greatly surprised-realizing this dinner was going to be something of an ordeal for him-if he ran three miles this
morning-and that at the age of sixty-two. However that may be, I do know that not
many years ago when he was medical officer to the Coldstream Guards, he regarded it as
his duty to keep the recruits fit, and he made them do a long run every day, and in order to show it could be done he did it himself-and he himself would then have been fifty. I sometimes find myself wondering whether those recruits, when they had
to run their five miles a day, had an absolutely uniform enthusiasm for all the estimable qualities of Dr. Blacker.
But of course the word energy refers not merely to physical energy and I think we can include the question of his intellectual qualities. I might cite the fact that many
of us who are firm believers in eugenics tend to sit back quietly and hope it will gradually
come about, but Blacker is not in the least like that. As soon as he had made up his mind that eugenics was a good thing he set to work to find out what we should next do, and got it done in every case. We have been hearing about the various societies connected with the development of the family, and these largely owe their existence to the energy of Blacker in getting them going. This connects up with the next item.
Ability: A great deal of the quality he has, this energy in getting things going, could be ranked either as energy or as ability. We can add to that the quality he has of writing remarkably good works-many of them short articles which come out in the REVIEW, but I might specially cite the book, Eugenics, Galton and After.
Manliness: When we come to the fourth quality, manliness, it is a little difficult for
most people to say what exactly is meant by that. In the case of Blacker it is particularly easy to do it. Blacker, I think, has a very remarkable military record. He served
in both Great Wars in the Coldstream-

i8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW.

The President presenting the Galton Medal to Dr. C. P. Blacker. Photo: RAWOOD LTD.

as an infantry officer in the first war when he was decorated with the Military Cross, an.d as a medical officer in the second, being decorated with the George Medal for the occasion when he walked across a known minefield to save the life of a wounded man.
Courteous disposition: Finally I come to the question of courteous disposition (which I must confess I thought was rather a queer
quality for Galton to have mentioned), but certainly Blacker passes very well under that. In this connection I will tell you a story that probably few people know. My uncle Leonard was President of this Society until I929, when he retired at the age of seventy-eight or seventy-nine. Two years later Blacker became secretary of the Society, and knowing that my uncle was still deeply interested in the subject, Blacker,
every month or two, used to travel down to a remote part of Sussex to call on my uncle and tell him how things were going. I hope Blacker enjoyed it, but I do know my uncle enjoyed these visits enormously. As a trivial

digression I remember on one occasion I told my uncle some funny story. He enjoyed it very much and said at the end, " I must remember that and pass it on to Blacker. He will like it so much."
So I think you will agree that Blacker passes very high on all the five qualities set by Galton as the qualities for eugenics. Indeed he passes far above First Class Honours, and in the light of that we can unanimously agree we are doing the right thing when we present Dr. Blacker with the second Galton Medal.
Dr. C. P. BLACKER, M.C., G.M., M.A., M.D.
MR. PRESIDENT, my Lords, Ladies and Gentlemen:
When, the day before yesterday evening, I sat down in my armchair at home and began to think of what I ought to say tonight, there floated into my mind a memory of something that happened almost exactly forty years ago.

JUBILEE DINNER ',

I

The occasion was the battle of Passchen- them, fall into three periods, about the first

da.ele and the scene a wood about three miles of which-from I907 to I927-I know only

behind the Line. I was second in command by hearsay.

of a company of which the company com- The Society's founder was the indefatig-

mander, Alan Dickinson, one of the bravest able and persuasive Mrs. Gotto, better known

and best men I have ever known, and also as Mrs. Neville Rolfe. She told me an amus-

one of the most modest, had just been ing story. She had been casting about for an

awarded a military cross. He was thrown appropriate president of the Society and her

into a state of acute distress. After a period active mind hit upon the name of your uncle,

of restlessness and painful indecision, he sent Mr. President, Major Leonard Darwin. She

for -the sergeant-major and told him to get sought him out and bluntly said that she

on to parade all the men he could lay his wished him to become president of the

hands on-and never mind about their Eugenics Society. He replied with a naive

dress. A motley group, mostly consisting of question which he later made classical.

company headquarters, including the com- "NWhat," he asked, " is Eugenics? " The

pany cooks, was assembled, and these Alan question has become classical because he

Dickinson addressed. He told them about himself later wrote a small book entitled

the military cross and went on, in effect, to What is Eugenics? of which the Society has

say that it was not really he that had earned sold thousands. I must deny myself the

it but they. It would be their colours that pleasure of telling you more of Leonard

he would be wearing in the future, not his Darwin, who was our president for no less

own. than eighteen years, from I9II to I929, and

This scene came back to me with astonish- who would surely have been delighted had

ing clearness: a wood of stunted oaks pro- he known that his nephew would succeed

viding a sort of camouflage; two ranks of him in the presidential chair twenty-five

untidy and mystified men, wondering what years after he had vacated it. During his

the excitement was about; in the back- eighteen years presidency he surmounted

ground wet tents, and the company cooker many difficulties with a characteristic com-

steaming away; out of a grey sky a drizzle bination of tact and gentle candour. He was

of rain and the continuous cannonade (the immensely admired and loved by us all. A

rain being no less characteristic of the battle great man.

of Passchendaele than the cannonade); and There are now but two survivors of this

standing in front of me a close friend under period who retain contact with the Society

much tension, apologizing for having been -that most faithful of women, Mrs. Ursula

awarded a medal. It was a moving scene, Grant Duff, and Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders,

not without its humorous side.

the recipient of the first Galton Medal and

I must confess, Mr. President, that when, also a past-president. He was the author of

about'three weeks ago, I received your letter the volume on eugenics in the Home Univer-

telling me about this award I reacted rather sity Library, first printed in I926, thirty-one

like my old company commander, though years ago. I thank him for the kind things

I do not compare myself with him in any he has said and I hope he won't mind my

other way. I thought of the many people- adding that I have recently been trying to

officers, fellows and servants of the Society persuade him to write a second and revised

-whom I have got to know since I927, when edition of his useful book. Such a revised

I was first elected to the Society and became edition would be of the utmost value to us

a member of its Council. Many of these to-day.

people I now count among my most valued Other names associated with this period

friends; and I feel that on this occasion, were those of Dr. A. F. Tredgold, whose son,

which is historical for the Society' it would be Dr. R. F. Tredgold, is now a Fellow of the

fitting if I recalled some of them to you. Society; and Dr. R. Langdon-Down, the

The last fifty years, as I think back on father of Lady Russell Brain whom we hoped

4-ER

20 V

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

would be with us to-night. Langdon-Down united triumvirate. They were close per-

was, in my eyes, another great man, with the sonal friends before the war, and together

same tact, courtesy, rectitude and gentleness they sustained the Society during the in-

as Leonard Darwin. Also to be recalled with active war years. Our debt to all three is

gratitude is the name of Mr. E. J. Lidbetter, great.

the author of a volume describing prolonged The third and last period of the half-

and painstaking researches, conceived as a century runs frcm I945 to to-day. Among

result of first-hand observations, into the the many people I would mention are Aird

incidence of social dependency in an East Whyte, Janet Chance's brother, among

London Borough. The volume, Heredity and whose numerous, unostentatious but highly

the Social Problem Group, was published by valued services to the Society, both as chair-

the Society in I933. I have a letter from Mr. man and treasurer, I include his part in

Lidbetter expressing regret that he could not organizing this dinner; Mr. Geoffrey Eley,

be here to-night. To this period belong the for several years our treasurer; Mrs. Barbara

figure, memorable to all who knew him, of Bosanquet, sister-in-law of Frederick Osborn

Dean Inge, a firm believer in, and an eloquent (director of the American Population Council,

(if sometimes provocative) expositor of, and secretary of the American Eugenics

eugenics; and such redoubtable personalities Society); and also, if it is not presumptuous,

as Sir Ronald Fisher and Professor E. W. Mr. President, yourself.

MacBride.

Of personalities loosely connected with the

The Society's second period, as I see it, ran Society whose writings on eugenics have had

from I927 to I945. This period was ushered a notable influence I would mention two:

in by a large bequest from Mr. Henry Dr. Havelock Ellis who died in I939 and

Twitchin, an Australian sheep-farmer and a with whom I had an almost continuous

friend of Major Leonard Darwin. This correspondence during the decade before'his

bequest banished financial pares and made death; and Dr. Marie Stopes whom we hoped

us rich by the standards of voluntary socie- would be among us to-night. It gave me

ties (though not by those of grant-giving much pleasure to read a very recent tribute

bodies). The responsibility of recasting the to her from the pen of Mrs. Mary Stocks who

Society in a fresh mould, made possible by is now sitting on the President's right. It

the bequest, lay with Sir Bernard Mallet will be found in a symposium called The

who succeeded Leonard Darwin as our Human Sum, produced in October this year

president. He was a man of the same rare by the Family Planning Association. Of Dr.

quality as Darwin and Langdon-Down, and Stopes's book Married Love, first published

I am grateful to the Society, among many in I9I8, of which hundreds of thousands of

things, for having enabled me to know these copies have since been sold, Mrs. Stocks fit-

three men. Sir Bernard Mallet's son, Sir tingly said that " no single publication in

Victor Mallet, is here to-night. Lady Mallet, our time has brought more happiness to

wife of Sir Bernard, also took a keen interest more people."

in the Society and it is a pleasure to welcome It was during the second and third of the

her cousin, Sir Michael Adeane, who is also three periods, after the Society had received

with us now.

Mr. Twitchin's legacy, that began the co-

To this period belong the names of John operation with other organisations to which
Fraser Roberts, David Caradog Jones, Julian Mrs. Raphael, on behalf of Mrs. Pyke, has

Huxley and David Glass; also the names of kindly referred. Of these organisations I will

Lord Horder, our honoured and active presi- mention first PEP, represented here by Mr.

dent for nine years, of Stanley Bramwell, Max Nicholson and Mr. Richard Bailey: I

and of Clinton Chance whose family, and the have co-operated closely with Mr. Nicholson

family of whose wife Janet Chance, have been over two fairly large reports with the costs the Society's warm friends. Horder, of which the Society was able to assist; and

Bramwell and Chance formed a happy and many are the happy holidays I have spent

JUBILEE DINNER

21

with him in Britisl and continental bird excellent film on eugenics of which I hope

sanctuaries. I wish I had time to tell you that we will be able to make more use in

what a courageous and many-sided-indeed the future.

remarkable-man Max Nicholson is. I To both the middle and last period belong

mention the Family Planning Association, the late Dr. Maurice Newfield, who succeeded

the Marriage Guidance Council, the British Eldon Moore as editor, and with whose wvife

Social Biology Council and the International Sigrid and son Gabriel we are happy to retain

Planned Parenthood Federation whose lead- contacts; and Mrs. Jessie Horner, our

ing representatives-Mrs. Margaret Pyke (to admirable housekeeper. Our friendship with

whom we wish a quick recovery), Mr. Joseph Mrs. Horner began in I933 when Clinton

Brayshaw, Mrs. Eleanor French and Mrs. Chance bought our house in Eccleston Square.

Vera Houghton-are, or intended to be, with Throughout the war years, undeterred by the

us this evening.

successive phases of the bombardment of

Lastly I come to the Society's servants to London, she and her husband stood fast.

whom, if I could, I would give bits of this Both refused to move. Of Mrs. Horner, Aird

medal. To both the early and middle period Whyte will agree, we are hard put to it to

belong two people to whom I wish to pay say which is the greater, our debt to her or

tributes. The first is the late Mrs. Cora our affection for her.

Hodson, a dedicated and deeply religious To the last period belong Miss Faith

woman whose undiscriminating generosity Schenk, the main organiser of this dinner,

seemed to some to outstrip the bounds of who has been with us for over eleven years;

prudence, or, to put it bluntly, who gave Miss Sheila Kordik whose powers of decipher-

away so much of her money and possessions ing my vile script are a perennial astonish-

as to leave too little for herself; she largely ment to me; Mrs. Kathleen Hodson, the

carried the Society on her shoulders during editor of the REVIEW since I949; Dr. Cedric

the early and middle 'twenties, being at the Carter, general secretary since I952; and now

same time the Society's secretary and editor his successor Dr. Colin Bertram, to whom I

of its quarterly REVIEW; she also travelled wish you could have the opportunity of

much and gave lectures all over the country. listening to to-night as well as to myself.

The second person whom I wish to thank is To all these valued and faithful servants

Mrs. Guendolyne Collyer, who is with us of the Society I would, if I could, give bits of

to-night. Upon Mrs. Collyer fell the responsi- this gold medal. I think I would give the

bilities of dealing with the Society's business biggest bits to Sigrid Newfield and Mrs.

,and finances which, after I928, became Collyer.

intricate. During the first ten years of its I conclude by thanking you, Mr. President,

existence, she was the business secretary of on behalf not only of myself but also of my

the Population Investigation Committee, men- wife and daughters, who are here with me,

tioned by Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders, for the very great honour you have accorded

which the Society convened in I936 and which to me to-day.

it financed and housed till the end of the war.

Mrs. Collyer kept with a noteworthy attention to detail, which was praised by the Society's auditors, numerous separate banking accounts; I shall always be grateful to her for the kind way she inducted me into the ways of the Society when I became its secretary in 193I.
To the middle period belong Mr. Eldon Moore, editor of the REVIEW from I928 to
I933, and Miss Hilda Pocock among whose
many services was the preparation of. an

There were present at the dinner some I46 people, including guests of the Society, Fellows, Members and their friends, but a number who had expected to attend were prevented by illness, a dense fog and the serious railway accident at Lewisham that evening.
Those who accepted invitations included:
Major G. H. F. Abraham; Sir Michael and Lady Adeane; Miss Addis; Mr. S. R. J. Addison; Lt.-Col. M. L. Ahuja; Mr. and Mrs. A. Appelbe;

22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Mr. R. Bailey; Miss P. Barclay-Smith; Sir
Thomas Barlow; Dr. Barry; Mrs. C. Bawden;
Mrs. Baxter; Mr. and Mrs. A. Bennett; Mr. B. Benjamin; Dr. and Mrs. G. C. L. Bertram; Miss
Bertram; Dr. and Mrs. W. R. Bett; Mr. and Mrs. C. Binney; Dr. and Mrs. C. P. Blacker; the Misses Blacker; Mr. H. H. C. Blake; Mrs. Bootle-Wilbraham; Mrs. C. Bosanquet; Mr. D. G. Bosanquet; Mr. and Mrs. 1R. A. Boyle; Mr. A. J. Brayshaw; Mr. H. Brewer; Dr. J. C. R. Buchanan;
Mrs. D. Buxton. Mr. L. J. Cadbury; Mr. and Mrs. A. Caroe; Sir
Alexander Carr-Saunders; Dr. and Mrs. G. B. Carruthers; Dr. and Mrs. C. 0. Carter; Mrs. Clifford Smith; Mrs. G. Collyer; Dr. and Mrs. R. Conrad; Dr. and Mrs. W. S. C. Copeman; Mr. P. R. Cox; Dr. J. D. Cronin; Sir Charles and Lady Darwin; Dr. and Mrs. Davies; Mr. R. A. Eccleston; Mr. and Mrs. G. C. R. Eley; Miss Ericson; Mrs. E. French; Dr. C. B. Goodhart; Mrs. Goyder; The Hon. Mrs. U. Grant Duff; The Rev. K. G. Greet; Dr. and Mrs. E. F. Griffith; Sir Gerald Grove; Mrs. C. Gruby; Professor F. Grundy; Miss V. Hardiman; Mr. andI Mrs. H. Hardman; Sir Clifford Heathcote-Smith; Professor E. Hindle; Mr. and Mrs. W. T. Hodson; Mr. F. Hollins; Mrs. V. Houghton; Mr. and Mrs. S. Hourmouzios; Mr. D. Hubback; D)r. Angela Hughesdon; Dr. and Mrs. K. B. Hutton; Dr. M. Hynes.
His Excellency The Indonesian Ambassador; Mr. N. Isaacs; Dr. Margaret H. Jackson; Dr. D. McI.

Johnson; Mr. and Mrs. D. Caradog Jones; Dr. and Mrs. T. Kelly; Miss S. M. Kordik; Dr. and Mrs. W. P. Kraemer; Lady Lane; I)r. Evelyn Lawrence; Dr. H. Lehmann; Dr. and Mrs.
A. D. Leigh; Mrs. D. Leonard; Dr. Hilda Lewis;
Professor P. Lindahl; Sir Ivison and Lady Macadam; Sir Victor Mallet; Mrs. Money-Kyrle;
Mr. E. Money-Kyrle; Mr. R. Money-Kyrle; Dr.
A. E. Mourant; Mr. E. M. Nicholson; Dr. A. F.
and Miss E. M. Norman-Butler; Dr. H. Murray Park; Dr. and Mrs. A. S. Parkes; Lt.-Col. C. L.
Pasricha; Mr. M. S. and the Hon. Mrs. Pease; Mr. N. S. Percival; D)r. and Mrs. B. H. Pickard; Captain R. A. Pilkington; Dr. and Mrs. A. Piney; Dr. and Mrs. D. A. Pond; Mr. J. Prince; Mrs.
M. A. Pyke. Mrs. N. Raphael; Dr. and Mrs. W. Linford
Rees; Dr. and Mrs. J. A. Fraser Roberts; Professor and Mrs. J. L. C. Rodrigo; Mr. D. Rolt; Dr. and Mrs. G. H. Rossdale; Mr. and Mrs. H. F. Rossetti; Miss F. B. Schenk; I)r. J. A. Scott; Mr. and Mrs. G. C. Seligman; Mrs. A. Smith; Mr. C. Sprigge; Miss Stephens; Dr. Marie Stopes; Mrs. Mary Stocks; Lord Strathcona; Dr. Barnett Stross; Dr. D). Sw\inscow; Dr. K. H. Tallerman; Dr. and Mrs. C. J. O'D. Taylor; Sir Henry Tizard; Dr. and Mrs. J. P. M. Tizard; Mr. C. W. Usher; Mrs. L. U'sher; Mr. and Mrs. N. Villeneuve; Mr. and Mrs. G. Aird WNhyte; Dr. Isabel Wilson; Mrs. M. W\oodside; Dr. and M\Irs. D. W'oollam; Dr. and Mrs. E. B. W\Northington; Mr. and Mrs. M.
Zander.

