NAlTURAL AND SOCIAL SELECTION V

2.-InAmerica as well as inEland

By FRANK W. WHITIE, L.R.C.P. & S.E&

INtioanalfomrwmretralarittiyclea*nddeaglninrgawlithhUoltphai-n

and
cOQClusions.

and Wales, I arrived
Some of them were

at certain
briefly as

follows:0

heritance play mortality, but portant of the

ttthwheaoitrisbpayirnthfsearriinttahdneecteme.or"rmeiniimn-g

THE ENGLISH-AMERICAN PARALLEL

t. That " An occupation (and a social

frade) seects its men according to their

natural) endowment "; that " In a

general way, the higher and more desir-

able the occupation or grade] the better

are the natural endowments of those who

gain admission to it; and vice versa ";

that " Their rates of mortality corre-

spond closely to their inheritance "; but

that " Every occupation (and grade) em-

braces [to a certain extent] an assort-

ment," which accounts for some of the

anomalies in the statistics.

2. That rates tend

" As age increases mortality
towards equality for all . . .

clear evidence of the mixed character of

each grade and occupation from the point

of view of inheritance. In each, those of

good endowment struggle successfully

etnhvrioruognhmtehnetsadvaenrdsittieensdoftotherieracrhespaecvteirvye

similar old age. But the constitutional

weaklings .
[especially]

. in

. manifest their presence the wide differences which

are noticeable between grade mortalities

at the earlier ages."

3. That, following the decline in the

mortality rates of infants and young

children, the death rates from both can-

cer and influenza are increasing. I there-

fore asked, " Are we snatching lives

from the ailments of -infancy only to

reseve them for a worse fate in later life,

opstssiruttwmeSrrunisondulenycacntghrootocuefnaondbantettrfriihueiynnercr,geemi,na'tittttBaihalAonfieusmfndoe.efro-tridfbon,iodcopoisaabknorsnsgtesfirw'acvorudrerleeaakrlhsri*aovtwteiiohndnfttgeehayfretrefogsofaotaimo,cruttlraasoy
etsoMoItoitctbhosnm1hnluccecnchhcuoooa0oatedctccrtcoecTtt5smrseuouuuecrunh,hetssppepeopa4oaiaaeptaasaapaau6fmva3lrclttstsyoti7tgia3iciaiiicelihbcie4aaooytoadoaiouoll"-ntuneynerntltrgwaifmsnaedsa"lsahsobhi.aDrtleatt;nenlloietohhruhioletrlipesoutnnnafim"hnleafhdovmpuoeL;iyprUaneetreisna"talnttnhtfrfthnrbimfopaaaebehothduviloapeoclwessclootnlotrnni,,eteotumdiopgtttdhonnbnrcIusaoyu",twaseyildnnganatipoafhnaseldteardoofbhoct1uoeroateenfllroei9rxtraeimneeel2otfahpdarcogld2nyothieeniteryey-e.thiun"usrciept.2orrdceessiodera4"stahpenel"e.yaoouorswniDrwm-rulcsoestcttaetueptdChcpeonyehhhcserucolIto,oeearoitrpofraiormenraksfoattonceyedalptcrtniiafogsldaoaiovconcwwyweveleontnshwaeezieataittnatuiynnrrerhtchhtianatoe,,dde-seeehehllhfefg
tavMhaorleryAueadaosbeuvilptemeahrirol,tracrsmaoessmnftptotuharder"yitCsfhhoooearnmvstppiehanregnihiyoabndvesheeuan1rs9ac1bna1oecn-nee1dn3"ou,fcOtomrmetaddahdienebnry.y-s

after they have transmitted the fatal tendencies to their children ?"
4. That " Both environment and inJAu,l*AyyNsazitwsua,r8al(V1aOrnaLndkXs,WoN.ao.WhSil2t)ce.,Uo,J:UGAIC'sB"lRex-vBIoaowk,'

iv+za;+V.ItBBScmineTyUeo0nsAnnLtuTLastCrLolS.aaoUTuunmPCiNscorsSeiern,sttOICa.mtlooNiDmfotTup.ybMDaleneOiaxynUtlp,,ehN.rPrIihbnfe.ydWnDDuac.PsseO,pSthc.rToicaaAfnunlTpgdtEathDtoeReinopoB,MbatUeer.Rtrt1Ert9mAo3eT0pUJn..hotleO,ViIPaPtGrornaoic9InevccUA,ee-uLor2piJin4afrs-.e-.5

47

48 THI EUGENICS REVIEW

Insurance

Dath Rate pe zooooo fr Agm (ear)

20 and 0r 20-24 345-335444 45-54 55-64 a

Industrialdepartment m ... 1,404-1
Ordiary deprtment males... 5500

400-6 255-2

556* | 946-6 |I.725'4 3.88 |3 7.57417
268-4 422-0 7901 1,5 *0 3,604-1

Peren8t., Indulotrdinof 255-3 |157-0 207*2 224x3 218*4 | 8 | 135 *

than " wage-earners," two broad social but only a small part-of the differecs, it

groups or grades could usefully be com- may here be noted that the better envi-

pared.

ment of the one group carries with it a

The ordinary department, we are told, is lighter risk from accident at all ages. In

composed mainly of the professional and round figures, accident accounts for some

commercial classes, clergymen, and the 5 per cent. of all deaths in the ordinary

better-paid mechanics. The industrial de- group, and for about io per cent. in the

partment, on the other hand, is made up of industrial.)

the lower-paid workers of every description, Our next table brings out the same

down to and including "undefined" points from another angle. In it the ex-

labourers.

pectation of life at various ages is shown for

the same two grades.

ADVANTAGES OF SOCIAL STATUS

The table above (reproduced from page 7 of the bulletin) shows the death rates Age.

Expectation of life in ya.
_____

for all causes in the year 1923 for the two main grades: ordinary department (total

Industrial.

Ordinary.

white males) compared with industrial de-

20

42-10

49-3I

partment (white males). It is unfortunate that thie second column

30
40
50

33*72 25.88
18*79

40.31
31 42
22*96

of the above table covers so short an age period; for, had the death rates at ages

60
70

12 .73
7-96

15332 9-23

15 to 20 been included, a still more pronounced divergence might have appeared at From the above we see that the ' indus-

the earliest period. However, the wide trials' again make a poorer showing than

differences in the mortality rates between the ' ordinaries ' at each succeeding period.

the two social grades are clearly revealed at At age 30, the difference in expectation is

all age periods, and a relative lessening in 6.6 years; at age 50, it is 4.2 years; at age

the ditferences is certainly to be noted after 70, it is 1.3 years. The differences again

middle life.

become less marked as age advances.

My general conclusions for England and Wales seem thus to apply here also with RECENT CHANGES IN MORTALITY

equal force. Undoubtedly both heredity and Returning now to the industrial group

environment are responsible, but the former alone and comparing their 1911-13 expe-

seems to be primarily so. Broadly speaking, rience of it as a whole with their 1922-24

the ordinary policy holders, belonging as experience, the authors claim that most of

they do to the more highly selected group, the causes of death have shown a " highly

enjoy both a better natural inheritance and gratifying " downward trend of mortality.

a better environment than do the industrial; The death rate from typhoid fever, for

and these things are reflected in the differ- instance, shows a fall of 72.2 per cent. since

ences in their respective death rates. (As I912-" a greater relative decline than was

serving directly to explain a small part- registred for any other cause of death."

NATURAL AND SOCIAL SZLCTION

49

And the gal statment is made that now be briefly mentioned. Influen, like

toay rers of -2o years of age may cancer, is also cang an increasing death-

expect to live, on the avIrage, five years roll among the white male ' industrials ' of

loger thandsimilar wrkars could in 1912." America. In fact " the influenza death rate

As causes of this provement the in 1923 for al age was 157.4 per cent.

authors give: si of workmen's com- greater than in 1912, the greatest increase

pen , prevtive industrial medicine, being recorded in the age period 25 to 34

the safety movement, reduction in hours of where the rate in I923 was almost four-and-

labour, elmination of the ' Weatshop,' one-half times that of 1912."

better plant sanitation, wider education of The year 1923, we are told, was a bad

workers regarding dangers inherent in cer- one for influenza. But the sinister fact

tain occupations, and last, but in their stands forth that during periods when the

opinion most important, the "i mpoved disease is prevalent, as seems now to be of

standard of living which the increased pros- frequent occurrence, the younger adult age-

perity of the American wage-earner has groups are found to suffer exceedingly high

provided."

mortality rates. And this same tendency I

emphasized in my former article, where I

CANCER AND INFLUENZA

stated that during the epidemic of I9T8 in England and Wales-which accounted for

Our authors admit, however, that " seve- no fewer than 112,329 deaths-" although

ral exceptions to the general downward trend all ages were attacked, yet the disease

of mortality are found."

showed an especial ruthlessness to early

Thus, cancer mortality has increased in adult life, a very high peak in the mortality

frequency among white male wage-earners occurring about age 30."

of IS years and older from 77.6 per ioo,oOO Thus the findings for our own country

in 1912 to 94.9 in 1923. Indeed, in the age correspond exactly with the American expe-

period 55 to 64 the disease was in 1923 the rience; and these corroborations, combined

second largest cause of death. And for all with many other well-grounded considera-

ages combined the death rate in 1923 from tions of a similar character,' seem to point

cancer was 22 per cent. higher than in 1912. to the conclusion that modern civilizations

The greatest increase, however, is recorded are rearing up to adult life, at enormous

in the age period 25 to 34, where the rate

was actually 47 per cent. higher than in the 1 The increasing ravages of the disease in our

earlier year. The more accurate diagnosis of recent

own country are presented in the following table which showa, in decennial periods since 1870, the average number of deaths per year in each period

times does not, in the authors' opinion, account for these increases. Nor do they find any very appaient correlation between the imcidence of the disease and the kind of occupation pu-rsued.
All this, it may be remarked paren-

from influenza for Etngland and Wales:

1871-80 1881-90 1891-1900 g90l-IO 1911-20

263 534 11,051 7,318 21,641

2 As I come to

write, hand.

aDreeacnentR.AmBerrnicdAangei,nstoafnctehehaUsniItuesdt

States Health Service, in a study for the research

division of the bank Memorial Fund, hs

analvzed a large volume of data showing the extent

thetically, confirms in a geral way my findings for England and Wales. I would

of disabling Sickes among wage-earning adults.
His report states: "The sickness statistics of industry represent to

call particular attention to the tendency a u"Prising extent the younger adult ages. In the

which cance now exhibits to appear at an earlier age than formerly. This baleful fact,

manufacturing industries of the cot as a whole,

probely 8o per cent. of the men forty-ye. A larger proportion of

are the

below age female in-

it seems to me, is of profod significance when vewed in connection with the lowered death rate of childhood which has been so

dustri workers, is below age 45.

apparently

from

90

to

95

per

cent.

It is further to be noted that, rding to this

rePt, the idutrial orkers " in the ma" are

notable a feature of recent years. One other ottstanding exception must

healthier than the general population. In fact they are referred to as " the Rlower of the general populatio in physique and constitution."

50 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

cost, a large and grong p tage of defective and highly Vulnerable individuals with low general resisting powers, who are ever liable to fall an easy prey to disease and

OCCUPATION,

Pw cent. ad denths from tuhswcuoiab of thPBer omR~Itade-p2itAoiyyst.
of whit. magks 932.4d d aepId

to perish prematurly by thousndonly

too often, alas I after being permitted and

15--24 25-34 35-44 45-54 55-64

even encouraged to procreate children like in

nature to themselves. Here, obviously, is social selection at its worst. Here is philan-

en and offi
assistants ... 31.8 38.4 24-6 13*1 6-3

thropy run riot I Racial suicide-no less. Farmers and

labours ... 24,-1 348 215 14t3 5*7

RESULTS OF OCCUPATIONAL SELECTION

Blacksmiths and forgmen ' 8.7 20'5 19'3 1-2 6.7

The next table, which I have built up from the author's chapter on " Mortality

Coal miner (underground) ... .

4*7

1310* 4

6.4

5S8

according to Occupation," appears to me to

indicate the superior importance of heredity over envionment. It shows in a most strik-

AU occupatios
(wagecarerS) 23*5

29.4

20-8

13-o

6*2

ing manner how the occupation selects the

type; how those who are hereditarily sus- MOST PHTHISIS IN THE COUNTRY

ceptible to a particular disease like tuberculosis are eliminated by death during the earlier age periods; and how, after the susceptibles have been removed, the percentages of those who die of the disease in the later periods of life tend to a remarkable
equality for all, despite the character of
their occupation. The figures represent the percentages of
the total deaths from all causes (at the different age periods in the specified occupations), which were due to tuberculosis of the respiratory system. I have included at the foot of the table the corresponding percentages
for " all occupations." These last give us a useful average for comparison. (See top
of next column.) With regard to the extremely high per-
centages of deaths among clerks from respiratory tuberculosis, as revealed in our table, no one, I think, can seriously contend that these are due, except in very slight degree, to the general conditions of the occupation.
The environment of the ordinary modern office is by no means a bad one, certainly not as contrasted with that of coal mine or forge. It cannot be doubted, therefore, that the explanation lies in the fact that for the most part men of poor physique and low resistance are attracted to just this relatively light, though meagrely remunerated, kind of employment.

The case of farmers and farm labourers, as above recorded, is at first sight amazing. Here is the occupation, the environment, in which, par excelimce, one would have
expected to encounter the very lowest per.
centages from tuberculosis. Yet our table
shows that these are worse even than the average for all occupations taken as a whole.
Dealing with this anomalous state of affairs, our authors have wrtten: " It is surprising to note that like previous mortality studies, the standardized relative index for farmers and farm labourirs does not fall below the average of all occupations. In fact, the standardized relative index is actually 7 per cent. above the average." Later they tell us that " The percentage of deaths from tuberculosis among farmers is about 4 per cent. greater in 1922-24 than in 1911-13, while the proportion for all occupied males has declined about 34 per cent.
during the period." " Apparently," they
continue, " farmers and farm labourers have not participated in the general improvement in tuberculosis mortality brought about by intensive public health activities during the past decade." They do not, however, tell us why.
It seems to me that there is only one
reasonable explanation-and that a biologi-
cal one. We are confrontd, in fact, by yet another case of selection. The towns,

NATURAL AND SOCIAL SELIFCTION

51

by their m attaction of higher wages should not be inferred that this is the whole

d gater falites for plere, have explanation for the low ratio for tubercu-

rectly been drang off from the rural losis. If we relate the deaths from tUbercu-

districts a continuous and increasing stream of the more vigorous stocks. And the cumulative effect of this, year succeeds

losis to deaths from all causes, excluding accidents for both all occupied males and coal miners, the ratios remai lower for

year, has been seriously to devitalize the mers in every age period."

agricultural population and to leave in the
country a gong proportion of individuals
whose general type is clearly reflected in our table. Aided, beyond a doubt, by a good deal of inbreeding, the downward tendency
is now becming more and more manifestand this in spite of a most favourable natu-
ral environment, coupled with the unremitting efforts of preventive medicine and all
the advantages of modern American civliza-

It is interesting to recall that in my former article I pointed out that an analysis of the mortality ratios of all colliery workers for England and Wales showed that the hewers had considerably lower ratios at all ages than the above-ground workers, though the work and conditions and accident mortality of the former were much stiffer than those of the latter. Hewers, however, could earn the highest pay....

tion.

In the above, I suggest, lies the only explanation that fits the facts.

THE BIOLOGICAL SUMMARY Finally, viewing our last table as a whole,

ON BEING STUOUS

we may summarize the extraordinary picture

Coming next in the table to the blacksmiths and forgemen-whose work is of a particularly strenuous nature, demanding a powerful and vigorous type of general
physique-we find that the percentages representing tuberculosis mortality are well below the average. With these men, as the bulletin informs us, the proportion of deaths from tuberculosis for all ages (iX years and over) has declined from 14 per cent. to 7.6 per cent. since 1911-13. This, we must note, is in marked contrast to the experience with farmers and farm labourers

there presented by saying: (i) That the worst tuberculosis figures are shown associated with the most favourable environments, while the best are found under the severest conditions; and (2) That after the hereditary defectives have been weeded out by death at the earlier and middle ages, the survivors share an almost equal mortality from tuberculosis in spite of their widely different environments.
I submit, if it were not for the biological explanation, the problem would be absolutely insoluble.

as just recorded, and is clear evidence that

in the main the occupations of smith and ADDENDUM

forgeman still attract a comparatively fine type of man, a man of relatively good natural endowment.
With regard to coal miners (underground), one cannot fail to be impressed by the exceedingly low percentages presented in our table at all the age periods. Here, once more, we find a hard job which offers a fairly high rate of remuneration attracting,
and being successfully performed by, a hard
man.
" While the heavy mortality from accidents," says the bulletin, " makes the proportion of deaths from other causes low, it

Since writing this article I have received another recent American publication, Study
III of a series on diseases of adult life from
the Division of Research, Milbank Memorial Fund, New York City. This is a reprint of an article-Some Recent Changes in the Mortalitv Among Adults, by Dorothy G. Wiehl, which first appeared in the Journal of Preventive Medicine, of May, 1930. It
deals with the whole period 192 1-7, but the
years 192I and 1927 have been chosen for the comparison of the detailed mortality rates of sex and age, mainly because the crude death rates for these two years were

52 RTHEUGEMNS REVIW

nearly the same and becaue no general falling mortality in the early years of life

epidemic occurred in either.

associated with evidence highly sugese

The mortality data used in the paper refer of omencing rcial de rio-mre

to the original death registraion area com- apparent as yet, seigly, among m

posed of the New England States, Indiana, than among fales, and i America than

Michigan, New Jersey, New York, and the in England. Since, howevr, our author

District of Columbia. Among the chief find- seems a good deal pled by the sex and

ings of the investigation are the following: national diffences, some attempt at ex-

r. " With the reduction in the mortality from the more serious ifectious diseases and in the mortality in the early years of life, the constitutional and degenerative diseases of adult life have taken the leading position as causes of death."
2. The trend of general American mortality in adult life has not been favourable in recent years.
3. In the registration area " for each sex the mortality in early childhood in 1927 was very decidedly more favourable than in 1921, the improent was less marked for the young adult ages, while in middle age and old age the rates were less favourable in 1927, with the increase in middle age mortality starting at an earlier age for males than for females."
4. " At every age the proportionate change is more favourable for females than for males-particularly for the ages of middle life." The differences, moreover, between sex mortality rates show a strong tendency to become wider, except in old age.

planation appears to be justifiable. The comparatively favouable mortality
statistics for women can at first sight be most easily explained by the higher male death
rate from accidents and the more seltered life women usually lead. But there is no reason to think that these factors have been accentuated of late; and a much
wider, a biological, interpretation is needed
to explain why in almost all forms of life
the females have greater vitality and longer lives than the males. The female, in fact, is by nature longer-lived than the male, and the declining infant mortality af recent
years must necessarily have led to the preservation of a relatively greater number of weakly males than females. This seeti factor has also been temporarily enhanced by the War which, while leaving the female population untouched, removed a great many of the fittest young men.
In partial explanation of the national differences recorded in (6) above, I would
point out that the American population i
compounded of a remarkable admixture of peoples; that, though always a migrantreceiving country, America has only quite

S- " For each ten-year group above 25 recently enforced restrictive immigration

years of age the New York City male laws of a eugenic natur; that in England

death rate increased between 1921 and and Wales, despite a phase of general de-

1927, especially in the younger adult pression, there is now being practised an

ages." After the age of 35, we are told, intensive system of ' reliefs ' and social

the trend of female mortality in New service on a scale probably without prece-

York City was also upward.

dent or parallel in the whole of human his-

6. A comparison with England and tory; and that but for that vast and codly

Wales shows that women of Englaud and system, and in the absence of the applica-

Wales live longer than those of America, ton of eugenics, our death rates at all ages

and that Englishmen and Welshmen, and for both sexes would undoubtedly be

while not as good risks as their country. very considerably higher than they are to-

women, also live longer than Americas. day. In fact, the urgent question now is:

In this experience again, then, we find a

How long can endured ?

the increasing burden be

Eugem. ReView, VOL XXIII. No. 1.

