THE
EUGENICS REVIEW
EUGENICS DURING AND AFTER THE WAR.1
By MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN.
ALL of us must have at times experienced a feeling of surprise when reading about the views held by apparently wise and
thoughtful persons in days gone by, and yet how seldom has
this sensation been accompanied by a frank recognition of the fact that many of our opinions are certain to be rejected with like contempt by our descendants. A vague feeling that we may be mistaken in accepting even widely-held views on social matters shows itself, no doubt, at times in spasmodic efforts to see things as they really are; as, for example, when we endeavour to picture to ourselves how our customs would appear to a visitor from another planet. Though it is extreinely doubtful whether, by bringing such an imaginary witness into the case, we do anything towards getting rid of any of the prejudices dwelling in our minds, yet it may perhaps be worth while trying to realise how a stranger to this earth would regard our present methods of warfare. He would note that good and wise persons throughout Europe seem to have their thoughts now for the most part fixed on two main objects: on the killing and wounding of human beings, and on the mitigation of the sufferings caused by any success in such efforts to kill and wound. Might not some surprise be felt when observing persons with such apparently contradictory ideals living together in perfect harmony? Next our visitor would perhaps note that our military systems seem to be devised with the object of ensuring that all who are definitely defective in mind o-r body shall be as far as possible exempt from all risk of being shot at, whilst those who are especially strong, courageous or patriotic shall be placed in
I Presidential address delivered at the Annual General Meeting of the Eugenics
Education Society, I915.

92 EUGENICS REVIEW.
positions of great danger. Men with these noble qualities, he would see, are being singled out for destruction, whilst the unfit are being kept at home to become the fathers of families; and, as no one denies that like tends to beget like, would not this appear like a deliberate attempt to deteriorate the natural qualities of the coming generations? And would such a visitor's astonishment be in the least degree lessened when he learnt that the learned nation which had brought on this war, and which had thus aimed such a deadly blow at its own race, was actuated in so doing by the ambition to seize for itself a position of enduring world-wide supremacy?
All eugenic problems raised bv the war are certain to be less keenly discussed in peace-time than at present, and no apology is, therefore, needed for dealing with these subjects once again. The racial effects of war and of training for war are totally different, and should be dealt with quite separately. Dealing with war itself in the first instance, as being by far the more important topic, there can be no doubt that the methods by which our primitive human ancestors settled their disputes were similar to those now employed by savages in war. Our remote forefathers were never kept out of the fray on public or private grounds, and all men had to fight or to die as outcasts from their tribes. In these contests sagacity often led the individual to personal victory by making him ready to take advantage of local circumstances; physical strength was obviously a great advantage; whilst a failure of nerve at the critical moment in a hand-to-hand fight generally had fatal results. These same qualities of sagacity, strength and courage not only made the warrior more likely to kill his opponent, but, especially when added to them there was an instinct of tribal loyalty, they also enabled one tribe to utterly annihilate another if less highly endowed in these respects, a proceeding fully in accord with the ethical code of both parties. In times gone by the death-rate from war was, therefore, higher amongst the feeble in mind and body than that amongst those more highly endowed with manly qualities; and the selective effects thus arising were enhanced by the great fighters seizing many wives. Thus, whether we look to what occurred within each tribe, or

EUGENICS DURING AND AFTER THE WAR.

93

whether to the results on each tribe taken as a whole, we see that
primitive war had in many respects a beneficial evolutionary effect. Those who hold that the origin of many good qualities can be traced back to this source have, however, yet to ask whether we here find any palliation for modern warfare.
Taking, in the first instance, only questions connected with the racial effects of war on hostile nations considered as separate entities, it is to be noted that casualty lists are often now not much heavier on the losing than on the winning side; and that, as peace is now never celebrated by the wholesale slaughter of the foe, it is evident that civilisation has greatly reduced the selective effects of war. The racial effects likely to arise from the transfer of territory from one flag to another must, it is true, not be overlooked; for no doubt the surplus population of the land of a victor does tend to flow in greatly increasing numbers into his newly-acquired dominions. But might not this increased outflow be completely balanced by a diminution in the emigration to other lands, together with corresponding changes in an opposite sense in the directions followed by the streams of emigrants of the conquered populations? Thus, though any loss of territory might rightly be regarded as a national misfortune, yet it seems that no cosmic racial results would necessarily be produced by a transfer of territory. Besides these more direct results of war, eugenists have also to take into account its relative effects on the subsequent rates of multiplication of the nations concerned. As will be seen later on, by making a nation poorer, war does produce a diminution in the birth-rate, an effect which is certain to be most felt by the defeated party in these days of huge war indemnities. But if a relative though not an actual numerical advantage is thus obtained by the conquering nation, this is likely to be but a passing influence; for it is changes in the amount of wealth possessed by individuals rather than the actual amount of their possessions which affects the birth-rate. The poorest strata of society are prolific mainly because they are deficient in natural forethought, a quality which money will not buy; whilst in all ranks a drop in income creates a desire for economy in the household not felt in normal times. But

94 EUGENICS REVIEW.
even if it were admitted that after a war the vanquished side will increase in numbers less rapidly than the victors, would it certainly follow that beneficial racial results would thus now be produced ? Do we wish to see a world-wide increase in the qualities which have made Germany such a terribly dangerous foe, namely, her love of power over other nations, her preoccupation in warlike matters in times of peace, and her determination to win at all costs, moral or material ? Success in war is surely becoming less and less a test of human worth, because the arts of peace are becoming more and more the sources of our noblest aspirations. To sum up, the racial results of one nation vanquishing another, which are exceedingly difficult to predict, are certainly less than was formerly the case, whilst the qualities fostered now seem nearly as likely to be bad as to be good.
Passing on to the second and far more important point of view from which this question may be regarded, namely the effect of war within the confines of each tribe or nation, and reverting in the first instance to the racial effects of poverty resulting from war, it must be remembered that primitive man only hoarded a few perishable goods, and that consequently, soon after hostilities had ceased, the survivors found themselves in much the same condition as when the fight began. In civilised countries, on the other hand, many men and women are found in every rank of society who have laid by wealth for future use by steady work, temperance and forethought; wealth which war forces the State to appropriate in ways almost unperceived by its owners. The inevitable result of every great struggle must be, therefore, as has been clearly indicated by Mr. Chambers, that the marriage and birth-rates amongst a selected type of human beings will be lowered for many succeeding years, and either that their rate of multiplication will be reduced below its present low level, or that the rate of decline of the population will be increased, as the case may be. But harmful as is this effect of war, it is not nearly so pernicious as that due to the actual destruction by wounds and disease of a selected class of citizens.' That the beneficial racial effects
IThe Eugenics Review, Vol. VI., No. 4, p. 285.

EUGENICS DURING AND AFTER THE WAR.

95

which resulted in the past from savage fighting are not produced by modern war is, however, a conclusion which need not be further insisted on; though it may be well to emphasise the fact that the evil consequences which must now be anticipated from all wars will be at their very worst where a system of voluntary service prevails; for those who recognise their country's peril most clearly, and who are most willing to face danger, will be found amongst the earliest volunteers, unless prevented from serving by physical defects. In short, as regards the racial qualities of future generations, and putting aside the differential racial effects as between the victorious and the vanquished nations as being of far less importance, primitive warfare was terrible though in some ways beneficial, whilst modern war is more terrible and utterly and entirely harmful.
What, then, ought eugenists to advocate in view of this anticipated damage to the racial qualities of future generations ? As to the effects of future hostilities, the only complete remedy
would be the entire abolition of war; and to secure this end as far as possible we must keep insisting on the fact that enduring racial deterioration must be included together with misery, waste, and hindrance to moral, social and scientific progress in the list of war's evils. No feeling of excitement or exaltation must ever be allowed to even partially blind us to the realities of the situation, because our best hope lies in making these realities patent to all. But no side of the truth must be hidden, and it should be freely acknowledged that a premature conclusion to the present hostilities, however desirable in many respects, would increase the probability of war soon breaking out again. Moreover, the eugenist must always give due weight to immediate consequences; as, for example, to the moral damage inevitably experienced by a nation when refusing to help a friendly Power through fear of the consequences which might result from intervention. These considerations are, however, little likely to be forgotten, and we cannot too often or too persistently condemn war in the abstract.
In discussing the directions in which efforts at social reform should be made, one important principle must not be over-

96 EUGENICS REVIEW.
looked. All will admit that to strive after impossibilities is a waste of time; but enough attention is not always paid to an obvious extension of this truth, namely, that if the best possible results are to be obtained, the efforts of mankind must be shared out amongst the various reforms under consideration in proportion to the good likely to result from each, and therefore in some relationship to the probabilities of success. But what are the chances of success in a campaign for the total abolition of war? If they are but very small, as I fear, it follows that the eugenist ought also to consider very carefully how the evil effects of war can be minimised. It is no use suggesting that the inferior specimens of humanity should be sent to the front, for this would be a certain road to defeat; and we must look forward to war always being dysgenic. If conscription were to be adopted instead of our existing voluntary system, future wars would produce less injury to the race, because the casualty lists would then more nearly represent a random sample of the population; though whether a conscript army would ever fight as heroically as our men did in their retreat from Mons, for example, is very doubtful. All efforts to heal the wounded and to cure the sick are, moreover, not only humane but eugenic in their results; though when the patients are cured merely to go back to the front to be killed, the labours of the surgeon and the nurse will have been in vain in this respect. A convention which would prevent wounded men from again fighting in the same campaign would be highly eugenic; though it is to be feared that great success on the surgeon's part is more likely to lead to the adoption of more deadly weapons than to any such humane reform. At the conclusion of hostilities, the aim of the eugenist should be to see that every encouragement is given to the combatants to settle down to married life, in order to promote the reappearance of their manlv qualities in the coming generations; an aim which would involve the consideration of several difficult problems.. Moreover, the civil population must not be
neglected, and the injurious indirect etects of hostilities on all useful sections of the community should, as far as possible, be mitigated. These are, in briefest outline, the directions in which our efforts should be directed in order to lessen the harm done

EUGENICS DURING AND AFTER THE WAR.

97

by war to our race, and in these efforts we must persevere even if we feel that but little can thus be accomplished.
The racial effects not only of war but also of training for
war in times of peace ought to be a matter for careful consideration. Our present volunteer army is unquestionably composed of men above the average of the nation in physical qualities, and, in reference to abilities, the fact that over sixtv per cent. of the undergraduates. of some of our universities have left their studies for service in the field tells its own tale. The conditions now obtaining are unquestionably very exceptional, and it perhaps ought to be borne in mind as regards our regular army that it is the men out of work who enlist in greatest numbers and that they are inferior on the whole to the men in work. The rejection of a considerable proportion of men presenting themselves for enlistment on account of various forms of unfitness is, however, almost certain to result in those passed for service being above the average of the nation in many qualities; a superiority which is certain to obtain in armies raised by conscription. Assuming this superior fitness on the part of the soldier, the question whether his military training will or will not produce eugenic results depends on whether it will increase or diminish the probability of his marriage; or, more accurately, on whether those who have enlisted will reproduce their kind more or less rapidly than the average of thoc-I who will have remained in civil life. Military training certainly makes men more strong and healthy for the time being, and probably permanently; and though, according to modern scientific views, no beneficial racial effects will thus be directly produced, yet their physical fitness will make them both more
attractive to the other sex and mnore useful as bread-winners.
Against any increase in their fertility thus produced by the training of recruits we must set the effects of certain influences in the opposite direction, namely, the removal of the men from their normal surroundings, their exposure to increased risk of sterilising diseases, and their higher death-rate when serving abroad. Hence it appears that military training is eugenic if the men are only kept with the colours for short periods, and the shorter the better in this respect. No doubt the officers and

98 EUGENICS REVIEW.
the staff must be engaged for long periods; and in their case especial efforts should be made to promote marriage; for the rate of reproduction amongst our officers is now so low that were they a class apart they would soon die out. It is questionable whether any mere increase of pay would have the desired effect of raising that rate, unless indeed it were given in the form of an additional allowance for each living child. Is not such a reform worthy of consideration ? Would it not be a dire misfortune if but little of the blood of those officers who have fought so nobly in this war were to be found running in British veins in the future? As to the Navy, the problem is more difficult, but no less urgent.
Thus far we have been discussing problems directly connected with war. The terrible wastage of life on the battlefield is, however, certain to give rise to far-reaching proposals having for their object a general increase in the birth-rate of the whole population, and the probable racial effects of all such reforms should be carefully studied. If the population of these islands had increased in times gone by no more rapidly than it is now increasing, the stock of British descent would now be occupying a comparatively unimportant position in the United States, Canada, Australia and New Zealand; and our faith in the value of Anglo-Saxon characteristics makes us assert with confidence that this would have been a great misfortune. Though this is a legitimate argument against a low birth-rate, yet it seems that the necessity for regarding racial questions from this world-wide point of view is now somewhat less urgent than was formerly the case, and that we shall perhaps be wise in focussing our attention on our own land. Limiting our field of view in this way, it will be seen, when these demands for a larger population are carefully studied, that what is needed is a rise in quality far more than an increase in mere quantity. It will be urged, no doubt, that an increase in fighting men is necessary for our own safety. Though this is hardly a eugenic question, it may be proper here to remark that if Spain, for instance, had been able to maintain her ancient racial qualities, she would now be occupying a very influential position in the Councils of Europe, even without any increase in her numbers. A high birth-rate

EUGENICS DURING AND AFTER THE WAR.

99

may also be demanded for the sake of filling up the gaps in the ranks of labour. But if any future increments of the population were to be composed of men of a type generally inferior to that of the existing nation taken as a whole, then the average status of the country would thus be lowered, with many harmful consequences; whilst every additional human being unable or unwilling to produce goods, other than those for his own use, to the value of his own cost to the community-and there are many thousand such amongst us now-every such degraded being would throw a burden on the community to cover which all but those who are living entirely as parasites on others would have to contribute. Our anxiety about our country's future fame should, however, make us look not so much to war or to commerce as to the general moral and intellectual level of the people; and ancient Greece may be quoted as proving what immense effects may be produced even by small nations if highly endowed with natural gifts. In connection with these topics it must, moreover, be remembered that by means of even a small annual increment of population, if carried on for long, great results can be produced; just as a sum of money multiplies marvellously when increased at compound interest. In fact, from whatever point of view we regard this matter we see that our greatest efforts should be aimed at raising the racial level of future generations, whilst but a small annual increment in numbers should satisfy our ambitions. But can we predict success in either direction with any degree of confidence? I fear not.
Arguments in favour of an increase in mere numbers are, however, certain to be heard, and there are indications that changes in our marriage customs will be advocated with this object in view. In the hope of increasing the birth-rate, attempts seem likely to be made to justify or to exalt the " unmarried wife "-a detestable term against which all true wives should protest-and, if this propaganda is not a mere temporary aberration due to excitement, the immediate moral consequences are likely to be grave; consequences about which, however, comparatively little will here be said because our Society is formed for the study of ultimate racial effects. The use of the word " wife " when there is no wife in the case will no doubt fre-

IOO EUGENICS REVIEW.
quently be avoided by the employment of the term " polygamy, " a change of language which only makes matters worse by more definitely confusing the issue. Polygamy is defined in our dictionaries as a " plurality of wives at the same time "; and, as it used to describe a system of family life which is regarded as being perfectly reputable by many millions of persons throughout the world, the attempt to whitewash either promiscuous intercourse, or intercourse with successive partners for short periods, the application of this title to such unions is both misleading and objectionable. Monogamy can, in my opinion, be shown to be superior to polygamy, both on racial and on immediate social grounds; but this is a comparison which need not here be made, because monogamy having existed as the custom of our race since the dawn of history, the introduction of true polygamy is entirely out of the question as a practical proposal. The question which really concerns us is the comparison between the advantages and disadvantages in regard to racial effects of an increase in the intercourse between unmarried persons.
First let us inquire whether in truth the encouragement of promiscuity would result in an increase in the population. For the following reasons it certainly would not do so, in my opinion. The habit of forming irregular unions not only unfits a man in many ways for continuous married life, but also makes such a life appear less attractive to him. Besides in this way making a man less likely to marry, and become the father of several children, promiscuity is certain to promote the spread of sterilising diseases throughout the community. The effects of promiscuity on women are somewhat similar; whilst in their case, such unions being from the first certainly regarded as being probably of a temporary nature and the hold over the bread-winner as being correspondingly precarious, a strong desire is certain often to be created to avoid all the burdens of motherhood. Even if it be admitted that promiscuous intercourse will for these reasons inevitably have a dangerously sterilising effect, yet it may be urged that this is beside the question, the plea which is really raised being that " marriage " for short periods would be acceptable to many women who would refuse to curtail their liberty

EUGENICS DURING AND AFTER THE WAR.

IOI

of action or their chances of success in their professions by contracting unbreakable unions. But as to these terminable unions, the more definitely this mode of life came to be regarded as a recognised social institution, the shorter would become the periods which would be held to be sufficient to make them appear respectable; and the inevitable result of this change in mental attitude would be a great increase in promiscuity. In fact, the exaltation of the unmarried mother is certain to bring in its train an increase in all the evils of prostitution, however much that result might be deplored by the promoters of this movement. Lastly, it may be urged that the toleration of irregular unions is especially likely to increase the population at a time like the present, when there is an exceptional excess of women. Polygamy being out of the question, those who use such an argument must definitely contemplate a man becoming the father of several families, each with a separate home, and they must consequently regard the father as being almost a negligible factor in family life. It is perhaps more to the point here to note that not only is this war-time excess of women a passing phase, but, as will be seen later on, it is a period exceptionally unpropitious for eugenic progress. The main conclusions here arrived at are, however, that both commonsense and experience indicate that serious sterilising effects are certain to be produced by promiscuity and all that encourages promiscuity; and that, if a change in moral standards is demanded in the hope that an increase in the habit of forming irregular unions would result in an increase in the population, this plea entirely fails because the desired effect would not thus be produced.
Notwithstanding the failure of this contention, it may be worth while briefly considering what are the racial effects of promiscuity. For a long time to come, at all events, irregular unions will meet with general moral disapprobation; and, whilst this disapprobation lasts, the qualities likely to lead to the adoption of this style of life, or the qualities which those who do so will have in excess, will be excessive sexual proclivities and a tendency to disregard what has been inculcated as being right. We shall no doubt hear of a noble contempt for stupid moral

102 EUGENICS REVIEW.
conventions, a contempt which, however, can hardly be noble if it is very harmful. As long as our national sentiments regarding marriage remain as at present, and if it were true that promiscuity did promote fertility, it would follow that it would tend to cultivate in the race the undesirable qualities prevalent amongst those who refuse to follow customary moral rules, or, in other words, to be dysgenic. On the other hand, accepting the conclusion just arrived at that promiscuity does in reality promote sterility, it might possibly be claimed that its effects would be eugenic as tending to eliminate these objectionable characteristics from the race. Such a claim will, however, never be made by me, and that for two reasons. In the first place, the whole basis of our ethical code concerning marriage seems to be founded on the fact that the most valuable part of a child's education, namely, its home education, must, in order to secure the best results, be given under conditions of stable married life; a fact which justifies the sweeping aside of all minor issues, including the very problematical racial advantage just mentioned. Then again, the foregoing racial argument in favour of promiscuity depends on effects resulting from the disapprobation now attached to irregular unions, and this disapprobation and its effects, would obviously lessen with every success in a campaign in favour of such unions. It is, in fact, far more important to endeavour to estimate the racial influences always accompanying an increase of promiscuous intercourse rather than those only appearing during a passing phase. Wealth must always make it easier for a man to contract a number of different unions, or, as we now say, riches add to the temptations to vice. But our whole social system, including free and assisted secondary education, and the wide competition for innumerable well-paid posts thus opened to all possessing sufficient ability, must inevitably have the effect of sorting out those possessing exceptional natural gifts into the richer strata of society to a more or less considerable extent. And if promiscuity is especially prevalent amongst the rich, it will, therefore, be especially effective in promoting sterility amongst a selected class of the community, and its results must inevitably be dysgenic. Stability of married life is, in fact, to be advocated

EUGENICS DURING AND AFTER THE WAR.

103

as regards both its immediate effects and its ultimate racial conse-
quences. If war conditions are to be made a pretext for a change in our attitude in regard to marriage, let us remember that it is far easier to loosen the moral bonds than to tighten them anew, and that a special effort ought now to be made to maintain the high standards of home-life which have ever existed in our race,
and which have been in large measure the basis of our racial and
social progress in the past. Thus far we have been considering what to avoid rather
than what to do in any endeavour to promote racial progress. If asked what steps should be taken with this object in view, we point to the whole eugenic programme as now known or as to be unfolded in the future, a subject on which little can be said to-day. The efforts of philanthropists are greatly admired by us and will ever receive our warm sympathy; for not only is it in changes of environment that we find the only possible method of benefiting our neighbours, but the improved and improving conditions thus created may be passed on to future generations for an indefinite period. The nation must, however, not be kept in ignorance of the fact that the highest scientific authorities believe that there is as little chance of improving the inborn qualities of the coming generations-that is, of increasing the start given to our descendants at their birth in the race of lifeby improving the surroundings of our neighbours to-day as there would be of producing a breed of greyhounds by the careful training of pugs. Where wretched conditions exist let us do our utmost to improve the environment of the people, but let us recognise the probability of there being a limit beyond which no advance can thus be made; a limit, moreover, which, though far distant in some directions, is already very closely
approached in others. On the other hand, no such impassable barriers can be clearly seen standing in the way of that progress which can confidently be anticipated from improvements
in the inherent characters of the race; and that progress can best be assured, if indeed it can be obtained in any other way, by a more rapid rate of multiplication being maintained amongst the higher than amongst the lower types of
humanity. And here it may be as well to mention a point which,

104 EUGENICS REVIEW.
though obvious enough, has as yet received little or no attention. The destruction in this war of picked men amongst those who have already reached manhood constitutes a terribly damaging blow to the nation, whilst the average racial qualities of those who will not be old enough to have become fathers of families when the war ceases will have been hardly, if at all, affected; for few of them will have been killed. The racial level of possible fathers will, in fact, be at its very lowest when peace is declared; because a steady rise in the average qualities of grown men must then begin to take place as the unaffected youth grow into manhood. If any exceptional all round increase in the birth-rate is promoted immediately after the war has ceased, it will, therefore, do definite racial harm, because the additions thus
made to our ranks will be below the standards. obtaining both
before or afterwards. The average type of father must continue to rise for some twenty years after this slaughter ceases; and then to slowly fall to a somewhat lower level as the racial damage from the war begins to affect the characteristics of the parents born after the commencement of hostilities. Surely, then, what we have to do is to avoid all panic and spasmodic efforts, and to make a mighty and continuous endeavour, increasing rather than diminishing whilst our boys are becoming men, and having for its object the promotion of parenthood amongst all those selected classes of the community which have been decimated, and far more than decimated, in this terrible war. For it is only thus that we can make the coming inevitable fall in the racial characteristics of our nation as small as possible.
Time only permits me now to touch on one or two broad eugenic considerations which ought to be brought into especial prominence during war-time. Philanthropic efforts to lessen the damage done to the families of combatants, and to bridge over the temporary difficulties caused by the war to industrious citizens, are to be most strongly recommended both on eugenic and on other grounds. But besides praising every wish to alleviate suffering, we must bear in mind that if philanthropy does tend to increase the rate of multiplication of certain undesirable types of humanity, as there is good reason to fear, then the lowering of our national standard in many directions must

EUGENICS DURING AND AFTER THE WAR.

I05

be its inevitable effect, unless effective means are adopted of counteracting this one harmful influence. The war makes it more than ever necessary boldly to face the difficult problem of checking the alarmingly rapid rate of multiplication of those whose large families are merely an indication of their utter incapacity to take thought for the future; and, if we have not courage enough to make the necessary reforms, national degradation is likely to be our well-deserved national punishment. Turning to measures tending to produce a more rapid rate of multiplication of the more fit, the gaps in our national ranks make war time an especially propitious season for advocating a forward move in this direction, a move which can be attempted by two more or less distinct methods. In the first place, what should be aimed at is to make the disadvantages attendant on the upbringing of children weigh less heavily on parents than at present, and especially to make those who have already had one child feel less dread of further additions to their families. This is largely an economic question, and one of great difficulty; for if trust is placed in State or philanthropic aid to parents, it is hard to ensure that it will have the desired racial effects or that it will not still further diminish the declining sense of parental responsibility and authority; and these difficulties are likely to be increased in times of heavy taxation. A second method of endeavouring to promote racial progress consists in making an appeal to the moral and national sentiments of the people, an appeal which ought to be especially effective in times of national emergency. Granted that the health conditions of both parents are fairly good, what is desirable is that the validity of only two limiting conditions as to the size of the family shall be admitted, namely, that there shall be a considerable interval between births, and that the economic conditions shall be such as to make it reasonably probable that the family will be brought up in comfort, though not in luxurv; conditions which can be advocated on eugenic as well as on other grounds. WVhat we have continually to urge is that, though there should be a rational pride of family, yet the love of luxury and the consequent dread of falling in the social scale are great stumbling blocks in the way of racial progress, as tending injuriously to limit

I06 EUGENICS REVIEW.
the families of the fit. If the above-mentioned conditions are fulfilled, all families born under conditions of stable married life should be as numerous as possible, and this in spite of the added financial strain thrown on all parents thus helping to rebuild the nation. In brief, the families of the fit can hardly be too large, whilst those of the unfit cannot be too small.
Whilst we as a nation should search diligently for our own faults, yet it would be worse than useless to forget how greatly the British race has in the past promoted the idea of liberty throughout the world, or what our natlon has done to promote progress in many ways and in many quarters; and the great question now before us is whether or not the Anglo-Saxon race shall continue to form part of the advance guard of this great movement. If we do not now take steps to insure that the progress in the inborn characteristics of our race shall be at least as rapid as that of our neighbours, and if our nation should in consequence cease in future to have any influence in this noble and eternal struggle for human advancement, then the fault will be ours. It is, indeed, not improbable that our recent social advance may be turned by this war into a disastrous retreat, and against this peril a great fight should be made. Our best hope lies, not in compulsion, but in voluntary effort, and all should be urged to join in the fray. In many matters the appeals of women are likely to be far more effective than anything that a man can say; because the burdens of parenthood must ever fall more heavily on women than on men. Moreover, the roll of noble deaths in this great war means innumerable blanks where noble lives would have been lived, thus entailing terrible damage to the moral and mental character of the nation for years to come; and since, whilst men have suffered and died, women have suffered and lived, in this coming struggle for recovery it is to its women that the country must more than ever look as the guardians of its noblest impulses. For the sake of the good name of our country in the future we must strive to make all, both men and women, wake up to the present peril to our race and be ready to undertake the arduous manly and womanly duties on which success depends.

