REGIONAL VARIATIONS IN INTELLECTUAL ABILITY IN BRITAIN: A DISCUSSION OF THEIR IMPORTANCE, AND OF THE POSSIBLE
EFFECTS OF SELECTIVE MIGRATION
By J. A. H. LEE, B.Sc., M.D., D.P.H.
Research Board for the Correlation of Physical Education and Medical Sciencet

D URING the I939-45 war it became important to select men as carefully as possible, so that the maximum use
could be made of their abilities. Further, it was of great importance that a man should not be admitted to long courses of trainingsuch as learning to fly-if he did not have a reasonable chance of being able to manage the course. Fortunately in this crisis psychologicAl techniques for measuring ability had developed sufficiently for them to be used extensively as an aid to selection. In this they were an unqualified success, with the result that it is now the established practice of each of the Services to use these methods for the selection of men, and their allocation to particular jobs.
When the data provided by many thousands of these tests were being analysed, it was observed that the average score of men from different parts of the country varied by quite considerable amounts from the average for the whole of Britain. An account of some of this work was presented to this Society in I95I by Professor P. E. Vernon. Variations of similar size have been found in the results of tests applied to large numbers of school children. Good examples of this are to be found in the report of the Scottish Council for Research in Edu-
cation (I933).
* A paper read at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics Society on November I4th, 1956.
t Now with the Social Medicine Research Unit of the Medical Research Council. London Hospital.

TABLE I

MEAN SCORES OF SERVICEMEN FROM DIFFERENT AREAS OF BRITAIN (VERNON, 195I)

Region of Great Britain Numbers

Mean
Score (g)

Home Counties i.. .. ,663

East Anglia, Beds, Cambs,

Northants

474

S.W. and Hants .. .. 563

Berks, Bucks, Oxon, Glos,

Hereford, Worcs

540

Leics, Notts, Derby,

Yorks W., Cheshire . I.I,28

London .. .. .. 695

Yorks E. & N., Northumber-

land, Durham, Cumber-

land .. .. .. 502

Scotland E. and N. Coun-

ties

.. .. ..

486

Wales

.. .. ..

466

Lancashire .. .. .. 1,125

Warwick, Staffs, Salop

I,046

Glasgow and S.W. Scotland 495

I04-0 IO1*7
IOI*5
IOI' 4 101-4 too*6
99-6 99X6
97 9
97-2
97.I 93.7

Natives .. .. .. 74-8 Migrants .. .. .. 25-2

99-0 I02o8

Examples of the variations of the mean score of Servicemen from different areas of Britain are given in Table i, taken from Vernon's paper. In fact these examples will probably underestimate the real variations of the populations of the areas concerned, for inability to score well in tests is likely to be associated with rejection for service on
medical grounds. This is for two reasons: the Services are unable to employ men of very low mental ability, and certain medical causes of rejection, such as chronic otitis

I9
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April, 1957. 49, i.

20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

media* and emotional instability, are much more common in the low scorers. Thus the areas where the average score of 'Servicemen is low will tend to have had a larger proportion of men of low abilities filtered out from the Service group by the medical selection.
Intelligence Tests and National Service-
men
I have recently completed a study of the health and social conditions of a large sample of men medically examined in preparation for National Service (Lee, I955 a and b). The Services have found it administratively convenient to give these men a preliminary test of intelligence at the same time as the medical examination. This also helps the doctors to recognize those men whose mental abilities are too small for them to serve usefully. The scores of these tests are distributed about their means in an approximately normal manner. Thus rather small changes in the mean will result in much larger changes in the proportions of the group above or below fixed levels. The Army uses one such fixed score as a threshold to separate a special group. Each man scoring less than io on the standard test, the R.T. 57 (a simple test of reasoning) is interviewed as a possible dullard. The variation of this proportion by average score of the particular Medical Board Centre is shown in Table 2.
Unfortunately, it is not possible to give the average scores on this test of defined areas or the proportions in these areas scoring less than IO, as this information cannot be made available by the War Office. However, variations comparable to those demonstrated by Vernon (op. cit.) continue to be present.
Are the wide variations in the proportions of meni with low scores from area to area likely to be spurious? The test is the same
* The association between chronic otitis media and apparent lack of intelligence in children is probably complicated. It may only be found because both are associated with poverty and poor environmental conditions, or there may be a closer connection-a partial loss of hearing persisting for much of the formative period having a direct effect.

TABLE 2

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE MEAN SCORE OF THE MEN EXAMINED AT DIFFERENT CENTRES AND THE PROPORTION SCORING LESS THAN 10. SCORES ON R.T. 57 APRIL I955-MARCH I956 ENGLAND, WALES AND
SCOTLAND

Mean Score*

Percentage scoring less
than IO

202I222324252627-
28-29

.. ..
.. ..
.. ..
.. .. .. ..
.. ..
*. ..
.. ..
.. ..

I9.3
i6*8
I6.3 I2.7 9I 93
8.7 7.7 3.8

* All areas with mean scores between the values have been grouped together.

in every case, and is administered in a
standard manner. Variations in the effects of deferment from area to area should not
affect the results, as this will be reasonably
constant over a period of time, with deferments during the period of observation being balanced by men coming into the system who were deferred from earlier periods. There are, however, large variatibns from
area to area in the proportions of men who are illiterate (War Office, I953). If there were local variations in the practice of Medical Board Centres, as to whether or not men who had difficulty in reading and writing were admitted to the test, the results
might be affected to quite a marked extent. This seems 'to occur in practice: some
centres with similar average scores, based in
each case on large numbers, show very different proportions of the men tested
scoring under io. However, these local variations do not affect the grouped figures very much-the relationship between mean
and proportion scoring under IO given in Table 2 roughly follows the theoretical distribution. Further, such local variations in practice cannot account for the variations in the mean scores observed. They only affect a small proportion of the total numbers of men examined. The coefficient of variation of the mean scores of all examined at the
Medical Board Centres in England, Wales

REGIONAL VARIATIONS IN INTELLECTUAL ABILITY IN BRITAIN 2i

and Scotland for the year April I955 to likely to be able to succeed in some difficult

March I956 was 8-6 per cent, the coefficient course of training and subsequently to

of variation of the averages of those who operate or service very complex equipment,

scored IO and over was still 62 per cent. These is at the same time likely to be able to

variations are in the results of the test given undertake jobs of comparable difficulty in

to men, opting for the Army. At the time of civil life. It therefore seems reasonable to

these studies, the R.A.F. were using different carry over the results of these tests from the

tests. Thus it is possible that some of the service situation to that of ordinary life.

variations are due to local differences in the The existence in an area of an unusually high

popularity of the R.A.F. and the Army proportion of potential National Servicemen

among boys of different levels of intelligence. who are unable to score well on this test

I know of no evidence of the existence of seems likely to indicate that the whole

differences of sufficient magnitude to produce population of that area will contain a greater

a large proportion of the observed variations proportion than average of people handi-

in mean score in the Army test.

capped in one way or another by lack of

Practical Consequences

mental ability. This statement is a deduction from two

These variations are interesting from the aspects of the distribution of scores in tests

purely scientific point of view, but it seems of intelligence-the man, and the proportion

probable that they also have practical of men taking them scoring below a fixed

implications. The R.T. 57 test produces level-and it therefore only applies to those

results that are highly correlated with those people whose intelligences form part of the

of the full battery of tests used in the Army approximately normal distribution. It is

selection procedure. These tests give ex- known that many of the more severe grades

tremely good results in predicting which of mental deficiency are not distributed in

men will be able to carry out certain jobs, this way (Roberts, I952). Thus this data can

and which men will not. For instance, they tell us nothing about them. However, I

enable the selecting officers to identify with think that it does apply to a substantial

a high degree of certainty the men who will proportion of those who can be classified as

be able to pass successfully through a course mental defectives, and to those who are

on the repair of motor vehicles, or one on classed as " educationally subnormal"

certain aspects of electronics. On the other because of lack of intelligence.

hand they help to locate the man who would I have been discussing only the lower end

not be able to manage the full training of the scale, but I know of no reason why

needed by the modern infantryman, and who comparable variations should not be found

could only have a reasonable chance of at the upper if one looked for them.

success in the less intellectually exacting Without the application of the same test

work of the Pioneer Corps. As mentioned, to substantial groups of the population

they help in excluding men from the Army living in, or coming from, many different

who would have little prospect of fitting in parts of the country, it would be difficult to

successfully. Now the details of all this are discover these variations. It is not likely at

only applicable to the military situation. the moment that their effects could be traced

But there is no reason to believe that it is in, for example, the waiting lists for hospitals

important for the service authorities to for the mental defective or for special

measure some special kinds of ability that schools. Here there are too many variations

are irrelevant in civil life. Thus if it is found -the actual provision of services differs

that a man is capable of only a limited range widely from one part of the country to

of service jobs, it is also likely that he will another, and this will affect the waiting

also only be capable of the simpler ones in lists in complex ways, as well as the actual

civil life. On the other hand, a man who *numbers receiving care. Further, the pat-

does well in these military tests, and thus is terns of work and family life are very varied,

22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and changes in them will certainly affect the demand for such services.
While this is so now, I think that we shall need to understand these variations more
fully in future years, and to take account of them in the development of different services. They are certainly relevant to the planning of both hospital and school facili-
ties, and they may affect questions of even wider social significance.
Mental ability is to a large extent constitutionally determined, and it may be wondered how these large differences have come about. In the second part of this discussion I should like to mention one possible mechanism by which some part of it may have been produced.
Selective Migration
Vernon (op. cit.) noted that men who were classed as migrants (i.e. were enlisted in a place other than their birthplace) had on the average higher scores than those who were not (Table I). Similarly, Martin (I949) found that, in another sample of Servicemen, migrants were taller and heavier than non-
migrants. Stewart (I953) found that among
men examined before military service, Social Class I contained the highest proportion of migrants, and that in one area illiteracy was three times as common among the natives as among the migrants. If men moving about tend to be slightly more intelligent than men remaining in one place, areas suffering a net loss through migration over a period will end up with a population of a rather lower average intelligence than areas with a net gain through migration. If the figures for the average intelligence of the population of different areas (such as these Service ones) are compared with measurements of migration (such as those published
by Newton and Jeffrey, I951), some rough correspondence is seen between loss of
population and low average score. However, the correspondence is not very good. Further, such comparisons may be vitiated by urban/ rural differences, etc. An opportunity to test the hypothesis that selective migration is an important cause of the observed differences in intelligence of different popu-

lations occured when Emmett (I954)
published the mean scores of the complete population of children in the schools of certain Locaf Authorities taking a particular test* as part of the " eleven plus" examina-
tion. With the average scores of the children
in certain areas available, it was possible to relate them to the area's experience of migration, as shown by the percentage change in the total population from 193I to 195I (Registrar General, I951). The results for the series of average scores for county boroughs published by Emmett are given in Table 3 and in the Diagram. This shows the relationship between the average scores for boys and population change. The correlation was o-624. Similar values were found for girls. These correlations are unlikely to be due to chance (P < o.oi). As all the areas were county boroughs, urban/rural variations
have been eliminated.

TABLE 3

THE MEAN INTELLIGENCE OF CHILDREN IN A SERIES OF COUNTY BOROUGHS, AND THE PERCENTAGE POPULATION
CHANGE I93I TO I951

County Borough

Mean Intelligence of Childrent

Percentage Population
Change:

Barnsley

IOI*298

Blackburn

104.248

Bolton

. IOI3I9

Bootle

98-559

Bournemouth

io6.5i8

Bury (Lancs) .. IO46i

Darlington

100-700

Derby

I02-704

Halifax

. IOI424

Leeds

99'419

Norwich

97.957

Salford .94.584

Sheffield

I02.329

Smethwick

.. 97.998

Southend-on-Sea .. IO3-i69

Stockport .I. .. IOI7I6

Warrington .. 99'523

Wigan .. ..

98-784

Wolverhampton .. Ioo-87I

York .. .. IO2-9I4

Total .. .. 2,0I7T495

+ 2-4 - 9.4 - 5.7
- 3.3
+23-9 + o-8 + 17.7 - o09 + 0°3 + 4.6 - 4-0 -203 - I*0 - 9.5 + 17I +12-I - I*I - IO
+ I3 + I2-0
+52 0

* Moray House Test No. 41. Emmett (op. cit.). t Emmett (I954) + Registrar General, 195I.

REGIONAL VARIATIONS IN INTELLECTUAL ABILITY IN BRITAIN 23

MEAN I.QIHMORAY HOUSE) OF CHILDREN IN L.E.A.SCHOOLS
AT AGE II+

of some large city and the proportion of children attending Local Authority schools

107 . BOURNEMOUOi is likely to be very high in all of them.

106
(05/

However, these data alone are not sufficient fully to substantiate the hypothesis

BLACKBURN

104

that selective migration is an important

DERBY' 105
SHEFFIELD * 102

YORK'

HUT END-ON-SEA

/STOCKPORT

BOLTANIALIFA *LEY

cause of variations in the average intelligence of different populations. Emmett has also

10 WOLVERHAMPTON. DARLINGTON

published average scores for other areas.

/100
WA GT ENLEEDS
WIGAN*. 99
BOOTLE
SsCK . NORWICH 98

Unfortunately, he was interested in urban/ rural variations and his material was, at an early stage, pooled into types of. adminis-

97 96 y. 0147X + 100492
r. 0624

trative unit. Thus he gave the mean score for the children in all the Municipal Boroughs

.SALFORD

r.95 STANDARD ERROR Of
0 229

in a particular county, and the mean for the

94 Urban Districts, and the Rural Districts.

250 25 20 15 10 5 0 5 10 15 20 25 30

This pooling of data could not subsequently

PERCENTARE CHANGE IN POPULATION (1951-1951)

be undone. When an attempt was made to

The relationship between the intelligence of schoolchildren in a series of English County Boroughs and the changes in population in these over the last twenty

relate these pooled figures to comparable figures for population changes, positive

years. correlations were again obtained, but they

were not statistically significant. This is not

We have no means of knowing what surprising, as it would be remarkable to

proportion of the change in population of demonstrate the effect, if it existed, unless

an area is due to natural increase or decrease, the population changes could be related to

and what is the result of net migration. If average score for quite small and homo-

the gain in population of some of these areas geneous areas. Unfortunately, the data

was in large part due to a higher birth rate published by the Scottish Council for

or a lower death rate than elsewhere, the Research in Education (I949) were also not

observed effect might not have been pro- collected in a suitable form for this analysis.

duced by the postulated method of selective

migration. However, it has been shown .Summary

that there is- a connection betWeen large families and lack of intelligence (Scottish Council for Research in Education, I953). Thus a high local birth rate would be expected to be associated with a low average intelligence, and produce an opposite effect to the one observed. Further, it is doubtful if there exist sufficiently large variations in the birth rate, combined with variations in the death rate in the correct direction, to produce very much effect on the population.

There are wide variations in the average intellectual abilities of the populations of different parts of this country, and these variations may have been produced by selective migration, as well as by other forces. The problem is complicated by lack of data, and there is a need for information about the mean intelligence of people in different places to be related to population movements.

There might be variations in the propor- Acknowledgments

tions of children attending the Local I am most grateful to Professor J. M.

Authority schools in different areas. It is Mackintosh and to Dr. J. A. Fraser Roberts

difficult to see how this is likely to be for much help and advice during the

associated with the changes in population preparation of this paper.

in a way that would produce the observed The data on test scores was made avail-

correlations. All the areas are complete able by the Ministry of Labour and National

units-i.e. they are none of them suburbs Service, as part of a larger survey.

24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

REFERENCES
Emmett, WV. G., I954. Population Studies, 7, 207.
Lee, J. A. H., 1955a. Public Health, 68, I02.
Lee, J. A. H., 1955b. Proc. Roy. Soc. Med., 48, 653.
Martin, W. J., 1949. The Physique of Young Adult Males. Medical Research Council Memorandum No. 20. H.M.S.O.
Newton, M. P. and Jeffery, J. R., 1951. Internal Migration. General Register Office Studies on Medical and Population Subjects No. 5. H.M.S.O.
Registrar General, 1951. Census of Great Britain, Preliminary Report. H.M.S.O.
Roberts, J. A. F., 1952. Eugen. Rev., 44, 71.

Scottish Council for Research in Education, I933. The Intelligence of Scottish Children. University of London Press.
Scottish Council for Research in Education, I949.
The Trend of Scottish Intelligence. University of London Press.
Scottish Council for Research in Education, I953. Social Implications of the I947 Scottish Mental Survey, p. io8. University of London Press.
Stewart, A. M., I953. Unpublished.
Vernon, P. E., 1951. Eugen. Rev., 43, 127.
War Office, 1953. Backwardness among National Servicemen, Army Analysis. Unpublished.

