POPULATION PROBLEMS AND FAMILY POLICY IN FRANCE*

By GERTRUDE WILLOUGHBY, M.A., D. Univ. Paris

RANCE today is directing a larger share Monsieur Alfred Sauvy, the Director of the

of her national income to aiding the Institut National d'ktudes Demographiques,

family than any other country, nearly has estimated that for several years prior

half of her total expenditure on social services to the war France lacked each year ioo,ooo

(£375,ooo,ooo) is paid out in direct money births merely to ensure the replacement of

allowances to families.1 This policy, which her population.

runs contrary to the family policy of this country is, I think, only intelligible when
certain demographic, social and economic

Background to the Present Demographic Situation

factors peculiar to France are given due I propose briefly to examine some of the

weight. I propose, therefore, to deal briefly causes responsible for this situation. Many

with the demographic problems of France are common to other countries with a falling

(I am no demographer) and then go on to birth-rate as, for example, the rising standard

consider the manner in which France has set of living in recent years and the changed

out to solve her population problem. In a position of women in society. But it is

final section I shall try to give some estimate possible to discern causes which have had a

of the demographic and social effects of the particular influence in France.3 In an inter-

policy which has been adopted.

esting article by Monsieur Bourgeois-Pichat,

France, of course, is not unique in having published in the review Population, the

a falling birth-rate; all European countries author shows the influence of the French

have been, or actually are, in the same Revolution of 1789 on demographic trends.

situation. The acute population problem in The political result of the Revolution was

France today arises from the fact that her greatly to advance the prestige and power

birth-rate started to fall about one hundred of the bourgeoisie, and this was the social

years before that of other countries in class in which the birth-rate was the lowest.

Western Europe. A comparison may be The Revolution had swept away ancient

made with Great Britain. A slight fall in the barriers to social mobility and the free and

birth-rate is observable towards the end of equal citizens, therefore, who wished to

the eighteen-seventies but during the first advance in social status adopted the family

half of the nineteenth century our population pattern of the social class which had already

had doubled owing to the fact that the birth- arrived. Advancement, then and up to

rate was fairly well sustained and mortality recent years in France, depended on restrict-

rates were falling. In France the fall in the ingone's family and saving; saving to provide

birth-rate became evident in the seventeen- for one's own retirement at the earliest

seventies and the rate fell almost continu- opportunity and saving to advance one's

ously up to I935. There had been a marked children in society and to leave them a

fall in mortality rates towards the end of the competence. Nice calculations of this order

nineteenth century but even so by I935 clearly do not result in the creation of large

France had an excess of deaths over births.2 families.

In I938 for each thousand inhabitants, It is important also to take into account

deaths exceeded births by o.8; in this the effect of the law on inheritance laid down

country births exceeded deaths by 3.7. during the Revolution and embodied in the

*A paper read at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics Society on March 25th, 1953.

Napoleonic Code. This law has had a profound influence on the birth-rate, since it

93

04 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

enacts that all children share equally in their father's estate. The peasant proprietor, in particular, has limited his family so as to prevent as far as possible the division of his
land.
Effect of Falling Birth-rate To whatever causes or combination of
causes one attributes the failure of French families before the war to provide for the next generation, the effects on every aspect of French life have been disastrous. France between the wars had to call on Poles, Belgians and Italians amongst others to come and take over deserted farmland and provide the workers in heavy industries, particularly in coal mining; industrial and social investment were far below the requirements of the country. For there is a close relationship between economic and social development and population. Of course the plight of France in the inter-war years cannot be attributed solely to her demographic situation. Many other factors must be given due weight. The enormous losses in men sustained during the I9I4-I8 war, for example, exercised not only a direct influence on the birth-rate but an indirect psychological influence which it is difficult to exaggerate.
Nevertheless, in the nineteen-thirties the demographic situation came to be regarded as the fundamental cause of France's decline. Or perhaps it would be more correct to say that the recovery of France came to be linked with a reversal of the demographic trends of over one hundred and fifty years. Obviously, to effect such a change necessitated a policy which would influence every aspect of family life and the Code de la Famille,4 which became law in I939 sets out to achieve this end. The Code deals with education, with the factors influencing the moral and physical life of the family, with criminal abortion. It also co-ordinates and extends the system of family allowances and it is with this aspect of French policy that the remainder' of my paper is concerned.
Financial Aid to the Family: Maternity Grant and Family Allowances French financial aid to the family is
directed towards achieving two ends: firstly,

a measure of social justice by redistributing the national income in favour of the lamily and, secondly, by the adjustment of certain
allowances, to the encouragement of the
birth-rate and the discouragement of abortion. Five separate allowances5 are being paid today, a maternity allowance, family
allowances, a special allowance paid to the
family in which there is only one income earner, allowances paid during the period of pregnancy and a housing allowance. Specific
conditions are attached to each of these allowances, conditions which are related to
the end which it is desired to achieve. The primary aim of the legislator immedi-
ately after the war was to- encourage the birth-rate, and to this end the maternity grant was directed. The birth of every child of French nationality gives the right to a grant of 36,ooo francs for the first child and
24,000 francs for subsequent births provided that the following conditions are fulfilled:
The wife must be under twenty-five when the child is born or the first child must be born within the first two years of marriage, and the second child within the first five years of marriage. After the fourth child there are no conditions. The aim of the
legislator in paying these very considerable grants is to encourage early marriage and families of more than three children. The rise of the birth-rate in postwar France is considered by some to be related, in part, to this financial reward; others question the value of a maternity grant payable under these conditions.
The report of the Government Commission6 appointed in I95I to review the whole family allowance poliey, under the chairmanship of Monsieur Prigent, voted unanimously against the retention of the maternity grant
in its present form. It was suggested that the birth of every child, irrespective of any conditions, should give rise to a grant towards the extra expense- which the birth of a child entails. It was proposed that the amount of the maternity grant itself should be reduced and the family allowances increased. Up to the moment, the views of the Commission have not brought about any change in policy so that these very consider-

POPULATION PROBLEMS AND FAMILY POLICY IN FRANCE

95

able sums are still being paid. It may be that quarter are held by representatives of inter-

the Government is unwilling to dispense with ested organizations.

an allowance which is judged by some to Family allowances in France provide a far

encourage the birth-rate.

higher proportion of the family income than

The family allowances proper claim the largest share of the total sums expended and benefit the greatest number of families. All French families are eligible for these allowances provided that the head of the family

the allowances paid in this country. Indeed, under certain conditions the budget of the
lowest paid workers may well be doubled by the addition of allowances. For France has
realized that if family allowances are to be effective in reducing the difference in stand-

is gainfully employed or can prove that ard of living which exists between those

through ill health or unemployment he can- members of the community who have

not satisfy this condition. It is not necessary families and those who have not, the allow-

to be employed under a contract of service, ances must be considerable. And further

peasant proprietors, members of the liberal that the allowances must be related to the

professions, employers and shopkeepers all cost of living and therefore to wages. All

have their own schemes. I propose to 'des- family allowance payments are assessed as

cribe the scheme which covers the largest percentages of a basic wage which, in theory,

number of families, namely that which is should vary with the wages actually being

applicable to the workers in commerce and paid. At the present time this basic wage is

industry.

I7,225 francs a month.* The legal minimum

The payment of family allowances in wage is 20,000 francs a month and the

France dates back to I9I8 when a number powerful family associations are constantly

of employers in heavy industry started to agitating for a rise in the basis of assessment

pay allowances over and above wages to so as to bring it more in line with actual

those of their employes who were the fathers wages.

of large families. By I932 some two million Allowances are paid, as in this country,

families were benefiting from these allow- for the second child to whom is attributed

ances. The employers financed this volun- 20 per cent of the basic wage, the third child

tary scheme by payment of a percentage of claims 30 per cent of the basic wage. There-

their wages bill into Caisses de Compensa- fore, the father of three children receives

tion, Funds created by the employers them- each month in family allowances the sum of

selves on a geographical or industrial basis. 8,625 francs. For every additional child

These Funds collected contributions and 5,075 francs a month will be added. It should

paid out allowances, for it was soon realized be noted that these are the allowances paid

that had the payment been left to individual in the Paris area, the allowances are smaller

firms, fathers of families far from benefiting in other parts of France.

from allowances might have found it difficult

to obtain employment. This manner of The One Wage-earner Allowance

financing family allowances was retained I come now to the one wage-earner allow-

when the payments were made a legal obliga- ance, salaire unique, attributed to the family

tion in I932 ; the present scheme is financed in which the mother devotes the greater part

in the same way, employers pay i6.75 per of her time to the family. This allowance is

cent of an adjusted wages bill into the almost as important to the budget as the

Family Allowance Fund in their area. Pre- family allowances themselves ; the allowance

vious to the war, the Funds were adminis- is paid if the father stays at home and the

tered solely by employers but since the war mother works. If there are two children in

fathers of families who are also trade union- the family this allowance will amount to

ists are allotted half the seats on the admin- 20 per cent of the basic wage and for three

istrative councils. One quarter of the seats children or more 5o per cent of the basic

are allotted to employers and the remaining

*I,OOO francs equal /i.

96 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

wage will be forthcoming. Thus a family with three children benefiting from this allowance and from family allowances will in fact have the right to I7,225 francs a
month. In fact, the amount will .be nearly
20,000 francs a month since i,6oo francs will be added in respect of an income tax rebate. If the father is employed in one of the lower paid industries, textiles or transport for
example, family allowances plus the one
wage-earner allowance may go some way
to doubling the family income. Since the allowances do not vary with income they
obviously form a smaller proportion of the total income in the higher income groups.
Rather over go per cent of the total sum (about £375,000,000) paid out in allowances
is absorbed by the one worker allowance and
the family allowances.7 Obviously the two
allowances complement each other and both
promote the well-being of the family. But whilst -the payment of family allowances calls forth little criticism today the one earner allowance is unacceptable to many in' its present form. The Rapport Prigent
already referred to brings out clearly the difference of opinion amongst the members of the Commission. The explanation of this difference is to be sought in the underlying principles governing the two allowances.
Famly allowances conform to a generally accepted idea of social justice. Quite apart from any population policy the necessity
of helping the family in a period of rising costs of living is regarded as essential. To a certain extent, the allowances in the immediate postwar period provided a substitute for our food subsidies, rationing and price control. And it may be that the proportion of family allowances to wages might diminish in the future if equilibrium between wages and cost of living were established.
The principles underlying the one earner allowance are of a different order, they are based on the catholic belief, often stressed by the Pope, that the place of the mother is in the home looking after her children. The one wage-earner allowance then has as its prime object the keeping of the mother in the home, her proper place. Or rather the allowance is designed to make it possible for

the mother to choose whether she will profit from the allowance and stay at home or go out to seek paid employment. Obviously an allowance which makes it possible for a mother to stay at home may result in a higher birth-rate and will almost certainly result in a better kept home. Nevertheless, the trade unionists and the parties on the left see in this allowance an expression of conservative and catholic opinion which is to them unacceptable. They would prefer to see the allowance abolished and the money paid out in larger family allowances.
This one wage-earner allowance is also criticized on other grounds. In the first place, it is extremely difficult to control. It has been alleged that 50 per cent of women drawing the allowance are, in fact, employed outside their homes. This figure is certainly grossly exaggerated, but in a large town it is impossible t-o exercise any control. And secondly, the allowance is criticized on the grounds that it is unjust. The middle-class husband drawing an adequate income from his employment gains from the one wageearner allowance since his wife, if she has children, would not in any event be working outside the home. On the other hand, the wage of a husband in the poorly paid industries might be so low as to oblige the wife to go out to work since she can earn more than the allowance provides. However, in spite of these criticisms the. allowance continues to be paid and it is highly unlikely that there will be any change in the near future.
Pre-Natal Allowances
I have dealt with three of the allowances. There is a fourth allowance which is paid before the child is actually born. The number of pregnancies terminated by abortion has caused grave concern in France for some years. An interesting article published in Population Studies8. gives -details of the extremely severe legal measures which the Government has enacted in an attempt to deal with the problem. The conditions attached to the granting of pre-natal allowances are definitely designed to discourage abortion. Pregnancy must be declared by the end of the third month and three medical

POPULATION PROBLEMS AND FAMILY POLICY IN FRANCE

97

examinations must be undergone in order
to qualify for the total of nine months' family allowance. The allowance is paid in three separate sums after the medical examinations. This method of payment is primarily designed to discourage abortion, but of course it also ensures medical care for the
mother and child and in so doing may well diminish the infant mortality rate. To complete this account of allowances I should mention that fathers are given three days'
paid leave on the birth of a child.

gone and the baby must be brought regularly for medical examination. 9
Again, the worker drawing sickness or accident benefit is paid about half his normal wage. But should there be three children in the family the benefit is increased to twothirds of the wage after one month. Even the old age pension is increased by one tenth if three children have been reared, on the assumption that the cost of providing for
the family has prevented the accumulation of savings.

Housing Allowance

The Assessment of this Policy

Finally, a housing allowance is forth-
coming if it is considered that the family is paying out an unduly large proportion of
total income on rent; up to the present the number of beneficiaries is small. The accommodation occupied by the family must reach a certain minimum standard before the allowance is paid and even though the standard required is extremely modest relatively few' families qualify for the allowance. The housing in France is deplorable, owing in part to the fact that so little
building was carried out between the wars. The housing allowance is designed to encourage the building of flats and houses to let since new accommodation is not subject to rent restriction. Therefore, if a family is fortunate enough to find a new home or' flat at a high rent the housing allowance facilitates the movement from old unsuitable
premises to the new accommodation.

I come now to some assessment of the
result of this family policy, an assessment
which it is extremely difficult to make. The outstanding fact is, of course, the increase in the French birth-rate since the war. The
present birth-rate in France is about onethird higher than before the war and though there was a 5 per cent drop in I95I the rate was almost maintained at the I95I figure in
I952.10 This may be compared with a drop of some 25 per cent in the English rate since I947, the year of the highest postwar birthrate. To what extent have the family allow-
ances contributed to this extremely favourable situation from the French point of view? Opinion in France itself is divided and clearly where so many factors have to be taken into account the weight to be attached to one factor as against another cannot be measured with accuracy. The official view is that considerable weight should be given
to the effect of the allowances and in spite

Social Insurance Benefits

of criticism those allowances such as the maternity grant which definitely express a

The concern of the French legislator for population policy have been retained. The

the family is exhibited not only in the com- official view was summed up by the Minister

prehensive family policy which I have just of Labour a-nd Social Security in I95I when

described, but also in certain aspects of the he addressed an international gathering in

social insurance benefits. Social insurance, Paris. Explaining the motives underlying

except for old age pensions, covers only the French legislation, he said: " Certainly

people employed under a contract of service. social justice is the chief characteristic of

The wife of an insured worker is paid the our family policy, but in addition, this

medical costs incidental to the birth of a policy has been an important element in our

child up to a certain agreed sum. But to demographic improvement, and France has

claim benefit certain formalities have to given a proof of what can be accomplished

be observed. Regular pre-natal and post- by such an effort in righting a critical situa-

natal medical examinations must be under- tion." Many other official pronouncements

98 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

expressing the same opinion could be quoted.
On the same occasion the demographer,
Monsieur Daric of the Institut National d'1Studes Demographiques, expressed himself with much more reserve: " It is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to isolate the
specific action of one factor amongst the numerous and very different factors which
are at the base of this renewed increase in the
birth-rate. These factors are economic,
psychological, sociological and cultural, some temporary, some permanent...." And later Monsieur Daric added, " Let us note only
that the influence of the family allowances on the renewed increase in the birth-rate appears evident whilst it is not possible to
adduce formal proof.'1 The Family Associations, which are largely
Catholic bodies, would claim that there has been a reawakening in France to the value of family life and that the increase in the birthrate is fundamentally an expression of this belief. Family allowances by redistributing income as between those with and those without children, have made it possible for parents to increase their families as they would wish to do without suffering an unduly large fall in their standard of living.
However, there is general agreement that this family policy has had some effect in reducing abortion and the infant mortality rate. It is obviously extremely difficult to assess the effect on abortion of the payment
of family allowances from the time that pregnancy is established. But the demographers tend to the view that the allowance has had some effect in reducing the number
of abortions. The infant mortality rate in France has
been reduced by 30 per cent in comparison with I936 to I938 and there is no doubt that the provisions outlined above have been instrumental in bringing about this result. Nevertheless, the rate remains high in France compared with that of other countries. The English infant mortality rate in I952 was twenty-eight per thousand births whilst the French rate, in spite of a sensible improvement, remains about forty-two.'2
Contrary to what might have been expected French family policy has not had

the effect of increasing the number of large families. Since I940 there has been an increase in the number of families having at least one child and families of two and three
children have also increased. The number of families with more than three children has
remained fairly constant. A recent Government report brings this point out clearly.13 Approximately 70 per cent of the families to
whom allowances are being paid consist of one or two children. Approximately I2 per cent only of families have four or more children.
It might also have been expected that French family policy would have had the effect of increasing the birth-rate in the lower income groups since family allowances do not vary with the income of the recipient. Far from this being the position there is some evidence to suggest that the difference in the size of families in social classes is less marked, and indeed that the size of the
middle-class family may be increasing. For example, the I946 census gives figures to show that the largest families are to be found in the peasant proprietor group but that the difference between the size of families in the administrative and liberal professions and the families of the unskilled worker is small. The latter group has an average of i 89 children per family and the former I 70.
I am indebted to M. Jean Daric of the Institut National d'JEtudes Demographiques for the analysis set out in the following table:

AVERAGE NUMBER OF SURVIVING CHILDREN PER FAMILY

IN THE MAIN INCOME GROUPS

Farmers, peasant proprietors . .

Unskilled labourers and skilled workers

Office -workers . .

..

Shop assistants . . .

. 2-53
. 89
I- 62 . I- 39

Small employers and independent workers

Shopkeepers . . .

.

Administrative and professional . .

i-8 I . I65 . 1-70

The Middle-class Birth-rate
This apparent change in the family pattern of the middle classes is due to factors not necessarily connected with the family allowance policy, though the middle-class man who is employed will be paid these allowances free of income tax. Moreover, the

POPULATION PROBLEMS AND FAMILY POLICY IN FRANCE

99

family allowances will be continued up to I have been discussing has an important

the age of twenty if the boy or girl is follow- reaction on current economic and social

ing a full-time course of study. But the problems. I propose to complete my paper

member of the liberal professions who is self- by briefly discussing two of these, firstly, the

employed will receive smaller allowances effect on wages of this policy and secondly,

than the amounts that I have quoted. The the serious difficulties which arise when the

middle-class family is aided more particu- sums paid to families in allowances are mis-

larly by the French system of direct taxation. used.

The family income is divided by the number I have already stated that the family

of children and adults in the family and each allowances in commerce and industry are

section is assessed separately for tax. There financed by the payment of I6 75 per cent

is no limit to the size of the incomes thus of an adjusted wages bill. This sum repre-

treated. A man earning the equivalent of sents an addition to labour costs and French

£8oo a year whose family consists of a wife economists agree that it is either added to

and three children will pay no tax at all selling price or deducted from wages. That

under this system, though it should be noted is to say that the wages which are distributed

that only about 30 per cent of tax revenue might be higher or prices might be lower

is raised from direct taxation.

were family allowances not being paid.

French writers suggest that the catas- Obviously, whether the charge falls on

trophic inflation to which France has been wages or prices will depend on the industry,

subject since I9I4 has influenced the family but in general it is agreed that wages are

pattern of the middle classes. Taking prices bearing this cost. This argument is sup-

in I938 as represented by Ioo, the price level ported by a study of the distribution of the

in Paris in I952 has to be represented by national income. Wages plus family allow-

2,464. In other words the value of money is ances take about the same share of the

twenty-five times less today than it was in national income in I952 as in I938. Families

I938.14 In Britain during the same period the are better off but it is doubtful whether the

value of money has been about halved. real income of the single person or the'

Middle-class savings in France have dis- married couple without children is as high

appeared and since there is nothing to leave as in I938. This fact may well be at the root

to one's children the need to limit one's of much labour unrest in France. Moreover,

family so that the inheritance may pass there is a disadvantage from the economic

intact has also disappeared. The fall in the point of view in thus divorcing economic

value of money has affected the family in effort from family income. If the amount

another way. Previously, the middle-class added to the wage or salary by allowances is

girl on marriage took with her a substantial a small proportion of the total the effect is

dowry. The young doctor acquired a wife negligible. But if, as may well happen, the

and the wherewithal to set himself up in family allowance almost equals wages, the

practice at the same time. The diminished economic effects may, in the long run, be

resources of the middle classes have necessi- serious.

tated a change in this social custom. The I pass now to a quite different problem,

father of two girls in the past might well that of the misuse by a minority of families

hesitate before the appalling prospect of a of the substantial sums paid in allowances.

third girl and the necessity of finding three The French method of helping the family

dowries if the girls were to marry suitably in reflects the legal and social position of the

their own class. Today the prospect is less family in society and in particular the pres-

grim. tige accorded to the father, the undisputed

Economic and Social Problems

head of the family. The legislator has been concerned to maintain this prestige and not

The redistribution of the national income to diminish the family's responsibility for its

which is effected through the family policy members. The family allowances are there-

1OO THE EUGENICS REVIEW

fore paid with no conditions attached as to
their use. The sums form part of the total
family budget and in law it is the father who directs how the money should be spent. A serious situation arises when the allowances are misused. The lot of the children may
indeed be made worse if the father is an alcoholic. There is some provision in French law for a kind of guardianship (Tutelle) whereby the family allowances are paid to a third person who is responsible for laying out the money in a suitable way.15 But the law is not clear and is difficult to invoke.
The guardian can only be appointed as a
result of a court order and this is not at all
easy to obtain. Moreover, there is some
difficulty in finding people to take over an unpleasant and often unrewarding task. In the meantime, the conduct of this small minority of families, many corresponding to our problem families, affords ground for criticism to those who are ill-disposed towards the present family policy.
Nevertheless, so long as France needs babies a family policy on the lines I have described will remain in being. The importance attributed to this policy by the politicians was emphasized a few months ago when

Monsieur Pinay's government fell. In the last resort it was a difference over family allowance policy which finally brought his government down.

REFERENCES

i. Cour des Comptes. La Sicurite Sociale. I950-5I.

p. I87.

2. Debre et Sauvy. Des Franfais pour la France.

Paris, I946. p. I9.

3. BourgeoisqPichat. "Evolution Generale de la

Population Population.

F'r9a5In.gai4s,e635d.epuis

le

XVIIIe

siecle."

4. Le Code de la Famille. Decret-Loi du Juillet, I939.

5. La Securite Sociale en France. Texte de la Direction

Generale de la Securite Sociale au Minist6re du

Travail. Documentation Fran9aise. 1951.

6. Rapport Prigent. I95I P. 14.

7. Ministere du Travail et de la Securite Sociale.

Rapport sur l'application de la Legislation de
Securit6 Sociale. Paris, 1952. p. 20.

8. Watson. " Birth Control and Abortion in France

since I939." Population Studies. 1952. 5, 26I.

9. La Securite' Sociale en France. p. 25.

io. Henry. " La Situation Demographique." Popula-

tion. 1952. 4, 722.

i i. Journees Internationales d'Etudes sur les Prestations

Familiales. Paris. I95I. p. i6.

12. Henry. "La Situation Demographique." Popula-

tion. 1952. 4, 722.

I3. Ministere du Travail et de la S6curit6 Sociale.

Rapport. p. 20.

14. Institut National de la Statistique et des Etudes

Economiques. Bulletin mensuel de Statistique.

I953. 1, O9. I5. " Le Contr6le de l'Emploi des Prestations Fami-
liales." Population. I947. 1.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLV, No. 2

