RECENT INVESTIGATIONS OF INTELLIGENCE AND ITS MEASUREMENT*

By PHILIP E. VERNON, M.A., Ph.D.

EARLY eugenic investigations of mental qualities were based, for the most part, on the investigators' own assessments
of intellectual eminence or special talent, social worth or depravity, and the like. Obviously the subjectivity of these judgments was open to criticism, however fairminded the investigator. Hence the invention of objective tests of intelligence was received with enthusiasm. They appeared to offer scope for far more scientific studies of inheritance. Thus the Eugenics Society has sponsored, or has undertaken the publication of, numerous and outstanding researches by psychologists such as Burt, Thomson, R. B. Cattell, Fraser Roberts and Terman, which were based on intelligence tests. It was of course realized that tests either of the Binet type or the group verbal type (e.g. Otis) were not pure measures of innate ability. Early studies like those of Gordon with canal-boat children and Freeman with American foster-children revealed a distinct influence of education and cultural background. This was confirmed by Newman, Freeman and Holzinger's work on identical twins brought up apart. However, analyses of foster-children and twin data by Burks and others indicated that environmental effects were unlikely to alter an Intelligence Quotient by more than ten points up or down; or, more precisely, that the contribution of heredity is three or four times as great as that of environment in determining individual differences in intelligence. Thus most psychologists, in this country at least, who were interested in eugenic problems were satisfied that ordinary intelligence tests were adequate tools for genetic investigations. Moreover, when Cattell (7) employed nonverbal group tests, based on pictorial or diagrammatic material, which would presumably be less susceptible to educational
* A paper read before the E-ugenics Society on May
29th, I95I.
B I S,

influence, he obtained much the same nega-
tive correlation with family size as did
workers with verbal tests.
Nevertheless, recent investigations by
myself and others have forced me to the
conclusion that, while intelligence tests are
admirable instruments for practical purposes
such as educational and occupational selec-
tion and guidance within any one cultural group, they cannot be regarded as sufficiently
pure measures of innate ability to be
employed in comparisons between different groups such as races or nations, nor for
genetic studies. And this discouraging con-
clusion applies to non-verbal, performance, or other tests as much as to verbal Binet or
group tests. My views have altered since
I949 (27), largely because two crucial
eugenic studies-those of the Scottish Mental Survey (2I) and of Cattell (8)-have given negative results. If the tests that they employed were adequate measures of inborn intelligence, then I do not see how they could fail to disclose some decline over the past
fifteen years. Thomson (24) and Cattell are
commendably cautious in their discussions of possible reasons for the rises in their group test means, and the lack of any drop on individual tests. But their explorations of possible genetic factors seem to lead only to blind alleys, and even Penrose's (I9) ingenious picture of heterosis could hardly compensate for the relatively large fall that was anticipated. Thus they appear to incline to the view that practice or sophistication effects may have distorted the results of the group tests, particularly among girls, and
that improvements in health and education may have played some part ; while Thomson admits the possibility that the negative relation between intelligence scores and family size may be partly environmental. Most of my paper to-day, therefore, will be devoted to relevant studies of practice and environmental effects, and their implications.

I26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

First, however, I would like to give you the preliminary results of a large-scale
survey of the abilities of some 9,ooo Army
recruits. When the Scottish results were published I suggested that part of the difficulty of interpretation arose from using such factorially complex tests as Moray House
and Stanford-Binet, and that further data
should be obtained with the aid of factor analysis to supply relatively pure measures of Spearman's g.
A Survey of Army Recruits
The scores of about IO,OOO male National Service recruits, mostly aged i8, were obtained on six mental tests. Their height and their physical and eyesight gradings on the Pulheems system were available, together with records of the county in which they lived. During an interview with a personnel selection officer they were classified by the place they had chiefly lived as rural versus urban and as native or migrant; finally the numbers of living siblings were ascertained. Such recruits provide a fairly representative sample of the population, but unfortunately
few agricultural workers were being called up
at the time (the end of I947). Also there was a wastage of 6 per cent of men who failed to supply the interview data, and these were somewhat inferior in intelligence.* The material was collected by the personnel selection staff of the War Office's Directorate of Manpower Planning, and all the essential tabulations and calculations were done from Hollerith cards by the Statistics Branch of the Admiralty. I am most grateful to those concerned and to my colleague in the Senior Psychologist's Department of the Adniralty -Mr. E. Elliott-for their assistance. A fuller account than I can give to-night will be published in due course.
Table I shows the best solution I have been able to reach so far to the analysis of the inter-correlations; it gives the loadings or saturations of the tests with four main factors or underlying types of ability: g
* There were 603 such cases, whose mean intelligence
" quotient," on the scale used below, was 96-5. A number of others had failed to take one or more tests, leaving a total of 9,183.

general, verbal-educational, spatial-mechanical and physical. The results are fairly logical, but one should note the overlapping
between the g and the education factors. Not only does an arithmetic test show the highest g-loading but also a non-verbal test and a
mechanical one have considerable educational content. Natives, you will see, are slightly (but significantly) inferior to

TABLE I
LOADINGS oF TESTS AND OTHER MEASURES ON FOUR FACTORS EXTRACTED AND ROTATED BY THE CENTROID
METHOD g v: ed mech. phys.

Arithmetic-maths.... .... .73 '57

Verbal ability ... ... *6i '65

Clerical ... ... ... *71 *56 o7

Education standard ... 6o *71

*o6

Non-verbal intelligence ... *72 .40 '20

Mechanical problems .. .54 50 *47 *12

Mechanical assembly ... .31

*45 *i6

P (physical) ... ... *o8

*37

EE (eyesight) ... ... *01 -23

.32

Height ... ... ... '09 '33 *13 '20

Variance, per cent ... 26'8 2I-4 4.8 3'2

Native ...

... -04 -'10 -07 -04

Urban ... ... ... -'04 '01 -'03 -III

Siblings ... ... ... -'34 -'I7 -'09 -'04

migrants on all factors. Urban dwellers seem to be slightly inferior in all respects, except education, and particularly in physical qualities. But I am afraid that the lack of agricultural workers may have affected these figures; we shall see later that the relationship is not linear. As regards family size, it is quite clear that the negative correlation exists not so much with educafion as with
our general factor. But as the general factor itself is somewhat mixed up with education this result does not carry us much further. It is interesting that the correlation of -.34 is higher than is usually found among
children; presumably this is due to more families being complete when a cross-section
is taken at i8 than at ii years.
I had hoped to calculate independent factor scores, but the labour proved too great,
and instead I merely combined the results of certain tests which were most highly loaded with each factor. For ease of comprehension
I converted these combined scores into
standard scores with a mean of IOO and a

RECENT INVESTIGATIONS OF INTELLIGENCE AND ITS MEASUREMENT I27

standard deviation of i6, so that they should
all be comparable to I.Q.s.* Table II shows
the mean standard scores for g, education, mechanical and physical tests for each family
size. Note, however, that because of the method of derivation the education and
mechanical scores are considerably impregnated with g. You will see that the decline

TABLE II

MEAN STANDARD SCORES OF RECRUITS WITH GIVEN

NUMBERS OF SIBLINGS ON TESTS OF DIFFERENT TYPES

No. of Freq.

Mean Scores

Scottish

Siblings % g ed. mec. phys. Mental

Survey

0 I3.3 io6-6 IO7-2 IO4-6 IO2-3 105.3 I 220 IO5-8 105.8 I04-3 ioir6 105*I
2 i8*8 ioi-8 IOI*7 IOI-7 IOO18 ioI.6
3 13-8 98-8 98-5 99-5 99-8 98-6
4 IO4 94-9 94-7 96.7 98.7 95.8 5 7-8 93-2 92-9 95-2 97.7 94-2
6 52 92-4 92-6 93-5 96*4 92-8
7-8 5.5 88-9 9I-6 92-9 96.5 9I-8
9-II 2-8 87.9 88-2 9o-6 96-2 9O-I
12-17 0.4 87.2 86z2 gi-6 95.8 86.5
is almost identical on the more g-loaded and the more educational tests, and that both closely parallel the results of the Scottish Mental Survey. On more mechanical tests the decline is less marked, and it is quite small on physical measures; indeed there is
scarcely any drop beyond six siblings. Turning to geographical differences: the
counties were grouped into twelve major regions, which were so chosen that no region contained less than 5 per cent of the total, and each would be fairly homogeneous in respect of industrialization. Table III shows
that variations in g scores in different regions are remarkably large, ranging from an average of I04 in the Home Counties to ninety-four in South-West Scotland. Wales, Lancashire, Stafford and Warwickshire are distinctly below average-ninety-seven- to ninety-eight; but the whole of the rest of England and Scotland, including London, is around ioo -to io2. There were, of course, variations between counties within regions; but numbers were too small for these to be highly significant. Surprisingly the regional differences on educational tests are smaller

* Such units are not normally employed by Service psychologists, who are well aware of the misinterpretations to which I.Q.s, particularly among adults, are
liable.

than on g tests, while mechanical differences are largest of all. The South-West Scots and Welsh are relatively well educated, the East Anglians are significantly poorer than would be expected from their intelligence. On mechanical tests it is the less industrialized
and more healthy regions that do best, though Warwick-Stafford does pull up slightly. The physical results run almost
parallel to the mechanical and are incident-
ally very similar to those discovered by W. J. Martin (i6) (in so far as our differently grouped regions can be compared.)

TABLE III
MEAN STANDARD SCORES OF RECRUITS FROM DIFFERENT REGIONS
Region of Great Britain Nos. g ed. mec. phys,

Home Counties ... i,663 104.0 103.0 I04.3 I03.0

East Anglia, Beds,

Cambs, Northants 474 IOI*7 IOO1O 103.0 ioo-6

S.W. and Hants ... 563 IOI5 IOI'0 103.7 102.5

Berks, Bucks, Oxon,

Glos, Here, Worcs 540 IOI-4 I00.9 I03-2 IO2*7

Leics, Notts, Derby,

Yorks W., Ches I,128 101-4 IOI*0 100.3 99.7

London ... ... 695 ioo*6 99.9 ioo.8 99*8

Yorks E. & N.,

Northumb, Dur,

Cumb ... ... 502 99g6 ioo0o 99-I 99*2

Scotland E. and N.

Counties ... ... 486 99'6 99-4 97.0 98-9

Wales ... ... 466 97.9 IOO-O 97-0 97-2

Lancashire ... ... 1,125 97-2 97-8 96*5 97-6

Warwick, Staffs,
Salop ... ... I,O46

97.1

96-9

98-4

99.5

Glasgow and S.W.

Scotland ... ... 495 93.7 97.o 91.4 95-0

Natives ... ... 74p8 99-0 99 0 99-2 99.5 Migrants ... ... 25*2 I02*8 102*9 I02-4 Ioi*6
Distance from open
country miles %
Rural ... 0 4.9 I00.4 99-8 IO2-5 102.8 Village or
small town < I 22-4 99'8 IOO1O 1004 101.0
Middle of
mod. town I-2 i886 Iroo9 100.7 IOO2 IOO2
Edge of large
town ... 1-2 15.0 I03-0 IO3I 102-4 100.7.
Middle of
largetown 3+ 39'I 98-4 98-5 98.5 98-7
Migrants are uniformly superior to natives. Note that they constitute only a quarter of the population in spite of all the war-time migrations. Martin found 20 per cent in

i28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

I939. My rural-urban classification refers to the place in which the recruit has chiefly lived (not necessarily where he was born nor where living at present), and was based on the distance of that place from open country. Thus the first group represents those who say they live surrounded by -open country, the second those living in small towns or villages where open country can be seen from close by their homes. You will see that the size of the town is not crucial. Those living on the outskirts of large towns are highest and those in the centre lowest on almost all psychological tests. The true country dwellers do not appear to be inferior in abilities; they are actually highest on mechanical as well as physical measures.
While I have admitted a possible lack of agricultural workers in my sample, the fact that 5 per cent of the total fall in the most
rural group and 22 per cent in the villagesmall town group suggests that the loss is
slight. Mrs. Bosanquet's (2) careful survey
showed, like mine*the physical superiority of rural populations. Her evidence for intel-
lectual inferiority was by no means unanimous, and she wondered whether such inferi-
ority as was found might not be ascribed to the content of the tests favouring urban children. I would add to this the suggestion
that urban children are more likely than rural to be practised, or sophisticated, in
taking tests; and we shall see below that
such practice effects may be very consider-
able. To conclude then: there is too much
doubt about the representativeness of my
sample for me to contradict the common
belief in the lower intelligence of the rural population. But at least it would appear
that any inferiority lies more in educational level than in general or practical ability.
The more important finding of my survey,
from the eugenic standpoint, is that the best
measure of intelligence that I have been able to extract from six mental tests behaves in
just the same way as tests with obvious
educational content in predicting a decline in
national intelligence-a decline which has so far not been borne out by direct evidence.

Practice and Coaching Effects on Intelligence Tests
Turning then to environmental effects on test scores: these may be classified under
five headings-
i. Coaching or teaching the right answers on the actual test used.
2. Practice in taking the test itself.
3. Practice on other similar tests. 4. Coaching on other similar tests. 5. More generalized educational training
or cultural influences which are incidentally reflected in test scores.
The first-coaching on the test itself-is obviously possible, but is unimportant because care is normally taken nowadays to prevent leakages. Secondly-practice effects from repeating the same test; these were shown to be so large in the Army during the war that additional norms had to be provided when men were retested. The improvements ranged from 2.i per cent to 8.6 per cent on different tests, in terms of I.Q. units with a standard deviation of fifteen. They were highest among tests with unfamiliar content or with elaborate instructions and restricted time limits, such as Progressive Matrices and a clerical test; least marked among straightforward tests such as arithmetic, where also the timing was generous. More recently Dr. Heim (6) and her collaborators have shown that repeated practice at a timed group test (having adequate ceiling) produces almost indefinite rises, though these tend to tail off after about the fifth retest. Obviously this is a quite artificial situation; practice or coaching on other similar tests is of far greater importance. It is particularly serious now that intelligence tests are used by almost all education authorities for competitive entry to grammar schools at eleven years. In many primary schools, much of the final year is spent in coaching children to pass intelligence and objective English and arithmetic tests, in spite of the efforts of the authorities to prevent it. Not only is this unfair to the schools which do refrain from coaching but also it naturally renders the original test norms valueless and it distorts the results of

RECENT INVESTIGATIONS OF INTELLIGENCE AND ITS MEASUREMENT I29

any comparative investigation, such as the which I drew from his results. It shows that

Scottish Mental Surveys. Thus there was trainability does indeed increase with intel-

virtually no rise in scores between I932 and ligence up to a certain point, say I.Q. i2o,

I947 in Scottish districts where children are but thereafter there is a dropping off, not

unused to tests, but a rise of 3.2 points in because of ceiling effect but because the very

districts where children are relatively bright children understand the initial test so

sophisticated.

well that they have little to learn.

I have surveyed some of the literature on Navathe compared the improvement on

practice and coaching effects in my book, timed tests with that when ample time was

with Dr. Parry, on personnel selection (29). allowed; the latter amounts to 2.8 per cent,

Important additional results have been that is roughly three-quarters as great as

obtained by McIntyre (14) in Australia, with the timed test. Hence the practice effect

Johri (ii) at Leeds, Dr. Watts (30) in Lon- is not merely a matter of learning to make

don and Professor Peel (i8) at Birmingham; efficient use of time or to read and follow the

and a series of experiments is being carried instructions quickly.

out by one of mystudents, Mr. D. T. Navathe.

TABLE IV

He is taking the precaution, which few SMOOTHED RESULTS (FROM PEEL) OF RETEST RISES

previous investigators have done, of mixing two parallel versions of each test so that those pupils who are initially given version A

Initial I.Q. Mean Rise Level on Retest 140 2*9
130 3.9

take version B as their final test, and those who are initially given version B take A

120 4-I
110 3.5
100 3-2

finally. Only in this way can slight differences

90 2-6

in the difficulties of the versions be controlled.

8o
70
Overall

I-9
(1.2)
3.14

The increase in score resulting merely from the practice effect of taking one previous test ranges from about 3 per cent to 8 per
cent. Peel compared I,593 pupils who took
Moray House Test 4I and Test 42 a few
weeks later, also I,367 pupils who took them in the reverse direction, and obtained an average rise of 3.I4 I.Q. points. Mr. Navathe got a rise of 4 per cent after two weeks using similar tests. But both these sets of pupils
may have had some previous familiarity with tests, and in another experiment at a private

With further practice between the initial and final test the improvement may be considerably greater. Thus Johri obtained an additional increase averaging about I2 per cent as a result of ten periods of practice at parallel tests on successive days. All investigators, however, show that this tails off; in other words, that increased practice produces diminishing returns.
TABLE V
SUMMARY OF RECENT INVESTIGATIONS, IN STANDARD SCORE (I.Q.) UNITS

school where the boys were virginal the rise was 7.4 per cent. These, however, were boys

McIntyre

Practice Effect

Coaching Effect 15-I8

of initial I.Q. around I20 and therefore perhaps more able than most to learn from
practice. Dearborn and Rothney (9), Rodger

Johri ... I2'4

Watts ...

5.4

3 32...

Navathe ... 4-o

14.8 9-5 8-2
8-I I

(20) and others have claimed that train-

so ...

T74

I6'2

ability is greater at higher I.Q. levels; but Under my fourth category, coaching or

one would naturally expect greater increases instruction in how to answer group test items

below the average than above as a conse- produces very large rises. Watts obtained

quence of regression. Peel has attempted to an increase of 8 to 9 points from quite inten-

allow for this regression effect and has sive coaching over ten weeks, but his testees

applied his as yet unpublished technique to were secondary modern pupils who already

Moray House retest results of 7,000 pupils. had some acquaintance with tests. Navathe

Table IV derives from a smoothed graph found 8 to ii points in similar groups. But

I30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in a private school two small groups who confficting. In one experiment in the

received only one or three periods of coaching Navy (29), practice obtained by taking one

rose by i6 points. McIntyre's pupils had battery of tests produced a 3.6 per cent

four and Johri's ten periods. It is, of course, improvement on another quite different

difficult to compare these experiments since battery. In another recent investigation by

the tests and the age and previous sophistica- Mr. Elliott, five groups, totalling I,719 men,

tion of the children varied. But it certainly took the same set of five tests in five different

appears that an hour or two of coaching can orders; and quite large variations, ranging

be as effective as much more prolonged up to 5.2 I.Q. points, were found when the

training. Notice, too, that coaching is only same test occurred in different positions.

about twice as effective as the practice For example, the I.Q. score on an abstraction

resulting from a single retest. In Johri's test was 97.7 if taken first(or second, but

study ten coaching periods were slightly IOI5 if it came later in the series.* On the

more effective than ten practice periods, but other hand a straightforward mathematical

to a statistically insignificant extent. Thus, test requiring creative responses appeared to

from the standpoint of educational selection, be upset if it followed other, selective-

the solution is obvious. If all primary schools response, tests. Thus when taken first the

were made to give a few hours' coaching score was IO2, but after other tests 99.5.

shortly before the iI-year examination, These tests all differed considerably from one

previously unsophisticated children would be another in form, and it seems likely that the

brought up to the same level as those who set of responding to one type of item inter-

had already been coached; and schools fered with the sets required for other types.

which coached for months beforehand would, Thus most of the tests showed a negative

in all probability, have been wasting their practice effect, i.e. more declines than rises

time. But the mere application of a short with lateness in the series.

practice sheet or (as happens in some areas) Johri trained or practised his boys on

of one preliminary test is clearly not suffi- analogies, similarities, directions, reasoning

cient to raise children to their effective limit. and mixed sentences. He also applied, but

Many other points require investigation. did not train them on, opposites, best answer,

Different types of test differ in their suscep- always has and absurdities. He claims that,

tibility to coaching, but there is no clear of the latter, only absurdities showed any

evidence as to which are the most prone. improvement; neither the practice nor coach-

Navathe found that a battery of separately ing transferred to the other three. Navathe

timed subtests yields much the same improve- gave four tests-verbal classification, verbal

ment as an omnibus test of the Moray House

TABLE VI

type; also that allowing ample time reduces

SUMMARY OF NAVATHE'S RESULTS

the coaching effects only by some io-2o per cent. He is trying now to find how lasting

Points Practice effect alone, on all four tests ... ... 4-o Practice effect on tests dissimilar to those

are the effects, also whether coached or
uncoached test scores are the more valid. On the one hand we might expect many uncoached children to fail to manifest their true ability because they often do not understand
what the test requires of them. On the other
hand, fully coached children may have
acquired what is mainly a familiarity with the tricks of the tester and their scores may be less valid indices of the intelligence they show at school or in daily life. How far training on one type of test transfers to other types is a matter on which the evidence is

coached 5-o... ... ... ... ...
Practice effect on tests similar to those coached 4.I Coaching effect on tests specifically coached... 8.4 Coaching effect when whole battery is coached I.io
analogies, non-verbal classification and nonverbal analogies-and he trained four of his groups, one on each of these tests; other groups were practised or coached on all tests. His results show that transfer effects were no greater than those arising from simple practice. Actually there was more transfer to
* The five groups were nearly, but not quite, identical in initial ability. However, analysis of covariance showed the variations to be statistically significant.

RECENT INVESTIGATIONS OF INTELLIGENCE AND ITS MEASUREMENT I3I

dissimilar than to similar tests, though the B. G. Schmidt's Study of Environmental

difference is insignificant. For example, Effects

those coached on verbal classification showed more improvement at non-verbal analogies
than they did either at verbal analogies or at non-verbal classification. Furthermore, those trained for two periods on one test showed less improvement at this test, on the average, than those trained for the same total time on
all four tests. I would suggest the following conclusions,
though I would like much more evidence. First, either practice or coaching has a rather general effect in familiarizing testees with intelligence tests, inducing the set of working quickly, of taking careful account of the instructions, not wasting time on difficult
questions, being alert to tricky items and in
improving confidence and reducing anxiety.

Miss Schmidt states that, during I935-42,
she took 320 Chicago children aged I2-I4,
who had been diagnosed as feeble minded, all with I.Q.s below 70. Three groups, totalling 252 adolescents, were educated for three years at special experimental schools where the curriculum was designed to increase emotional and social adjustment, as well as to provide appropriate training of academic and manipulative skills and study habits. Another, control, group of sixty-eight cases went to more conventional schools. The follow-up of subsequent careers continued
for one and a half to four and a half years after the end of schooling. Stanford-Binet tests and certain educational tests and tests
of personality adjustment were applied at

One might call this the sophisticated attitude eighteen-month intervals throughout. The

or even the morale of the testees. Dr. Watts main findings regarding intelligence are

suggests that this attitude may not only shown in Fig. i. The controls show the com-

improve but also decline if testees are overcoached so that they get bored. Second,

Fig. i

there is a highly specific coaching effect

B. tCxMI1T?MVDRTS LTS

which helps only at the particular type or

types of item coached or practised, and which

may hinder facility in tackling other types.

The more general sophistication may well

be stimulated to some extent by recent

schooling or by the taking of any kind of

examination. Adult recruits tend to show

rather large practice effects, possibly because

their schooldays are so remote that they do

not readily settle down to writing answers to silly questions as quickly as possible. But

X/XIIL ~ 4t,o It

this brings us to the fifth of my headings-

the improvement in intelligence test per-

formance attributable to environmental in-

fluences and education. I shall not attempt

to resummarize the earlier literature which

tended to show a definite, though quite small,

environmental effect. Nor will I describe the notorious Iowa studies, which claim to show t aa

3

5 in

very large effects but which have been

devastatingly criticized by McNemar (I5). monly observed drop over the four and a

I would, however, like to discuss the startling half years from an average I.Q. of 6o to 56.

results published in I946 by Bernardine But the three experimental groups, starting

Schmidt (22).

at an average of about 52, rise to 73 in the

132 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

three years' schooling and continue to in- be as many children with I.Q.s below 70 on

crease thereafter, Group I reaching 89 in the second as on the first occasion. But they

seven and a half years. The Vineland Social would not all be the same children. Owing to

Maturity scale showed even greater improve- imperfect correlation, some of those scoring

ments, and the personality test results were above 70 at I2 fall below 70 at i6, and vice

concordant. Apart from tests, half the versa. If, therefore, we pick out only those

experimental children went on to ordinary below 70 at I2 years (as Miss Schmidt has

high school courses and 27 per cent graduated done) they inevitably show an average rise

from high school. When last surveyed, 83 per by i6; this rise has no psychological sig-

cent were in regular employment and nearly nificance at all since we are neglecting the

two-thirds of these were in clerical or skilled above 70s who show a fall in the same

work. By contrast, the controls showed a period.

very poor educational and employment A second point is that the experimental

record.

children were tested from five to eight times,

Naturally these results have aroused the controls only twice. Schmidt denies that

doubts and criticisms, but it has been very there is any practice effect when retests are

difficult to find flaws, apart from some minor as far apart as i8 months. I doubt this, par-

arithmetical slips. At least one reviewer (12) ticularly with children near to their limit of

seems to suspect gerrymandering, but this is intellectual growth, and suspect that at least

unlikely since the study is backed by several 5 points of the average rise might be attri-

highly reputable psychologists. (I myself buted to practice.

feel grave doubts as to how children in the Thirdly, you will note that much the

imbecile grade could have taken such per- biggest rise occurs in Group III, which was

sonality questionnaires as Bernreuter's.) tested with Terman-Merrill. It amounts to

The initial intelligence testing was all done 35 I.Q. points in four and a half years

by trained psychologists of the Chicago compared with 26 points in Groups I and II

schools Child Study Bureau; thus we cannot who were tested with Stanford-Binet. Now

object that some of the children were diag- in spite of all Terman's care in standardiza-

nosed as feeble minded because of bad test- tion the new revision undoubtedly exag-

ing, as occasionally occurs in Britain. Re- gerates adolescent I.Q.s. Every psychologist

testings were, apparently, carried out by who has used Form L on children of I2 years

Miss Schmidt using i9i6 Stanford-Binet upwards has been surprised by the number

throughout with Groups I, II and IV, and of very high I.Q.s that turn up. In I940 I

Terman-Merrill Form L throughout with pointed out that the vocabulary test alone

Group III. Moreover, an independent tester was considerably easier at the upper end

is said to have given a further test to some of than the Stanford-Binet vocabulary, and I

Group I, getting virtually identical I.Q.s. carriedout a rough restandardization reported

Nevertheless, certain weaknesses deserve in my book The Measurement ofA bilities (26).

mention. First, there are always considerable The first two columns of Table VII show that

fluctuations in I.Q.s during the teens. The children with a ten-year Terman-Merrill

correlation between tests applied to a repre- vocabulary score would score nine years

sentative group four and a half to seven and only on the Stanford-Binet or according to

a half years apart would hardly exceed .6o, my norms, while a twenty-year Terman-

and might be lower. Hence, due to regression Merrill score corresponds to sixteen and a

effects alone, we would expect an apparent half years only. Next, over several years, my

rise in average I.Q. of I9 points, that is from students at Glasgow University applied

52 to 7I. The statistically untrained person Terman-Merrill to small groups of children

finds this very difficult to grasp, but it is along with several other intelligence, educa-

really quite simple. If a representative group tional and performance tests believed to be

was tested (with accurately standardized relatively accurately standardized. In this

tests) at I2 years and at i6 years there would way I collected records for several hundred

RECENT INVESTIGATIONS OF INTELLIGENCE AND ITS MEASUREMENT I33

children of various ages and, on graphing M.A. and I.Q. system of scoring tests is

Terman-Merrill mental ages against other quite inadequate above ten years or so and

mental ages, found that Terman-Merrill was are resorting to standard scores or percentiles

probably quite accurate around six to eight (cf. Vernon (28)).

years, but then gave more and more exag- This long digression was necessary to bring

gerated results. I combined these into a out my third criticism of Miss Schmidt.

rather conservative restandardization sum- Clearly a child of average intelligence at

marized in the third column of Table VII. I2 years will obtain an I.Q. greater than IOO

Then in I949 the second Scottish Mental if retested with Terman-Merrill four or five

Survey appeared, showing a tremendous years later, merely because of this defect of

positive skew in the Terman-Merrill distribu- scaling. I calculate the increase as about

tion of eleven-year I.Q.s. Whereas 3 per cent I4 points. A bright child might easily show

of the representative sample obtained I.Q.s a much larger rise of 30 points. Miss

below 70, not three but IO per cent obtained Schmidt's dull children would not be ex-

I.Q.s above I30. It is quite simple to work pected to increase as much, because they

out from the Scottish figures revised norms would still be below the level where Terman-.

which turn this skewed distribution into a Merrill exaggerates most, but some 5 points

symmetrical one, and an extract from these of the rise in her Group III may well be due to

norms appears in the last column. My three this. Whether similar exaggeration occurs

attempts at restandardization do not agree with the old Stanford-Binet (as used in

very closely, but they all show the same Groups I and II) we do not know. There is

trend.* I do not know whether this inac- actually more evidence that it gives unduly

curacy in the Terman-Merrill scale arises low I.Q.s among older adolescents and

TABLE VII

adults. But everything depends on what

RESTANDARDIZATIONS OF TERMAN-MERRILL MENTAL divisor is used for calculating I.Q.s, and this

Obtained M.A.

AGES

Revised M.A.s, Based on

Vocab. Test

Glasgow Scottish Tests Survey

Miss Schmidt fails to tell us. If it was sixteen
years for those aged i6 or over, then the reported rise in average I.Q. is indeed sur-

8 7:6 8:o 8:o prising; if fourteen, then it is much less so.

10 12

9:0 10 4

9:7 II: I

9: IO Ii:6

But in any case Schmidt's results are open

14 11 . 7 12: 7 I3: I to the criticism that the I.Q. standardization

i6 I8 20

14:1 I5:3 I6:6

14: 3
15:11 17 :7

14: 5 15: 8 I6: IO

of all the Binet scales is most unsatisfactory for older children and adults.* When we also

22 I7: 8 19: 3 17:9 take into account the natural effect of regres-

from Terman's failing to secure representa- sion and the probable practice effect, we

tive older groups, but I suspect that it is due must admit that the claims for large increases

more to the fact that mental growth is not in I.Q. are very dubious. Personally I am

even approximately linear after about ten more impressed by the sociological data. One

years. Several investigations suggest that it cannot dismiss the finding that, when steps

is logarithmic, i.e. that there is a gradual are taken to improve the emotional adjust-

deceleration. Terman makes some allowance ment and to provide a suitably stimulating

for this, but not enough. Hence, if successive educational environment, a large proportion

mental age years above ten represent smaller of children once diagnosed as feeble minded

and smaller increments of mental growth the are converted into reasonably capable adults.

exaggeration of I.Q.s that we have found I am sure, however, that the investigation

would naturally follow. Psychologists are needs to be repeated with better controls and

coming more and more to the view that the more adequately scaled tests.

* Quite a close approximation to the average of these figures is obtained by counting each year above 7: 0 as IO months. E.g.: Obtained M.A. 13: 10 = 7 0+ 82 months; Corrected M.A. = 7: o + IO/I2 x 82 =
7: 0 + 68 months== I2:8.

* Yet another likely reason for a spurious rise on
Terman-Merrill is that the standard deviation of I.Q.s at I6-17 years is only three-quarters what it is at I2. I know of no information as to whether the same is true of Stanford-Binet.

C

'34 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Other Evidence of Effects of Education college education to i8, 22 or later, and when

Further evidence of environmental effects this finishes they usually enter jobs where

is forthcoming from studies of the intel- their intelligence continues to be fully exer-

ligence of adults. Ever since large-scale cised. They may be represented by line C,

testing began in the American army in I9I7, which shows an increase till 25 or 30 before a

two apparently conflicting results have been gradual decline sets in. Since, however, they

obtained. On the one hand the average M.A. are relatively few in number, the mean M.A.

of representative adult groups has been of all adults around 20 years is even lower

remarkably low; for example, the mean than the maximum that the average pupil

Army Alpha test score corresponded to a reached at I5.

M.A. of I3j. On the other hand, when Now what is the evidence for this hypo-

pupils or students in high schools or colleges thesis ? Lorge (I3) retested a number of

are given intelligence tests of appropriate adults at the age of 34 whose test results at

difficulty they usually continue to show I4 years were known. There was a clear

rising scores from 15 up to over 2o years. effect of education beyond I4. For example,

Hence it seems absurd to say that the aver- adults who had received a university educa-

age individual reaches the lmits of his tion were two years superior in mental age

intellectual growth at i3 to I4 years. But to others who had had no further schooling

these two findings can be reconciled if we but whose intelligence level had been the

allow that growth continues as long as same at I4. Similarly Terman and Oden (23)

education or other intellectual stimulus con- followed up their gifted California group

tinues and that thereafter a decline sets in. after 2o years and gave them an individual

The majority of the population, including synonyms and analogies test. It may be

almost all the average and dull adolescents, deduced from their results that those who

finish their education around 14 to i6, hence had had the best education and had entered

their intellectual growth and decline might professional careers scored best, relative to

be represented by lines A and B in Fig. 2, their I.Q.s as children. Might these results

Fig. 2
CUVESV OFMU,TAL CRRcWTI4
AND WC

not be due, however, to the use of verbal tests with high educational content ? Actu-
ally the same seems to hold for other types of test. Thus the mean score for i8 year

recruits on an abstraction test, which has

only a small verbal component, is equivalent

to that of I3 year children; but brighter

recruits score distinctly higher than bright

I4-I5 year olds and dull recruits distinctly

-r~~~~~W.~~~~~~~~~~

lower than dull school-leavers. Again
Raven (io) has published age norms from 5 to 65 years for his vocabulary and for his non-verbal matrices tests, both of which show the tendencies pictured in my Fig. 2,

namely the fanning out of ability during

adulthood and the earlier decline among

lower-grade adults.

Elsewhere (29) I have given the mean

scores on the twenty minutes' progressive

0 2h

matrices for nearly go,ooo naval recruits,
ranging in age from I7 to over 40. These

A Gs C

indicate that an average decline has begun

which reach their maximum height at about as early as i8 years, though it is difficult to

15 years. But a minority receive secondary or be certain of the comparability of the various

RECENT INVESTIGATIONS OF INTELLIGENCE AND ITS MEASUREMENT I35

age-group samples. When the recruits are classified by civilian occupation there is a definite tendency (shown in Fig. 3) for such
Fig. 3
(20-M*,.) TAVI SC0M&
.A44 -
43
42
40-
33.
3S' 34.
3201.
25 24
M4eAfM 26')zS 358A6R 4$ 4)A5S
51OMI GRARM5 SHUAA 3)ECLWE OFw wIGe
Wrfl A&LW VWIJ OCCU?ATM CJW(ULigroups as mates and labourers, whose work demands least intelligence, to drop more rapidly than clerks, electrical and woodworkers, who are likely to make more use of their brains in their jobs and leisure pursuits.
A corollary of my hypothesis is that we would expect the relation between intelligence and education to be closer in an unselected adult population than the relation between intelligence and educational attainment among children still at school. So long as the educational stimulus is much the same for all individuals, innate factors will be the main determiners of individual differences in abilities; but after I5 years the amount of educational stimulation varies widely, and this, I would claim, affects the measured intelligence. This is borne out by our factor analysis, where the arithmetic test had as high a g loading as the non-verbal intellig-

ence test, and the latter had a substantial educational loading. Hence, also, family-size differences in our measure of g were practically identical with differences in education.
Conclusions
Now to sum up the inferences that appear to follow from these investigations: I accept
the view of Burks (3, 4), of Professor Burt (5)
and others, that, within a culturally fairly homogeneous group such as the primary school population of the U.S.A. or of Great Britain, something like 75 per cent of the variance in intelligence is attributable to hereditary factors, provided that care is taken to ensure a uniform degree of familiarity with the tests employed. When the amount of practice or coaching varies between different sections of such a population, no worthwhile conclusions at all can be drawn. But I would say that this large hereditary influence is manifested only because the environmental stimulation is fairly uniform for all children. They all hear much the same language and learn to use much the same concepts; they receive a more or less standardized education; they live in a country where the same pictorial or other concrete symbols are current; they are all trained to attend to printed questions and to write down answers quickly, and so on. All these factors do of course vary between social classes, between families within classes or between children within families, though not enough to raise the environmental component of the I.Q. to more than 20-30 per cent. They begin to vary more widely when children are segregated into different types of secondary schools and after school-leaving age. Probably also they vary more widely among emotionally maladjusted children who have difficulties in absorbing adult concepts, or among Gordon's canal-boat and gipsy children, or among such cases as Miss Schmidt investigated who, through emotional handicap or intellectual weakness, had fallen by the wayside so that the education which stimulates the growth of the ordinary child became too advanced for them. Certainly the variations in concepts, habits of thought, and in attitudes to intellectual tasks, between

I36 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

members of different nations or races biased than it would be by that hypothetical

are so large that experts like Nadel (X7) and and unattainable instrument-a pure test of

Biesheuvel (i) believe that a culturally inborn ability.

neutral intelligence test is an impossibility and that psychologists who try to make racial

REFERENCES i. Biesheuvel, S. Psychological tests and their applica-

comparisons are wasting their time. This tion to non-European peoples. 1949 Yearbook of

applies just as much to performance or pictorial or other non-verbal tests as to verbal

Education. London: Evans Bros. 2. Bosanquet, B. S. The quality of the rural popula-
tion. EUGEN. REV., I950, 42, 75-92.

ones. But I am afraid that this conclusion 3. Burks, B. S. Nature and nurture: Their influence

holds also, though in lesser degree, for many of the comparisons within relatively homo-

upon achievement. 27th Yearbook, National Society for the Study of Education. Bloomington, Ill.: Public School Publishing Company. I928.

geneous cultures in which eugenists are 4. Burks, B. S. On the relative contributions of nature

interested. The stimulus value of the environ-

and nurture to average group differences in intelligence. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 1938, 24,

ment in which the numerous children of 276-82.

social-problem families on the one hand, and the only children of university graduates on

5. Burt, C. L. Intelligence and Fertility. London: Eugenics Society and Hamish Hamilton. 1946.
6. Cane, V. R., and Heim, A. W. The effects of

the other hand, are reared, may account for repeated retesting: III. Further experiments and

no more than 25 per cent of the differences in their observed intelligence; but surely this

general conclusions. Quart. J. Exper. Psychol., I950, 2, I82-97. 7. Cattell, R. B. Is national intelligence declining ?

25 per cent is too large a component for the test scores to be accepted as reliable measures

EUGEN. REV., I936, 28, I81-203. 8. Cattell, R. B. The fate of national intelligence:
Test of a thirteen-year prediction. EUGEN. REV.,

of genetic differences.

1950, 42, I36-48.

I do not think that I am saying anything revolutionary about intelligence tests. It is,

9. Dearborn, W. F., and Rothney, J. W. M. Predicting the Child's Development. Cambridge, Mass.: Sci.-Art. 194I1.

after all, a commonplace of genetics that IO. Foulds, G. A., and Raven, J. C. Normal changes in

qualities as such are not inherited, only the capacity to develop these qualities under

the mental abilities of adults as age advances. J. Ment. Sci., 1948, 94, I33-42. ii. Johri, S. R. The Effect of Coaching and Practice

favourable environmental conditions. Thus on Intelligence Tests. M. Ed. Thesis, University of

I would regard intelligence as the outcome of the interplay of innate potentiality and of

Leeds. 1939. 12. Kirk, S. A. An evaluation of the study of Bernardine
G. Schmidt. Psychol. Bull., 1948, 45, 32I-33.

such conditions as good emotional adjustment and appropriate educational stimula-

I3. Lorge, I. Schooling makes a difference. Teach. Coll. Rec., I945, 46, 483-92.
14. McIntyre, G. A. The Standardisation of Intelligence

tion. I am not sympathetic to the argument Tests in Australia. Australian Council for Educa-

that intelligence itself is an innate quality, and that our tests are inefficient at measuring

tional Research, Educ. Res. Ser., No. 54. Melbourne University Press. 1938. 15. McNemar, Q. A critical examination of the

it because they are subject to environmental influences. Rather, I regard intelligence operationally as the general all-round ability

University of Iowa studies of environmental influences upon the I.Q. Psychol. Bull., 1940, 37, 63-92. i6. Martin, W. J. The Physique of Young Adult Males.

that an individual manifests in his daily life adjustments, at school, in his job, or in test

Medical Research Council Memorandum No. 20. London: H.M. Stationery Office. I949. 17. Nadel, S. F. The application of intelligence tests in

performances, and all these manifestations the anthropological field. The Study of Society

are environmentally as well as hereditarily determined. That brings me to my last

(edit. F. C. Bartlett and E. J. Lindgren). London: Kegan Paul. 1939. I8. Peel, E. A. A Note on Practice Effects in Intellig-

point: my criticisms of tests apply only to ence Tests. Brit. J. Educ. Psychol., 1951, 11.

their use in genetic studies and do not affect their application to practical problems such

ig. Penrose, L. S. The Galton Laboratory: Its work and aims. EUGEN. REv., 1949, 41, 17-27.
20. Rodger, A. G. The application of six group intel-

as educational and vocational prediction. Success at school, or in a skilled job, is

ligence tests to the same children, and the effects of practice. Brit. J. Educ. Psychol., 1936, 6,
291-305.

helped by a superior environment or educa- 21. Scottish Council for Research in Education and the

tion and hindered by a poor one. Thus it is better predicted by a test which is culturally

Population Investigation Committee. The Trend of Scottish Intelligence. London: Utiversity of London Press. I949.

RECENT INVESTIGATIONS OF INTELLIGENCE AND ITS MEASUREMENT I37

22. Schmidt, B. G. Changes in personal, social and intellectual behaviour of children originally classified as feebleminded. Psychol. Monogr., I946,
60, No. 5. 23. Terman, L. M., and Oden, M. H. The Gifted Child
Grows Up. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University PreSs. 1947. 24. Thomson, G. H. Intelligence and fertility. EUGEN.
REv., 1950, 41, I63-70. 25. Vernon, P. E. Intelligence test sophistication.
Brit. J. Educ. Psychol., 1938, 8, 237-44. 26. Vernon, P. E. The Measurement of Abilities. Lon-
don: University of London Press. 1940.

27. Vernon, P. E. Psychological studies of the mental quality of the population. Brit. J. Educ. Psychol.,
I950, 20, 35-42.
28. Vernon, P. E. The interpretation of intelligence test results. To be published in Le Travail Humain,
'95I. 29. Vernon, P. E., and Parry, J. B. Personnel Selection
in the British Forces. London: University of London Press. I949. 30. Watts, A. F. Coaching for the Grammar School Entrance Examination. Paper given at the Education Section, British Psychological Society, Dec. 29th, 1950.

The American Journal of Human Genetics

A quarterly record of research, review, and bibliographic material relating to heredity in man, and to the applications of genetic principles in medicine, anthropology, psychology, and the social sciences.
Edited for the AmmucAN SocrTY OF HuAN GENETICS by C. W. CoTRmAN, University of Michigan, in collaboration with C. N. HERNDON, M. T. MACRLiN, H. W. NORTON, BRONSON PRICE, N. F. WALKER
and A. S. WIENER.

Volume 3

CONTENTS

Number 1

SNYDER, L. H. Old and new pathways in human genetics. HERNDON, C. N., and JENNINGS, R. G. A twin-fanily study of susceptibility to poliomyelitis. BANTON, A. H. A genetic study of Mediterranean anaemia in Cyprus. KALLMANN, F. J., FEINGOLD, L., and BONDY, E. Comparative adaptational, social and psychometric data on the life
histories of senescent twin pairs. FINNEY, D. J. Review of: I. M. Lerner's Population Genetics and Animal Improvement. MOURANT, A. E. Review of: W. C. Boyd's Genetics and the Races of Man. WALKER, N. F. Review of: A. Lundstrom's Tooth Size and Occlusion in Tuins. McCULLOCH, C. Review of: A. Sorsby's Genetics in Ophthalmology. STEINBERG, A. G., and MULDER, D. W. Review of: C. H. Alstr6m's A Study of Epikpsy in its Clinical, Social and Genetic
Aspects. NEEL, J. V. Review of: A. B. Grobman's Our Atomic Heritage. BIBLIOGRAPHY OF HUMAN GENETICS, 1950, PART 3.

ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION, $8.oo-SINGLE NUMBERS, $2.50

Subscriptions and inquiries regarding membership in the Society should be addressed to H. H. Strandskov, Department of Zoology, University of Chicago, Chicago 37, III.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLI, No. 8

