STERILIZATION IN PRACTICE
First-hand Impressions of American Methods and Experience
By C. B. S. HODSON, F.L.S.
Mrs. Hodson has just returned from a tour in the United States, during which she had special facilities for investigating the treatment of the mentally diseased, and particularly the practice of eugenic sterilization. She discovered one point of especial importance-the usual friendly co-operation of patients and their guardians.-ED.

M OST students of recent social work lization was Indiana in I899. The law in

are aware that sterilization' has this State, as also in some others which fol-

been adopted in some parts of the lowed Indiana's lead, was made applicable

United States as one amongst many instru- to criminals, and objections were brought

ments for reducing the misery, both present forward in the Courts that under such

and future, caused by mental deficiency and statutes sterilization could be regarded as

mental diseases. There is, however, still a a punishment, and was then held to be a

great deal of misunderstanding and vague- " cruel and unusual " form of punishment

ness on this matter; and at the risk of and therefore contrary to the Constitution.

repeating what is well known to some Such rulings led to the repeal of quite a

readers, I propose first briefly to sum- number of statutes in which penitentiaries

marize the data now available in regard and reformatories were included amongst

to the extent of legislation and practice. the State institutions authorized to perform

Two studies are in the main responsible this operation.

for making readily accessible relevant in- Dr. Laughlin did much good work in

formation. The first is in the survey of helping to frame a form of statute con-

the legal position made by Dr. H. H. formable to the Federal Law. The law in

Laughlin in i922 and subsequently. He Virginia has now become famous as the one

has shown clearly that the repeal movement which has stood a trial in the Federal High

amongst States which had already adopted Court and has there been vindicated as con-

sterilization laws was not, as Europeans stitutional.

have so frequently supposed, owing to un- The number of States which had laws

desirable social results, but to purely legal permitting, at the State charge, the steri-

difficulties. Sterilization laws are an affair lization of mental defectives and insane

of the State legislature, but all State law, patients, was 2I on January Ist, 1928. The

if not conformable to the Constitution as number of patients treated varies greatly

expressed in the Federal Laws, is likely at in different States; and the total was 8,5I5

some time or other to be contested in the on the date above mentioned.

Courts. The first State to introduce steri- However enthusiastic the eugenist may

feel about the probable value of sterilization

'Those who are not regular readers of the in cutting off a source of racial contamina-

RxvInw should note the following points. The term sterilization is used for an operation which leaves the reproductive glands intact, but which interrupts

tion wherever it manifests itself, he must nevertheless, as a student of social affairs,

the tubes (by tying, severing, or both) conveying feel the gravity of supporting measures

the reproductive cells, either of male or female, to the exterior. The term is also used for ray treatment (external) of the ovaries, which without de-

which might adversely affect social ethics and the cultural level of the life of the

stroying the functions of the non-germinal parts of these organs, so disturbs the germinal layers that they are incapable of producing ova for a period, sometimes permanentlv.

community. It is, indeed, eugenists who
are probably most alive to this danger. Those students who do not regard society

35

36 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

as a biological unit have some excuse for East) as stowaways on every kind of trans-

believing that they can by imagination and port, in the hope of finding a fortune.

logic predict beforehand the social effect I have never felt any doubt on the point

of any change, whether legislative or of the ultimate racial advantage of a steri-

economic; but for those who regard not lization law, but I have been often very

only individuals, but also populations as seriously concerned as to its social reactions

fundamentally subject to biological laws, when put into practice on a large scale. An

there can be no a priori argument as to what objection has very frequently, of course,

the outcome of any change will be. We can been brought up in regard to a possible

only observe in the field and in the street as growth of moral temptation, with conse-

patiently and carefully as we do in the quent spread of venereal disease, when

laboratory.

sterilized patients return to more or less

The whole world is under a debt to the free community life. It is often alleged

first State in the Union which was bold that the knowledge that no offspring could

enough to venture on operative sterilization result would lead to an increase of irregular

as a social instrument. But most of all is intercourse. On the psychological side,

the world indebted to-day to the State of this suggestion will not have much weight

California, which has followed this lead on with those who have had experience of the

such a scale that a study of the working out very small extent to which the danger of

of the system there can be of value as an procreation acts as an inhibition either with

adequate demonstration of its possibilities. men or women in our own country-even in

classes which could by no means be brought

A LURE TO THE UNFORTUNATE

under the heading of defective or insane. Nevertheless, this objection has to be met,

It may be well to remind ourselves that a and California, with its very heterogeneous

result, in the sense of a statistical diminu- population, with its constant influx of poor

tion of inheritable deficiency or mental and rather low-grade Mexican labourers and

disease, is not to be expected in fifteen their families, with its villages of Digger

years-the time which the Californian ex- Indians (not as fine a human type as the

periment covers. It is very doubtful, in tribes in the North and North-East), is cer-

fact, whether California will ever be a tainly a region where such consequences

region capable of showing such results. would be likely to become apparent, if the

Each State in the United States must neces- danger were as great as has been supposed.

sarily be less a unit as regards population

than a nation or country of Europe; people pass freely from State to State as their

VENEREAL DISEASE NOT SPREAD

employment or their desires dictate. But Under the safeguards of the scheme car-

California draws certain groups to-day with ried out by the State institutions in Cali-

such persistent lure, that a considerable fornia, this trouble is obviated-that is to

part of its population ought really to be sav, neither the Chief Probation Officers

called migratory. Not only do the special nor the women who are taking a prominent

groups of sufferers from tuberculosis and part in State legislation for female offen-

arthritis flock in; the " unfortunate " also ders, were able to point to cases coming

seem to cherish the conviction that this El under this head. Further, neither these

Dorado is the one place in the world where people (who would be in the best position

failure will not again overtake them. At a to know if such cases do exist), nor

single sitting of the Juvenile Court for boys psychiatrists in mental hygiene work,

in Los Angeles, only two cases (brothers) child guidance work, and connected with

appeared whose parents were resident in the children's courts, as well as other citi-

California; every other lad had come from zens, social workers, teachers, and so on,

another State (some all the way from the felt this objection to be valid, or to have

STERILIZATION IN PRACTICE

37

become a recognizable feature since the said to be a root of that vigorous growth of

introduction of the law.

public sentiment determined to do the best

A much more real danger (though less that is possible for the individual patient.

frequently anticipated), is the possibility At the same time, the knowledge deepens

that sterilization laws may influence public that the happiness of the future largely de-

opinion in such a way as to hinder the pends upon the course taken by this genera-

growth and development of scientific and tion, and the sacrifices entailed, whether

humane methods of treatment of mental personal or social, are boldly shouldered.

patients and mental defectives now present It would be confusing to think of the Cali-

in the population. It might well be that fornian law as though it stood by itself.

the public, lulled by the illusion that steri- The Act is in fact the pivot of a whole

lization gives a cheap and easy method of system of careful social treatment; and it is

cutting off the source of future misery, further a satisfaction to realize that this

may therewith rest content, letting the pre- system in practice has a great educational

sent take care of itself. If such an attitude value in developing a eugenic conscience.

should grow up, it would cause a serious Three points should be noted in regard to

setback to the present growing sense in the the method of putting the law into operation.

community at large of responsibility for First, there has been great frankness;

those who are in distress through no fault secondly, individual objections and religious

of their own.

or political bias have been very liberally

This feature of the social conscience treated; thirdly, careful social work has

surely holds rank as one of the most pre- accompanied and upheld decrees. The law

cious products of our civilization. I was itself is compulsory, but the directors of

therefore at some pains to inquire into the institutions are at pains not to have recourse

development, not only of institutions and to compulsion. Operations are never sug-

schools dealing with all phases of mental gested for patients until they have reached

and temperamental trouble, but also into the stage at which they might with safety to

the public interest in such work, as ex- the community and advantage to themselves

pressed in the growth of voluntary social either return home or be released as self-

organizations connected therewith. There supporting units. When this time arrives,

can be no doubt that in California some of it is suggested to the patient that he is now

the most advanced work in these directions in a position to be independent, but that

has been taken in hand, and year by year either for reasons of heredity, or because he

special schools, children's courts (following would not be capable of supporting and car-

the most enlightened methods of dealing ing for a child, it is desirable that the State

with delinquency) psychological clinics and posterity should be guaranteed against

attached to the courts, child guidance work, the possibility of procreation. He is there-

and the like are all growing rapidly and vigo- fore offered the opportunity of sterilization

rously. Further, the reports of social in the hospital of the institution, with

agencies show that support in time and subsequent parole. The spouse, in the

money for such work is every year increas- case of married persons, is asked for con-

ing. A law of our own nature, which has sent as well as the patient. In the case of

not always met with due recognition, the mentally defective, the guardians are

operates in this field, namely, that men are asked to give their consent. If this is with-

apt to be most careless and unfeeling where held, the director of the institution may, if

they are conscious that they have least he considers it desirable in the interest of

power. As fresh social instruments are the State, keep the patient in the institu-

put into their hands, human beings, whether tion; there is then always the possibility

as individuals or societies, find their sense that the relatives may resort to a Court for

of responsibility becomes intensified. Thus a writ of habeas corpus. This is sometimes

sterilization in California may almost be successful, where some relative may be

38 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

found who will guarantee that any offspring pean countries to parents in allowing their

shall not become a State charge.

children to be taken to an institution.' That

After consent given and sterilization, the the probation officers and the social workers

individual is released on parole. Always a attached to the Courts feel sterilization to

suitable home is first found. Of course, be a very important and useful measure is

for the insane it is often simply a question clear. Probably no group is working so

of return to their own homes. For the hard to get consent for operations as these

mentally defective it is usually a case of officers; and they often meet with such suc-

finding a reliable employer; for in Cali- cess that patients who are not committed by

fornia, even when there are known parents the Courts are sent to institutions by their

or relatives, these are mostly found to be of parents to enable them to have the opera-

such low-grade intelligence themselves as tion.

to be unsuitable guardians. After the

successful training in the State homes, MARRIAGE ENCOURAGED

there seems little difficulty in finding decent employment. For the boys, this is mainly in gardens and farms, on fruit estates, and so on; for the girls in domestic service. The parole officers attached to the institutions are, in the main, women. This is probably
as arduous a piece of social work as one can
find, and one would therefore expect a high
grade of personnel, well trained and of
attractive personality. A woman who
spends much of her time driving in her car about rural California (where hold-ups are so frequent), alone unless she is carrying one or two patients from place to placedealing sometimes with farmers, with mis-
tresses of three or four different nationalities -called up by telephone at all sorts of
awkward hours when one of her charges is
suddenly in trouble or ill, has indeed need to be an all-round woman, well-educated, sympathetic, strong, and courageous.
Parole usually continues for two years, sometimes longer, and if the patients demonstrate that they are not really capable
of making good in the community, they can be recalled to the institution. There is a
very cordial and courteous co-operation between the Courts and the institutions.
At present the care given to the examination of children in schools varies in different
counties, just as it does in different districts in England, so that very frequently the mental defective is not detected until he or

One interesting development amongst the paroled mental defectives is the extent to which marriage can be allowed or encouraged. Some of these marriages, of course, are not successful, the percentage of failures to date being somewhat higher than the percentage of divorce in the United States at large (though not than in the worst States). Where the marriage is successful, it is surely a very consoling achievement, and a triumph of the modern way of handling the mental defective. I saw two typical homes, one in town and one in country, of married sterilized girls; and could only wish that such a prospect was possible for girls of the same type whom I
know in this country. It is to be emphasized that sterilization is
never allowed in California for anyone in a
criminal institutionl. This plays a part in
the fine tradition which is being built up, namely, that presenting himself for sterilization is an ennobling act on the patient's part, one by which he puts himself in line with the best feeling of the community and demonstrates his sense of citizenship, assuming his share of responsibility for the future and for progress. The criminal is not offered this opportunity, though obviously when someone serving sentence is shown to be insane or mentally defective, he may be transferred to the appropriate home,

she is brought to public notice in the Courts. Thus probably California does not give an

' With us some careful safeguarding, putting children in non-resident special schools on the same

exact test as to how far the possibility of sterilization might be a deterrent in Euro-

footing as institutional cases, would need to be devised; and such is in contemplation in the far West.

STERILIZATION IN PRACTICE

39

and in his new category would have the ease with which they were once more living

opportunity of sterilization before parole. an ordinary life, to the fact that this

anxiety was removed. In the mental

DESIRE FOR OPERATION

hospital the strong feeling for posterity was

I was very curious to learn how the a pleasing feature of the frank and careful

mentally defective patient was notified of scientific information- given to patients.

the fact that an operation was pending in Obviously not all cases would be hereditary,

his or her case, how they would feel about but any married person, who knew the diffi-

it, whether they would be frightened or culties of returning to work, would feel that

distressed. In those institutions with from the point of view of support and

which I came in touch, there had evidently environment he or she would not desire

been very careful work done in the first another child.

instance, so that a thoroughly happy senti- There are many points about the general

ment now prevails. The doctors told me organization of the Californian Institutions,

that it was never necessary to tell a patient which differ somewhat from the type most

that they were due for operation. Those often found over here; but this is not the

who think they are getting on well with place to go into such details, save to state

their training constantly importune the doc- that the State control is sufficiently elastic

tors as they go their rounds, asking how to allow of a good deal of diversity and to

soon their turn will come. It is realized admit of careful adjustment to the type of

that having the operation marks a stage of patient. The presence of a well-trained

advance in the patient's training and be- psychologist in Homes for the Feeble-

haviour, and is the hall-mark of his being Minded, Homes for the Young Deilinquent,

ready to take his place as a normal citizen and Mental Hospitals, will be anticipated

again. In the State Home in which I from what has already been said about

stayed, the life was very free and seemed mental examination in schools and courts.

happy, and the relationship between the In the Stockton Mental Hospital I was

authorities and patients most friendly. So particularly impressed by the capacity of

that this hurry to be put on the hospital the personnel in general, the air of comfort

list, in that institution at any rate, was pervading the whole institution, and the

obviously not due to any desire to escape. evidences of concern for adjustment of rou-

In the hospital itself, those who had tine to conditions of individual patients. It

recently been operated upon spoke frankly may be well to repeat that every patient in

and happily about it. They showed all the every institution is early examined and

normal interest in their condition that one their intelligence quotient noted (in insane

finds in a recovering surgical case, and cases where possible), with any subsequent

would with pride display their scar with deviation detected; and this, together with

slender encouragement.

temperamental assessments (in which Dr.

Whatever the social dangers and difficul- Ordahl of Sonoma has evolved a very

ties may be in regard to sterilization for interesting technique), is constantly re-

the mental defective-and it seems clear ferred to by all who have contact with the

from California that with careful work these case.

may be reduced to a minimum-no such As regards the operations, the institu-

objections can be urged in regard to the tions vary; in some one surgeon is respon-

recovered insane. For them, when they sible for most of the work done. In others,

understand what sterilization means-that each medical officer takes his or her turn.

it will leave unaffected normal married rela- Outstanding work has been done at the

tions, but will release them from the respon- Stockton Mental Hospital, where the Direc-

sibility of an increasing family-it can have tor, Dr. Clark, has from the beginning left

only beneficial results; and I had the oppor- this in the hands of Dr. Margaret Smythe,

tunity of seeing patients who attributed the whose skilful technique is now so well

40 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

known that many operators come to see her in this method when the real objectives are

work.

kept in view from the start, namely (i) the

A technical medical description of the safeguarding of posterity, (2) the lightening

types of vasectomy and salpingectomy has of the present burden of misery, by prevent-

recently been published in the States, and a ing procreation and enabling trained, re-

number of reprints (carefully illustrated) covered patients to lead as nearly normal a

will shortly be available here, through the life as possible with a maximum of personal

kindness of the Committee on Maternal liberty, under the safeguards which steri-

Health, New York. It is enough for the lization creates.

general public to say that these two opera- The most striking evidence of success is

tions are those exclusively used in Cali- yet to be mentioned, in that the anticipated

fornia, and for males as well as females a opposition of the Hebrew and Roman Catho-

general anaesthetic is customary.

lic communities has, in the former case

As Mr. Paul Popenoe, working for Mr. disappeared, and in the fatter no longer

Gosney's foundation, has already published causes obstruction.

a most successful analysis of the various

categories concerned,' it is unnecessary to For the information on which this survey is

repeat here his findings, particularly inas- based I am indebted to the Assistant Director of

much as they should soon be available in this country in book form. But it may not be out of place to say a word about the data

the State Department of Institutions, Sacramento, California, who explained the present law and the method by which all sterilization operations under the law come up for the sanction of the Director,

on which they are based. In every institu- and also of the Director of the State Department

tion I was given the opportunity of examining the records kept of patients, and I was struck with the completeness of the data available, from the moment the first

of Public Health. Further to Dr. Butler, Director of Sonoma State Home for the Mentally Defective, at Eldridge, who allowed me to stay in the Home, and who, with his staff, including social workers, gave me every facility for study. Dr. Clark,

contact is made with a patient till the last on which the responsible social worker hears from him or her.

Director of the Stockton Mental Hospital, allowed me to stay in the Hospital, and Dr. Margaret Smythe (who has been in charge of sterilization work there since the beginning) gave me all

SUMMARY

possible information. To Dr. and Mrs. Fenton, of the Whittier State School, to the Assistant

California brings out clearly the fact that sterilization legislation is only an instru-
ment; and that its social value depends

Director of the Norwalk State Hospital, to the Chairman of the Psychopathic Court and Mrs. McCracken of the Psychopathic Hospital and after-care organization in Los Angeles I owe my

wholly on the way in which it is used.

thanks for cordial help. Also to persons outside

The importance of slow and careful popular education is brought out.
The value (though it may at first appear a hindrance) of working on a voluntary

the Institutions: Mr. Astredo and Mrs. Bray,
Chief Probation Officers, San Francisco; the social workers attached to the Sonoma Home and Stockton Mental Hospital; the social workers attached to the central probation office in Los Angeles. I

basis, is clear, as is also the possibility am grateful for information also given by the

of securing a widespread public co-operation

Director of Child Guidance Work in Los Angeles, and Dr. Rosanoff, Professor Frans, and Dr. Gow

3 Sterilization in California series of pamphlets; Human Betterment Foundation, 26, North Marengo

and Dr. Laws. Finally, to Mr. E. S. Gosney and Mr. Paul Popenoe, who put all the resources of

Avenue, Pasadena, California. These may also be the office of the Human Betterment Foundation at

consulted in this Society's library.

my disposal and helped me in every way.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 1.

