MENTAL HEALTH SURVEY IN A RURAL AREA
A preliminary report*

By W. MAYER-GROSS, M.D., M.R.C.P.
Crichton Royal, Dumfries

T HE present report is based on a survey cedure, the number of available beds, en-

which aimed at ascertaining the men- lightenment of doctors, etc. Moreover, the

tally abnormal persons in the popula- less severe cases of mental abnormality living

tion of a rural area. One can think of many within the community are, from the point other ways of assessing the mental health of of view of mental health, much more im-

a sample population, for instance, by de- portant than those within hospitals.

scribing progress in industry, housing, educa- During the last thirty years the interest

tion, working conditions, community life, of psychiatrists has shifted from the major

etc. This was and is the procedure of the psychoses, statistically relatively rare occur-

social surveys initiated in this country by rences, to the milder and borderline cases,

pioneers of progress such as Charles Booth the minor deviations from the normal

and Seebohm Rowntree. Their work sprang average. Their dependence on social condi-

from concern about slums and poverty in tions and their influence on the social life of

large industrial centres. Dr. Caradog-Jones, the patient himself, of his family and of the

in his Merseyside Survey, and others, gave community, have been studied. This has led

these social studies a scientific foundation. to some measure of understanding of the

His work contains chapters on epileptics and human aspect of certain social problems

other chronic invalids; but abnormals-one which in any material study of social life is

would think-can only be of secondary so difficult to assess. Thus, psychiatry, one

interest in an inquiry dealing with the life of the youngest branches of medicine, has for

of the average population.

many years taken a greater interest in the

As a kind of forerunner of the social sur- social side of its subject than many older

veys of our days, the Statistical Account of medical specialities.

Scotland has to be mentioned. Its last edition It is, therefore, not by chance that

was published in I84I. It was drawn up by psychiatrists believe themselves able to

the ministers of the Church, each recording assess the mental qualities of sample popula-

the life of his parish. Industries, commerce tions, using their clinical experience and

and trade, prices and wages, amenities and nomenclature. But it is not claimed that

important events are carefully reported and psychiatric surveys can be compared with

sundry other noteworthy facts. Among them the broad and comprehensive social surveys

was the number of " fools," " insane," previously mentioned. The psychiatrist

" fatuous persons " and idiots for which the looks at the complex fabric of social life from

parish had to provide.

one angle only. The facts he tries to assess

This was probably the first survey of the are more subjective, less tangible and less

prevalence of mental cases in this country, definite. While he considers them essential

certainly the last based on intimate know- and close to the roots of social conditions-

ledge of the population. Later statistics, good or evil-others may think of them as

here and in most other countries, relied on casual and unimportant.

the mental hospital admission rate, a figure The evils of urbanisation were mentioned

dependent on public prejudice, legal pro- as inspiring the large-scale surveys in town-

* Paper read before the Eugenics Society on March x6th, 1948.

ships. Psychiatric surveys have, with a few notable exceptions, been carried out in

I40

MENTAL HEALTH SURVEY IN A RURAL AREA

country districts. This is not because of any the net loss by migration, hence the

greater urgency, or because a larger number stationary figure of inhabitants. The migra-

of abnormals was suspected, but because tion is the district's tcontribution to the

rural populations are, as a rule, more static, general exodus from the land setting in " on

people are better known to one another and a national scale about i88o as a result of

especially to persons in authority and to the import of American foodstuffs" (G. M.

other key persons, so that fuller information Trevelyan). Trevelyan adds: " The later

should be available. Islands with certain Victorians looked on with indifference at this

traditions and characteristics of language, tremendous social disaster as a natural and

like Bornholm in the Baltic Sea, used by therefore acceptable outcome of Free Trade,

E. Stromgren, are especially suitable for a and did nothing to check it at all."

census of abnormals.

The first inference of the migration figure

The area of our own survey can be re- on our survey must be that it can hardly

garded as a natural unit, bounded by very serve as a basis for working out the incidence,

sparsely populated hills and moors to the in an average population, of certain types of

North and East, by the sea and a national mental illness presumed to be hereditary in

boundary to the South. The country ad- nature; nor can it be used to calculate the

joining the West is much poorer farm land expectancy of becoming a victim of this or

and less densely populated. More than 30 that mental affliction: too many subjects

per cent of the male population was in I93I have probably left the district before reach-

engaged in agnculture, by far the largest ing the age of susceptibility. Others whose

number in one occupation. There are several mental abnormality existed from birth or

small centres of industry, quarrying, stone- started in an early age will probably have

cutting, textile industry, food manufacture stayed behind. In short, we are dealing with

and coal-mining on the northernmost edge a " residual population," and this has to be

of the county. The main town of the county kept in mind if the results are compared

and certain parishes of suburban character with those of similar surveys in other

were excluded from the survey. It can be countries.

maintained that the area represents a fair While, thus, the value of our findings for

sample of many rural districts in England genetic research seems questionable, their

and Scotland.

interest from the social and economic point

Besides the relatively easy access to per- of view is increased. The survey was under-

sonal information, the homogeneity and the taken at a time when, under the pressure of

representative character of the area, there war, the slump in farming, prolonged for 6o

are other reasons for studying the mental years, came to what then appeared a tem-

health of rural populations in this county. porary end. A similar temporary improve-

The population of our area appeared to be ment occurred during the first World War.

relatively stable because the number of in- This time, however, for reasons which do not

habitants, about 56,ooo, has hardly changed require explanation, the vital necessity of a

since the beginning of the century. This im- prosperous home agriculture in peace-time

pression, however, was misleading. Accord- has been realised by the authorities. An

ing to the Registrar-General of Scotland's economic depression lasting for decades is to

estimate, not less than I4,000, that is, one- be reversed by assured prices for agricultural

quarter of the present inhabitants, have produce, by re-equipment and reconstruc-

migrated from the district since I9OI. If the tion in housing, in communications and in

district is taken together with the group of many other fields. It is obviously of great

counties in the Scottish Lowlands to which importance to know something about the

it belongs, this larger area lost more than people who are to manage and carry forward

half of its mean population by migration in this process of material recovery, not only

the sixty years before I93I. The excess of as to their numbers, but also as to their

births over deaths has just counterbalanced human qualities.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Before discussing the method and some results a second finding of vital statistics is to be considered: the change in age distribution while the exodus from the land was in progress. There were, according to the Registrar-General, in the group of lowland counties, of which our district forms a part, 7,000 more persons living over the age of 65 in I93i, and 45,000 less under 20, than 6o years' earlier. This change in age structure and its social and economic implications he regards as alarming when the future prosperity of the area is being considered. It is far more serious than in the neighbouring urban and industrial regions. " It is evident that a community consisting of a disproportionate preponderance of old people is one that cannot hope to share in any industrial revival of the country " (Kyd, I946).
The last sentence does not only refer to agriculture, but also to the small industries demanded by many economists as an important supplement in rural districts. It also applies to the important r6le of the countryside as the place of recruitment for workers, managers and members of the professional classes who during the last hundred years have increased the population of the industrial towns. A steady flow, not only of numbers, but also of fresh blood, intelligence, enterprise, went from the open country into the cities. This has continued in face of a fall of the birth-rate to about one-half what it was in I87I. Rural populations have been and probably always will be an important source of renewal of town populations. If this source deteriorates or dries up it must have important consequences for our general industrial efficiency. This lends further interest to the study of the health, and e,pecially the mental health, of rural populations.
Method of the Survey
The procedure in the Scottish investigation was modelled on that of Str6mgren in his survey of the Danish island of Bornholm. He lived in the district as a doctor of the local hospital and got in touch with the key persons of the island. He searched the records of hospitals and almshouses for patients belonging to the area.

The records of the local mental hospital,
where most patients from the area have been
treated for the last IOO years, provided a nucleus of cases from which our own survey
was started. The social worker began her investigation by enquiring about patients dis-
charged during the last ten years and about the relatives of those still in hospital. Thanks to the collaboration of the County Medical Officer of Health contact was made with the Local Government Officers who are also
Public Assistance Officers and Sanitary In-
spectors, and with the former, now superseded, Inspectors of the Poor. The interest of the county's Director of Education assured access to teachers and schools;
equally valuable was the use we could make of the results of an intelligence test given to all school-children at the age of eleven.
This test, introduced in I937, is the Moray
House Test, standardised for Scottish children. As a rule we considered as suitable for
inclusion in the survey the children who scored less than an I.Q. of 8o, but in all cases the present or former teacher was consulted as well as other informants.
The moral support given to the enquiry by the Board of Control was helpful in gaining the co-operation of district nurses,
welfare officers, N.S.P.C.C. officers, and other officials or semi-officials. Ministers of
the Churches could be interested and so
were certain private persons known to have extensive knowledge of the population.
The value of information gathered from these different sources naturally varied a great deal from person to person and from parish to parish. Assessing the judgment and reliability of the witnesses was one of the foremost tasks of the worker in the field, as well as confirming the facts on which his or her information was based; contradictory views had to be weighed before reaching a decision. Many preliminary diagnoses had to be corrected in the light of new information coming, for instance, from a neighbouring district; and judgment on cases with too scanty information had to be suspended.
Str6mgren, mainly interested in the major psychoses among the population of 46,ooo of his island, visited and examined most of

MENTAL HEALTH SURVEY IN A RURAL AREA

his cases personally. In a district of Balti-- and is, in fact, often only an approximation

more, on the other hand, where the John to what could result from a thorough

Hopkins School of Hygiene carried out an examination and evaluation of the person

urban survey, most of the evidence was based included. But in the circumstances it seemed

on social workers' reports, or on other circum- the best and most reliable method.

stantial evidence. Only a restricted number From the commonly used clinical diagnoses

of cases were seen by the psychiatrist. There twenty-two applicable to an enquiry of this

is no doubt that examination by a psychia- kind were selected. Some of them refer

trist would be the most desirable supplement merely to symptoms which were expected to

and the most reliable check of indirect in- be easily recognised, such as stammer, chorea,

formation. Nothing of this kind has been enuresis; the majority are the generally

attempted in our district, mainly because it used groupings of psychiatry based mainly

would have meant in most cases an intrusion on the psychological conduct of the patient.

into the privacy, which might endanger the This also applies to the grading of the intel-

smooth working of the survey. The inclusion lectually subnormals which form almost one-

of the minor abnormalities in their different half of our diagnoses. As in a considerable

disguises in such visits would have made the proportion of our cases under fifteen an in-

work most unpopular. Even with the telligence test had been carried out, one was

greatest tact and discretion it would have on relatively safe ground here, that is, in

been very difficult to find a reason or pretext 7I per cent of all cases in which the diagnosis

for such visits from a psychiatrist.

of backwardness and mental deficiency was

Examination of every person in a sample made.

population arranged by the authorities seems the only way out. It would, however, have yielded much less reliable results because the unavoidable publicity would have led to deliberate withholding of cases and facts.

The field of subnormality was enlarged towards the normal by including the dull and
backward with an I.Q. between 8o and 70.
This has, to our knowledge, not been attempted by other observers. In view of the

Some of the American workers, using preponderance of high-grade mental de-

similar indirect ways of enquiry, thought it ficiency found in rural districts by E. 0.

necessary to mirror the variety of informa- Lewis, the inclusion of these cases seemed of

tion obtainable in different cases in a great special interest.

variety of diagnoses, some of them with

very little medical or psychiatric meaning. Results of the Survey

To keep the scope of an investigation like Turning to a summary of our findings (see

this within its proper limits and to make its table), we decided that 5,105 persons should

results comparable with similar work it is be included as abnormals, being 9 per cent

desirable to arrive in each case at a clearly of the total population. Although in keeping

defined diagnosis, or, if two or more diagnoses with the idea of the " psychopathic tenths"

are needed, to consider one as primary. In of popular writers, the proportion is above

a relatively small number, with well-estab- the average of 7 per cent found in the com-

lished mental deviation, diagnosis was not parable American survey of Williamson

possible and they were included under County in Tennessee. In certairr parts of this

" undiagnosed." In an even smaller group large and prosperous county, however, which

abnormalities were suspected, but could not " have been subjected to special study," the

be established with sufficient certainty. They rate of cases per hundred of population rose

were listed as " suspected." Both groups up to I2 per cent.

together represent 6-3 per cent of the Examining the nine diagnostic sub-

material.

divisions into which the original 22 diagnoses

This effort at fixing a diagnostic label, were telescoped for the purpose of tabulation

despite the vagueness and discrepancy of we have no comparable results from other

available information, may appear arbitrary workers to check our large rate of dull and

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

backwards of 28 5 per thousand. One-third in I935-36 by eight psychiatrists, who per-

of the figure of i,6o6 refers to children under sonally saw every suspected case within

15, most of whom have been tested. The populations numbering in all over 400,000.

diagnosis of dullness among adults may be With our method of case finding, alcoholism

incorrect in some instances: but where it was relatively easy to ascertain, while the

errs, it errs in favour of the subject, placing underlying abnormality of which it fre-

what is in fact a tolerably adapted high- quently is only a symptom often remained

grade defective among the dullards. The doubtful. The rate of 39 is similar to that

problem of adaptability of these cases under found in Tennessee; the much higher mid-

the present economic conditions will be dis- European figure being influenced by the

cussed presently.

habits of Bavaria, where many of the samples

The rate of incidence of mental deficiency, were collected.

I5X6 per i,ooo, is high if compared with
the mean figure of I049 found in I927 by E. 0. Lewis in three English rural districts. The difference is significant and far beyond
expectation as a sampling error. Here, again, one-third belongs to our best ascertained group of under I5; correction of

The incidence of epilepsy, I 7- per i,ooo of population, is definitely higher than that in Bornholm and in Finland (standard error of differences +0o2). In Tennessee epileptics were not assessed under a separate diagnosis.
European surveys omitted the psychiatric
conditions of old age, which, because of the

possible mistakes would rather tend to increasing longevity of the population, are

increase the figure than to reduce it.

now of special interest. From the age dis-

Under the heading neurotics and psycho- tribution table of the Tennessee survey an

paths we have put together all milder non- approximate rate of 3 per I,000 can be

intellectual deviations from normality, in- calculated, which is one-half only of our

cluding maladjusted children as well as finding of 6 for the same group.

hysteria and other neuroses disguised as Summing up this bird's-eye view of the

physical illness. The rate of I9 per I,000 results of our enquiry it can be stated that,

is very close to the findings in Tennessee, in spite of the relative superficiality of our

which was 20 7, and to a figure compiled case-finding method, the number of mental

from I5 investigations of small sample health problems of all kinds is high compared

populations in Germany and Switzerland, with the findings in similar work here and

which was 20 8.

abroad. There was half as much mental

The incidence of affective and schizo- deficiency disclosed as in rural England 20

phrenic psychoses has been studied by many years ago. All psychoses in which hereditary

observers in different countries. Affective factors play a part, affective and schizo-

psychoses show considerable variation of in- phrenic psychoses and epilepsy were found

cidence. The high figure of 3 5 per I,000 to be more frequent than in rural districts

in our survey surpasses that of the Bornholm abroad. On the other hand, afflictions pos-

survey, which was conducted with much sibly due to environmental stress, such as

greater thoroughness. The difference is psychopathy and alcoholism, are as numerous

statistically significant. One-quarter of our as in the populations available for com-

cases suffered from involutional melancholia, parison.

an affliction supposed to be relatively fre-

quent in Scotland. The proportion of schizo- Cases Below Age of Fifteen

phrenia is also high. It is only exceeded by For a more detailed analysis I propose to

the compiled figure from Germany and discuss the cases below the age of I5. Their

Switzerland, which may be due to different number (see table) represents between one-

criteria of diagnosis. Schizophrenia in our fourth and one-fifth of the total and is just

area occurred in an almost identical fre-. above 2 per cent of the total population,

quency with urban and rural samples in but more than ii per cent of the school

Finland. The Finnish census was carried out population. The latter figure and the other

MENTAL HEALTH SURVEY IN A RURAL AREA

145

rates calculated with reference to the number siderable number had undergone the intelli-

of school-children are slightly too high gence test and the test results were known.

because of a small number of children below Ascertainment was, therefore, almost as

school age included in the material. Thanks complete as in the under-I5s. WVhat was

to the help of the education authorities, and their social position at the time of survey?

the teachers' co-operation, our information Exactly two-thirds of the 8i6 subnormals

in this group is much more complete than were at the time of the survey either fully

in the rest of the material, the proportion of employed or working in the house as house-

undiagnosed cases being much smaller. From wives. We have also data on the steadiness

the social point of view, the mental health of work record, although less complete.

of the children born in a country district is However, only one-fifth of the subnormals

no doubt of great interest. They will have to between I5 and 24 were reported to have an

carry through the programme of economic and unsteady work record, 29 being in need of

social recovery initiated during the last few institutional treatment.

years while our investigation was in progress. The comparison of the two groups of

Columns 2 & 3 of the table show the dullards and defectives suggests that under

telescoped diagnoses and their rate per I,OOO the present conditions of labour shortage on

school-children.

the land subnormals can easily lead a useful

Compared with the total material the rate life in the community. Their handicap will

of dullards is more than doubled, that of the be little noticed after leaving school and

mental defectives almost doubled. The probably forgotten in later life. This is

absolute figures, founded on the teachers' certainly one important factor explaining

estimates and, in children over ii, on test the smaller figure of subnormality in the

results as well, do not lend themselves to adult population.

exaggeration. They form the biggest single item, over 70 per cent of the abnormal cases found among children. If imbeciles and idiots are omitted, 8* i per cent of school population represents the subcultural group
of defectives of Dr. Lewis, a figure which agrees well with the estimate of this group
by the Ministry of Education.

Maladjusted children are often the precursors of neurosis and psychopathy and are listed under this heading. The number is
in the same range as that of the total, but is
twice the official estimate of the Minister of Education. Child guidance clinics have recently been opened in the district to deal with this problem. Among the maladjusted

One can think of three possible explana- are included 20 cases with the secondary

tions for the higher proportion of dullards diagnosis of dullness. The group also includes

and defectives among the children if com- 45 children with speech defect, stammer, etc.

pared with the adults. The difference may It is difficult to suggest help for their handi-

either be an artefact due to the fuller in- cap except by a travelling speech therapist.

formation about the children from the Among the organic group are I9 cases of

educationists; or dullards and defectives chorea as primary or secondary diagnosis.

may adapt themselves so well after leaving Five per cent of all the children have a

school that their abnormality cannot be de- chronic physical handicap, including deaf-

tected; or, thirdly, the greater incidence in ness, blindness or other crippling afflictions,

children may be a real one, perhaps con- besides being mental problems.

nected with a general lowering of the nation's Turning from the medical to the social

intelligence so much discussed recently.

conditions of these children and their families

To test the second theory, that of adapt- and homes, we find, as one would expect,

ability of the subnormals, we have made use that the majority come from the occupational

of the next higher age group (15-24). In group of semi-skilled and unskilled workers.

this group of I,I07 cases we found 8i6 dul- There is a definitely greater number of farm

lards and defectives, a proportion very workers and labourers among the parents of

similar to that in the school-children. A cohi- these children than among the adult cases.

I46 THE EUGENICS REVIEW,

As in so many formerly depressed rural

districts, housing conditions of the labouring

population are deplorably bad. No up-to-

date record exists of the average number of

persons per room. Many derelict dwellings

at the time of the survey were still in use

and had not been condemned. This explains

why only 24 of our cases live in officially

condemned houses. Thirty-nine per cent

of the children in whom this could be

assessed live in overcrowded houses, three

and more persons to one room. In about one-

third of those of whom we received informa-

tion about the home conditions these were

characterised as " bad," i.e. dirty or dilapi-

dated or verminous or with insufficient

furniture.

The I,I63 children in our group come from

83I they

families, i.e. I'4
are, therefore,

children not the

per family; offspring of

limited numbers of parents, but are sprinkled

throughout the population. Nevertheless a

majority of 56 per cent have three brothers

and sisters or more, and 33 per cent have

more than five siblings. In 7 per cent of the

material we have no information on this

point. Fifty-seven per cent of the mothers

are still in the childbearing age. The fer-

tility of these subnormals and abnormals is

certainly above the average of the popula-

tion.

In Io per cent the children or their siblings

were neglected. In one-third of the cases

there was a report of sexual immorality in

the family, promiscuity or incest of parents.

In over 6oo cases the parents were included

among the number of abnormals and in

about 300 cases one or more brothers and

sisters. On the other hand, the ratio of

illegitimate children in the material (I3 per

cent) is not much above the ratio of the district calculated from the Registrar-General's

data as being II per cent of births.

The character of the family life, as it

appears to the outside world, could be

estimated in 8o per cent of our child material. In over 50 per cent it was described as har-'

monious, and in only I4 per cent as dis-

turbed by frequent quarrelling and violence,

leading in some cases to disruption.
The relative contentment and absence of

aggression in this group is also shown in the
low figure of juvenile delinquents-55 cases
only; an even smaller number of offenders was found in the next age group (15-24).
Another sign of the contented and inactive outlook in these families is the small number of siblings of our cases who have migrated from the county. We ascertained this figure in 94 per cent of the age group and found migration only 86 times (-7-4 per cent), a figure probably still too high because it may include in some instances the same migrating siblings more than once.
Summing up the findings in our youngest age group, it can be stated that subnormality is the main mental health problem among the children in this rural district, closely followed in importance by emotional maladjustment. Dull, defective and maladjusted children are to a large extent the offspring of families of the labouring population. The fertility of these families is above average; they often live under very unfavourable conditions, physical and moral, in overcrowded dwellings. On the whole, they seem to be happy and content and show little sign of resentment or protest against their life situation.
It would, however, be misleading to conclude this report, and especially the part dealing with children, in this sombre note of peaceful gloom.
It his to be remembered that our enquiry only surveyed the subnormals and abfiormals, who, of course, only form a small minority. There is no reason to doubt the mental health of the great majority of the children.
Proposed Remedies
Turning to the remedies the psychiatrist can suggest for his disquieting findings, I would like to quote one more figure: 330, or one-third, of these abnormal children are in need of special schooling without receiving it. They now attend ordinary classes and their presence in smaller or larger numbers must necessarily cast a shadow on the teachers' work and on the education of the healthy. - In some schools the dullards form a large minority, frustrating the school-

MENTAL HEALTH SURVEY IN A RURAL AREA

master's efforts. The fact that the subnormals do relatively well after leaving
school in practical work on the land points the way to the education they need. First
and foremost they should be taught the
daily routine of a civilised life: how to wash and keep clean, how to dress and eat properly, how to make use of the appliances in
the house, of the street, of leisure time, how
to be helpful and honest and to live as
members of a community-all things which a normal child of normal parents learns as a matter of course at home; but which are not so easily picked up by the subnormal child and are often not practised in the families of subnormals. The educational emphasis has to be put on activities of a practical kind, which, however, does not
mean on arts and crafts, but on the simple prerequisites of ordinary life in the country. Reading, writing and arithmetic should be secondary subjects and should not be pushed beyond the ability of the child.
A boarding school or home is needed for those maladjusted children whose home conditions are inadequate, as suggested in the Education Act, I945. Preparations for such a home are on the way, but in a county without its own mental defective colony it is most important to prevent such a home from being flooded by defectives and dullards.
As to the adults, a policy is needed not only to stop the exodus of the active and intelligent, but to add to the " residual population " by attracting fresh incomers to the rural communities. Experts have fully discussed this problem and suggested solutions on paper; since the end of the war some start has been made in our area with improved housing and- afforestation on a larger scale, the latter attracting a desirable type of incomer. Speaking without expert knowledge in such matters, I venture to suggest that the scarcity of farms which are owned by the cultivator and can be developed as a family property, prevents the settling of young and progressive people; equally, the absence of marketgardening and other intensive methods of cultivation doubtless reduces the prospects of the enterprising individualist so suitable to life on the land.

Light industries are needed giving those children of the worker who are unsuited for farming an opportunity of apprenticeship and of permanent work; such industries would at the same time provide the seasonal labour without which certain types of farming cannot prosper.
The last word in all these changes must be with the economist and the politician. Some may find drastic changes unnecessary because the area is now a prosperous one, thanks to guaranteed prices, wages and subsidies. But it should be remembered that material prosperity alone cannot reverse the effect on human qualities of sixty years' depression
and neglect. It would, however, be unjust to deny
certain signs of recovery and of the increasing consciousness noticeable in the human and social sphere. One of them was the widespread understanding and friendly support of this survey. I doubt if it could have been concluded so smoothly and successfully while the depression still lasted. If it could in a small way hasten the revival of country life at a turning point of rural history, the sad facts it has revealed will have been worth while collecting.
REFERENCES
Kaila Martti, " Ueber die Durchschnitts-Haufigkeit der Geisteskrankheiten & des Schwachsinns in Finnland," Acta Psychiat. & Neur. (I942), 17, 47.
Kyd, J. G., Some Thoughts on Scotland's Changing Population. Report of Conference held by the Scottish Council of Social Service, Edinburgh, 1946.
Lemkau, P., Tietze, C., and Cooper, M., " Mental Hygiene Problems in an Urban District," Mental Hygiene (I94I/3), 25, 624; 26, 100, 275; 27, 279.
Lemkau, P., Tietze, C., and Cooper, M., " A Survey of Statistical Studies on the Prevalence and Incidence of Mental Disorders in Sample Populations," Public Health Reports (I943), 58, I909. Washington.
Lewis, E. O., Report on an Investigation into the Inci-
dence of Mental Deficiency in Six Areas. London,
1929.
Roth, W. F., and Luton, F. H., " Tb,e Mental Health Programme in Tennessee," American Journ.
Psychiat. (I943), 99, 662. Special Educational Treatment, Ministry of Education
Pamphlet No. 5. London, 1946. Statistical Account of Scotland, by the Ministers of the
Respective Parish,es. Edinburgh and London,
1841Stromgren, E., " Beitrage zur Psychiatrischen Erb-
lehre," Acta Psychiat. & Neurol. (I938), Suppl. 19. Trevelyan, G. M., English Social History. London, 1944.

i48 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

RESULTS OF A MENTAL HEALTH SURVEY IN A RURAL AREA OF SCOTLAND

I
Diagnosis

2345
in IO,141 per I,ooo in total per I,ooo school- school- popula- of popuchildren children tion lation
(56,23I)

6
E. 0. Lewis
I927,
rural

7
Bornholm, rural

8 Tennes-
see,
rural

9
Germany and
Switzerland,
rural and
urban

I0
Finland, rural and urban

Dull and back-

ward ... 599 59.I i,6o6 28-5

Mental

Deficiency

279 27.1

878 I5.6 10-49

8-2

Neurosis and

Psychopathy 217

21.4 9,091

19*4

207 20-8

AlfectiveI

Psychoses ...

-

199 3-5

2.7 1.7 2.3 0-3

Schizophrenia

_ 236 4.2

3-3 I.7 7.7 4 3

Alcoholism ... - - 220 3-9

3-2 8-6

Epilepsy ...

13

1.3

85 1I7

1I0

4.2 1,0

Senile-arterio-

sclerotic

psychoses ...

339 6-o

Other organic

psychoses ... I6 I-6 126 2*2

Undiagnosed ...

II

I.*'

174 3.0

Suspected ...

27

2.7

151

27

Total ... I,I63

114-3 5,05

90.7

Findings in persons under I5 (columns 2 and 3), in the total population (columns 4 and 5) and in similar surveys for comparison (columns 6-I0)

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY
Edited by Warder C. Allee, the University of Cbicago. In the October 1948 number: INGESTION OF COLLOIDALMATERIAL AND WATER BY GOLDFISH. By W. C. ALLu= and PETER FwsA. THE EFFECTS OF THYROXINE AND ANTITHYROID COMPOUNDS ON THE SYNTHESIS OF PIGMENT GRANULES
IN CHICKMELANOBLASTS CULTURED IJV VITRO. By CLENT L. MARKzRT. RELATIONS OF AN ENDOGENOUS DAILY RHYTHMCITY IN THE FIDDLER CRAB, UCA, TO TEMPERATURE. By
FRARK A. BROWN, Jr., and H.MARGUEEITEWEBB. PATTERNING OF CENTRAL SYNAPSES IN REGENERATION OF THE OPTIC NERVE IN TELEOSTS. By R. W. SPBaY. STUDIES ON THE RESPIRATION OF AN AMOEBA,MATORELLA4 PALESTINESIS. By K. Rmcn.
PHrSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGT is published quarterly in January, April, July and October Subscription $io a year Single copies $3 Canadian postage 20c. Foreign postage 48c.
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS, 5750 Ellis Avenue, CHICAGO
Eugeica Ebview, Vol. 4, No. a

