' Eugenics is the science which deals with all influences that improve the inborn qualities of a race; also
with those that develop them to the utmost advantage.'-SIR FRANCIS GALTON (1904)
The Eugenics Review
EDITORIAL OFFICES: THE EUGENICS SOCIETY - 69 ECCLESTON SQUARE * LONDON * SWI - VICTORIA 2091
Editorfor the Society: Mrs. K. Hodson

NOTES OF THE Q-UARTER

sessions was excellent, it is noteworthy that nonmembers heavily predominated in the audience. Members who, one would expect, should have a special interest in the proceedings did not attend in strength.

CONTENTS OF

JAPANESE FERTILITY

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

IN AN ARTICLE in the present issue of the

IT IS DESIRABLE that the editorial policy of REVIEW, Dr. Samuel discusses the decline in the

every journal should be reconsidered from time birth rate in Japan in recent years, and its im-

to time, and the Council of the Eugenics Society plications. In this connection, the opinions of

has recently given some attention to the format Japanese demographers, as expressed in their

of the REVIEW in the light of suggestions that current writings, are of some interest. One (Dr.

more original work might be published in its Muramatsu) describes it as very difficult to

pages. The result was a reaffirmation that among evaluate the role performed by government

its functions there should be included: (i) the measures in bringing down the rate, and surmises

making of comments on the general eugenic im- that the present low level could have been reached

plications of current developments of all relevant anyway-sooner or later-even if there had been

kinds, whether economic, political or scientific; no government-sponsored efforts at all. Never-

and (ii) the giving of succinct accounts of recent theless, he feels that official action has been

researches, in a form in which members of the beneficial in diffusing the knowledge and prac-

Society generally should be in a position to tice of family planning rapidly and extensively.

appreciate their significance.

This view of the part the government has played

Subject to these considerations, the REVIEW accords well with Dr. Samuel's analysis.

will from time to time publish both original Another writer from the same country (Dr.

scientific material and comprehensive summaries H. Mizushima) has drawn attention to the fact

of current researcrh and of accumulated know- that the net reproduction rate there has now

ledge in particular fields of inquiry.

fallen to below unity and speaks of the necessity

If any readers care to make particular sug- of raising its level if eventual depopulation is to

gestions concerning the contents of the REVIEW, be avoided. For technical reasons, it seems

the Editorial Committee will be glad to receive possible that the picture presented at the moment

them. by the reproduction rate may be unduly pessi-

Fellows and members of the Society are also mistic, and in any event those with memories

invited to comment similarly on the general of the scare in the 1930s about British

programmes for the two Symposia that have so depopulation will be rather sceptical of the

far been held. While the total attendance at the need for alarm at this stage. Moreover, the

1R-A

1

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Japanese population is even now expected to education in these countries if the "population

rise for some years, and any decline in total explosion" were to be checked.

numbers seems unlikely to begin before the end Dr. Mohiuddin Ahmed, in a detailed paper

of the twentieth century.

dealing with population growth at different

Amid these developments, it is of interest to levels of living, with density of population and

note that, according to Dr. M. Kimura there possible future shortage of land in certain parts

has been a considerable narrowing in the disper- of the globe, said that the rate of world increase

sion of fertility between occupational groups, had moved from 1 1 per cent a year during

even in the relatively short period 1955-60. 1930-40 to about 2 1 during 1960-62. Most of

Although traditional views are still held by some the growth was taking place in areas of acute

people in rural districts, the younger generation poverty amidst hunger and malnutrition, and

is being largely absorbed into industrial life in the rates of increase in these areas were out-

the cities and is conditioned to a small family pacing their rates of economic betterment. If

size. "With wage levels still insufficient to meet these areas were ever to improve their standards

prevailing material and cultural aspirations, a of living, their rates of growth must decrease.

continuation of the current low level of fertility Miss Kamudini Dandekar illustrated the

is in prospect, at least for the immediate problem by reference to India, which had accept-

future."

ed the need for population control. A programme

The views to which reference has been made involving clinics, the manufacture of contra-

were expressed at the World Population Con- ceptives and the acceptance of sterilization where

ference last year, and they emphasize the unique there were three or more children, had been

demographic position of Japan at the present drawn up. By 1966 it was hoped there would

time. Dr. Samuel rightly selects only some of be 12,000 family planning clinics and the aim

the features of the scene in that country as pro- was to reduce the birth rate to 25 per thousand

viding suitable lessons for India and other by 1973. At present it was 39, though in cities

nations.

like Bombay, Madras and Poona it was under 30.

Mrs. A. F. M. Ahmed spoke of the position

INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF UNIVERSITY WOMEN Conference, Brisbane, August 1965

in Pakistan. In the first years of that country's independence, in power politics, human resources were counted as a blessing to justify various social programmes, the necessity for new markets

MISS I. A. LAURENCE writes: The Conference and industrialization. In the mid-1950s the

theme was "The Impact of Population Change; intellegentsia realized the need for population

Social and Educational Implications". It was control. They now had a family planning scheme,

developed in addresses from seven distinguished on a voluntary basis, consisting of surveys

experts.

among those who were in receipt of Government

In her opening paper, Dr. Swaine Thomas medical help, the creation of groups of enlight-

traced the history ofthe study of population over ened people in the villages who would undertake

300 years since the time of John Graunt, dwelling education of their fellows and the setting up of

on the difficulties and uncertainties attached to family planning clinics (about 1,600 are now in

any estimate of world population. Estimates operation). So far, very few people had taken

indicated that the world population had doubled to family planning, and she instanced certain

itself in the 200 years from 1650 to 1850, doubled drawbacks to the plans, such as insufficient

again in the ninety years from 1850 to 1940, and, funds and the reluctance of the Government to

on the assumption of continuing trends, might have open propaganda.

again be doubled by 1980, a period of only forty Dr. Hilde Wander compared Indonesia with

years. The recent rapid growth was due to falling Western Germany, countries which had both

death rates in the under-developed countries suffered from war destruction and had had

while their birth rates still remained high. She rapid increases in population since, but in the

stressed the need for economic development and former it was all natural growth, whereas in

2

NOTES OF THE QUARTER

Germany about three-quarters of the increase than usual interest because it surveys "the

was due to immigration. This immigration was second post-war decade" and contrasts it with

political and non-selective, so that it had had the ten preceding years. The Report is of ample

little effect on the age-distribution of Germany's length and the text is accompanied by a com-

population. Indonesia was suffering all the prehensive set of tables and charts.

difficulties of a developing country with a large Much of the account is of a technical nature,

natural increase. West Germany, on the other especially in relation to farming, fishing, forestry,

hand, having got over her food, housing and economics and trade. It contains references not

other problems of accepting about ten million only to national planning but also to an Indica-

refugees into her war-disrupted economy, had tive World Plan for Agriculture Development

now expanded industrially.

upon which work is now being started. This

Professor E. W. Emmens described the role exercise sets out to show the levels of production,

ofthe International Planned Parenthood Federa- consumption and trade in produce that should

tion, whose views he to some extent represented, be attained by the developing countries by

and whose primary aim was to advance educa- 1975-and even 1985-if their economic and

tion in family planning and responsible parent- social objectives are to be realized. (Developed

hood. He outlined measures being taken in and centrally-planned economies will be con-

Singapore (for South-East Asia), Pakistan, sidered in terms of their impact on developing

Ceylon, Latin America, the United States, nations.) It will recommend a pattern of action,

Great Britain and Japan. He concluded with policies and measures appropriate to the

some observations on modem methods of birth achievement of this target. The Plan will be

control.

presented to a World Food Congress in 1968.

In the final paper, Dr. Jean Bourgeois-Pichat The Report contains a short section on nutri-

dealt with the relationship between cultural tional requirements, with two interesting tables

factors and demographic events. He discussed in which average daily supplies of calories and

social customs and taboos in various parts of proteins in each country are compared with

the world (defining "cultural order" as a set of estimated average needs. According to a recent

values common to a social group) and their document published jointly by an expert com-

effects on marriage, intercourse, reproduction, mittee of WHO and FAO, meeting the protein

mortality and migration (including urbaniza- requirements of man is "perhaps the most im-

tion). Of the three main factors affecting popu- portant nutritional problem that is still not fully

lation growth, migration was most clearly linked solved", especially in relation to children.

to cultural orders, fertility second and mortality According to the October issue of WHO

last. In conclusion he warned that all the cul- Chronicle, anything up to 9 per cent of children

tural orders were about to share one feature, under age five in the developing countries suffer

birth control; if easy and efficient contraceptive from severe protein deficiency disease, while

devices became available, reproduction might perhaps one-half have mild or moderate protein

drop to a dangerously low level. Would it be deficiency.

possible to establish new cultural orders to Members of the Eugenics Society will be

avoid the eventual disappearance of the human particularly interested in Chapter II in which

species?

the relative growth of population and production

during the past ten years is measured. The

THE STATE OF FOOD AND

world summary of these statistics is charted on

AGRICULTURE, 1965

the cover of the volume, and shows that for the

IT IS CUSTOMARY to review in these columns last six years the rates of increase of the two

the annual publications of the Food and Agri- elements have just kept pace with one another.

culture Organization of the United Nations Further charts on page 17 indicate that during

under the above title.* That for 1965 is of more this period agricultural production per head

actually fell in the developing countries-in

* Rome, 1965. Pp. xi+273. Price 37s. 6d.

Africa, Latin America and the Far East alike-

3

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

while rising steadily in the developed regions. Production itself grew at the same rate in both types of area. It is in the population growth that the difference lies, and in this respect the rate of increase is twice as high in the less favoured nations than in the more fortunate.
QUALITIES OF FREEDOM
"FREEDOM IS A U-word, and together with "human rights" can be used attractively in presenting an argument. Words of an opposite sense tend to be pejorative. When, therefore, A. V. Hill in his presidential address to the British Association in 1952 queried whether the rights of man could be held to include the right to unlimited reproduction, he might have appeared to some people to be suggesting a curb, and this might have tended to arouse unfavourable reactions. Sir Dugald Baird put the same case in a more encouraging light when, in a recent article in the British Medical Journal,* he suggested that mankind should be granted another freedom. In addition to the four proposed by Franklin D. Roosevelt (of speech, of worship, from want, from fear) he postulated "freedom from the tyranny of excessive fertility".
For Sir Dugald, this means making contraceptive advice freely available under the National Health Service and offering tubal ligation to women who have the desired number of children, leading in turn to more independence for the female sex and a greater use of their education and skill for the benefit of the national economy. Not only women would gain, however; the advantage to children is obvious and men too would gain by the general relief from overcrowding. To reduce the problem to its most succinct and elemental terms, might not Sir Dugald have asked for "freedom from pressure" by his fellow men?
THROMBOSIS AND THE PILL
IN AN ARTICLE in the British Medical Journal,t Illis, Kocen, McDonald and Mondkar discuss four cases in which arterial occlusive episodes developed in young women within a few weeks
* 13th November 1965, pp. 1141-8. t 13th November 1965, pp. 1164-6.
4

of starting on oral contraceptives. It was not, however, possible to draw any conclusions about a possible causal relationship between "the pill" and thrombosis; in two of the cases there had already been a similar episode before the taking of the pill began, and contrary to popular belief cerebral arterial occlusion is not altogether unknown among young persons.
A letter in the Lancet of the same date gave a report from the Committee on Safety of Drugs in which it is stated that approximately half a million women used oral contraceptives at some time during 1965. The committee estimate that on the average 400,000 used them continuously, and on this basis it is reckoned that, in a period of twelve months, thirteen deaths would be expected from cerebral thrombosis or embolism, coronary occlusion, pulmonary embolism or infarction and mesenteric infarction. The actual number of deaths from these causes among pilltakers was sixteen.
As the committee emphasize, no firm conclusion can be drawn from the very limited data so far available, but the inference for the present is that there can be no objection to the marketing of oral contraceptives. Without question, the future development of the situation will be watched with great care, but so far as we know at the moment there is very little to fear.
PRIMATE FOSSILS IN THE FAYUM
MR. DAVID PILBEAM writes: Since 1961 Professor Elwyn L. Simons of Yale University has been leading yearly fossil-collecting expeditions to the Fayum Depression, a desolate area on the edge of the Western Desert, some forty miles south-west of Cairo, UAR. The area is famous for the discovery of the archaic primates Propliopithecus, Moeripithecus, Apidium and Parapithecus, found by Markgraf during the first decade of this century, and described then by Schlosser and Osborne. These forms were, until recently, the earliest animals assignable with some certainty to the Higher Primate suborder Anthropoidea, the zoological group to which we and our ancestors, recent and ancient, belong. The last five years have seen an enormous increase in the number of specimens known from the Fayum, and the discovery of several

NOTES OF THE QUARTER

new genera as well as new species of previously definite about the relationships of Proplio-

known genera. The deposits are of Oligocene pithecus and Aegyptopithecus. However, Aegypto-

age, 30-40 million years old.

pithecus is an ancestral ape, and Propliopithecus

The Fayum deposits consist of sandstones is not an ancestral gibbon (as had been previously

and gravels, laid down by ancient seas, deltas suggested). Propliopithecus may be the earliest

and rivers. The fossil-collectors rely on erosion known primitive hominid, and the Fayum may

produced both by the wind and by their own be a sampling in time close to the bifurcation of

hand-powered brushes. A typical day involves the ancestral stocks of men and apes.

crawling across a wind-blown quarry for all

available daylight hours, one's face a few inches from the sand, hoping to sight one of those

SUCCESSFUL STRATEGY

precious primates. Difficult indeed to imagine DR. G. C. L. BERTRAM writes: The recent

when surrounded by the bleak emptiness of the agreement of certain London Boroughs finan-

desert that this was once lush tropical forest. cially to support the special work on problem

Upper jaws-normally rare in comparison to families of the Eugenics Society's subsidiary, the

mandibles in fossil assemblages-of Apidium and Marie Stopes Memorial Foundation, affords an

Parapithecus have been recovered, as well as occasion for referring to an important mode of

many additional lower jaws. It is now clear that leadership in a sophisticated society.

these two forms were closely related, that Propaganda, education, research and leader-

neither had much to do phylogenetically with ship have all been overlapping facets of the

fossil tarsioids, and that neither is related closely Society's activities for over half a century. But

to the ancestry of living Higher Primates. One the stress changes from decade to decade with

problem at least which has vexed palaeoanthro- changes in fashion, public opinion and social

pologists has been solved by the new Fayum necessity. It is also to be recognized-though

discoveries: the lower dental formula of Apidium some find it hard to accept-that in the United

and Parapithecus is neither 2.1.2.3. nor 1.1.3.3. Kingdom the mark or reward of successful

but 2.1.3.3. The medial incisors had been lost voluntary effort by a specialized society is that

from the Parapithecus type specimen. The most public opinion is at last convinced and Govern-

primitive of the new forms, and the most primi- ment takes over. The early work of the British

tive of known fossil Higher Primates, is Oligo- Social Biology Council (formerly the Social

pithecus, a tiny primate related perhaps to the Hygiene Council) on venereal diseases is a case

Eocene prosimian family Omomyidae. Aeolo- in point. Some may dare to hope a like "fate"

pithecus, so-called because of the wind erosion for the Family Planning Association, the

suffered by the type specimen during its 35- Abortion Law Reform Association, the Euthan-

million-year history, is thought by Simons to asia Legislation Society, even the Marriage

be related to the ancestry of the gibbons.

Guidance Council, to limit the present list to a

Perhaps the most exciting new find is that of particular area of interest. Arguments over the

several specimens of a new fossil ape, Aegypto- relative efficiency of private endeavour and

pithecus. Aegyptopithecus was gibbon-sized and nationalized welfare are relevant but will not

is probably the earliest known pongid, that is here be expounded.

belonging to the family of living and fossil apes. Consider in this light two related matters

Morphologically it appears to be ancestral to where the Eugenics Society subsidized activity

the Miocene Proconsul-Dryopithecus group that later to be taken over by a more substantial and

later gave rise to the modern great apes. Pro- less catholic voluntary body, and by local

pliopithecus and Moeripithecus are now known authorities.

to be synonyms. Because little is known of the In the 1920s the Council of the Eugenics

stratigraphical position of the new finds relative Society realized that in a modern society

to the original type specimens, and because our differential fertilities-the whole basis of poten-

knowledge of structural variability in these tial eugenic advance-could only be brought

forms is so meagre, it is difficult to say anything about by appropriate voluntary means when

5

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

effective, cheap and acceptable contraceptives had become universally available. The Society therefore spent much in the stimulation and support of research into contraceptive effectiveness, notably in the work of Dr. J. R. Baker at Oxford on spermicides. The Volpar series was the direct result. This important work was real pioneer effort, later to be taken over and extended until its evolutionary product to-day is the whole testing apparatus of the Family Planning Association and other testing laboratories. Is the time now ripe for an Industrial Research Association in the contraceptive field? Is contraception now an industry? The answer must be affirmative.
To take a second example: thirty years later, in the late 'fifties and early 'sixties, consider the growth of domiciliary birth control assistance. Pioneers in Newcastle upon Tyne and Southampton demonstrated how kindness and tact

could gain entry for medical women into the often squalid homes of the feckless. Sympathetic discussion and the provision of free contraceptives could result in a remarkable limitation of problem families, whose mothers were eager to do just that, given the right help.
The Eugenics Society quickly grasped the opportunity, subsidized this work substantially, and extended it to London through the Marie Stopes Memorial Foundation. It encouraged the calculation of the detailed cost of this contraceptive service against the saving to the community in grants and allowances for the children whose birth was avoided. And the figures are striking indeed.
The subsidization of personal service to those who needed it was throughout a tactic within the main strategy of promoting differential fertility of a favourable sort, and of persuading the public authorities to pay for its promotion.

6

