THE
EUGENICS REVIEW
THE EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE.
Held at the University of London, South Kensington, Saturday, March Ist, I9I3, under the presidency of MAJOR
LEONARD DARWIN.
TIIS Conference was organized by a Special Committee appointed by the Eugenics Education Society consisting of the following members: Mr. John Russell, chairman, E.E.S. Education Sub-Committee, headmaster King Alfred School; Mrs. T. Chambers, secretary, E.E.S. Education SubCommittee; Miss Creaton, headmistress, Penrith House School; Mrs. Gotto, hon. secretary, Eugenics Education Society; Mr. W. Hope-Jones, of Eton, member of E.E.S. Education Sub-Committee; Miss E. Lawrence, principal, Froebel Educational Institute; Mr. G. Lewis, headmaster, Torreano Avenue School; Mr. Nicholls, ex-president National Union of Teachers; Mr. K. Richmond, headmaster, West Heath School; Mr. M. Tagg, principal, Bedford Park Day Training School; Miss Tuke, principal, Bedford College; Miss Trench, member E.E.S. Education Sub-Committee; and Miss Wood, Cambridge Training College for Women. Its object was to provide opportunities for a discussion of the possibility of introducing eugenics among the moral lessons learnt at school. This possibility was suggested by the fact that a feeling has been growing for some time among the teaching profession that, in order to guard boys and girls against the many dangers which arise from their developing sexual instincts

2 EUGENICS REVIEW.
under existing social conditions, a knowledge of sexual hygiene should be made an integral part of their moral equipment. Many members of the Society feel most strongly that if teaching of the type suggested was to be given, its aim should be of a more lofty and altruistic kind than the desire for personal safety, whether moral or physical, and that such an aim is provided by the eugenic ideal.
With practical problems in pedagogy the Society does not concern itself, therefore in order to give effect to the view outlined above, it was thought desirable in the first instance to invite headmasters and headmistresses to meet for the open discussion of the subject, and to arrange for the delivery of a series of papers by persons qualified to assist them in their deliberations. The invitations to the Conference met with a quite unexpected proportion of acceptances, as more than goo applications for tickets of admission were receiVed from headmasters and* headmistresses. The papers read and the discussions which followed them are fully reported in this number of the REVIEW, and it only remains to call attention to the practical outcome of the Conference. In the first place the following resolution was passed: " That the Minister of Education be asked to receive a deputation requesting an enquiry as to the advisability of encouraging the presentation of the idea of racial responsibility to students in training and children at school." Secondly, it is hoped to organize a course of lectures for teachers, to be given during the winter months, in order to provide those interested in the subject with a thorough grounding in the science of eugenics and to instruct them in the nature and aims of a eugenic policy.
" THE EUGENIC IDEAL." By MAJOR L. DARWIN.
THIS conference has been organised by the Eugenics Education Society as an indirect consequence of the growing interest taken in educational circles in the question of sex-hygiene; that is, in considering what educational methods are best calculated to safeguard the young and the inexperienced against the many

EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE.

3

dangers connected with sex. Numerous enquirers have come to our office under the impression that sex-hygiene and eugenics are identical, which certainly they are not. But our Educational
Committee were thus led to feel that they would be playing a useful part in drawing up a list of books in which this difficult subject is wisely treated; a list which I now mention mainly to emphasise the fact that the ideal work on this topic has yet to be written. Now, I am not to-day armed with any mandate from my Society to express on their behalf any opinion concerning
sex-hygiene; except, perhaps, to endorse the views of our Educational Committee, who hold that it is essential that teachers should not be ignorant on such matters, and that the
passing on to their pupils of the knowledge they acquire is a matter only to be undertaken slowly, cautiously, and indirectly.
To this I may perhaps add mny own belief that ignorance seldom makes for safety. However, it does not lie with me to express
any dogmatic opinions whatever on these topics. But 1' am here to plead in the name of my Society, and with all the force at my command, that in all institutions where sex-hygiene is
taught, it ought to be taught in connection with the eugenic ideal; for not only would this subject thus be elevated and rendered less difficult, but at the same time you, the teachers, would be doing your best to ensure the future progress of the
race.
No doubt we shall be asked what is this eugenic ideal, this
principle we hold to be of such vital importance? The answer to this question cannot be given in a single sentence, because the meaning of words depends so greatly on the mental atmosphere into which they are received. The belief that man has been slowly developed from some lower form of life, or at all events from some primitive human type, came during last century to be held to be indisputable by all civilised communities. Now, this creed naturally led to the hope that this upward march of mankind would be continued in the future, and that our descendants would be better than ourselves, morally, mentally, and physically. And out of this hope sprang
the eugenic ideal.

4 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Evolution has no doubt been a very slow process, and some may feel discouraged by the thought that all we are justified in hoping for is a continuation of this upward movement at a snail's pace. The recent discovery of the remains of primitive man in Sussex under conditions proving that these bones had laid buried there for untold hundreds of centuries seems at first sight to confirm this dismal forecast. But, if there be grave cause for discouragement, it is not to be based on facts of this kind. Civilized man is different in many respects from the animals living in the wild, who are generally pure in breed. Men should rather be compared to a grey sand made up of innumerable little particles of all shades of colour, from black to pure white. And this sand, to which I am likening the innate qualities of man, is of such a nature that, whilst the colour of each grain can be changed but very slowly, yet there is nothing to prevent us from sifting out much that is black, and adding greatly to the white, so that the whole would quickly take on a brighter hue. In other words, science tells us that it is at all events possible to make each generation somewhat better than the preceding one, and thus up to a certain point to make fairly rapid racial progress. But science also tells us that a grave danger does exist, the danger that the lower elements of human nature-the black particles of our grev sand-are now being actually increased by our present social methods; and it is in any case undeniable that, if we look to the past, we see that many a nation of the first rank, when apparently rapidly advancing in civilisation, has begun to decay from unseen causes, and has in time so far fallen from its high estate as to
utterly cease to count as one of the factors making for the world's progress. A determination that, if we can help it, this shall not be the fate of our nation must be the sentiment shared by all who are inspired by the eugenic ideal.
But if, according to our creed, we are bound to strive to ensure the advancement of our race in the future, is it not necessary, so we may be asked, for us to state clearly whither we are endeavouring to march ? Must we not describe our ideal man; and, if we hold that society ought to be composed of many different kinds of human beings, must we not also give some

EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE.

5

indication of the proper proportion for each type? To this we may reply by asking in our turn whether the building of Utopias in the past has ever in truth done much towards helping man on his upward path? The better plan is rather to copy the example set to us by Nature, and to advance by one small step at a time, thus ensuring that some little racial progress will certainly be made as generation succeeds generation. It is of little use now constructing Utopias, which will vanish before us like will-o'-the wisps; though, with increasing knowledge, a time may come when it will be possible to erect such ideal structures with safety. No one can possibly deny that the world would be greatly improved if it contained fewer of the insane, the feeble-minded, the drunken, the diseased, and the unemployable; and everyone must see the advantage of having in our midst as many men as possible of high character, great ability, or perfect physique. Progress is now unquestionably possible in many regions free from all reasonable doubts, and here work can be found which will occupy all our energies for many a generation to come. It is true that in our efforts we should not aim at only one ideal type, or at a mere dull uniformity. For the present, however, we may well be satisfied with an attempt to eliminate all the many types of mankind which are unquestionably bad, whilst encouraging the appearance of all those which are unquestionably good; for any marked success in such an effort would mean that our descendants would come very near to the attainment of the eugenic
ideal. An ideal is, in fact, quite useless as long as it remains as a
mere ideal; for it is only by the actual attainment of definite benefits that good is done. Our actions of to-day may affect posterity in two distinct ways. In the first place we may alter our own surroundings, and the improvements we may make in the world, or some of them, may be left by us as valuable heritages to our descendants. But, though we should strive hard to improve the environment of our fellow citizens, yet it must always be remembered that we cannot be sure to what extent the benefits thus attained will pass on to future generations, or which of them will completely die out in time. A

6 EUGENICS REVIEW.
more certain method of ensuring the progress of the race in the
future is dependent on the force of natural heredity; and, be-
sides attending to environment, we have therefore thrown on us the paramount duty of making the best use we can of this progressive agency. Though the generations seem to follow
each other like links in a chain, one exactly like another, this is in truth a false analogy; for the character of one generation
must in a measure depend on the marriages made in the pre-
ceding generation. When the marriages amongst the higher types or the fit are more fruitful than the marriages amongst
the lower types or the unfit, then mankind is on the upward
path; and, when the reverse is the case, the nation is degenerating. We of this generation are absolutely responsible for the production of the next generation, and, therefore, of all mankind in the future; and to make every citizen realise his
great racial responsibility in all things connected with marriage, to make him feel this as a deep-seated sentiment greatly affecting his actions, this is the eugenic ideal.
Our problem is, therefore, how to spread abroad this keen sense of racial responsibility. Now this end can only be attained, we hold, by making the inculcation of the eugenic ideal form part of our national system of education. The object of all such systems is threefold; practical education, having occupation or livelihood as its objective; intellectual education, being designed to ripen the judgment; and moral education, having the highest aim of all in the elevation of character. With practical education we are not concerned to-day. As regards intellectual education, many of us feel that whatever else may be said concerning the teaching at schools of questions having any connection with sex, it is essential that such subjects should be implanted very gradually and with great tare, whilst certain points should not be touched at all; and, if this be the case, how is the judgment of the pupil to be duly ripened? The solution of this problem is to be found, as already suggested, in the thorough training of the teacher. On many questions the child, whilst a child, must rely on his seniors in matters of judgment; but no one, not even a child, ought to be called on to place implicit trust in those who are themselves insuffici-

EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE.

7

ently instructed to be able to form sound opinions. Whatever may be done in regard to the instruction of sex-hygiene and eugenics, the foundation of this work must be laid in the proper training of all instructors of youth. This is the most essential
step of all, for without it progress will undoubtedly be slow, and may be in the wrong direction.
Even if it be granted that the eugenic ideal should be implanted in the minds of all teachers, we yet have to enquire as to the exact methods they should adopt in dealing with this topic with their pupils. This is, however, a question I am here to ask rather than to answer. But, in framing your replies, I beg of you to consider carefully whether a knowledge of the outlines of our creed would in any way tend to sully the mind of a child, or whether it would not rather be an ennobling influence. Of the story books read by boys and girls at school, half of them, and these of the purest, teach the lesson that marriage will be their probable fate in life. Surely with this prospect clearly in view, there is nothing ignoble in making the boy know how much his welfare in mind and body will depend on the companion he chooses for life, or in making the girt perceive the misery which inevitably springs from a marriage with a drunkard or a wastrel. Such a lesson is not only greatly needed for the safety of the pupils themselves, but it would at the same time convey an unperceived but very useful eugenic
lesson. Would there be any harm, moreover, when speaking to the elder children, in making them directly realise the eugenic ideal by telling them they ought to desire that their children should grow up to become good and healthy citizens, and this not only for the sake of the whole family, but also for the sake of the nation to which they belong? Again, is there anything evil in pointing out that there is no better guide in choosing a mate for life than to note the character of the home in which he or she has been brought up? Affection should no doubt always point the path to marriage. But, though we often seem to act on the pure impulse of the moment, yet in reality our
actions are ever in large measure the result of all those innumerable impulses in the past which have been instrumental in moulding our minds and in forming our characters. Our

8 EUGENICS REVIEW.
affections in their earlier stages are, therefore, largely guided by our preconceived ideas; and whether your present pupils will fall in love wisely or foolishly will depend in a certain measure on the ideals you are now planting in their minds. If we trace back actions to their final causes, we find that it is on you, the teachers, that a part of the responsibility for the selections made in marriage by your pupils will ultimately
rest. Every reform is certain to meet with keen opposition. In
this case, amongst other things, it will be said that we are as yet so ignorant concerning the laws of heredity that no reform can safely be built on such unstable foundations. Much no doubt remains to be learnt in this field of science; though enough is now known, we believe, to make advance in certain directions both wise and safe. Moreover, no one now doubts that the world of to-morrow will have grown out of the world of to-day in accordance with fixed laws, some of which are known and some of which are unknown; and no one denies that our knowledge concerning these laws is increasing day by day. Even if we are now in error in many of our beliefs concerning them, these errors will be largely corrected by the time the little children now in your hands come to be fathers and mothers. If you attempt to implant the eugenic ideal in these growing minds, as I earnestly hope you will, you will unquestionably be facing a task of considerable difficulty. But if once that ideal is successfully planted, it will in future, I am convinced,
serve as a much needed stimulus tending to make your pupils, when grown up into men and women, regulate their conduct
in accordance with the truer views of life which will then be known; and this both to their own advantage and to the advantage of the State. If you plant the ideal, the good fruit will grow of itself from that seed. The benefits resulting from your wise teaching will in part appear in the form of sound eugenic legislation; for legislation now springs out of the opinion of the
many, which it embodies. And the good to the race due to all citizens more fully realising their responsibilties in the matter of marriage will be still more important. In short, the conclusion I wish to urge with all my force is that by implanting

EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE.

9

the eugenic ideal in the mind of the children of to-day, you will be taking a definite step towards ensuring the racial progress of our nation in the future.

THE DIFFICULTIES IN INTRODUCING THE SUBJECT OF
EUGENICS INTO THE ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS.
By MR. W. A. NICHOLLS
(Ex-President of the National Union of Teachers).
THE study of eugenics is a very fascinating one, and it is with some regret that I turn from the charming way in which the President dealt with the subject to the more prosaic manner in which I shall have to deal with it. You will see that my position is ostensibly one in opposition to that, but I simply read this paper in order that a full discussion on both sides of the question may take place.
I think the first difficulty is expressed in the words of Sir James Barr, the President of the Liverpool Branch of the Eugenics Education Society. He says "The science of Eugenics labours under great difficulties at present, because it is popularly misunderstood." One may go a step further, I think, and say that comparatively few people have taken the pains to find out what it is that the Eugenist is really trying to achieve. In the public elementary schools we cannot wisely and safely attempt to go far in advance of public opinion. The Board of Educatioii, Education Authorities and teachers generally are to a considerable extent influenced by what they conceive to be the most urgent needs of the pupil in the short term of his school life. Nor are we helped very much when we turn to the definition of Eugenics, formulated by Sir Francis Galton. the founder of the Eugenics Education Society. " Eugenics is the study of agencies under social control that may improve or impair the racial qualities of future generations either physically or mentally." On the face of it, any critic of our primary schools would be inclined to say that the subject was not suitable for children drawn largely from the working classes whose school life ends at fourteen or earlier.

