MOUTHS TO FEED*

R ECENTLY Sir Alfred Munnings, P.P.R.A., urged a Suffolk audience to stop the increase of the population.
Taking, so to speak, a pigment from Sir Alfred's palette, Pandit Nehru, Prime Minister of India, has just said that birth control must be encouraged by the State in India to check the rapid growth of the population. In the case of the Past President, this Malthusian anxiety originated in a desire to safeguard the countryside from urban encroachment; on the part of the Prime Minister the motive was fear of famine. India has added 42 million to her population in the last ten years, and many of the poorest families have been perilously near starvation. Only through the provision made by the United States and other friendly Powers has the stark spectre of famine been, temporarily, banished.
Mr. Nehru's call for family planning in his country may or may not be heeded, but it will serve to bring to the consciousness of other world leaders the need for the utmost care in the use of land. As this troubled old world rolls on towards the twenty-first century there will be more and more mouths to feed. In due time atomic energy may provide the answer, but at present there is little prospect of that " treasure-house " being fruitfully developed in the true interests of mankind. So it behoves those who direct the policies of nations to plan the wise use of their available land and to cut out waste.
Our own country, once " a right little, tight little island," has for the last six years been " a Left little island," but it is still, and
* This was a leading article in the East Ainglian Daily
Times of July i9th, 1951. It is reproduced by kind permission of the Managing Editor.

will always be (in the absence of full-scale emigration), a " tight little island." So much
has to be fitted in. Room must be found for
homes and factories, schools, hospitals and
other institutions, for airfields and defence
needs, such as Battle Schools (of which there
is no need to remind many long-suffering
East Anglians), for the demands of afforestation, and much else. Ribbon building has been stopped, but year by year valuable farm land is sealed for ever-if future bombingcanberuledout-underbricks and mortar.
Every year, it has been authoritatively stated, some eighty square miles of farm
land are sacrificed in this way. Can we afford such shrinkage ? A former M.P. for Ipswich,
the late Jesse Collings, invented the phrase
" three acres and a cow," and according to
certain present-day American authorities, " three acres " (cow omitted) per head of the population should be regarded as the minimum to support a reasonable standard of living. The available farm land in Britain works out at well under a quarter of this American minimum. With more mouths in
the world to feed, this country must aim at
being less dependent upon overseas sources. Consequently we should husband our resources of agricultural land. The Minister of Town and Country Planning has advised local planning authorities to give priority to agricultural needs. A National Farmers' Union representative, Mr. J. F. Phillips, said at the week-end, " We do not think that
people realize the extent of the encroachments or of their effect on food production. Good, flat, well-drained agricultural land is also the best land for building, but what does it profit the State if the saving on initial building costs is offset by buying food abroad ? "

143

EEgenics Review, Vol. XL=, No. 8

