FOUNDATIONS OF NOTABLE FAMILIES.
By T. W. J. GuN, F.R.H-IIST.S., F.GEN.S.
The origin of those family conniectionis, whose membeis have w(n distinctioni, is ani interesting study. For this purpose 120 suclh coni-
nectionis in the Britishl Isles anid in the Uniited States of Amiierica lhave
beeni selected and(I certaii p)articulars relatiing to those will be fouinld in
the six anniexed tables. The names on the left hanid side are those of thie founiders of the
connection, i.e., those wh1o are the commoni ancestors in eaclh case of the greatest niumber of niotable descenidanits. The letters placed in front of the naames in certaini inistaiices denote the fotunider's counitrv of domicile: S=Scotch, I=Irish, W =Welsh, A=Ameiricani, EA_ Eniglislh birth but sub.seqlcuent settlemeint in Amiierica, F, G. anid J. represent Frenelh, G(erman anid Jewish origin respectivelv. All those iiot so marke(d were Eniglisli.
Thie seconid column in the tal)le gi-es the status of the founderl, the tllird columniii the statuis of the fotunider's father, wlhere ascertainiable. The fourtlh columnii gives the niumllber of niotable descenidalnts dowii to -tlhe 5th genieration, linmited to those of whomi separate memoirs appear in the Dictioniary of Nationial Biograply or in Appleton's Encycloptudia of Americani Biography. In the later tables sonme of the final descend(lanits are still living, in these cases account is takeni of those wlho will in all probability, appear in future biographical dictionlaries. The fiftlh columni gives a general classificationi of the activities of the desceneidants, 'ptublic affairs' iieltcldes politics genier-
ally, diplomacy and the Civil Service.
The tables tlhemiiselves are arranged in general clhronological order, comminlenicinig at the beginniing of the 16tlh centuiry anid finishlinig
at the enid of the 18tlh. Conniiectionis o-f note originatinig in the 19th century are inot inicluded, as in these cases 5 genierations would Inot as
vet have elapsed. In eaclh table, however, the order adopted is niot chironological, bu.t is based on the number of notable descendanits.
The exact (late at wlichl the founiders flourislhed is not in itself of great importance. buit the broad distinietioni between centuries does preselnt features of initerest.
Tlhe quiestion of the status to be assigned to fouinders and thieir fathers lhas presenited somle difficulty. Some hlave to be specially (lescribed; for inistance, in a few of the earlier cases the lheading 'citizeni' seemiis to be the best avrailable, among Americans 'planters' for some of the Soutlherners, 'coloinist' for some of the Nortlherners. For ultimate purposes of classification lhowever it will be sufficient to conisider tlhree leading divisions, landed, professional, commercial.
The planters. colonists, yeomeni anid farmers may be assign-ed to

FOUNDATIONS OF NOTABLE FAMILIES.

III

lan(led interests, the citizenis to coimmercial, the rest either to pro-
fessionial or commercial. The status of the fathers of the founders
hias been inelu(led in order to carry back the origini a ste) further, the *status of the fathers-in-law would also no doubt be of interest, as
obviously qualities mav ha-ve been derived through the wife of the founider. btut the inclusioin ol these would tend to overload the tables.
It mav no doubt be urged that fromii the point of view of eugenics
no special stress should be laid on the founiider of a notable connection,
as maniy of the descendants, particularly those in the later generations,
max' well have (derived their qualities from other ancestors. This
is no doubt true for any one particular case, but in considering as many, as 1220, the writer is of opinion that a great deal mlay be learned
fronm the foutnders taken as a, whole, as they must necessarilv represenit betweeni tlheml the ty-pe of ancestors wlho have ha(l the most eugeniic
value.
Wl"itlh regard to the numniber of notable deseenidants in each case,
the test of reference in a biographical dictionary is certainlv the best available, thouglh undouibtedly some of those so mentioned had little real abilitv and appear only througlh fortuitous circumstances. This
applies chiefly however to the earlier tables, and in them to those ,connectionis witlh the grea.test number of names. On the other hand meni of marked ability have often failed to wiin biographical mention
owinlg to their having devoted themselv,es to purely commercial activities. M1any such had their rewar(d in their lifetinme, but their
names have not survived. There are, however, v-ariouis cases of notable commercial men amonig the descenldanits of the 120 founders inl the tables.
It muist be rememubered that the iiumbers of notable descendants specified are iil every case a minimum, as owing to the difficulty of tracinig tlhrough female lines, nmany must necessarilv lhave been over-
looked, particularly in the 4th and 5th generations.
Witlh regard to the classification of descendants, two maini groups appear, the first those slhewing more particularly qualities of leader-
lship, the seconid more particularly qualities of intellect. In addition to l)ublic affairs the first comprises generally, the Law, the Clhurch, the
Armi and the Navy, while the second may be divided into the three maiin lheadings of Literature, Science and Art. While these distinc-
tions are by no means absolute, qualities both of leadership and intellect sometimes appearing in the same individual, while family connectionis may be themselves divided, still the great majority of conniiectionis can be definitely assigned to one or other group. In the final classification it has been found possible exactly to divide the 120 conniectionis, assigniing 60 to the leadership an(d 60 to the intel-
lectual group.
The tabulatioin of these 120 conniectionis has been prepared entirely in accordance with the achievements of the descendan-ts, without any
prior referenice to the status of the fouinders. All these cases have been inclu(led wlhere l5 or more notable descenidants of a common ancestor
have beeii traced, and the great majority of these wliere 10 or more have beeni traced; the omissions between 10 and 15 being all 'leader-

112 EUGENICS REVIEW.

ship' cases, particularly those where extrinsic circumstanices have

evidently played a considerable part. In those examples which shew

less than 10 notable descenidants a very rigid selection has been made,

preference being given to connections where marked intellectual powers

have been evident, and where extrinsic circumstances have played

comparatively little part. A few very special instainces of only 5

notable descenidants have been included. this being the lowest figure

taken. The total number of cases between 5 and 10 is of course very

large, of these the writer has a inote of at least 400.

As shewing the clhances against any given individual attaining

biographical note, a quite specialised group may be cited, those who

entered Harrow School between 1845 and 1885. The youngest of

these is now well over 50 years of age. and on a rough estimate only

some 3 % have attained biographical distinction. Those sent to
Harrow would obviously hlave opportunities well over the average,
and having regar(d to such a percenitage, it is quite clear that, apart

from hereditv, the clhances of the occurrenice of several relatives of

note would be alnmost negligible.

It is Inot possible within the linits of ani article to deal at all

fully with the notable descendants in the 4th column of the tables.

Where the distinction is in the male linie, the surname of the founder

affords a clue, and it is proposed therefore to set out the names of only some of the best known meni and womeni who derive from the founders

through female lines. The list that follows is of course far fron

exhaustive and it mnust be emphasised that all descending in a direct

male line are excluded. The 4tlh column in the tables combinied witlh

this list will however furniislh some idea of the coinsiderable numbers

of relatives of distinction plossessed bv these inidividuals of the first
eminence.

TABLE 1.

Ancestors.

Desceidatnts.

Sir William Sidney

.. .. 2d Earl of Manchester.

1st D)ukc of Schomberg.

1st Earl of Halifax.

Roger North.
1st Earl Stanhlope.

Duke of Norfolk .. .. .. Queen Elizabetlh.
3rd Earl of Sussex. Sir Robeit Dudley. 3rd Earl of Essex.

Sir Edmund Deniny

.. .. Sir Franicis Walsiniglham.
2nd Viscount Falkland.

Henry Hope

.. .. .. 1st Lord Erskine. Thomas Coutts.

Sir Antlhonyv Cooke

.. .. Francis Bacon. 1st Earl of Salisbury.

Sir William Fairfax

.. .. Admiral Lord Hawke.

Sir Henry (romwel

. . John Hampden. Lord Bolingbroke.

FOUNDATIONS OF NOTABLE FAMILIES.

Sir Thomas Wvatt James Staniyhurst Matthew Guild Sir John Mlore
A ucesturs Sir George Villiers
Sir Richard Templh
Gavin Elliot Sir James Dun(das Henry Sewall Edmuniid Quincv
Sir Johln St. Jolhn
Robert Barclay Samuel Bayard Robert Walpole Sir Bernard Granviille Mlichael Hill
Peter Folger John Drydeni
Anicestoi"s.
William Randolph

Sir Henry Vane. 2nd Viscount Falkland.
Archbishop Ussher.
The Gregory family.
John Donne.
TABLE 2. Descenidants'
1st l)uke of Marlborough. 1st Earl of Chatham. Lord Harvey. Lady MIary Wortley Montagu. Henry Fielding.
The Grenville family. WVilliam Pitt. Clhief Justice Cockburn.
Sir John AMalcolnm.
Archbishop Davidsoni.
H. WV. Longfellow. President Grover Cleveland.
President John Quincy Adanms. Oliver WVendall Holmes. Charles Francis Adams.
MIrs. Hutchinlsoni. 2nd Earl of Rochester. 4th Earl of Sandwich. Charles Townshend.
Sir Francis Galton.
AMrs. Elizabeth Fry.
('hief Justice .John Jay.
Lord Nelson.
.. .. Mrs. Delaney. Granville Sharp.
1st Duke of Wellington 2nd Marquis of Salisbury. Earl Balfour.
Benjamin Franklin .
Jonathan Swift. Horace Walpole.
TABLE 3. Descendan ts.
President Thomas Jefferson. Chief Justice John MIarshall. Robert E. Lee.

113

114 EUGENICS REVIEW.

James Pierpont
Robert Carter
Wtilliam Robertson
John Taylor
Earl Cadogan
William Bird
Nevill Mtaskalyne John Thiornton Sir John Pratt
Sir John Swinton
Thomas Tlhackeray Ancestoirs.
John Symonds
Thomas Wedgwood Aulay Macaulay Roger Kemble.. Sir Beaumont Hotlham Richard WVard George Abercomby

Jonatlhani Edwards. Timothy Dwiglht.
J. P'ier)pont M1organi.
President WVillianm H. Harrison. President Benjamini Harrison. Robert E. Lee.
Lord Broughamn. Robert Adam. Patrick Henry.
Admniral Sir W1 iillianm larrv. Lady Eastlake. Lady Duff-Gordoni.
Charles Fox. Sir Charles Napier. Sir WVillianm Napier.
WVilliam Wilberforce. Bishop Samuel Wilberforce. Bishop Charles Summer. Isahella Bird. Lordl Rosebery.
St. Loe Stracely. Lytton Strachey.
WVilliam Wilberforce. Bishop Samuel Wilberforce.
The Hlardinige family. Lord Randolph Churchill. WVinston Churchiill.
Sir Walter Scott.
Archlbislhop Davidson. Sir D)ouglas Hogg.
Sir Rennell Rodd.
TABLE 4.
Descendants.
Sir Rowland Hill. Sir Morell Mackenzie. Compton MIackenzie. St. Loe Strachey.
Charles D)arwin.
The Trevelyan family.
M1rs. Siddons.
.. .. Lord Avebury. Charles Doughty.
Julia Ward Howe. MNarion Crawford.
Lord Haldane.

FOUNDATIONS OF NOTABLE FAMILIES.

-. D)aunay ..
XVilliain Scott

.. ..

.. George Riehmond. Sir W illiam Richmonid.
.. Sir John Burdoni-Saniderson. Lord IIal(lane.

Johnii Gainsborough

.E... Edmoid WVillianm Lane.

Anicestors Ea.11 Spelnccr. ..
D)anicl Bell .. ..

'T'ABLE 3. Descen?dants.
.. .. 2nd EarlG1ranville. Alfred Lyttelton. Lord I)esborough. B3ishop Clharles Gore. Bishop William Temple.
.. .. Mrs. Elizabeth Fry. E,dward Gibbon Wakefield. Bishop Charles Wordsworth. WV. Clark Russell.

Jamiies Stephen .. .. .. lIenry Hodson.

Charles D)ovle

.. .. .. 1st Earl of Lytton. Sir Bertram WVindle.
ldith O'E Somerville. Plunket Greene.

WN'illianm Ellery .V. .. .. William Ellery Clhaiiniiig. Rielard Henry Dana.

Francis Turner .. .. .. Sir Joseph1 Hooker.
William S. Palgrave. Francis J. Palgrave.

Hall ..

.. .. .. Samuel F. B. Mlorse Benjamin Rush.

Benijamnin Iheatl

.. .. Charles MIerivale.

A ncestors
Johln1Bartlett Allen.

TABLE 6.
Descendan ts .. .. The later Darwins.
The later Cecils.

Johln Barinig

.. .. .. I-enry Labouchere. Samuel Rawson Gardiner.

Oliver Everett .. .. .. Edward Everett Hale.

JonIII Penrose

.l. .. .. Matthew Arnold. M1rs. Humphrey Ward. Julian Huxley. Aldous Huxley.

Johln Alsop

.. .. .. John Alsop King. Mary King Waddington.

Erasmus Darwin . .. .. Sir Francis Galtoni.

Thomas Callcott .. .. .. Sir Victor Horsley.

115

116 EUGENICS REVIEW.
The names of descendants given include representatives of prac-
tically every form of activity, and the direct male lines would furnish an almost equal number of individuals of note. It may be of interest to add a few observations oni the tables in general and certain connections in particular.
TABLE I.
It will be noted that the founders and their fathers sprang inainly from landed families, and that the descendants as a whole belonged to the 'leadership' groups, though almost every connection can show at least one man of letters, and three scientists of the first note are included. John Napier the mathematician, Hugh Myddleton the engineer alid Robert Boyle the chemist. Scotland is well represented, America does not yet appear, except for a branclh of the commercial family of Saltonstall, who were distinguished in the New World at the later
part of last century. The Fletchers, the best known of whom was the
dramatist, are an interesting early instance of a purely literary family, while the Mylnes shew a remarkable and almost unique instance of long descent of specialised talent, 5 generations of master masons being followed by 5 further generations of architects.
TABLE, 2.
Here the landed interest, though still prominent, is muclh less so thani in the first table. Scotland is still to the fore, and several miotable American conniections now make an appearance, all those except the Livingstones of New York, first achieving distinction in New England. The Bayards were of French origin and were perhaps the most distinguished of all the Hiuguenot families who settled in AngloSaxon lands.
Among the English families, a peculiar interest attaches to the St. John connection, as few,shew so well the inheritance of definite characteristics, considerable ability combined with much moral obliquity. Instances are Lord Rochester, Lord Sandwich, Charles Townshend and the Duchess of Cleveland, the mistress of Charles II. M1rs. Hutchinson, oIn the other hand, was all that was excellent.
Worthy of special remark in this table is the joint relationship of Dryden, Swift and Horace Walpole. Their common ancestor was an obscure Northamptonshire squire, his wife, however, who was a Cope had several relations of that name of some note in the 16th centurv.
TABLE 3.
The landed interest remains quite as prominent as in the previous table, mainly owing to the four Virginian families, Ranidolph, Lee, Carter and Marshall. These families intermarried to a considerable extent and the Confederate general, Robert Lee, was descended from all but the Marshalls. The relationship of Lee, Thomas Jefferson and John Marshall, all descended from William Randolph, it is as remarkable in the sphere of public affairs as that of Dryden, Swift and Horace WValpole in literature.

FOUNDATIONS OF NOTABLE FAMILIES.

117

Scotland shows a drop and the proportion of Scotch connections of note originating in the 18th century is decidedly less than that originating in the 17th.
Attention may be drawn to the fact that William Bird, a country gentleman quite unknown to fame, was the common ancestor of no less than eight bishops.
TABLE 4.
By the mid 18th century the landed interest has entirely ceased to predominate.
The Schomberg family is the only one of Jewish origin included in these tables. The writer has been unable to trace any other British or American Jewish family with more than 3 or 4 members receiving biographical mention. There can be little doubt that the prominence of the Jewish race is habitually exaggerated.
The Twining family, the well-known tea merchants, are an interesting instance of a combination of commercial pursuits and other very varied activities.
TABLE 5.
The Bosanquets are probably the most notable family of French Huguenot origin who settled in this country, though others such as the Romillys and the Laboucheres, have produced more striking individual figures. It would appear, however, that the influence of the French Huguenots, like that of the Jews, has been on the whole overestimated, and that families of German origin have been generally speaking more distinguished. This certainly applies to the Barings in Table 4 and to the Herschells in Table 6; the Wyons in this table were of much less note, but furnish an interesting instance of a family which for several generations specialised with much success, in their case in the craft of seal engraving.
TABLES 5 AND 6.
Four families, those of Evans, Tuckerman, Pickering and Cunnigham are good examples of connections shewing a remarkable variety of attainment, without any one member reaching world wide fame.
The Evans family included 2 archaeologists, 2 mathematicians, 1 musical composer, 2 miscellaneous writers, 1 journalist.
The Cunninghams included a poet, a commentator, a critic, an archaeologist, an Indian official, a surgeon and a botanist.
The Tuckermans included 4 authors, a divine, an artist, an architect, a musician and a botanist.
The Pickerings included 2 astronomers, a stateman, a philosoph ist, a physician, a poet and a lawyer.
It must be remembered that all the above achieved sufficient note in their various vocations to warrant biographical mention.

There are various possible classifications to be made of the 120 founders and fathers, and it is proposed now to consider one or two of
the more striking.

118 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Takinig the 120 foun(lers as a whole, 48, can be assigned to the
professional classe4, 43 to the landed interests (of wlhomll 34 were British landed proprietors, including 5 )eers), and 28 to the coml-
miercial classes. (In one instanec it has beeni found imlpossible to ascertain the status of a founider. The individual in question was a Mr. Ilall. the common anicestor of two notable American families, those of Moise anid flush, the first distinguished in science, the second
in politics anid diplomacv.)
All three groups are thus well represented amioiig the founders. WV'heni we tuLrn to the fathers the division is found to be as follows: Lanid 54, Commercial 31, Professional 20, anld 15 wlhose statuis canniiot be aseertainied. It will be observed that the Professional 1now
(lrops to the 3rd lplace, from whlichl it is evident that the beginniinigs of
(listinietioni were apt to occur wlheni the so$1s of lanided anid conmmlercial men took to the professions.
With regard to the professions themselves, amonig the founiidlers
the clerical leads with 22, the legal is a good second witlh 17. The others are very few in nuimbers, the medical only shewinig 3, a somewhlat astoniishinig result, as long before the enid of the 18tlh century, the miiedical profession had produced maniy enminenit meni, butt these were not the progenitors of equally emninent families. AMilitary anid naval meln rarely founded connections of any niote, tlhe only onie of naval origin in thie tables is that which commenices witlh ani American, Christopher Perry.
Seeing that the limit of period of origin is the encd of the 13tlh cenitury, it might be anticipated that the clerical would head tlhe l)rofessions. The number of clergynmen founders, 22, is not howev%1eer so very high out of a total of 120, thouglh as will shortly be seeni, the proportion is much higher in the strictly intellectual group. Of these 22, 12 were nmembers of the Churclh of England, 2 only were SCotCli Presbyterian ministers, anid though these founded two highly distinguished coninections, the Robertson and the Macaulay, it wouild certainly seem that the prov?erb as to the success of sons of the manise
does noit lhold quite equally witlh regard to remoter descenidanits.
Among the 28 commercial founders, 16 may be described as having been in a large way of buisness, 9 in a small way, wlhile 3 are doubtful. Only 2 founders however, Robert Peel and John Baring appear to lhave made very considerable fortunes. Great riches have notoriously had an evil effect in smothering ability among those wlho inherit them.
Anl initeresting classification can be arrived at on the basis of the divisioni of descenidenits into the leadership and intellectual groups, to wlichl division reference has already been made. The 'leadership'
group shews as might be expected a great preponderenee of the lanided initerests, amonig the founders and still mnore among the fatlhers.
Greater interest attaches to the origins of the 'intellectual' group and this merits close analysis. Among the founiders we fin(d that
the professions lead easily witlh 33, as against 15 commercial alnd 11 landdc. Of the 33 professional. 18 or more than half were clergymen, anld of thiesc 12, or more than lhalf, were parsons of the Chuirchi of Eingland.

FOUNDATIONS OF NOTABLE FAMILIES.

1.9

When we turii in this group from the fotmiiders to tlheir fatlhers, we finid tlhe samne law applying to the part as has alreadv beeni shown for
the wlhole, n-amely that the professionial are less stronigly represenited
aniong the fathers tlhani anmonig the founders. As a result tlle division inito the three categories is remarkably eveni amonig these ultinmate aniicestoIrs ot initellectual families. The divisioii runis as follows: Land(l 16, Commi-rcial 16, Professioinal 14, anid 14 stattus unaseertained. It is almost a dead hieat.
Tlhere is tlhus a great (teal of variety in the statuts of originators of
initellectual families and it is proposed accordinigly to set these out in (letail. Wlic-re the pOsit Oil of the father lhas nlot been asceltailled., that of hlis soni the fouin(ier lias beenl takein.

S British landed )roprietors. 2 Barristers of lai(le(I origin. 5 Britishl yeomiieni.
2 American farmers
IHighland clansnman . ] Irishl clansman
7 (hurch of Englaiid clergynmeni . 2 otlher clergymen. A stewalrd wiho hecanie a barrister. A solicitor. A Town Clerk. 2. Amiierican lamwvcr^.. 2 physicians. A suilrgeoni.
An actor.
2 ~citim,cns..' :1 'considerable mercha-Ints."

A slhip)owner.
Ak potter. A tea merelhant.
A fuller
A wool mierchlanit. A timher imiere}lianit.
A carl)et manufacturer.
A WVest India miierchl.ant
A maltster.
A builder.
Ani armourer. A inaster mnasoji. Ani enigraver. A silversmith.
A weaver.
A glardener.-
A carpenter.

It will be seenI that time initellccttual famiiilies have emllaniated fromii almuost every stratum of society, buit the ulllper middle classes (leci(ledlv prep,onderate. Greatest initerest l)elrhaps attaclhes to the tlhird( or commrercial category. The first ninie on tlhis list seem to luivc-e been meni of stanidinlg, the inext six to have beeni in a comiparatively smnall way o butsiness Only tlhe last seven belonged in any wray to
whlat wve slhoul(l now call the artisan classes, btut of these time first foulr wcre alnmost certainly rathler tradesmen than aIrtisals. There renmaini the final tlhree, tihe fatlhers of the founders of the Coleridge, HIerselicll ciind Lin1ev connections. Tlhese xvcre certa inlv artisanis,
but thiere is sonmc evidence that in the Coleridge and Herschell famlilies, remiioter forebears occupied a somewlhat superior position. Ouit of
tie 120) examp)les collected oiilv tlhe musical family of tle Lilevs appear to lhave sp)rung directly from a quite luimble walk of life.
It scemis iin(leed abunldanitly clear that famlilies of distinietion ladl lhad 10O suidden rise from obscurity, behind the linles of niote stretcl linles of competence. B3rilliant individnuals arisc occasionallv fromii
complete obscuritv, sometimes a pair of brothers, buit wlhere ability lias p)ersisted for several generations, a thoroughly solid founjidation
seemls to have beeni requisite. Wh'liile the origin of these initcllectual families wacls thoroughly
aristocratic in the true nmeatning of the word, it was not often aiisto-

120 EUGENICS REVIEW.

cratic in the coinvenitional meaniing. Long before the enid of the 18thi century "la carriere ouverte aux talents" prevailed to a great
extent in this country, still more of course in America. No doubt it
prevails niow to an even greater extent, and it would be interesting by
a s-tudy of 19th century origins to see how far a change in the status of founders is occurrin-g, thlough the fact that only 2 or 3 generations would have elapsed renders a comparison difficult. It is doubtful whether the change eveni among intellectual families would be as great as is sometimes thought, and there is probably little or no clhange at all in the origini of families witlh the true gift for leaderslhip. Their e'Volution miust undoubtedly be slow, if we are to attain the certainty that it will also be sure.
Clhances of leadership certainily come nlow to those whlose origini in the pa t would lhave afforded them scant opportunities in this direction, but recent events give grave cause for doubt as to whetlher the capacity
in suchl cases equals the opportunity.

TABLE 1.

SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

Statuts.
Sir WVilliam Sidney .. .. LaLnded Thomas, 2n1d Duke of Norfolk ,

Status of Notable Classification of Descenidants.

Father.

Descend ants.

Lanided

42 Public affairs. Literature.

,, :3a35 ,, ,, Naval.

.John, 1 5th Earl of Oxford

Military

,,~

26

M,lilitary.

Sir Edmund Denny

Legal

Citizen

2

S Henry Hope

Commercial Commercial 21

Law.

Sir Thomas Finclh Sir Anthoniy Cooke Sir William Fairfax Sir Henry Cromwell

Landed

Landed

19

,,913
,, 13

Literature.

W Richard Myddelton Sir Thomas WVyatt

,,9 12 Science, the Churchl. ,,)11 Public affairs. Literature.

EA Sir Richard Saltonstall. Commilercial Citizeni

1.].

Edward Lord North..

Legal

,,910

Literature.

Roger Boyle

Citizen

,,910

,, ,, Science.

1 James Stanyhurst

Legal

,,~ 9 The Churchi. Public affairs.

S Matthew Guild

A.rmourer

9 Science.

S Archibald Napier

Lanided Lanided

9 Science. Public affairs.

Sir John Mlore

Legal

Steward

8 Literature, the Church.

Richard Fletcher S John MIylne

Clerical . Nlasoni

5 Art.

FOUNDATIONS OF NOTABLE FAMILIES.

121

TABLE 2.

LATE SIXTEENTH CENTURY AND SEVENTEENTHI CENTURY.

Statuts. Status of Notable Classification of Descendants.

Sir George Villiers

Landed

Father. Des(ncteflnsd.-

Land(le(d

47 Public affairs Literature.

Sir Richard Temple SA Robert Livingstoni

,, Planter

1,, Clerical

33 27

S James Viscount Stair

Legal

L-anded

23

Law.

S Gavin Elliot

Landed ,, 21

Literature.

EA Henry Sewall

Colonist Commercial 20

EA Edmund Quincy Sir John St. John

,9 Landed

Yeoman Landed

13; 14 Public affairs. Literature.

S Robert Barclay

,, Military 14

Commerce.

Science.

EA Adam, Wintlhrop..

Legal

Conamercial 12

Science.

FA Samuel Bayard

Commercial Clerical

12

Robert Walpole

Landed Lainded

12

Naval.

Sir Bernard Grenville

,, 11

Literature.

S Sir James Dundas

Legal

,, 11

Law. The

Clhurch.

I Denniis Sherida'i .

Clerical

11 Literature.

Johin Wesley

Clerical Clerical

10 Religious activity. M1usic.

1 Michael Hill

Landed Landed

] 0 Public affairs. Military.

EA Peter Folgeri

Clerical Colonist

9 ,, ,, Science.

IV Sir Edward Her eit

Landed Lainded

7 Literature. Naval.

Johln Dryden

.

,, .v Literature.

EA William Randolplh A James Pierpont A Timothy Edwardes A Robert Carter A John MNarshall
Johni Lord Hervey S William Robertsoni
John Taylor William Earl Cadogan
William Bird A Richard Lee..
Nevill MIaskalyne FA Stephen De Lancey
John Thorntoni Sir John Pratt... S Sir John Swinton Thomas Thackeray
William Wollastoni
Charles Mlayo. Samuel Reynolds

TABLE 3.

EARLY EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

Status.

Status of Father.

DNeosatcnatebsnl.de-

Classification of Desendants.

Planter Lanid Steward 37 Public affairs.

Clerical Colonist

29

, , L't rature.

Clerical Commnercial 23

Law.

Planter Planter

23

,, Landed

5,, Lainded

22 Law. 22 Public affairs. Literature.

Clerical

20 ,, ,, ,, Art.

,,9 Coimmercial 20 Literature, Science.

Landed, Alil- Legal

18 Public affairs. Military.

itary.

Landed

Landed

18

The Church.

Planter Planter 13 ,, ,, MIilitary.

Landed

Landed

13

Science. Literature.

Commercial Commercial 14

Clerical

13 Commerce. The Church.

Legal

Citizen

12 Public affairs. Military.

Landed

Legal

12 Literature. Art. Science.

Clerical

Yeomani

11 Public affairs. Literature.

Landed Commercial 9 Science.

Citizen

Citizen

9 Science. Literature.

Clerical Clerical

8 Art.

,,

122 EUGENICS REVIEW.

John Symonids

Thomi-as WVedgwoo(d

A Aaron Cleveland

S Aulay M1acaulay

A Epes Sargeit

..

Roger Kemzble

Sir Beaumoiit Ilotlani

A Richard XWar( .

.1 Roger WVolott Isaac Taylor..
S George Abhr onlbv

Dauiayv Samuel Jcbb..
WVilliam Scott Sanmuel Cockerell WVilliam Cartwright J Meyer Schlomnberg Jolhni Gainisborough.. G Isaac Herschell Daniel Twininig

Jolhn, 1st. Earl Spenecr Daniel Bell S Jamies Stephen . I Clharles Doyle lA WVilliam Ellely .
Tlhomas Liniley Johln Coleridge A Richalrd Dan.a
F Samuel Bosanquct
Robert Peel
A Edward Tuckermani Franicis Turnier
Sir Thomas Trollopc A4 Isaac Roosevelt A.-. Hall G George Wyont
John Wordswortlh I James G ayes
Benjamin Heathl IV Lewis Evan.s

TABLE 4.

MI) EIGI-ITEENTH CENTURY.

St(tul.s.

Stat-us of Notable C(lassifica tiotn of Descendants.
Fathcr. deascnetnsdt-

MNledical MNledical 23 Literature, Scienice, Law,

Stage.

. C.Commercial Commercial 20 Scienice, Literature, Art.

Clerical Farmer

18 Ilublic affairs. Literature.

.. Clerical Clanisman 13

- (Cmonercial Commercial 15 Military. Scienice. Art.

.. Actor

14 The Stage. Literature.

.. Landed

Landedl

1 Naval. Science.

.. Colonial Commerical 14 Literature. lublic affairs

Governor.

.. ,,

^Farer

14

Engrav-er Commercial 12 Literature. Art.

LegalI

Legal

12 'Military. Public affairs.

Scienlce.

Clerical

11 Art.

Conimcrcia I

11 Scienice, Literature, S' ship.

Yeom,0an1

10 Law, Science.

Archlitect. ,Mcedical

9 Art. Literature. Naval.

Lande(d Legal

8 Science. Art.

Medical Medical

87' Scienece. Naval.

Commercial

8 Literature. Art.

Musician Gardener

Scienice.

C'onmnmercial Commiliercial 7 Literature. Scieni e.

TABLE 3.

M1I1). EIGHTEENTIh CENTURY.

Status.

Status of INotable Classif (cation of De cetndants. Father. desancretns,.-

Landed Landed

33 Ilublic affairs. The Church.

Conmmercial Comnmercial 18

,, ,, Lite ature.

Legal

Yeoman

16 Law. Literature.

Landed Landed

16 P'ul. aff..1'tarv. Lit. Art.

Commercial Cominercial 11 Religious aetivitv. Litera-

ture.

Milusiciani Artisan

12 Music. Public affairs.

Clerical Commercial 12 Law. Literature.

Legal

12 Literature. Law. Science.

Comi-mercial Commercial 11 Literature. P'ublic affairs.

Yeoman

10

Commercia I 10 Science. Art. Literature.

Clerical Towni Clerk 10 Science. Literature.

Landed Lanided

9 Literature. Naval.

Commercial Commercial 9 Public affairs. Comiimerce.

9 Science.

. . Engraver Silversmitlh 9 Art.

.. Legal

Yeoman

8 The Clhurch. Literature.

. . Clerical Citizen

8 Science.

,,

.. Citizeni Comnmercial

Scholarslhip

,,

.. Clerical Clerical

Literature. Science. Art-

FOUNDATIONS OF NOTABLE FAMILIES.

123

A John Lowell.. John Bartlett Allen
G John Baring Charles 1st Earl Grey
Weedon Butler A Oliver Everett
John Penrose Thomas Scott S David Pollock A Jolhn Alsop A Joln Adams George Tenniyson . A Christopher Perry Erasmus Darwini
S John Cunninighani
A Joseph Potter Thomas Callcott Timothy Pickering Lant Carpenter
S Robert Stevenson

TABLE 6.

LATE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

Statuts. .. Legal

Status of Notable Classification of descendants.

Father.

descendants.

Clerical

15 Lit. Science. Commerce.

. . Landed Landed

15 Science. Public affairs.

.. Commercial Clerical

14 Public affairs. Commerce.

. . Landed Muil- Land(le(

13

itary

.. Clerical Legal

12 Scholarship.

12 Public affairs. Literature.

,,

(Clerical

11 Literature. Art. Science.

Yeomani

11 Art. Literature.

Conmmercial Yeoman

11 Law.

(Cornommepcial 11 Public affairs.

Legal

Farmer 10 ,, ,, Literature.

Landed Landed

10 Literature

Naval

Legal

10 Naval.

1Iedical Landed

9 Science.

Land Agent Yeoman

8 Science. Literature.

Farmer

9 The Churchl.

Commercial

7 Art. Music. Science.

Legal

Legal

7 Science. Literature.

Clerical Commercial 6 Science.

Engineer

,,, , 6 9

Literature.

