LEGAL AND SOCIAL IMPLICATIONS OF

ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION*

By CECIL BINNEY, M.A.
Barrister-at-Law, Inner Temple

IT is plain that the law cannot ignore become common and, in particular, well-

artificial insemination, and though it is known cinema actresses have had children

improbable that it will often come before by this means. I hope I shall not be con-

the law courts it might easily give rise to sidered cynical in expressing incredulity.

litigation of an important and a sensational Not long ago I noticed a news item about

character. There has as yet been no Act of some persons in the United States who had

Parliament which in any way deals with the won a prize of some three or four thousand

subject nor any reported case upon it in dollars, and desired to be excused from

England, but the existing law can be applied receiving it in view of the avalanche of

by analogy to this new process as it has been begging letters and demands for money

to other new discoveries, whether biological, which was descending on them. And this,

chemical or mechanical in character. This I be it observed, was in respect of a sum worth

shall attempt to do in the present paper, but I shall not confine myself merely to a state-

only about £I,500 in our money. One can therefore well understand a successful film-

ment of the law, but shall consider also social star or her business manager announcing

implications. The paper is in fact an expansion of one dealing with the purely legal

that the baby which she happens to have had was artificially produced-that it was, so to

aspect of the subject which I was this summer speak, brought by the doctor in a black bag-

asked to read to the gynaecological section of in order to avoid claims by indigent noble-

the British Medical Association at their men, cabin stewards and film extras alleging'

annual meeting.

that they may have been the father of the

I was greatly gratified by this privilege, child. Other ladies less highly placed may

which is seldom conferred on anyone who is still have adequate reasons for making a

not a medical man, and the doctors gave me similar pretence. Even if there were none of

the courteous hearing which was to be the legal difficulties to which I refer, I do

expected of them, but I could not help not believe artificial insemination would ever

observing from the subsequent discussion become widespread. It is at best a com-

that they took little interest in the subject of plicated way of effecting something which

artificial insemination. And I felt they were can be done quite easily.

quite right. Artificial insemination raises I remember a most interesting paper being

some interesting problems for the academic read to the Eugenics Society by the late Mr.

lawyer, but to medical men habitually Gunn regarding the royal families of Europe,

engaged on difficult obstetrical problems in in which he pointed out that the Spanish

which life or death depend on success or Bourbons had only been saved from utter

failure there can be little interest in an opera- degeneracy or extinction by one queen

tion which presents no technical difficulty to prudently having children by someone other

the practitioner, and is unlikely ever to be than the reigning monarch. The same is true

anything but rare.

of the Romanovs, and the subject has been

This last statement I expect to be chal- exploited by Swift in Gulliver's Travels.

lenged, for I have seen it stated that in Though the motives of these royal ladies

America artificial insemination has already may have been mixed, they would certainly

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on October 26th, I948.

justify themselves, if we were able to communicate with them, by saying that it was

I99

200 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

their wish to provide an adequate heir to the throne notwithstanding the impotence or feebleness of their.royal husbands, that they had taken every step available to conceal the
paternity of the children, and they had thus
with the lesser facilities available before the
invention of artificial insemination achieved every result expected of it.
Before coming to the real subject of this
paper-the artificial insemination of a
woman by some man to whom she is not married-I ought to deal with the artificial
insemination of a woman from her husband, which may be resorted to by married couples
who cannot have children in the ordinary
way. This is not likely to give rise to any legal questions. The child is in fact the child
of the lawful husband, and from the point of
the lawyer-though not, I understand, from that of some theologians--it is merely an improved medical technique for enabling married persons to have children who might otherwise be unable to do so. It may, however, be worth calling attention to one point which might not occur to those unfamiliar with proceedings in the Divorce Division.
The law of nullity of marriage is untouched by artificial insemination. A decree of nullity of marriage is granted on proof of the
incapacity of the other party to consummate the marriage; ability to have a child is not material. Sterility on the part of a person
who is capable of sexual connexion is no ground for the annulment of a marriage; on
the other hand, a decree of nullity has in one case, at least, been granted to a man on the ground of his wife's incapacity to consummate the marriage, notwithstanding the fact that she had had a child by him. Accordingly, a woman who was liable to have her marriage annulled on the ground of her incapacity, or a man liable to have a decree of nullity given against him on the same grounds, could not affect the result of the case by proof that it was possible for the wife to have a child by artificial insemination
from the husband: indeed, even the fact
that she had had such a child would be no answer in itself to the suit, assuming that the facts could be proved.
That a decree of nullity would be granted

in a case where a child had been so born I do not affirm. It has always been a principle of
the ecclesiastical law which still governs these cases for nullity that no decree is to be
granted to a petitioner guilty of what is
styled " want of sincerity." The exact limits of this doctrine have never been laid down, and there is naturally no case at all similar to
that suggested, but in practice a decree would probably be refused in a case in which a child had been born by means of artificial in-
semination to the husband and wife.* To return, however, to the more ordinary
case of artificial insemination from some man to whom the woman is not married, and
whose identity is not revealed to her, it is clear that, however common such operations might become, there are few types of legal proceedings in which it is likely to come under consideration. Indeed, if we disregard
such melodramatic but improbable characters as the Machiavellian doctor who artificially inseminates a woman against her will and the unscrupulous adventuress who has herself artificially inseminated in order to bring false charges against some man, and confine our attention to situations which are reasonably likely to occur in practice, there are only two branches of law in which artificial insemination is likely to be of importance-the law of divorce and the law of inheritance.
I should perhaps refer in passing to the criminal law. Since the Eugenics Society has spent much time and money in trying to find a satisfactory answer to the question whether sterilization on eugenic grounds is a breach of the criminal law, it might occur to some of its members to ask whether the equally new process of artificial insemination was illegal. There is in my opinion no ground for any such fear. Since a married man who seduces the wife of another man, takes no precautions to avoid making her pregnant, and in fact
causes her to have a child, is not guilty of
any crime by English law however reprehensible his conduct may be morally, it can-
not be that to make a woman pregnant by
artificial means (assuming, of course, that
* Since this paper was written such a case has come
before the Court: on the particular facts of that case a decree of nullity was granted.

LEGAL AND SOCIAL IMPLICATIONS OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION 20I

she consents) can constitute a crime by any Now, if adultery consists in law of any

person participating in the operation. The sexual act between two persons of the

report of the Commission appointed by the opposite sex, one at least of whom is married

Archbishop of Canterbury advocates a to someone else, irrespective of whether it

statute making artificial insemination a does or could result in the conception of a

criminal offence: but such a law is not child, it seems to me to follow that adultery

likely to be passed since its tendency must cannot be constituted by the conception of a

obviously be to encourage perjury, adultery child without any sexual act in the ordinary

and blackmail.

meaning of the words. To put the same

The importance of artificial insemination argument in the language of moral theology,

in divorce is obvious. In spite of the reforms on which our divorce law is originally based,

iintroduced in I937 by Sir Alan Herbert's adultery seems to me to involve some ele-

famous Act, a large proportion of divorce ment of concupiscence or carnal desire which

suits are still concerned with sexual matters: is lacking in artificial insemination. More-

and, indeed, there would be something badly over, those who maintain that the woman

wrong with a divorce court which disregarded who is artificially inseminated is guilty of

artificial insemination. It has been suggested adultery have never specified with what

that for a woman to be artificially insemin- man and at what point of time She commits

ated and thus made pregnant by some man it, questions to which it is impossible to find

other than her husband would constitute an answers that do not have nonsensical

act of adultery on her part. Although this implications.

opinion has recently received the formidable Had artificial insemination become avail-

support of Mr. Justice Vaisey and Mr. H. U. able before I937 it may be that some provi-

Willink, K.C., I am certain that it is errone- sion would have had to be made by law for

ous. A married woman who commits this, but the passing of the new Matri-

adultery may be said to aggravate the wrong monial Causes Act in that year obviated any

done to her husband if as a result she gives difficulty, for one cannot doubt that the

birth to an illegitimate child; yet the birth court would hold that any woman so un-

of a child is not necessary in order to consti- feeling as to get herself artificially in-

tute adultery. It is no less adultery when seminated from some other source without

committed by a woman who is beyond the her husband's consent was guilty of cruelty

age of child-bearing, or who is already to him, which under the I937 Act is a ground

pregnant by her husband, or who by taking for divorce.

contraceptive measures avoids having a The branch of law, however, into which

child. The law goes further, and will regard artificial insemination will introduce most

as adultery any sexual act, notwithstanding problems is that concerned with the in-

that by its nature it cannot result in the heritance of property. It seems to me plain

conception of a child. Hence arise the that the child of a married woman not con-

occasional findings of adultery against women ceived by her husband, but as the result of

cited in divorce suits who have conclusive artificial insemination from some other

medical evidence that they are virgins. source, is not in law any more than it is in

Though such decisions may cause surprise fact, the child of her husband, even though

to newspaper readers they are eminently just circumstances may make it impossible for

and logical. Assuming that adultery is a him to disprove that it is his. Strictly

matrimonial offence, it would be intolerable speaking, the mother should register it like

that a man or woman guilty of it should any other child conceived by someone other

escape legal liability by establishing that, than a man to whom she is married, under

either in order to provide a technical legal her own name alone as an illegitimate child.

defence, or for some equally discreditable To do otherwise would be a breach of the

reason, they had done something other than law; but there is no likelihood of any pro-

the normal-sexual act of connexion.

ceedings being brought, for in practice a

202 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

married man is permitted to accept as his having one legitimate child by her husband,

own any child born to his wife during mar- left him to live at and manage a public

riage; and (subject to the recent and ill- house, and there had had three more

considered Inheritance (Family Provision) children by another man. The question, of

Act, 1938) he can by will make what financial course, was whether the first child could

provision he likes for such a child. Serious establish that the three others were illegiti-

difficulties may however arise where the mate and thus get the whole and not only a

children of the marriage are entitled to inherit quarter of the fund. In the Aylesford Peerage

money under some settlement by which, if case* in i885 the question was whether the

the husband and wife have no children, the title was to devolve on the younger brother

fund will go to a collateral relation. The sup- of the late Earl or on a son born to his wife

posed parents can of course pass off as their some years after she had left him to live in

own the child produced by the wife by Paris under an assumed name with another

artificial insemination, but such conduct is nobleman.

not honest; it is a fraud on the next heir no There have no doubt been other cases of

different from passing off as legitimate an the same kind which it has not been found

illegitimate child of the wife, or a supposi- necessary to report, and it is easy to imagine

tious child obtained from some other woman. the protracted family quarrels which must

Although an examination of authorities is have taken place. Similar quarrels and

seldom of interest except to a lawyer, it may similar litigation would ensue if a child con-

be relevant briefly to refer to some cases of ceived as a result of artificial insemination

this kind which are to be found in the reports. were put forward as entitled to the settled

Thus, in the Slitgsby baby case,* the younger funds or lands, particularly if it had been

brothers, who in the event of their elder known in the family that the husband was

brother dying childless were entitled to the for some reason incapable of having children.

family estates, alleged that a child born Such litigation would incidentally raise in

while the elder brother and his wife were in the acutest form the question of professional

California and registered as theirs was sup- confidence. Apart from medical evidence it

positious, being born of a different parentage would be much harder to prove the concep-

altogether. In the case of Rideout's trustst tion of a child by artificial means than its

in I870 there were five undoubtedly legiti- conception as a result of an adulterous

mate children of the marriage, but a share in association by its mother, which would

the settlement funds was claimed by a sixth probably be known to her friends and rela-

child. The husband and wife had separated tions; whereas the case would be simple if

in Paris, and from then until she gave birth medical men could be compelled to give

to this child nearly two years later the wife evidence of the artificial insemination of the

remained there: the husband, on the other mother or merely that her husband was in-

hand, returned to England immediately after capable of producing children.

the separation, never again lived with her If, on the other hand, the artificially

and never went to France at any material produced child is to forgo as he logically

time before the child's birth, except for one should, any claim to the settled funds, this

occasion when he went with his solicitor to renders nugatory his registration and accept-

Paris to get evidence against his wife, and ance as the lawful child of the marriage. It

did not see her. Accordingly, he alleged that will be difficult to conceal from the world at

the child was illegitimate. Similarly in the large, almost impossible to conceal from the

case of Yearwood's trusts not many years other persons interested under the settle-

later it appeared that the lady on whose ment, and quite impossible to conceal from

marriage funds had been settled had, after the child when he reaches the age for taking

legal advice, the reason why he is debarred

* (I912) 2 Ch. 21. t (L.R. io Eq. 41.)

from a share in the funds to which he

1 5 Ch.D. 545.

* ii A.C. I.

LEGAL AND SOCIAL IMPLICATIONS OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION 203

appears, as the child of his supposed father, children of parents who had been members

to be entitled.

of a very small English community living in

I can see no solution for this impasse a distant country.

except the reform which I myself have con- So far I have been dealing principally with

sistently advocated on other grounds- the law as it concerns the woman in question

namely the abolition of all settled funds. If and her husband: it may however be in-

a testator had to decide once and for all to teresting to consider its application to medi-

which existing persons he wished to leave his cal men. As I have already stated, criminal

money, he could before doing so make what proceedings could not be successfully brought

inquiries he liked as to his beneficiaries, in respect of the operation of artificial in-

including inquiries as to their parentage, but semination performed under any conditions

the persons named in his will would take the which can be reasonably anticipated. It is

money left to them irrespective of their even more obvious that a woman cannot take

antecedents and no one would be concerned civil proceedings for damages against a

to ascertain who was their father. Un- doctor for carrying out an operation which

fortunately, I see no chance of this reform she has herself authorized him to perform. It

being adopted, and so long as settled funds is arguable whether a doctor who artificially

exist they provide an insuperable barrier to inseminated a woman without her husband's

artificial insemination as a practical measure consent would be liable in damages to him.

among the limited class interested in them. I can see this forming the subject matter of a

I must resist the temptation to digress into most interesting legal debate in which the

a discussion of this subject, and will consider most fundamental principles of law might be

rather the objection which has been made to discussed. On the whole I think the answer

artificial insemination, that it might lead to is that the doctor may be liable, not on the

incest between persons unaware of their ground on which a co-respondent is liable,

relationship.

since artificial insemination is not adultery,

This is a social rather than a legal objec- and the divorce court.can only grant damages

tion. If a man formed an association with a for adultery, but on the ground that making

woman who as a result of artificial insemina- the wife pregnant has interfered with the

tion in the previous generation was in fact husband's right to her services and marital

his half-sister, there is no possibility of either duties-on the same basis, that is, on which

of them being prosecuted for incest for ex the outraged father is entitled to claim

hypothesi neither would have had knowledge damages against a man who has seduced his

of the relationship which must be established daughter and thus caused her to have a

for a prosecution to succeed. Socially the child. It may be objected that I am now

result would be no less deplorable. We must dealing with an unreal situation since any

admit that artificial insemination does lead medical man would be careful to obtain the

to an increased risk of incest being un- husband's consent first, but those who have

wittingly committed, but in so large a com- experience of actions brought against medical

munity as Great Britain the risk is very men may agree that such precautions are not

small. After all, this risk is always present. always sufficient to prevent actions being

Every man who has not complete confidence brought.

in the chastity of his mother-in-law runs As in the case of any other medical opera-

some risk that the true father of his bride tion or treatment, a claim for damages

may have been one of his own near relations. against a medical man could be made by the

The risk is infinitesimal in the social circles woman if he carried out artificial insemina-

in which most of us move, but it must be far tion unskilfully or negligently. This immedi-

otherwise in village communities which live ately raises the question whether such an

an isolated life and in which the standard of action could be based on proof that as a

chastity is not high, and the same might be result of artificial insemination the plaintiff

true where the bride and bridegroom were has found herself with a child far other than

204 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
what she had desired. Such a claim might whereas artificial insemination is put forward perhaps succeed if owing to the doctor's neg- as a means by which a childless wife can have ligence the unfortunate woman found herself a child without embarking on a love affair with a baby suffering from some hereditary which may destroy her relationship with her disease or abnormality: if her objection was husband, it involves her' abandoning the merely to the baby's general character or right to choose the father of her child and in physical appearance a court would probably the end may have even more disastrous conrefuse to entertain the action, but that would sequences to the marriage. Although I may not make the social problem underlying it seem to have reached this conclusion by a any the less difficult. To take the most somewhat indirect route, this seems the real obviously controversial example, what are objection to artificial insemination and one the rights as between the blonde Nordic which to most people will seem insurmountlady who feels miserable and humiliated at able, namely that all but a very few women having a child of unmistakable Jewish wish to select the fathers of their children, paternity and the liberal-minded doctor who which becomes impossible if artificial inthinks it his duty to do everything to elimin- semination is practised under the conditions ate racial differences and to discourage racial of secrecy which are ordinarily advocated. prejudice ? To say that no doctor would be If, on the other hand, the wife is to be guilty of such an appalling lack of sensibility allowed to know and to select the father of as is implied by the example I have given is the artificially produced child, the operation merely to restate the problem in a less will to the vast majority of persons seem dramatic form: it still remains true that pointless.
SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION
Foe the promotion of knowledge of the course of legislation In different countries, more particularly In the sevral parts of His Majesty's Dominlons, and In the United States." Presidan: The Rt. Hon. Lord MACMILLAN, G.C.V.O. Chairman of the Executiwe Comnitte: The Rt. Hon. Lord DU PARCQ
Editors: Sir ARNOLD McNAIR, K.C. Sir CECIL CARR, KC.B., RC., asssted by
Professor H. C. GUTTERIDGE, K.C., and F. H. LAWSON, Esq., D.C.L. Honorary Secretary: C. E. A. BEDWELL, Esq.
Annual Subscription - - - ONE GUINEA
Address: THE ROYAL EMPIRE SOCIETY, NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, LONDON, W.C.2
Eugenics Review, VoL XL, No. 4

