HOMOGAMY IN FERTILITY

An American Study of the Mating of Like with Like

By RAYMOND R. WILLOUGHBY, Ph.D.

IN i928 the writer, wishing to throw A SIGNIFICANT CORRELATION

additional light on the problem of the In the first inquiry conducted by the

correlation of intelligence and fecundity improved method, in which the Clark

by adding to the usual measures of the University class of I934 acted as subjects,

latter more remote degrees of relationship, systematic examination of the data was

propounded to a group of college and non- made in an endeavour to determine its possi-

college people the question " How many bilities. Among the findings appeared a

grandchildren (born alive) has your father's correlation between the number of the

mother had? Your father's father? Your father's siblings and the number of the

mother's mother? Your mother's father?" mother's siblings amounting to .36. It can

While the results were approximately hardly escape notice that this is an item of

satisfactory for the purpose intended, it some moment; for fertility is fairly well

became evident that the value of the data established as a character determined in con-

could be greatly enhanced at the cost of siderable degree by hereditary factors, and

little extra effort by requesting the subject homogamy in this character has its usual

to draw a pedigree chart showing the exact significance in favouring the differentiation

relationships of his grandparents and their of strains, plus the particular one that in

children and grandchildren, with dates of this instance the strains so differentiated

death or present ages. It may be pointed will survive in direct proportion to the

out in passing that, if carefully gathered, a degree of the trait. Accordingly, rather

body of data in this form offers extensive intensive efforts have been made to learn

possibilities for the demographic analysis whether the phenomenon is reasonably

of any population able to comprehend the constant, upon what it depends, and

directions, and that for such a population a whether it is essentially a contemporary

considerable sampling may be gathered with phenomenon; the results, not as unequi-

comparatively little effort. The method vocal as might be wished, but nevertheless

accordingly merits, in my judgment, much highly suggestive, are reported in the

more extended use than it has yet received present paper.

on the part of eugenists and students of We may consider first the information

population. The possible question whether yielded by the original (I928) material.

it can be still further generalized by includ- These data are of somewhat limited service-

ing, say, the great-grandparental genera- ability in the present problem on account of

tion and its descendants, must, however, be the form of the question asked (see above).

answered in the negative, at least for The average number of grandchildren of

America; since the number of intelligent the maternal grandparents (the same as

persons of the average age of twenty who that of either maternal grandparent except

have no information on their own first for plural fertile matings) correlated with

cousins is astonishing at first glance, and the average number of children of the

those who must consult their parents before paternal grandparents yields a coefficient

recording the number of the latters' siblings of .494+.036; this, however, is spuriously

are not rare.

large, since the subject and his siblings are

223

224 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

included in both distributions. To estimate The largest of these differences (seniors-

the size of this spurious contributing factor, juniors) is only I.67 times its standard

the Clark University data mentioned above, error; it is therefore concluded (i) that the

which were collected by the pedigree-chart I928 data indicate the existence of a degree

method, were examined; a correlation simi- of homogamy in fertility represented by a

lar in every respect to that noted above was coefficient of .28; and (2) that if any secular

calculated, and yielded a coefficient of trends in the tendency indicated exist, they

.496+.055. The latter correlation was then cannot be discovered from these data by

recalculated, omitting the subject and his reason of (a) the small secular range (not

siblings from both distributions; the result- more than a single generation between

ing coefficient was .280. It appears to be a faculty and freshmen), and (b) the small

legitimate inference that in both populations size of the sub-populations.

the spurious factor amounts to about .2I (in Passing to the freshman data of I930,

terms of raw correlation) and that the degree upon which the original observation was

of assortive mating in fertility is approxi- made and which were the first collected by

mately measured by a coefficient of .28. the pedigree-chart method, we may consider

It should be observed, however, that this three measures of homogamy: (i) The num-

effect is the aggregate of two generations; ber of siblings of each parent (or that num-

extreme fertilities in either the parental or ber plus the parent himself-the two values

the grandparental generation could be com- being indistinguishable in correlations);

pensated by extremes in the reverse direc- (2) the number of individuals in the sub-

tion in the other, and a coefficient of - .2o ject's generation on paternal and maternal

between the generations on the paternal side sides respectively; and (3) the average fer-
(approximately zero on the maternal) indi- tility of those of the paternal and maternal

cates that they are occasionally so compen- siblings who reproduced at all (so defined

sated; the true measure of homogamy in in order to allow both for individuals unable

fertility is therefore probably somewhat to marry and for the fact that the number

larger than that obtained.

of individuals in the subject's generation is

The distributions encountered in corre- partly determined by the number in the

lating these variables, it should be men- parental generation). It is possible that

tioned parenthetically, are, of course, not there are other suitable measures.

normal, but J-shaped; the regression lines The marital correlation in the trait (i) are, however, sensibly rectilinear, and the above is .34±.07, which becomes .356 upon

use of the product-moment coefficient is the exclusion of one extreme case (22 child-

therefore appropriate.

ren, from three wives); that in variable (2)

Examination of the sub-populations yields is .496+.055, which becomes .280 when the

the following results:

subject and his siblings are excluded from

r N both distributions; the correlation in vari-

Faculty ... ... Graduates ...
*Seniors ('28) ...

.525 45
*47I 46
.I27 I2

able (3) is .6i + .05 when the fertility of the parents is included in both distributions, or
.23 when this common component is

*Juniors ... ... .642 23 excluded.

*Sophomores ... .553 3I
*Freshmen ... .390 29

INTELLIGENCE VERSUS OCCUPATION

Non-college ... .422 23

When the data are divided into halves on

the basis of (i) intelligence of subject (Thur-

stone Psychological Examination), and (2)

* These are the terms in customary usage in occupational level of father (a subjective,

America to designate respectively the fourth, third, but probably fairly reliable division by the

second, and first year students in the standard undergraduate university or college course of four years.

writer), the following curious situation is disclosed: In the lower intelligence group

HOMOGAMY IN FERTILITY

225

homogamy in fertility is measured by a
cient of .509 ± .o85, while in the higher
gence group it is .078+.II7; and in
lower occupational group (skilled and illed labour, etc.) the coefficient is 3+.III, while in the higher (professional business) it becomes .429 + . Io8. There n insignificant correlation (biserial r=
±.I6) between subject's intelligence and
al occupational level; the homogamy lation of .356 for the entire group is ished infinitesimally (about .004) by partialling out of subject's intelligence.
ese latter findings make it possible to late somewhat upon the causation of
phenomenon under examination, which
nk may be regarded as established for freshman group also. The curious sal of direction as between intelligence occupational groups appears to be a uence of the low correlation between gence and paternal occupational level d in this group; that is, the two variare independent of each other, and ent in one category of either implies
ng with respect to the accompanying ry of the other. This is a fortunate stance, since each variable is free to its own contribution independently, the respective contributions can be disd free from each other's influence. low occupational level and high intelliwe must presumably see restrictive s, in the sense that individuals ssing these attributes are prevented doing something they otherwise might done; the effect of such restrictive facmight be to reduce range and therefore nuate correlations. But inspection of ndard deviations does not confirm this tion (product of the two standard tions=4.70 for the lower intelligence
4.65 for the higher; 5.44 for the occupational group; 3.78 for the ). The alternative appears to be that
tendency to which the restriction has applied is a true tendency to homo-
that is, in the lower intelligence and occupational groups there is a ten-
to seek a mate from a family approxig the size of one's own, which tendency

is modified with higher intelligence and lower occupational level.
The whole matter being somewhat difficult and hypothetical at best, the experiment should be tried of reversing this supposition. It is possible that the " normal " tendency is to avoid selective mating in fertility, that this tendency is seen in the higher intelligence and lower occupational groups, and that the modification comes with a decline in intelligence and a rise in occupational status. Choice between the two hypotheses is exceedingly difficult and tentative; it seems perhaps more conservative to suppose that the unmodified condition is that of random mating, and that the homogamy phenomenon is the one to be explained; further, it has been remarked upon that marked consciousness of kind and resulting stratification of society are often associated both with inferior social (and presumably intellectual) elements of the population and with somewhat uncultured but occupationally ' successful ' groups. This disposition of the problem does not, of course, disclose the mechanisms involved; it does, however, provisionally ally it with other somewhat recognized social processes. Further, whatever the mechanisms, the consequences are presumably of somewhat extensive social significance.
In summary of the Clark University data, there appears to be indicated a degree of homogamy in fertility represented by a coefficient of about .3, its exact size varying somewhat with the remoteness in relationship to the mating pair of the individuals whose fertility is used to estimate it. Subpopulation analysis on intelligence and occupational bases yields results which are provisionally interpreted as indicating that the homogamy arises from the accentuated consciousness of kind sometimes associated with low intelligence and high occupational
status.
A HIGHER SOCIAL GROUP
Pedigree charts numbering II3 have been collected from the students in an elementary psychology course at Smith College, through

226 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the courtesy of Dr. Hanna Faterson; the girls are mostly sophomores and juniors,
that is, about 20 years old. The social background of these girls is markedly different
from that of the Clark boys; the former
come from homes economically far more
stable than the latter, who are predominantly sons of local and near-by artisans,
small business men, and a scattering of professional men. Contrary to expecta-
tion, however, the parent-sibling distributions are not curtailed; the product
of the standard deviations is 6.9, as against 4.7 for the Clark group. The homogamy correlation for the entire group (omitting cases complicated by half-siblings)
is .363 + .o62, identical with that for the
parents of the boys. The group was divided into a higher and
a lower intelligence group (the Smith College Intelligence Examination is the source of the intelligence data); for the former the
homogamy coefficient is .496 + .077, for
the latter .3I4 + .o98. The group does not divide readily into higher and lower
occupational groups, since no men in ' lower' occupations can afford to send their daughters to Smith College; it does so, however, on the basis of busi-
ness (the selling of materials) versus professions (the selling of services requiring learning and skill). For the business group
the homogamy coefficient is .523+.070, and for the professional group .278 + .II7. The
correlation between intelligence and occupation could not be computed satisfactorily, since the latter is categorical and the former arranged in centile ranks; but the mean intelligence centile of the business group (which is also the more variable) is
0o.9o, while that of the professional group is 56.35, so that the correlation is evidently
of appreciable magnitude. The critical ratios (d /a-d) are in none of these instances statistically reliable, but some weight should be given to the inter-relationships of the values found.
The Smith College data confirm remarkably the existence of a homogamy coefficient of about .35. The results of the subpopulation analysis are not, however, so

clear. The consciousness of kind men in connection with the Clark results-_ perhaps be predicated of the business
as against the professional group; but_
indeed difficult to understand why the
of the homogamy should reside in the
intelligence group at Clark and the hi intelligence group at Smith. Since ther
relatively few sources of error in this r
we may assume that the cause for the di
ence is to be sought in the differences
tween the groups; the most obvious ences are in economic status and or The Clark parents are economically
less stable, and more of them spring
European and Jewish backgrounds; in way these factors appear to influence
degree of homogamy, in co-operation
intelligence, in different ways. Dr. Mason N. Crook has very kindly
lected pedigree charts from a total of Dartmouth College students enrolled, psychology courses. These boys rese the Clark group in sex and the Smith g in economic background. The produ the standard deviations of the distribul of parent-siblings is intermediate (about 5 between the corresponding figures for C and Smith. The homogamy correlation
- .132 + .o64. This group has also divided on the basis of intelligence and into business versus professional. The relation for the higher intelligence group
-.204+ .090, and that for the lower-.022 .o98. The professional group yields a efficient of - .159 ± . i6o, and the busin group one of - .049 +.II2; attention sho be called to a greatly reduced range, with standard deviation of only I.4, in the dis bution of siblings of fathers of the prof sional group. The median intelligence tile for the business group is 40, that the professional group 55. Except for th negative sign, the whole constellation facts here is very reminiscent of the Sm
group.
Dr. Harley N. Gould, of the Departmet of Biology of Newcomb College, Tulane Un versity, New Orleans, has recently publish an article on the sizes of families of

HOMOGAMY IN FERTILITY

227

young women students of his institution.* The most obvious source of such a corre-

At my request he has calculated from his data lation is in a mutual correlation of both

the coefficient of correlation between number series with date; it is well known that birth

of father's siblings and number of mother's rate is a function of time in certain civiliza-

siblings, i.e., our homogamy coefficient in tions, and it may be that a tendency to

fertility. This value turns out to be .II3+ marry into families of the same size as one's

.043-evidently a real and positive value, own is a consequence of the fact that there

but much smaller in size than most of those are no others. The number of the wife's

for the northern groups. The product of his siblings was therefore plotted against the

standard deviations is 6.9, identical with that date of marriage (which to be sure is not

for the Smith group.

the date at which the phenomena under con-

sideration were determined, but may be con-

IN EARLIER TIMES

sidered to be rather uniformly a constant

We have now canvassed the modern evidence bearing upon the problem of the .existence of homogamy in fertility as defined, and may pass to a consideration of evidence drawn from older populations. 'Ideally these should be college populations, 'to ensure strict comparability; it has not, however, been practicable to secure any such. The first population to be considered is that s of the marriages noted in the History of Gor,.ham, Maine, by Hugh D. McLellan. This tCommunity is a typical colonial Yankee

time later); the resulting distribution is curvilinear, with a gradual rise during the period of active colonization to a point of approximate stability in the late eighteenth century; this is maintained to about 1820, when a slight drop sets in, to be considerably accelerated about i850. The series was accordingly divided into four sub-series at I790, i820, and I850: the following are the corresponding coefficients:
rN 1743-1790 ... .09 66

village, racially almost pure English, agri-

I790-I820 ... .12 I59

cultural in economics, and considerably in-

i820-i850 ... .12 I57

bred through the mechanisms of cousin mar-

I850-I887 ... .05 52

riage, marriage of members of one fraternity to those of another, and marriage of one individual to two siblings. This inbreeding is a source of error of unknown proportions, as is also the fact that the upwards of 500 marriages considered are necessarily only those in which both spouses were born in the community. The range of
dates is from 1743 to I887, with a median

For the I820-50 period, the correlation between number of wife's siblings and date of marriage is -.13; for the period 1790I820 it iS .03. Partialling out the date in the I820-50 period reduces the homogamy correlation from .12 to .I0. Further reductions can be effected by using only one sister per family (and only one brother where duplication can be recognized-it

* the decade I8I0-20. The homogamy correlation differs
cously in various parts of the range;

should be recalled that the reductions would presumably be greater if this could occur throughout); on this basis the 1790-i820

e data are arranged alphabetically by surme, yet the correlation for the first I00 es is .26, while that for the entire series eluding half-sibling cases, but not countg the half-siblings) is .I5. Excluding if-sibling cases reduces this to .14±.03.

correlation becomes .o6+.o65 and that for
i820-50 .o8+.o6. On the basis of the Gorham results it may
be concluded that the true homogamy in this group was negligible; on the other hand, it should be observed that the coefficients re-

main stubbornly positive, from which it may

* Parental generation: average number born, 5.37; perhaps be inferred that the potentiality for

ived to age 21 4.73. Student generation: aver,number born, 3.I6.-Journal of Heredity, 1930,
,pp. 489-494.

homogamy has been present in the population for a long time.

228 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

FERTILITY IN A RELIGIOUS SECT

gamy correlations based on these

Another population was sought which and their sub-divisions are:

might serve as a check on the Gorham

rN

results; it was found in the records of a

I730-I790 ... .04 72

Schwenkfelder Society, a German religious

I790-i820 ... .30 66

sect with a history much like that of the

I820-I850 ... - .o6 I08

New England Puritans. Records are available extending from I736 to 1922, and

I850-I880 ... .o8 II5
I880-I910 ... .03 52

covering about 663 marriages. These data

I910-I922 ... .II 42

are subject to the same sources of error noted in the Gorham material, viz. that only Partialling out date of marriage v those marriages in which both spouses were the two largest of these correlations born in the society can be used, that there .I8 for the period 1790-I820 and is considerable inbreeding in the sense pre- for the period I9I0-22. (Correlations viously mentioned, and that the conditions tween date and wife's siblings are of search make it impossible to detect multi- for the earlier period and .28 for the plications of the same fraternity on the side recent, and are not significantly diff

of one of the spouses (here the wife, in Gor- for husband's and wife's siblings.) For ham the husband). The raw correlation be- former period, using only one husband tween the numbers of husband's and of each fraternity gives the raw correla wife's siblings is .I0. This is raised to .2I and the partial .I4. The latter val

.I2+.03 by the exclusion of cases compli- the smallest to which it has been possibl

cated by half-siblings, and probably de-
creased about as much (judged by results on sub-populations and other populations) by the use of only one case from each family (so far as the records permit, which in practice means the use of only one hus-

reduce this coefficient, and appears to re
sent a real phenomenon. For the period, the correlation for the group cases) whose occupations are known, an presumably "higher" on the averag
.32, and that for those of unknown oc

band from each fraternity); if practicable, tion (38 cases) is .28. This is the

the use of only one husband and only phenomenon previously noted in the m

one wife from each fraternity might result in a still further slight decrease. The
fact of this decrease appears to mean that
it is slightly more probable that a man will marry the sister of his brother's wife than a
member of another family. The regression lines (as in the Gorham material) appear to be satisfactorily rectilinear.
To eliminate the possibility of spurious correlation through the correlation of both variables with time, the number of the wife's siblings was again plotted against the date of marriage, with about the same results as in the Gorham group. Up to 1790 (72 cases) there was approximate

college groups. It is clear that over the greater part of
period considered there was no real h gamy in fertility among the Schw fejders; the most striking exception is cult to explain, but may be due to a
ning tendency, after social stratification
set in, but before effective communica was established, to marry within cl which had begun to show characteristic
tilities. It is conjectured that the tende to positive correlation from I9I0 to I may be the same as observed in o modern populations, since this is the range from which the college pa

stability at 5.5 children per family; from marriages were drawn.

I790 to I820 there was a rise to about 9;

from I820 to i850 there was approximate THE CONCLUSIONS SUMMARIZED

stability at the decreased value of 7; beyond This concludes the presentation of

I890 there was a steady drop to about 4 at evidence gathered; it remains to derive

the end of the period of record. The homo- generalizations that seem to be indicated

HOMOGAMY IN FERTILITY

229

We have examined five modern and two direction have existed in the population for storcal populations, separated by an aver- the entire duration of the nation, the condige lapse of about a century. The historical tions necessary for their expression have
pulations, widely different in location and arisen only in the present century. tural background, but similar in isolation The tendency in question appears from
d economics, agree in showing nearly com- the present data to be always associated with lete absence of homogamy in fertility, superior economic status, if it be permisthough the traces that are shown are in nine sible to include in that term the business t of ten instances positive; only one of group (probably with a higher income) as
ese is of a size comparable with that of the opposed to the professional group. The odern populations. Of the modern popu- data on intelligence are conflicting, but in tions, all of which are drawn from the the two groups with male children the ass sending children to colleges, three are greater tendency towards positive homo-
a size represented by a coefficient of .3 gamy resides in the lower intelligence group
somewhat greater; these are groups send- (as measured by the intelligence of the child*g children to north-eastern colleges, and ren), and in the one with female children in o sex factor in the children appears to be the higher intelligence group. From these f any determining power. A fourth, drawn findings the hypothesis is proposed that
m a southern population (the children homogamy is dependent upon mating within *ng female), shows a much reduced, but social classes which have approximately
dently real correlation (.ii). A fifth, characteristic fertilities, and that the stratim a population sending male children to fication is greater among less intelligent and famous and expensive north-eastern col- more financially successful groups. But ge, yields a negative coefficient (-.I3). whatever the cause, the consequences of such
e may conclude that homogamy in fer- a phenomenon, where it has become estab-
ty was, as recently as the days imme- lished, must be of considerable significance ately preceding the War, a tendency of in promoting the differentiation of classes despread but not universal application; based upon fertility and the survival of d that although potentialities in that those with the higher fertilities.

MEETING OF THE EUGENICS SOCIETY
PROFESSOR C. G. SELIGMAN, F.R.S.,
will g,ive an Address on
Race and Temperament
at 5.30 p.m. (Tea at 5 o'clock), on November 25th, at the Rooms of
the Linnean Society, Burlinpton House, Piccadilly.
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 3.

