THE EUGENICS SOCIETY*
By G. AIRD WHYTE, M.C., B.Sc.

DO not let me startle you if I open past year or two: " Eugenics in our time."

with the words " Forefancy your Translated into everyday usage, that means

deathbed " ! My father had a drama- stimulate worthwhile eugenic ideas today:

tic turn of phrase. This was one of his free stimulate by thought, by word and by action

translations of the Latin motto " Ut often in association with others of like mind

migraturus habita." Another of his transla- and by the use of such funds as may reason-

tions was, " Live, as though about to ably be expended. Our Society has in hand

depart." Why? Why do I say this to you ? a programme of work for the next two or

Well, let me return to that in a moment. three years. We shall outrun the constable

Our Society is perhaps comparatively well and trench to a small extent on our capital

placed financially because our principal resources. The Council has given grave

benefactor was a rich Australian pasturalist, thought to this course and has so decided,

the late Henry Twitchen, who left us a large wisely in my view.

sum of money, of which, in the main, only What, then, are our immediately pros-

the income may be expended. There is a pective activities and how do we propose to

proviso that we may spend some of the put them into effect ? Pilot inquiries and

capital, and this we have done and are doing trial runs have been a feature in the past

to a moderate extent.

and will be in the future. The achievement of

Now do you see why I say " Forefancy results on a national scale is beyond our

your deathbed"? If that is too shuddering power and our purse. Therefore, we believe

a thought, then let me say " Take time by that we shall gain much by banding our-

the forelock."

selves from time to time, with like-minded

I take it that you are interested in eugenics, groups, by providing expert knowledge from

that you regard much of what the Society within our ranks and with the addition of a

does as being of prime value to the nation relatively small amount of money to meet

and to the world at large. Of course you do, part of the costs, make possible an inquiry,

that is why you support the Society so a piece of research, a trial on a practical

actively-or do you? Whether you d6, or working scale.

do not, please all do so in the near, the very That is how we proceed-now whither?

near, future. Find a new member: " Fore- Before the war we were for a time allied

fancy your deathbed," that is, add a codicil to PEP-Political and Economic Planning

to your will and leave the Society £5, fIO -in a population study. It is interesting to

fioo, or what? For we need now and shall note that the findings were very similar

need in the future.

indeed to those of the Royal Commission on

The Society would be very hard put to it Population before which the Society placed

to achieve what it does and what it plans to its evidence and its ideas. We are again,

do but for Twitchen's wisdom and fore- this time perhaps more actively, associated

thought. Will you supplement this ?

with PEP in another study with the simple,

I find that our late honorary treasurer, if all-too-comprehensive, title " World Popu-

Clinton Chance, with whom some of us have lation Policy." Two members of our Council,

worked so long and so closely, and whom we Dr. Bertram and Dr. Blacker, represent the

shall greatly miss, had made use of a phrase Society at the meetings, to which PEP has

which has often been on my tongue in the also kindly invited me. Lord Simon of

Wythenshawe, who is also a member of our

* Part of a symposium on " The Future Activities of the Eugenics Society," at a Members' Meeting on Wednesday, November i8th, 1953.

Council, is chairman of this Study Group. Our Society bears one-half of the cost. The

'7

i8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

aim is to produce a report which will centre containing information never before readily

around two principal aspects:

available, and much of it but partly known.

firstly-prospective world sources of food, raw It then only required one question in Par-

materials and power in relation to prospective increases in world population, and
secondly-to review possible practical measures of population control, particularly in areas

liament to set the hive humming. The Ministry of Health and the Home Office instantly found in our report a valuable and

now contributing most markedly to popu- basic contribution giving a lead to the study

lation growth.

of these matters on a national scale. Copies

The general urgency of these problems is of the book found a ready sale amongst

only too well known to you all. The specific various local health authorities, and we may

value of such a report, at this moment of supplement. this by further direct distri-

time, has its cogency in the forthcoming bution.

UNO World Population Conference to be Today, we are on the threshold of another

held in Rome in the autumn of I954. such inquiry-in a manner of speaking the

A sufficiently comprehensive factual volume, counterpart to "Problem Families "-

such as we hope to produce, where none namely " Promising Families." We are

today exists, might well form a handbook asking the question " Is it possible to ascer-

and sourcebook for that Conference, or a tain which families might best be encouraged

guide for the Governments concerned after to reach adequate fulfilment ? " In this

the event.

connection it is of particular interest to

In August of this year the Society sent recall Mr. Kenneth Hutton's inquiry limited

two delegates to the Stockholm Conference to the families of Winchester scholars. This

of the International Planned Parenthood inquiry had our support and the result was

Federation. That was a natural sequence to published in the EUGENICS REVIEW of

our support of the Bombay Conference in January I953, being his lecture at our

I952, and of the Federation itself whose Member's Meeting a year ago. It may, we

central secretariat we now house in our hope, be extended to other schools. It might

building at 69 Eccleston Square. In I953-54 in part answer the question-Do the higher-

and in the two ensuing years we are also intelligence groups in the community main-

engaged to give this useful and practical tain an adequate reproduction rate ?

body our financial support. Our Society is At one time we gave office accommodation

represented on the Council of the Federation to the Family Planning Association. Today,

by Dr. Blacker as vice-chairman and by now" that they have so greatly expanded

myself as joint honorary treasurer. The their manifold activities, and have moved

eager interest which official and unofficial elsewhere, we are still closely interested in

Indian groups extended to the I952 Bombay all they do. That Association's funds are

Conference alone warrants all and every help stretched to the limit. It therefore seemed

we can give to the International Federation. appropriate to our Council to support specific

Such immediate aid to practical work in the research activities similar to those in which

field-and what a population field is India ! in past years our Society had itself been

-is in its own way as useful and valuable engaged. We have promised financial aid

as the wider if more theoretical joint study for one year, renewable for a possible further

with PEP. Where India leads, maybe all period of two years, to enable basic research

Asia will follow.

to be continued and extended, such research

You will all recall our pilot inquiry- being a background requisite to the Associa-

"Problem Families." Here is a good tion's Approved List of Contraceptives. The

instance of the use of the Society's expertize ultimhate and most desirable aim is that all

and funds. By centralizing the knowledge the control work, which the Association now

and experience of the various authorities, undertakes, should become the responsibility

Health, Education, Police and others, it was of some central and authoritative body.

possible, at small cost, to produce a volume Thereby, all contraceptives offered for sale

THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

by reputable chemists would have to pass set will also provide, through Dr. Blacker and

standards.

Dr. Carter, the specific examinations and

The Association's honorary secretary, advice to individuals, or guidance as to the

Mrs. Pyke, was elected an Honorary Life medical clinic or institution best suited to

Fellow of. our Society this summer. Mrs. advise the inquirer.

Rachel Conrad, a member of our Council, is May I call your attention to our Statement

a member of the Association's National of Objects, with its outline of origins, eugenic

Executive Committee. From this you will studies and policies, -and now particularly

see that we have close and active linkages. call your attention to the paragraph dealing

In another direction we have taken similar with our policy concerning termination of

action by banding ourselves with like-minded pregnancy.

people. The Society's " Statement of A.L.R.A., The Abortion Law Reform

Objects " sets forth the need for " Five- Association, is sponsoring a Bill to amend the

Purposes Parenthood Centres." The "Five law of abortion as it stands today. Repre-

Purposes " are marriage guidances, pre- sentatives of our Society have met those of

marital health examinations, advice on birth the Association, in order to discuss the terms

control, treatment of infecundity and eugenic of the Bill. I must not pre-judge our own

prognosis. The long-established North Ken- Council's decision in this matter; therefore,

sington Women's Welfare Centre is now suffice it to say that this Bill would seek to

changing its name to the more comprehen- codify what is largely accepted today as

sive North Kensington Marriage Welfare general practice, and, it is hoped, will include

Centre. It has as its far-sighted founder a clause of more definitely eugenic interest.

and chairman, Mrs. Margery Spring-Rice. In any case, maybe all that can be achieved

Early this year we had useful and interesting at present, is more of a general educational

talks with her and her associates. That and propaganda value rather than necessarily

original and pioneering centre already glves the outright expectation of early Parlia-

effect to all and more than all our suggested mentary success.

" Five-Purposes " save only eugenic prog- From all this you will have gathered that

nosis or guidance on eugenic problems both we have a fairly full programme ahead of us.

before and after marriage.

But eugenics is so wide a subject, so com-

Our Council has approved a grant-in-aid, prehensive, that each year new projects, or

spread over three years, to enable the North extensions of old, will appear on our horizon.

Kensington Centre to expand its work to So I know that each and all will render the

cover eugenic guidance, while we on our side Society every possible aid.

D

