THE GALTON LECTURE, 1947

DR. W. NORWOOD EAST delivered this year's was to show that, if the three-quarters of a

Galton Lecture at Manson House, Portland million criminals were between the ages of

Place, on February I7th, I947, taking as i6 and 65, the proportion of criminals within

his subject " The Non-Sane Non-Insane this age group was very much higher than

Offender."

if the comparison was made with the total

Mr. B. S. Bramwell, who took the chair, population.

apologized for the absence of Lord Horder, Dr. C. P. Blacker, moving a vote of thanks,

who had unfortunately been prevented from said that while the whole of Dr. East's

presiding at this year's Galton anniversary. paper had been of interest to him, the most

February i6th, said Mr. Bramwell, was the important part from the Society's angle was,

anniversary of the birth of Francis Galton, he thought, the proposal put forward at the

but as that day fell this year on a Sunday end. Dr. East's thesis, if he had understood

it had been arranged to celebrate it on the it correctly, was that three roughly definable

following day. The Council had considered classes of offenders were discernible between

the question of returtling to the former the boundaries of indisputable sanity and

practice of having the Galton Lecture in the indisputable insanity. Each class com-

evening, after a dinner, but had come to prised a continuous series. Those offenders

the conclusion that it was probably better placed in the series nearest the boundary

to carry on the war-time arrangement, a line of insanity were, while the furthest

decision which in the present circumstances removed from normality, the least respon-

had turned out a wise one. Introducing sible, culpable or blameworthy for their

the lecturer, he reminded the audience that actions; they were therefore the least likely

Dr. Norwood East was probably the coun- to be reformed by sentences given with a

try's leading criminologist to-day and that solely punitive purpose.

he had some time been chairman or presi- But the measure of their " irresponsibility"

dent of almost every legal and medical and unblameworthiness was also the measure

society that concerned itself with his of their danger to the community whose

topic. need for protection could not be ignored.

The text of the Galton Lecture is published Punishment for such people should serve

in full elsewhere in this issue. At its con- what Dr. East had called a " demophylactic "

clusion, Mr. Cecil Binney commented on rather than a punitive purpose; its aim

the lecturer's statement that there were should be to safeguard the community

few criminals over the age of 65. What was rather than to punish the offender.

to be deduced from this ? Was it a fact The new type of institution proposed by

that the offenders abandoned a life of crime Dr. East resembled a colony for defectives

at the age of 65 or was there a high mortality or epileptics rather than a ptison; a real

among them ?

effort could there be made to rehabilitate

In reply, Dr. Norwood East said it was or treat the offender over a sufficient length

certainly a fact that offenders did give up of time to make the effort worth while.

crime as they got older. For many years This proposal was of great interest to the

he had been in touch with a man who, in Society. If we could, at any time, do any-

a recent letter, had remarked that now, at thing to help in the establishment of an

75, he had- kept straight for fifteen years. A experimental place of this sort, Dr. Blacker

study of the figures showed that the number hoped that we should be informed.

of aged criminals was relatively very small; A warm vote of thanks to Dr. East was

and his reason for quoting the age limits carried with acclamation.

22

