VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION

Private Member's Resolution

O N February 28th, I934, Mr. Hugh In this House we are divided into parties,

Molson, M.P. for Doncaster, made largely because we disagree among ourselves

the following speech in the House of on what kind of social and political organiza-

Commons:

tion is most likely to reduce the amount of

I beg to move,

human suffering in the world. This afternoon we are discussing the question of those

" That this House considers that the facts set who come into the world and start life

out in the Report of the Departmental Committee on Sterilization indicate a state of affairs calling for action, and respectfully requests His Majesty's
Government to give immediate consideration to

without the normal equipment with which
most men and women are endowed; people who would not be able to live a normal life

the unanimous recommendation of the committee in any conceivable organization of society,

in favour of legislation permitting voluntary sterilization in certain classes of cases."

however it might be reformed and improved. We are discussing to-night the question of

Eugenic sterilization has been discussed those of whom it might be said,

in this country and elsewhere for many years past, but it has only recently become a question of practical politics owing to the

" Good were it for that man if he had never been born."

publication of the report of the Departmental The first point which I wish to establish

Committee upon this subject. I should like, is that mental deficiency or disorder is to a

if I may, to congratulate the Minister of large extent hereditary. There is already

Health on the foresight he displayed in a great volume of evidence both in this

setting up that committee and in securing country and abroad which tends to show

the services of such distinguished men and that there is a likelihood of mental defect

women to serve upon it. What, however, being transmitted. In view of this evidence

is most remarkable is that this committee it is not surprising that all the witnesses who

has presented a unanimous report upon appeared before the Departmental Commit-

what is admittedly a most controversial tee were of opinion that heredity was an

subject, although unanimity among medical important factor in bringing about these

persons is not very common.

conditions. Certain researches have been

The report unanimously recommends that made in foreign countries, and I will quote

voluntary sterilization should be legalized a couple of examples. At Rostock in Meck-

subject to certain safeguards. The persons lenburg it was found that 67-6 per cent. of

who may be sterilized are first, either mental the inmates of an institution had one or two

defectives or persons who have suffered parents mentally defective. At Renton, in

from mental disorder; secondly, those who the United States of America, out of I,OOO

suffer from some grave physical disability cases of mental deficiency, only 350 had

which has been shown to be transmissible; both parents normal.

and, thirdly, persons in whose case there is Not satisfied with this, however, the

evidence that he or she is likely to transmit Departmental Committee made an investiga-

mental defect or disorder. Sterilization in tion itselt, one which was of special interest

these cases is to be permissible in the first because most of the researches that had been

place if the patient makes application for it; made before had investigated the parentage

secondly, if it is recommended by two of mental defectives. This research was

medical practitioners; and thirdly, if the carried out through the agency of local

Minister of Health, after considering their authorities in England, who investigated the

certificates, gives his approval.

children of mental defectives, and produced

47

48 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

some figures which are of extraordinary interest. A group of 3,733 parents investigated had 8,84I children. Of these no less than 2,00I, or 22-5 per cent., had died. If I
may make a slight digression in passing, apart from the question of mental deficiency,
we find among the children of mental
defectives this abnormally high rate of mortality. Of those who survived, grouping
together defective and retarded children
between the ages of 7 and I3, the percentage of sub-normal children was 40 4. In the
group of children over I3 that proportion had risen to 45-4 per cent.
It may be said that all this evidence only goes to show that in point of fact a large
proportion of the children of mental defect-
ives are themselves mentally defective, and
that it does not prove that it is due to here-
dity. The suggestion may be put forward that the condition may to some extent be
due to environment. In the first place, there is no antithesis at all between heredity and environment. It is recognized that in the majority of cases there is some predisposition which has been acquired by heredity and then, where the environment is unfavourable, complete mental deficiency occurs. Drs. Penrose and Turner made a special investigation of a number of cases and found that in their opinion 9 per cent. only were defective for purely environmental reasons; 29 per cent. were defective for reasons of heredity only, and the remaining 62 per cent. were mentally defective on account of a combination of heredity and environment.
Heredity and environment go hand in
hand. The child is bom with some predisposition to mental deficiency, and then the sordid, the squalid, in many cases the appalling environment of a house looked after and kept by a mentally defective woman or man results in a child being stunted in mind as well as in body. It is therefore a part of my case that even if it were not the fact-which, I think, I have shown-that mental deficiency is largely hereditary, it would still be undesirable for mentally defective persons to have children. Upon this point the Report of the Board of Control for the year I928 is almost conclusive:

"It can hardly be denied that the 200,000 defectives who must remain in the community are wholly unfitted for parentage. Though it does not necessarily follow that the children of defective parents will themselves be defective, they are liable to be exposed to the miseries and hardship of being brought up by a mother or father incapable of self-control, who will almost certainly neglect them and may, by reason of mental instability and ungovernable temper, aggravate by cruelty the results of ignorance and neglect."
I claim that it is right that the State should not only enable but encourage parents of that kind to refrain from incurring the responsibility of having children.
Perhaps I might give one striking case where environment and heredity have gone hand in hand. I will quote from the memorandum submitted to the Committee by the National Society for the Prevention ofCruelty to Children. In this case the family consisted of mother, father, and six children. The mother was mentally affected and also two of the children, and a boy aged I3 and a girl of ii were mentally deficient and suffering from paralysis. In the case of the boy the society were able to put him into a home and the result is that he has improved both mentally and physically. No home could be found for the girl and the result is that she has grown steadily worse. She is now almost completely paralysed and has become practically an imbecile.
Although it is not part of my case to prove that mental deficients are more fertile than other people, perhaps I might be allowed to quote the case of a family where there was a strong taint of mental deficiency, insanity and epilepsy. The mother had I7 children. The first two, who were illegitimate, died of convulsions in infancy. The third, a daughter, was mentally deficient and is now in an institution. The fourth, a son, was certified as an imbecile and died at the age of II. The fifth was a son, certified as a mental defective and is now in an institution. The sixth was a daughter, an imbecile. The seventh was a daughter, who died at the age of II months. The eighth was a son, certified as an imbecile. It is only at the ninth child that we find the child living and in service. The tenth child died

VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION

49

in infancy. The eleventh child is of low greater or lesser extent affected, and these

mentality, the twelfth is of average intelli- in turn are likely to transmit the taint to

gence, the thirteenth is now in an institution, another generation. In the case of another

the fourteenth is in an institution, the common form of insanity, manic depressive

fifteenth was recently admitted to an insanity, the proportion is slightly less, but

institution, and the sixteenth and the seven- still high, 4-I per thousand. Sixty to 66

teenth children are so small that it is not per cent. of the children are likely to be

yet known whether or not they are normal. affected if one parent suffers from this form

Apart from the strong tendency to of insanity, but if both are affected probably

mental deficiency, it is from these same ioo per cent. will be affected.

stocks that there come those who compose Let me say a few words about the giving

our social problem group. They not only of valid consent on the part of the patient.

contribute to those who are filling our In the case of manic depressive insanity

mental homes, our asylums, our hospitals, there is, first of all, mania, then acute

our infirmaries, our gaols and our work- depression, and then a normal and lucid

houses, but they are also contributing a interval, during which time there is no

large proportion of the criminal element of question that the patient is able fully to

the population, especially of those who are understand what is involved by sterilization,

charged with offences most repellent to and in such cases perfectly valid consent

ordinary people. Of the cases of criminal could be given. In the case of schizophrenia

and indecent assaults dealt with by the it is not suggested that any sterilization

Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to could take place while the person is actually

Children, about one-half of the girls involved suffering from that disease. It can only be

were feeble-minded, while in the case of the when such person can be safely released

males it was exactly one-half. As will be from the institution that the question of a

recognized by anyone who has sat on a voluntary operation for sterilization will

public assistance committee, it is these arise.

stocks which contribute a vast quantity of I have referred to cases of mental defici-

the unorganized, unskilled casual labour ency and insanity, but there is a third class

which is so often upon the rates and which so of people concerned, and I am not sure that

often undercuts a higher, more skilled and they do not present the strongest case of all

better type of labour. So much for the for legalizing sterilization. I refer to the

question of mental deficiency.

carriers who, in the words of the report, are

Cases where the mind and the intelligence " persons whose family history gives reason-

have not fully developed raise then one able grounds for belief that they may trans-

question which I have dealt with; cases mit mental disorder or defect." Those are

where the mind has developed normally up the same people in whose family there is

to a certain point and then become disor- some taint of insanity. Carriers are probably

dered raise quite a separate question. In I. times as numerous as affected people.

this class there are two particular forms of In their case there can be no question of the

insanity, both of them fairly common, in reality of consent. The safeguard that a

which it has been almost proved-I do not certificate of two medical practitioners is

wish to overstate my case-that the taint is needed will make certain that it will not be

hereditary. In the case of schizophrenia, in undue sensitiveness on the part of these

Bavaria 5-8 per thousand of the population persons which causes them to apply for

are affected, and it has been shown there by sterilization. I have no doubt that most

figures that where one parent is affected hon. Members kmow of cases of people,

IO per cent. of the offspring are insane and perfectly normal and perfectly sane, who

34 to 40 per cent. are mildly affected. refrain from marriage and from having

Therefore, half the offspring of one single children because they know that some parent

person suffering from schizophrenia are to a or some uncle or other relative has suffered

D

50 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

from insanity, and they feel very strongly further inquiry, more particularly as there

the responsibility and the danger of trans- will be no chance of that inquiry being

mitting to offspring the misfortune that they conclusive. Whether voluntary eugenic

have seen in their parents or relatives. In sterilization is legal or not is not known,.

regard to people with so high a sense of because there is no decided case upon the

civic and parental responsibility, who do subject. Therefore, no inquiry could make

not desire to have children to whom they the law on the subject certain. If we are in

might unwittingly transmit so appalling an favour of eugenic sterilization, let us legislate

affliction, are we justified in refusing them and make the law certain. If we are against

the right to save themselves and their it, then let us equally legislate and make the

possible children from any such danger? law certain.

There is also the question of physical In the Motion which my friends and I

infirmity-deaf mutes and blind persons. are putting before the House we do not put

I went over a school for deaf mutes and foremost in our arguments the consideration

discussed this matter of sterilization, long of the cost to the community of the increasing

before the Report of the Commission came number of mental defectives and insane

out, with a gentleman who had given up the persons, great as that burden is. The capital

whole of his life to devoted service in the cost of a bed for each person in one of these

interests of one of the most unfortunate institutions is about £400, and the weekly

communities in our midst, and he told me cost of maintaining them there is 25S., or

that, from his own personal experience and more than an unemployed man and his wife

observation, he thought the danger of these cost. The cost of mental deficiency service

disabilities being transmitted was very last year was over £I,8oo,ooo and of mental

great, and that he was strongly in favour of hospitals over £8,ooo,ooo. Important as

legalizing sterilization. My hon. and gallant that point is, we do not over-stress it. Nor

Friend who will second the Motion, if time do we emphasize overmuch the position of

allows later in the evening, will deal in some the potential parent. We are not in any way

detail with the procedure recommended by the committee and the safeguards against
abuses. I see that on the Order Paper, in the name
of my hon. Friend the Member for Mile End (Dr. O'Donovan), there is a reasoned Amendment which suggests that what is needed is a further Departmental Committee to investigate the present legal position in regard to sterilization. I could have wished and

seeking to restrict the right of the individual to parenthood, much as we may desire them
to regard it less as a right than as a responsibility. Rather we make our appeal to the House in the name of the children, the unborn children. We ask that an operation, which even now is legal and not uncommon, if the purpose of it is to prevent danger to the life of the mother, should be equally made

expected that my hon. Friend's Amend- legal if the purpose of the operation is to

ment would be less timid than it appears to prevent the danger of being born to the

be. Whether one is opposed to the principle afflicted and unwanted child, whose whole

of sterilization or not I cannot see that any life in this world must be one of misery and

good purpose would be served by having a humiliation.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 1

