Cbe Eugenic8 )Sbucation 5ocfet .

Vreement: MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN.

Vicelpreztbentz:

SIR JAMES BARR, M.D.

HON. SIR J. FINDLAY,

SIR JAMES CRICHTON-BROWNE, F.R.S.

PROF. STARR JORDAN.

MR, MONTAGUE CRACKANTHORPE,' -K.C.

DRL A. PLORTZ.

BISHOP D'ARCY.

PROF. SEWARD, F.R.S.

MR. W. C. MARSHALL.

Memberv of Council:

MR. CROFTON BLACK.

DR. F. W. MOTT, F.R.S.

SI -E. BRABROOK, C.B.

MR. G. P. MuLTDGE

MRS. THEODORE CHAMBERS.

MRS. E. F. PINSENT.

MR. R. NEWTON-CRANE.

MRS. G. POOLEY.

MR. A. E. CRAWLEY.

PROF. E. B. POULTON.

SIR H. CUNNINGHAM, K.C.I.E.

MRL W. REA, M. P.

HON. SIR JOHN COCKBURN, K.C.M.G. DR. LANGDON DOWN.

DR. A. REID.
MR. JOHN RUSSELL.

MR. HAVELOCK ELLIS.

DR. ETTIE SAYzL.

PROF. J. FINDLAY.

PROF. A. SKDGEWICL.

DR. GREENWOOD.

F. C. S. SCHILLER, D.SC.

DR. W. HADLEY.

PROF. A. SCHUSTER, ENLS. -

MRS. HI. C. HEATH.

EDGAR SCHUSTER, D.SC.

ADMIRAL HENDERSON.

DR. C. G. SELIGMAWN.

MAJOR IIILLS.

MRS. SYMONDS.

Dr. INGE, THE VERY REV. THE DEAN OF

PROF. J. A. THOMMSON.

ST. PAUL'S.

DR. TREDGOLD..

MR, HOPE-JONES.

MRS. ALEC TwEEDIL

MISS K1RBY.

ML W. C. D. WHETHAKM0 R$f

MR. ERNEST LANE, F.R.C.S. MR. W. C. MARSHALL.

MR. ARNOLD W-HI1 -
DR. DOUGLAS W.IT -' X

LADY OWEN MACKENZIE.

,..oaA. AoRp

Hon. Treasurer: MR.- P. VON FLEISCUL.

Members repreting Br Co

1,J
-I
., .."
;1'1.
-,v_
-.

MR. CAREY GILSON. MR. I

AR. R. T. BODEY. MR. D. LAU-RI.- i'

la TlSmePc:

P eJLaDt:

MR. E. NETTSLESHIP, F.R.S.

PROF. J. HI. LINDSAY.

Mew Zealant:

THE HIGH COMMISSIONER OF NEW ZEALAND.

-. o-V- .4S$
ADMIW HEN >

"Eugenics is the study of agences under sodal control that ay ire the racal qualities offuture generatons either physically or omit ." X

OBJECTS.

I. .-- +. .

Persistently to set forth the National Importance of Eugenics in order to miy public X

and create a sense of responsibility in the respect of bringing all matterspertas i t

parenthood under the domination of Eugenic ideals.

II.

To spread a knowledge of the Laws of heredity so far as they are surely known, an&

that knowledge may affect the improvement of the race.

TII. - se

To further Eugenic Teaching, at home, in the schools, and elsewrhere.

.s--^

MMembership

-

AssociLte Membership

SUBSCRI[PTION.

::

- - One Guinea per nu

- - Five Shillings per Annum,

PRIVILEGES.

Attendance at Lectures, Discussions, and General Meetings, Use of Library.

Members only receive THE EUGENICS REVIEW free.

Forms of A

Xlication

for

Membership and Associate can be obtained of the

Membership and Hon. Secretary.

fullwPpri

rs of Me

OFFICES: Klngsway House, KIugWaay, W.O. OiFFICE HOURS: 10.30 am. to 5 p.nm, Satudayu 10.80 a.m. to t 4-!

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

ARCHIV FUR RASSEN-UND GESELLSCHAFTS-BIOLOGIE IX., 2, March-

April, 19I2.

H. Lundborg: Uber die Erblichkeitsverhaltnisse der konstitutionellen

(hereditaren) Taubstummheit und einige Worte uber die Bedeutung der

Erblichkeits/orschung fur die Krankheitslehre. A paper based on the

statistical material contained in E. A. Fay's " Marriages of the Deaf,"

Washington, I898. Lundborg's conclusions are: (i) That constitutional

deafmutism (deafness) is transmitted according to Mendel's Law and is

recessive and monohybrid, and that consequently it can appear in o, 25,

5o,
is

and not

ioo per cent. of the offspring; identical with constitutional,

(2) or

that congenital deafmutism transmitted, deafmutism-

strange that this fact should require demonstration !; (3) that inquiries

into heredity enable us to analyse diseases and " clinical entities " in a

much more exact manner than formerly; and (4) that Mendelism throws

a clear light on the nature and biological effects of consanguinity. All

these conclusions may be very true; but conclusive evidence is hardly to

be obtained in regard to the relations of deafmutism to Mendelism unless

we know in each particular case the chief causes of the defect, or are

at least able roughly to group them-a thing that is impossible to one

who uses Fay's material, which takes no account whatever of the medical

side of the question.

W. Strohmayer: Die Vererbung des Hapsburger Familientypus. A

continuation of an interesting paper, of which the first part appeared in

No. 6 of last year.

W. Weinberg: Weitere Beitrage our theorie der Vererbung. 4. Ueber Methode und Fehlerquellen der Untersuchung auf Mendelsche Zahlen
beim Menschen.

M. Alsberg: Schadelform und Umwelt-Einflusse. A criticism of a paper by J. Kollmann which appeared in the Archiv, I9II, No. 3. Kollmann holds that the characters of the existing races of man are fixed and unalterable, and that the tendency of various types to merge into one another is a result of crossing alone. Alsberg refers to papers by Johnannes Ranke, Nystrom, Walcher, and Prof. Boas of Columbia University, in support of his own belief that the form of the head, at least, which has long been considered one of the most constant of racial characteristics, can be rapidly changed by environmental influences.

K. A. Weith-Knudsen: Der Mensch. A descriptive account of G. Sergi's theories and classification of races.

S. Weissenberg: Zur Biotik der sudrussischen fuden. Beginnender
Zerfall. A study in degeneration.

F. A. Theilhaber: Die Genealogie erner judischen Familie in Deutschland. A study of the Samson family.

To the Kleinere Mitteilungen: W. Claassen contributes a short paper on comparative statistics, showing that in spite of the efforts of the prohibitionists the consumption of alcohol in America is increasing.
W. Schallmayer: Rassenhygiene und sonstige Hygiene. An interesting discussion of the alleged incompatibility of individual and social hygiene, and a criticism of W. Prausnitz's rather needless defence of indi
vidual hygiene in his Grundauge der Hygiene, gth ed.

414 EUGENICS REVIEW

In the section headed Diskussion und Erkldrungen, W. Weinberg replies to a letter from Karl Pearson which appeared in the preceding

number of the Archiv.

Among the books reviewed are the first three of an important series of papers which is in course of publication in the Archiv fur Entwicklungs-
mechanik der Organismen, on the surroundings of the germ-plasm; a
recent study of the problem of the determination of sex by R. Hertwig;
papers by P. Kammerer, F. A. Woods; A. Grotjahn's Soziale Pathologee,
and Slosse and Waxweiler's Enquete sur l'alimentation de Io65 ouvriers
belges (No. 9 of the Notes et M6moires de l'Institut Solvay de Sociologie,

I9IO).
ARCHIV FUR RASSEN-UND GESELLSCHAFTS-BIOLOGIE. Vol. 9, Heft. 3.

May-June, 1912.

A. Hink: Selektion und Patkologie. Eine Kritik des Ueber-

Lamarckismus auf dem Gebiete der Pathologie. An able criticism of a

paper by Professor Duerst, of Bern, entitled " Studies in the inheritance

of structural changes (variations) caused by disease processes, as well as

of pathological alterations, malformations, and a cause of many species and variety characters

idnistehaesesanoifmatlhewoorrlpda,nsanads

their significance for practical stock-breeding." According to Duerst,

such characters as the cranial development of Polish and Houdon fowls

and hooded ducks, the crooked legs of the Dachshund, the absence of

tails in certain breeds of fowls, the bare necks of vultures, the pecu-

liarities of tumbler and pouter pigeons, etc., are of pathological origin,

and clear examples of the inheritance of acquired characters. According

to Hink and the majority of present-day biologists they are simply

variations that have been intensified by the breeder.

H. Roemer: Uber psychiatrische Erblichkeitsforschung. An inter-

esting and suggestive paper read at the second Congress fur Familien-

forschung, Vererbungs-und Regenerations-Lehre (Giessen, April, 1912),

on the various methods of investigation of the inheritance of mental and

nervous defects, with a special plea for uniform methods and co-operation

between psychiatrists in the collection of statistical data.

Agnes Bluhm: Zur Frage nach der generativen Tuchtigkeit der

deutschen Frauen und der rassenhygiensischen Bedeutung der arstlichen

Geburtshilfe. The generative capacity of a woman depends upon the

fcs(o5hu)rimlftdoh-roebfberraeehraaiessnrtog-n;cfaet(peh4ad)acitinftgoti.rheesr:ensIuin(smitb)raeenfcrgoearortfdococtdnooicnsec(eiiea)pvstiew,ineogn;ethsca.(iv,2se)dnunfoorotritndrgpeurtsceetorgwnmnofiarinntnechedyym;essntota(;3tm)isuatfcinochdrs

by physiological capacity as by the wishes of the parents. The per-

hipcanurenvsendevbtsaaaPtlngiredegan.agoct)feiosAtntooefrdbieIylm4fei-e7sPcmcitaaniprvcrereurrisia,acgcgeaee4npsst0a.capiapet(nnryHadorcffeeomnpnretrtyl.eepvmrroa)vefta.gurcnriaaeesnseAcsbfcyircroootfihmrssds.7itsen5hrgioplweiHttrnoeyrceamaenratevi.aengdrl(auyAyieunscbttaeyorirtelttfihhutieelzs

difficult to get at the facts, for a large proportion of miscarriages are

intentional, and only a comparatively small number of them become

known. births arrives

By comparing some collected in Baden and at the conclusion that,

statistics of miscarriages and premature Hamburg at different times, Dr. Bluhm at least in the localities above mentioned,

there is a decrease, if Very much the same bearing, in regard to

only a slight one, in the can be said in regard to which the author quotes

capacity for pregnancy. the capacity for childW. Schallmayer: " The

more successful the advance of tion will have the need of it."

obstetrics, the more (To be concluded in

the the

coming genera-
next number.)

drheerinWFi.estcthCuenlbaeaKrslnseaeihnnr:buanugDeriiienscSEhtreanndatFharumunindlgieLdnaenrdi.mIalnAadhlrisecthueIdn9yIOBofeuvnotdhlekdeinreuutnrUgirtsiaioncnhe3on0f

PERIODICAL LITERATURE

4I5

30 small peasant and labourer families in the Rhine Province with remarks on the nutrition of the urban population. Claassen finds on the basis of Hagemann's investigations (I91i) that the country population of the Rhine Province, like the urban population of Germany, is over-nourished with fat and under-nourished with carbo hydrates. In the country districts this is largely due to the substitution of pigkeeping for cattle-raising and to the desire of the people to get as much meat as possible for their money; in the towns it is closely connected with the general use by the working-class population of beer restaurants, where highly-seasoned dishes, rich in fat, enter largely into the diet supplied, for the reason of their thirst-provoking qualities. As is well known, in such restaurants, the beer and not the food sold is the chief source of profit, and the landlord is as a rule merely a manager employed by the brewer owners. Under-nutrition with the proteids is in part due to the substitution of coffee for the milk-soup of former days, in part to the idea that meat is the best of all diets. That the consumption of carbo hydrates is much greater in the country than in the towns is largely a result of custom and individual preference.
Diskussion und Erkiaruntgen. H. ten Kate: Nachtrag zu " Schadelform und Umwelt-Einflusse " von Moritz Alsberg. The author is unwilling to agree with Alsberg (see supra) because he does not believe either in the accuracy of F. Boas's investigations or in the correctness of his conclusions, and quotes from a criticism of Boas by Paul R. Radosavljewich (American Anthropologist, New Series, Vol. I3, No. 3)
in confirmation of his doubts. Among the books reviewed are:-R. Hertwig: Uber den derseitigen
Stand des Sexualitatsproblems nebst eigenen Untersuchungen (from the
Biologisches Zeutralblatt, Vol. 32, Nos. 1-3, 1912). W. Wegelius: Untersuchungen uber die Antikorperubertragung von Mutter auf kind.
(Archiv futr Gynaekologie, Vol. 94, No. 2, I9II). E. Mattauschek and A. Pilcz: Beitrag zur Lues-Paralyse-Frage. (Zeitschrift f. d. ges. Neurologie u. Psychiatrie. VIII. pp. 133-152, I91I). An investigation of army statistics relating to 4,134 German officers who were infected
between the years I88o and I900. Of the 3,430 cases that have been
under observation for ten years and longer, there are I6o paralytics, or 4'67 per cent. In the majority of cases of paralysis the disease appears
from 9 to I2 years after the infection. The percentage of cases of paralysis is highest among those patients who recovered from their
original infection without suffering a relapse, G. von Bunge: Die Tabakvergiftung, Basel, 1912, 13 pages. The author endeavours to prove that chronic nicotine poisoning as well as chronic alcohol poisoning is a cause of degeneration. Mosse und Tugendreich: Krankheiten und soziale Lage. The first instalment of a very important work on the influence of social conditions in the causation of disease.
HENRY BERGEN.
THE ARCHIVES D'ANTHROPOLOGIE CRIMINELLE, DE MEDICINE LEGALE ET DE PSYCHOLOGIE NORMALE ET PATHOLOGIQUE for March I5, I912, contains a
short account of Professor Niceforo's investigations into the connection between economic conditions and causes of death, the death-rate and the birth-rate. Returns from the eighty sub-divisions of the city of Paris provided part of the material, and the degree of interdependence between the phenomena was measured by means of correlation coefficients. As indices of the economic conditions in the different quarters the proportion of workmen among the employed inhabitants and the average rent were taken. From the official statistics of the city of Lausanne the author
calculated the correlation between the death-rate and the average con-
ditions of life with regard to hygiene and sanitation, prevailing in the various quarters. The general results obtained in these two ways cannot be profitably compressed into a smaller space than that which occupy

4I6 EUGENICS REVIEW

the article here referred to, but one or two special points may be noted. Whatever index is taken of poverty the correlation between it and deathrate through pulmonary phthisis or other forms of tuberculosis is extremely high, reaching to *985. The death-rate from other causes is generally strongly correlated with poverty, but not to this extent, and the correlation reaches its lowest, 250, in the case of typhoid fever. The influence of poverty on the death-rate from all causes in Paris is highest between the ages of 5 and 6o years. In Lausanne the condition which more than any other is correlated with a high death-rate is a low number of cubic feet of air per person in the bedrooms. EDGAR SCHUSTER.

SociAL DISEASES (quarterly). The July number of this journal con-

tains an interesting paper by Professor Seligman, epitomising the recent

history of the movement towards a proper view of the subject of prostitu-

tion. He shows how the best opinion steadily grows against State regula-

tion, and urges the necessity of education on the subject. Florence Kelly

follows on the economic causes of prostitution, showing how they mainly

consist of under-payment of women workers. She advocates a wide

extension of the minimum wage principle. Dr. Kelly sees a close rela-

tion between sexual and other forms of vice; he looks on religion as the

main safeguard, while law and police (in America) do more harm than

good. The commercialisation of vice is discussed later on, and the need of

safeguards in public places of recreation.

The October number contains a hopeful report of the progress of the

Society, and of the increasing public interest in the evil results of vice

to the nation. There are two useful papers on sex instruction of the

young and adolescent. Notification of V.D. is also discussed; the author

believes in it, but waits for the education of public opinion. We our-

selves believe notification in the full sense to be impossible; nameless

notification is much to be desired for statistical purposes; but even

in the way of this there are great difficulties, mainly owing to the common

employment of the quack for these diseases.

We recommend this quarterly to all who wish to keep in touch

with the progress of opinion on this subject.

D. WHITE.

THE JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL ETHICS, October, I912. The Decline of Culture, by E. Benjamin Andrews, affirms that culture has declined in America-that the accepted system of values ignores the higher attributes and qualities of man and awards recognition solely to wealth. This is attributed to four main causes: (i) The wealth of the
country; (2) " the spread of communistic socialism "; (3) bad theory and
practice in education; and (4) " depressing views of the world, life, and man." To the latter cause much weight is given, and the application of biological laws to human society is regarded as a fostering of individual selfishness, and necessitating a denial of all the moral qualities hitherto valued. " Either naturalistic thinking or altruistic conduct must go by the board " is one of the extraordinary statements made. Surely a knowledge of the laws that govern human racial development is likely to require a great increase of altruistic effort on the part of its students. A belief in special creation hardly seems necessary to culture or conduct in these days.

THE SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW, October, I912. The Origin of Exogamy, by W. M. Strong, M.D. The author analyses the causes of exogamy in
the evolution of human society, and traces its development through primitive tribes, showing the need of such customs in the development of a more stable form of society.
THE NINETEENTH CENTURY, December, 1912. The Church and
Divorce, by Bishop Welldon, gives a most clear and interesting statement as to the position of the Church with reference to the problem of divorce,

PERIODICAL LITERATURE

4I7

considered in conjunction with the recent Report of the Royal Commis-
sion. In the lucid historical statement with which the article opens it is shown that in pre-reformation days the fifteen grounds for the annulment of marriage recognised by the Church did much to make the recognition of indissoluble marriage a possibility, and yet bring it into conformity with the demands of human nature. The Reformed Church retained the sacramental view of marriage, but not the methods of annulment, hence the present difficulty, although " the absolute indissolubility of marriage . . . .is not the law of the Church accepted by the Reformers." The author concurs in the main with the Report of the Minority, although in alluding to insanity as a ground for divorce,he recommendsthat it should be a reason for prohibition of marriage, and emphasises the fact that the
Minority Report advocates that " where one of the parties to a marriage at the time when it takes place was suffering from an aggravated infectious disease, or where the seeds of insanity or incurable drunkenness were already sown in him or her, the marriage should judicially and ecclesiastically declared to be null." Members of the Church are urged to maintain the highest possible ideal of the sanctity and stability of marriage, the family being one of the corner stones of both Church and
State.
The Passing of Marriage, by W. S. Lilly, is an attack on divorce on what purports to be sociological ground, but while being convinced that the family should be the unit in the State, the question of the quality of offspring is absolutely ignored.
The issue of BEDROCK for October, I9I2, contains a number of articles of considerable interest. In Recent Discoveries of Ancient Man Professor Keith gives an admirably lucid account of some of the recent French, German, and English finds, with special reference to the relative ages of the remains of the Neanderthal and modern types. In What will Posterity say of Us the " Hermit of Prague " reveals the future as an
ample prospect of pleasant materialism. Dr. A. M. Gossage contributes a criticism of a previous article by Dr. Archdall Reid; Dr. Gossage inclines to the belief that different races are by nature equally susceptible to disease, and that, whereas a rapid improvement in immunity may follow the introduction of a disease, this improvement ceases in spite of further selection. In a rejoinder Dr. Reid severely criticises Dr. Gossage's methods of reasoning, and gives a number of examples supporting his
original generalization that the inhabitants of the different parts of the
globe show insusceptibility to the various bacterial diseases according to ,their past experience of them.
THE BULLETIN OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF MEDICINE, October, 1912. In an interesting paper entitled Remedial Conditions of the Feeble-Minded and Backward, Dr. Cornell discusses various theories of the causes of feeble-mindedness, and expresses the opinion that feeble-minded children cannot generally be cured, but can have their condition materially improved by appropriate treatment. Dr. Groszmann emphasises the differ-
ence between feeble-minded and backward children, contrasting those
whose development is arrested from those with whom it is retarded. In
reply Dr. Cornell describes both classes as mentally deficient, but advo-
cates differentiation of treatment.
THE ECONOMIC REVIEW, October, I912. In A Negative Ideal the
Reverend Edward Latham criticises the change of sentiment which this country has undergone in abandoning the lasssea faire doctrines of the
early Victorian economists in favour of the modern movements of social reform on socialistic lines. The writer contrasts Ruskin's ideal of " the
greatest number of noble and happy human beings" with the modern
ideal of the abolition of poverty. Under the latter the State must sooner

4I8 EUGENICS REVIEW

or later concern itself with the problem of population, and take control of domestic life. The proposed legislation for the better care of the feebleminded is regarded as constituting the thin edge of a very big wedge.
THE SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW, October, 1912. Science and Race Prejudice. Of the three theories, that the races of men are unlike, that they are unequal, and that they are equal, Mr. G. Spiller attempts to establish the third. Much emphasis is laid upon the success of coloured students in white universities. The concluding dictum, " Birth counts for nothing, civilisation for everything," sufficiently summarises the author's point of view.

THE INDEPENDENT, New York, September 12th, 1912, contains a short account of the First International Eugenics Congress by Dr. Raymond Pearl, one of the most distinguished of the American representatives. After passing briefly in review the main characteristics of the Congress, the large membership, the wide range of discussion, the undogmatic tone of the meetings, and the objects of social and eugenic interest in the exhibition, Dr. Pearl gives unstinted praise to the hospitality with which the delegates were treated, and especially to the skill and ability with which the Congress was organised and administered.

BULLETINE DE LA STATISTIQUE GENERALE DE LA FRANCE. Tome I.,

fasc. iii. April, I912. This important publication continues to maintain

the high level promised in the earlier issues. The special study in the

present number, contributed by M. Dug6 de Bernozville, deals with the

statistics and administrative machinery of Poor Law relief in the United

Kingdom and in the German Empire. In the tables of general statistics

the speculative student may be interested to note that the highest position

in the Servia,

scale of marriage while the " Great

and birth rates Powers," for the

is occupied by most part, rank

rBeulla&tiavreilay

and low

in these instances of racial vitality.

NOTES.
Congress of Family Histories, and the Study of Soeial Regeneration.* - In April, 1912, an important meeting was held at Giessen with
the object of promoting the scientific investigation of family histories and the study of heredity and social regeneration. Its business was conducted in the following manner: First, lectures of an educational kind were delivered to a very large audience, consisting largely of men whose professional work brought them at one point or another in contact with the series of problems under discussion. A congress was then held for the purpose of hearing and discussing papers in the usual manner. The contributions to the congress were classed in eight sections. Of these the first dealt with methods of research and the laws of inheritance, the second with the study of genius and of the normal in human beings, and the third with abnormalities. Of the papers in this section we would call special attention to Dr. Crzellitzer's on the inheritance of diseases of the eye. He finds that in short-sighted families the women are more affected than the men, while the reverse is the case where the defect is long sight. Consanguinity of the parents figured largely as a contributory cause of anomalies of vision, particularly of the rarer ones. The first-born appear more subject to short sight than those born later, the number of children in the family and the social class of the parents appear to have very little influence, while their age at procreation appears to have none at all. Crzellitzer's paper is given only in abstract, and we hesitate to express an opinion on the validity of his conclusions without seeing the full evidence. For a detailed account of his investigation the reader is referred to the Berliner Klinischen Wochenschrift for 11912.
Criminal propensities are the subject matter of Section IV., which contains an interesting paper by Professor Rosenfeld on the relation between race hygiene and the prevention of crime. The question, of the sterilization of the insane and of insane criminals on social and eugenic grounds was introduced by Dr. Oberholzer in a paper which led to a lively discussion.
The fifth section contained contributions dealing with the results to be obtained from the investigation of particular families. Among them is one by Professor Sommer on the family of Schiller's mother, which is valuable as an attempt to elucidate the causes which produce genius.
Under tne heading of heredity and sociology two very interesting studies may be found, namely, that of Professor Roller on the length of life in Germany during the Middle Ages, and F. Macco's attempt to answer, by the investigation of records preserved at Aix-la-Chapelle, the question: Does the economic or social rise of families lead to dangers in relation to race hvgiene?
The seventh section is concerned with breeding and inheritance, while the eighth is headed " Regeneration," which means apparently race-
* Bericht uber den II. Kurs mit Kongress fur Familienforschung, Vererbungs-
und Regenerationslehre, in Giessen vom 9. bis 13. April 1912. Von Geh. Med.Rat Dr. Robert Sommer, o. Professor an der Universitat, Giessen. Halle,
Carl Marhold, 1912, pp. 590.

420 EUGENICS REVIEW

regeneration. The only contribution which touches this subject is that

of Professor Sommer, " Renaissance and Regeneration," and this con-

sists almost exclusively of a consideration of the causes which led to

the renaissance in Florence and Tuscany. Though necessarily rather

speculative in its nature, this paper is one of the most interesting and

suggestive of those read before the Congress. Professor Sommer does

not attempt to find any single explanation of the remarkable fact that

in the period beginning in the middle of the thirteenth century and

ending with the close of the fifteenth, so many men of genius or remark-

able talent were born in Florence; he attributes it rather to the combina-

tion of a variety of circumstances of which the most important are to be

looked for in the political condition of that city during and preceding

the renaissance. On the one hand, the constant conflicts and fights

between the dominant factions led to the development of a true aristo-

cracy of war, while on the other hand among the more peaceful citizens,

who were constantly struggling to obtain their rights, another aristocracy

of trade and craftsmanship arose. The happy combination of the best

psychical traits of both classes, which was brought about by inter-

marriage between them, provided the biological basis on which outside

influences, such as the notable beauty of the neighbourhood, could

operate to produce the creators of so many noble works of art.

In conclusion, it must be said that, although the Giessen Congress

did not bring to light any notable contribution to the sum of human

knowledge, it provided opportunities for the careful consideration of

facts already wholly or partly known, which was no doubt the object

for which it was organised.

EDGAR SCHUSTER.

Mental Deficiency Bill.-It is with the deepest regret that we have had to relinquish all hope of seeing this much-needed measure become law this Session. The most important clauses were discussed in Committee, and considerably amended; and a promise has been given that a Bill on the lines thus laid down will be introduced next Session. Our efforts to secure this result must not, however, be in the slightest degree relaxed; for the danger of measures being dropped if no party capital can be made out of their enactment seems to be increasing. Great numbers of Boards of Guardians have passed resolutions of protest against the diopping of the Bill, and these afford the best possible indication of the widespread demand for this measure. Members of Eugenic Societies should continue to urge on their representatives in Parliament by every available means the necessity of dealing with measures affecting the nation as a whole, and should unsparingly condemn their abandonment on account of the mere demands of party.

Eugenies Edueation Conferenee.-On the recommendation of the Education Sub-Committee, the Council have decided to support the organisation of a conference of heads of elementary and secondary schools and training colleges to discuss the desirability and method of introducing eugenics into the educational systems. The appended letter has been widely circulated, and has already elicited a large response. The date of the conference will be Saturday, March Ist. The morning session will be opened at II a.m., and take as subject for consideration, " The Eugenic Ideal as a Factor in the Formation of Character." The afternoon session, opening at 2.30 p.m., will discuss " Methods of Introducing the Eugenic Ideal into the Schools." Among those who will probably speak are the Headmaster of Eton, the Dean of St. Paul's, the Principal of Bedford College for Women, and the Headmaster of Bedales. Members of the Society are invited to attend the conference as passive members; only those who are qualified as experienced teachers are eligible to take part in the discussions. Members wishing to attend should apply for tickets

NOTES

421

to the Offices of the Society, as admission will be by non-transferable ticket only.
Letter circulated to heads of schools and colleges:

"Dear Sir or Madam,

It has been suggested to us by a number of Head Masters and Head Mistresses that the

problenm of educational

isnytsrtoedmuscinof

the the

idea of country

Eugenics-and, to a limited degree, Sex needs special attention at this moment.

Hygiene-into
Many teachers

the
are

feeling the need of such instruction? but also realise that, in the present state of pu lic opinion, it

needs trained and competent handling, if it is not to prove more harmful that beneficial.

Although many would like to see the teaching given, the lack of teachers with the necessary

knowledge and training stops the way.

After having been approached by several educationalists, this Society obtained the advice of

the Educational Officer of the London County Council, the Head Inspectors of the Board of

Education, the Heads of Training Colleges and others, with a view to introducing the subject into

the curriculum of the Training Colleges, and thus ensuring that in future at least some teachers

shallItresceeievmesantoelbeemetnhtearoypignrioounndoifngthiongeEuogfeneixcpse.rience in educational matters, and also of the

Education Committee of this Society, that while instruction in Eugenics and Sex Hygiene must be

directly given to teachers, it should be transmitted through them to children and adolescents, only

indirectly-through Nature Study, History, Literature, and for more advanced students, through

Biology and Civics. It also appears that alterations in the curriculuim of the Training Colleges are

made at the suggestion of the Heads of Schools. To offer an opportunity of free discussion as

to

the best

methods

of

introducing

these

subjects

into the various systems of education, and to enable those who have not yet dealt with the subject

to hear accounits of the results obtained by those who have, a small Conference will be held towards

the end of the Spring term. Only Head Masters and Mistresses (of Elementary and Secondary

Schools and Training Colleges) are invited, but when prevented from attending in person, the

Head may appoint a duly qualified teacher as his or her representative.

To facilitate attendance the Meeting will be held on a Saturday afternoon probably March Sth

or I5th, in LondoL.

The Agenda will be drawn up by a small and representative Committee of Heads of Elementary

and Secondary Schools and Traing Colleges, meeting before Xmas.

Attendance will be free, the Conference being organized by the Education Committee of the

Eugenics Education Society.

If you wish to attend, will you kindly inform us of your intention, and all further particulars

will be sent to you. In the event of our receiving no reply to this letter, no further intimation will

be sent, etc.

Leeture Course.-The growth of interest, due in part to the International Eugenic Congress, has brought a fresh duty before the Societythat of providing an elementary grounding in the science of eugenics for those who wish to study the subject seriously, and are not content with the superficial knowledge obtainable from general lectures. There is also a growing demand for speakers who will deal with elementary practical eugenics in such a manner as to arouse interest in its problems in the minds of the public. It is impossible to speak on such a
difficult subject as eugenics without an elementary knowledge of biology, heredity, genetics, and recent statistical work. The following course has therefore been arranged, and the warm thanks of the Society are due to Professor Adam Sedgwick, Mr. Dobell, Professor Punnett, and Mr. Udny Yule for, ensuring the success of the first year's work by their
co-operation and support. GROUNDWORK OF EUGENICS.-A year's course of lectures will be
held, by kind permission, at the Imperial College of Science, South Kensington, from January to December, 1913. It will be arranged so as to be open to the public on the payment of the fees stated, and previous university training will not be compulsory. The course of elementary biology is to meet the needs of those who have not already studied that subject elsewhere. The session will be divided into three terms: January to March; April to July; October to December. An examination will be
held at the end of each term.
Certificates will be awarded to students qualifying in all three examinations, proof of having qualified in an examination in biology held elsewhere and recognized by the Committee as being sufficient, belng accepted as qualification in the subject in question. As the number of students is limited to twentv-five, application should be made immediately by those who wish to take the course. Fees must be paid in advance, and all communications addressed to the Hon. Secretary, Eugenics Education Society.

422 EUGENICS REVIEW

Spring Term, Tuesdays, 5.30 p.m., January I4th to March 2oth.

"Elementary Biology," with special reference to the reproductive system.

A course of twelve lectures, followed by practical and experimental work

in the laboratory by Clifford Dobell, M.A. (Lecturer in Zoology, Imperial

College of Science). Lecture, 5.30 to 6.30 p.m.; practical work, 6.30 to

8.30 p.m. Synopsis of syllabus: " The general anatomy and physiology

of a mammal "; " plant"; "Outlines

Tofhecygteonleorgayl";a"naAtnoamtyomayndanpdhpyhsyisoiloolgoygyofofa

flowering the repro-

ductive systems of mammal and flowering plant: gametes, fertilization,

and embryonic development."

Summer Term (April to July). "Heredity " (including evolution,

genetics, and heredity in man). A course of twelve lectures by R. C.

Punnett, F.R.S. (Arthur Balfour Professor of Genetics in the University

of Cambridge). The course will deal primarily with the facts of heredity,

though some attention will be devoted to the various theories which have

been held at different times. The lectures will also deal with some of the

problems associated with the terms evolution, variation, and mutation.

Illustrated specimens will be provided, as far as possible, to serve for

demonstration and discussion at the end of each lecture.

Autumn Term (October to December). A course of twelve lectures on

"Statistical Methods applied to some Problems in Eugenics," by G. Udny

Yule (University Lecturer in Statistics, Cambridge). The course will deal

primarily with the statistical methods of greatest importance to the

student of eugenics, the practical calculation and the interpretation of the

constants involved. Examples of the application of such methods will be

drawn, as far as possible, from recent work, and some problems of special

interest will be considered in detail, as illustrations in the latter part of

the course. Exercises may be given or discussions held after each lecture.

Fees: For complete course of three terms, io Ios..; for each separate

term, X4 4s. Lecture Committee (appointed by the Council of the

Eugenics Education Society): Dr. M. Greenwood, junr., Dr. E. Schuster,

Professor A. Sedgwick, Dr. Douglas White; secretary, Mrs. Gotto.

NOTICES.
New Ofllees.-The new premises of the Eugenics Education Society
are at Kingsway House, Kingsway, W.C. Several members have generously assisted in the furnishing and fitting of the offices. Our thanks are especially due to Miss Henderson for the loan of the Council room furniture and many gifts; to Mrs. Heath for a bookcase; to an anonymous donor for two further bookcases; to Mrs. von Fleischl for curtains and mirror; and especially to Mr. Newton Crane for having found the offices, and arranged the terms of the lease on behalf of the Society.
Voluntary Workers.-The increase of accommodation makes it possible for us to invite the help of two more voluntary workers to help with the secretarial and other work for one or two days in the week. Such help is especially needed from the middle of January during the organisation of the Education Conference, to be held on March Ist.
A course of six leetures will be given at University College, on Tuesday evenings, 8 p.m. Admission is free, but by non-transferable tickets, which may be obtained from W. A. Seton, M.A., University College, Gower Street, W.C.

NOTICES

423

February iIth: I. " Heredity, Environment, and Parental Habits in their Relation to Infant Welfare," by Karl Pearson, F.R.S. (Galton Professor of Eugenics).
February z8th: II. " Heredity of Piebaldism and of Albinism in Man," by Karl Pearson, F.R.S.
February 25th: III. "The Relation of Fertility in Man to Social Value in the Parent," by Ethel M. Elderton (Galton Eugenics Laboratory).
March 4th: IV. " On some points with regard to our Present Knowledge of Heredity in cases of Feeble-mindedness," by David Heron, D.Sc. (Galton Eugenics Laboratory).
March iith: V. " On the Mortality of the Phthisical under Sanatorium and Tuberculin Treatments," by W. Palin Elderton, Fellow of the Institute of Actuaries.
March i8th: VI. " On Recent Studies of Heredity in Dogs, and their Bearing on Heredity in Man," by Karl Pearson, F.R.S.

QUARTERLY CHRONICLE.
CENTRAL SOCIETY.
PROGRAMME.
October x8th, at the Theatre, Burlington Gardens, 8.30 p.m.-Mr.
E. J. Lidbetter opened his course of four lectures on " The Social Applications of Eugenics" with No. I., " The Basis of Eugenics." The President in the chair.
November 7th, at the Grafton Galleries, 5.15 p.m.-Mr. Lewis P. Orr
on " Insurance Research and Eugenics." The President in the chair.
November I5th, at the Theatre, Burlington Gardens.-Mr. E. J.
Lidbetter, " The Social Applications of Eugenics," No. II., " The Public Service." Mr. Newton Crane in the chair.
December 5th, at the Grafton Galleries, 5.I5 p.m.-Dr. M. Green-
wood on " Some Popular Misconceptions of Eugenics." The President in the chair.
December 20th, at the Theatre, Burlington Gardens.-Mr. E. J. Lidbetter, No. III., " Social Sanction the State Control." The President in the chair.
MEETINGS.
October i5th.-The Dean of St. Paul's addressed a meeting of the
Rural Deanery at St. Leonard's Vicarage, Hoxton Square, on " The Church and Eugenics."
October i6th.-Major Hills gave an address to the Christian Social Union on " The Care of the Feeble-Minded."
October 24th.-Mr. Lidbetter addressed the Ilford Women's Adult School.
October 25th.-A public meeting was held at the Town Hall of Manchester, preparatory to the formation of a branch of the Society in that place. The Lord Mayor presided. Major Darwin delivered an address, and among those who spoke in support of the resolution advocating the formation of a branch were Bishop Welldon, Professor Arthur Schuster, Dr. Mumford, Professor Findlay, and Father Day.
November ist.-Mr. E. J. Lidbetter gave an address on " Eugenics and the Poor Law " to the St. Matthew's Literary and Debating Society.
November iith.-Mr. E. J. Lidbetter gave an address to the Battersea Polytechnic Literary and Debating Society.
November i7th.-Mr. Dixon Kingham addressed the British Socialist Party.
November i8th.-Mrs. Gotto read a paper on " Women and Economics in relation to Eugenics," before the Union of Ethical Societies, at the Emerson Club.
November 2ist.-The Rev. the Dean of St. Paul's addressed a public meeting at Worthing on " The Aims and Method of Eugenics."
November 27th.-Mr. Rolleston Stables gave an address at the Peel Institute, Clerkenwell Green.
November 28th.-Mr. Dixon Kingham gave a lecture to the Forest
Gate Literary and Debating Society on " Practical Eugenics."

QUARTERLY CHRONICLE

47-5

January 6th.-Miss March read a paper before the Training College
Association at the London University on " Sex Studies in the School and Training College."
January gth.-Mr. F. Fisher gave an address to the Women's Liberal
Federation, Shoreditch, on "Popular Eugenics."

COMMITTEES.
October 22nd.-Education Committee Meeting, 3 p.m. November ist.-Executive Council Meeting, 4.30 p.m.
,, 6th.-General Council Meeting, 3 p.m.
,, igth.-Education Committee Meeting, 3.30 p.m.
December 4th.-Research Committee Meeting, 4 p.m. ,, I3th.-Research Committee Meeting, I i a.m. ,, I3th.-Executive Council Meeting, 4.30 p.m. ,, I4th.-Education Conference Committee, 6 p.m.
,, Igth.-Education Conference Committee, 5.30 p.m.

HASLEMERE.

This Branch has held two meetings this quarter. On Monday,

November iith, Mr. Marshall read a paper on " The Connection

between Economic Conditions and Eugenics "; and on .Monday, December

i6th, Dr. Tredgold lectured on " Heredity and Environment in regard to

Social Reform." This lecture was open to the public, and a good number

assembled.

L. E. MUIR, Hon. Secretary.

LIVERPOOL. A meeting of the Society was held in the Anatomy Lecture Theatre of the University on Monday, December 2nd, when Dr. W. H. Broad, lecturer in physical anthropology, gave an admirable lecture on " Heredity and Skull Form," in which he explained the chief methods of craniology, drew attention to the index differences among different races of mankind, and showed how a change in social conditions might alter the relative chances of survival, and therefore ultimately the proportion of different elements in the population of the country. The audience was, unfortunately, small. A resolution was passed unanimously protesting against the abandonment of the Mental Deficiency Bill, and was communicated to the Home Secretary and to the local Members of Parliament. Letters have also been sent to the Education, Health, and Insurance Committees, and to the various bodies of Guardians of the neighbourhood, as well as to the Lancashire Asylums Board and their institutions, calling attention to the same matter. Our President, Sir James Barr, has delivered an address on Eugenics at Birmingham. The Philomathic Society of Liverpool has debated upon the question whether the time was ripe for incorporating the principles of eugenics in legislation, and decided that it was not. Subscriptions for the calendar year 1912 should now be sent in.
R. T. BODEY, Hon. Secretary and Treasurer.

MANCHESTER AND DISTRICT. The Manchester Branch has been formed as the sequel of the public meeting held on October 8th, I912, the constitution being ratified at the last Council Meeting of the Central Society. The following members have been elected as officers and members of committee:

426 EUGENICS REVIEW

President-Bishop Welldon, Dean of Manchester.
Chairman of Council-Professor Arthur Schuster, F.R.S. Vice-Chairman-Dr. Mumford
Hon. Treasurer-Mrs. Maxwell Garnett.
Hon. Secretary-Dr. D'Ewart, Middleton Street, Manchester S.

General Committee.

Mr. Russell Allen Sir Charles Behrens Mrs. Harold Behrens Dr. Vipont Brown Mr. Alfred Cann, B.A. Professor Chapman Dr. Catherine Chisholm

Dr. Barbara Cunningham Professor Findlay Mr. J. C. Maxwell Garnett Mr. T. C. Horsfall Dr. Emerys Jones
Mrs. McKellan Dr. Milligan

Mrs. Mumford Dr. James Niven Mr. Paton Councillor Mrs.Jane Redford Rev. G. E. Rees
Mr. J. H. Reynolds
Dr. Edward Somers, J.P.

The first general meeting will be held the third week in January, when Dr. Melland will lecture on " Legislation for the Feeble-Minded."
Bishop Welldon will shortly address a meeting of the clergy on the

subject of Eugenics. Dr. D'Ewart addressed the Jewish Working Men's Club in November. The Eugenics Class at the Technical School is still in progess.

NEW ZEALAND.

Miss Macgeorge, honorary secretary for the New Zealand branch of

the Eugenics Education Society, commenced work as honorary organiser

for the Society in November, 1912. Since that time, besides the in-

auguration of the Timaru Division, lectures on " Heredity and Eugenics "

have, with the aid of Professor Pearson's and other charts, been given

before the Waitaki Boys' High School, Waitaki Girls' High School,

Lyttelton Women's Christian Temperance Union, Christchurch Kinder-

garten Association, Worcester Street Girls' at Merivale Church, the Fabian Society,

Bible Class,
students of

Mothers' Meeting Normal Training

College, inmates of Te at Papanui, Women's

Oranga Reformatory
Social and Political

for Girls, Mothers' Meeting League, workers of junior

VbScFbWciuhrrorurciairmyaenpcrncethdahuEn,lgerdeyseusca)Ca(n,SaYStodntoic.MtiouoeCentJnrhtaohgbyihle,lunrd'rssrIMyA')neev,snnot,M'niWHetssooeuiWstmtdpeoCieei,hmnn,trgea'pi,nlussGb'tilLraisiylIanctsnnd'tsCtelhilCAerFtthcsiuroatstsinruoet.eir,cinetiadaanlbtaMylitLiToeenenKciS,mAsatotiuipceradeirSepersosotB'acyioinwaeAcert(aserdyEsne,oudcgUfieNanoaolnorittsiroiohctnoeHsnh,red,saeaCllCnaaithdGtnvrhiteirerttslrehhtosd-eef-'

ldpatelaactnta"tuMsrdio,ersnraslwtoiihswMeneagartcl-agraweponsrooiermmsogaseflen"s,th.ewrhihenaiSdnicudtahpiypclwsaayetsparpteodeefidmssecapnoientnvcyiearhrslaeelubrgyclahewrgodiimirnvanektgntt.hbeehyrelrto(hwpwereoerrfwkefar,onartbmslsyaofyiosnff:ul-crihtTfahheree-tr

form) would be gratefully received by her.

In Christchurch, as everywhere else, the keenest interest in eugenics

is invariably evinced whether in the
the lectures given. The first object is chiefly through the EUGENICS REVIEW.

case of
always Up

personal interviews or at education on eugenic lines, to the present, subscribers

taNsoenenldttshaoastntiyomnpp2a0u,otblnhiebctetasihtiecidoelansoicdainlnuodmfiCbvoteiuhrdneu:cailllosDcuiasinlnebdPeoriitennhsgesr1l2a0apn,radgretClsohyfroieafsadtccdNhheeudtrwcothwoZ.ne2a0lvTiahsniTedti.emdpraabRrcyeutpirtc5eha0-el,

tihonocnlotuhrdeaesreyDuaonrnegddainnoits,heerTriimsaagirenunv,caileOusaa,bmlaienrtuet,roesTttheeminuwkoeraukgeanunindcdseCrhtirsaiksertancp.hiudrlcTyhh.essperTehtaaodnwiknnssg

over New Zealand as well as to many parts of Australia.

PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED.
A Catechism of Life, by A. M; BUCKTON. (Publishers: Methuen & Co., Ltd. Price is. net.)
A Short Study in Ethics, by C. F. D'ARCY, D.D. (Publishers: Macmillan
& Co., Ltd. Price 5s. net.) Baby, The, by A UNIVERSITY WOMAN. (Publishers: T. C. & E. C.
Jack. Price 6d. net.)
Changes in Bodily Form of Descendants of Immigrants, by FRANZ BOAS,
Ph.D. (Publishers: Columbia University Press. Price 7s. 6d.)
Confidences: Talks with a Young Girt Concerning Herself, by Dr. C. B.
LOWRY. (Publishe-rs: Forbes & Co., Chicago. Price 50 cents.) Cults, Myths and Religions, by SALOMON REINACH, translated by E.
FROST. (Publisher: D. Nutt. Price 7s. 6d. net.) Daughters of Ishmael, The, by R. W. HAUFFMAN. (Publishers: S. Swift
& Co. Price 6s. net.) Elements of Child Protection, The, by SIGMUND ENGEL. Translated by
DR. EDEN PAUL. (Publishers: George Allen & Co. Price 15S. net.) False Modesty, that Protects Vice by Ignorance, by DR. E. B. LOWRY.
(Publishers: Forbes & Co., Chicago. Price 50 cents.) Fourth Annual Conference of the National Association for the Preven-
tion of Consumption and other forms of Tuberculosis. (Publishers: Adlard and Son. Price 3s. net.) Fourth Scientific Report on the Investigations of the Imperial Cancer Research Fund. (Publishers: Taylor and Francis. Price 7s. 6d. net.) Fifth Scientific Report on the Investigations of the Imperial Cancer
Research Fund. (Publishers: Taylor and Francis. Price 5s. net.)
Growth of Groups in the Animal Kingdom, The, by R. E. LLOYD, M.B., D. Sc. (London). (Publishers: Longmans, Green & Co. Price 5s. net.)
Herself: Talks with Women Concerning Themselves, by DR. E. B. LOWRY. (Publishers: Forbes & Co., Chicago. Price $i net.)
Himself: Talks with Men Concerning Themselves, by Dr. E. B. LOWRY and DR. R. J. LAMBERT. (Publishers: Forbes & Co.,
Chicago. Price $I net.)
Hygiene for Health Visitors, School Nurses and Social Workers, by C. W. HuTT. (Publishers: P. S. King & Son. Price 7s. 6d. net.)
Hypnotism and Self-Education, by A. M. HUTCHINSON, M.D. (Publishers: T. C. and E. C. Jack. Price 6d. net.)
Introduction to Experimental Education, by ROBERT R. RUSK. (Publishers: Longmans, Green & Co. Price 4s. 6d. net.)
Love and Ethics, by ELLEN KEY. (Publishers: G. P. Putnam & Sons. Price is. net.)
Main Currents of Modern Thought, by R. EUCKEN. (Publisher: T. Fisher Unwin. Price 12S. 6d. net.)

428 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Malthusian Limit, The, by E. ISMCSON. (Publishers: Methuen & Co. Price 3s. 6d. net.)
Marriage and the Sex Problem, by DR. F. W. FOERSTER. Translated by MERRICK BOOTH, B.Sc., Ph.D. (Publishers: Wells, Gardner & Co. Price 5s. net.)
Marriage and Motherhood, by H. S. DAVIDSON, M.B., F.R.C.S.E. (Publishers: T. C. and E. C. Jack. Price.6d.)
Meaning of Christianity, The, by the REv. FREDERICK A. M. SPENCER. (Publisher: T. Fisher Unwin. Price 7s. 6d. net.)
Minority Report of the Divorce Commission, The. (Publishers Longmans, Green & Co. Price id.)
Modern Problems, by SIR OLIVER LODGE. (Publishers: Methuen & Co.
Price 5s. net.)
Mother and Baby, by SELINA F. Fox. (Publishers: J. & A. Churchill. Price is. 6d. net.)
Nutrition of the Infant, The, by D. R. VINCENT. (Publishers: Balliere, Tindall & Cox. Price ios. 6d. net.)
Perfect Health for Women and Children, by E. SLOANE-CHESSER. (Price 3s. 6d. net.)
Progress! What it Means: The Evolution of Education, Religion, and Woman, by MRS. R. MORDECAI. (Publishers: Sands & Co. Price is. net.)
Psychology of Insanity, The, by BERNARD HART, M.D. (Publishers: Cambridge University Press. Price is. net.)
Responsibilities of Fatherhood, The, by FRANCIS SWINEY. (Publishers: The League of Isis. Price 3d.)
Truths: Talks with a Boy Concerning Himself, by DR. E. B. LOWRY. (Publishers: Forbes and Co., Chicago. Price 50 cents.)
Woman and Womanhood, by C. W. SALEEBY. (Publisher: W. Heinemann. Price Ios. net.)

