REVIEWS OF BOOKS

GENETICS
Sonneborn, T. M. (Editor). The Control ofHuman Heredity and Evolution. New York, 1965. The Macmillan Company. (London, Collier-Macmillan.) Pp. xiii+ 127. Price 15s. Paperback.
THIS INTERESTING LITTLE BOOK iS the edited record of a symposium held at Ohio Wesleyan University in April 1963. It consists of three parts, each consisting of formal lectures followed by discussion. The lecturers in Part I were Professor Luria, one of the leaders in viral genetics, and Dr. Tatum, who with Beadle, founded what we may call biochemical genetics. Those in Part II were Dr. DeMars, a leading authority on the genetics of human cells in tissueculture, and Professor Pontecorvo, famous for his penetrating analysis of what genes are and do. The single lecturer in Part III was Professor H. J. Muller, an outstanding specimen of that rare organism the all-round biologist. In addition to his brilliant work on Drosophila genetics, starting as a member of T. H. Morgan's famous pioneer team, and his outstanding discovery that mutations can be artificially induced, he has kept up with every aspect of evolutionary biology, from its directive mechanism of natural selection, to its results in the shape of detailed adaptation and long-term trends. Among the four discussants was Dr. Klein, the authority on tumor-genesis, including genetic predisposition and host-tumour relationships.
Parts I and II deal with the molecular and cellular aspects of what may be called analytic biology, whose primary aim is to analyse biological phenomena into their elements in evergreater detail. Its subsequent aim is to discover how those elementary facts are built up to produce more complex organizations: but it must be confessed that this has not yet penetrated very far up into the almost incredible complexity of a higher vertebrate or even an insect.
In this book we are given fascinating examples of how DNA operates, how genes can be
functionally subdivided, how they are related to enzymes; and of how viruses and bacteria work

and reproduce, how genetic transduction and transformation operate (in viruses and bacteria), how different mutagens may cause specifically
different kinds of mutations, how normal human cells in tissue-culture can be made to
differentiate in different ways, including the
pathological way of becoming malignant, and even to conjugate. These are all exciting and
theoretically fundamental discoveries. But, frankly, they are a long way from any practical
application in animal breeding or human eugenics.
Dr. Atwood repeats the hoary slander that selective eugenics involves "forcing people to breed in a directed manner", which merely shows
that he hasn't listened to Muller's lecture. He does, however, envisage the possibility of "really complete technical mastery" over genes and their operation in development, and goes on to say that this would permit us to bypass the "limited evolutionary process of stepwise mutation" (hardly any of the analytic biologists mentions the fact that recombination is much more important than mutation as a source of variation), and achieve a goal directly without worrying whether the intermediate stages are disadvantageous. The examples he cites are pure science fiction. Before we can dream of anything like this, we must master the complexities of development, or epigenesis as Waddington calls it, and must in all humility recall the fact (elementary to the evolutionary biologist) that every character depends on many genes, and that small alterations in the constellations of modifiers can produce large changes in the
phenotype: and in evolution, it is the phenotype that counts.
Evolutionary (or organismal, or integrative) biologists like Muller, on the other hand, know this, and know that in any elaborate process, each kind of organization must be studied separately on its own level, before we can hope to achieve an understanding of the process as a whole. No one could have deduced the facts and principles of evolutionary specialization and improvement from those ofneo-Mendelian genetics,

28

REVIEWS OF BOOKS

any more than they could have deduced the audience and to communicate to them some of

facts and principles of neo-Mendelian genetics the excitement and inspiration of the scientific

from those of the molecular structure of DNA endeavour". Judged within this context, the book

and RNA.

undoubtedly succeeds in that the material is

As a result, Muller is the only contributor interestingly presented, up-to-date and accurate,

who has anything important to say about and aims to convey to the non-specialist reader

eugenics. While acknowledging fully the scien- not only a synopsis of recent discovery, but a

tific importance of recent discoveries in mole- discussion of its implications for the future of

cular genetics, "genetic engineering" etc., he mankind.

stresses the present impossibility of applying One of the major difficulties of presenting

them to the genetic improvement of any higher genetics to a mixed audience is the varied amount

organism, and reiterates his view (which appears of basic knowledge they will have, and it is

to me to be completely unassailable) that negative inevitable that in such a book the better informed

eugenics is merely tinkering, and that positive readers will find themselves skipping some of

eugenics could perfectly well be begun on the the descriptive material of the earlier chapters,

basis of our present knowledge of genetics and but Dobzhansky's compromise in this situation

selection, through what he calls voluntary has been a good one, for three reasons: because

germinal choice-artificial insemination with the the material is throughout treated in its relation-

sperm ofa donor chosen by the couple concerned ship to man; because the author has (not without

for his qualities-whether of strength, intelli- some trepidation, one feels) been bold enough

gence, physical good looks, or moral qualities. to omit a great deal of elementary instruction

With the establishment of "sperm banks" of on Mendelian genetics; and because so much

deep-frozen sperm (and doubtless in the not too of this part of the book is written as an exciting

distant future of ova banks too) such eutele- history from Leeuwenhoek's discovery of

genesis, as Brewer has called it, could reverse the spermatozoa to the chemical structure of genes

apparent dysgenic trend of to-day and gradually and chromosomes. Dobzhansky's knowledge

but steadily raise the genetic potentialities of the of this history-not only of the chief highroads

population.

but also of some of the by-ways-is very

This is the way that evolution has made a impressive.

man out of a fish and a fish out of a protozoa, From this we come to Race, and to questions

but multiple voluntary germinal choice could of human diversity, to genetic load and radiation

enormously speed up the process, while ensuring hazard, each chapter discussing biological,

variety in the results.

political and moral implications as well as

To sum up, I would say that anyone who scientific knowledge, and finally a chapter on

wants to keep abreast of the exciting and indeed man's future in relation to cultural and biological

revolutionary discoveries ofrecent molecular and evolution and the control of environment.

cellular biology should read Parts I and II, but Dobzhansky presents anew the arguments for

that anyone who wants to keep abreast of chance or design in evolution and shows how

eugenic possibilities should read Part III.

the factors of chance in genetic recombination

JULIAN HUXLEY are counteracted by the constant operation of

the anti-chance agency of natural selection.

Dobzhansky, Theodosius. Heredity and the Nature ofMan. London, 1965. Allen and Unwin.
Pp. x+179. Price 25s.

None ofthis is new and the seeker for advanced knowledge must remember that the book was not written for him. Neither is it an elementary
textbook for beginners, but it is an interesting

THIS IS A book which arose from the Holiday and worthwhile discussion of questions which

Science Lectures, sponsored by the American are always worth re-examination, and it will be

Association for the Advancement of Science. of interest to many members of the Eugenics

The purpose of the lectures, the author tells us, Society.

is "to broaden the scientific horizons of the

ROBERT PLATT

29

