REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

137

March, NORAH H., B.Sc., M.R. SAN. I. Towards Racial Health: A Handbook for Parents, Teachers and Social Workers on the Training of Boys and Girls. With a Foreword by J. Arthur Thomson, M.A., LL.D. George Routledge and Sons, Limited; 1914; price 3S. 6d.; PP. 326.
THIS is the kind of book for which many have been waiting. Thousands of parents, teachers, and others have recognised the imperative duty of training boys and girls for parenthood, and safeguarding the difficult years of adolescence by " moral education." Some have begun the taskhaltingly and painfully; others have shirked it; all have felt the need for more efficient guidance than they have hitherto found. Such people will be deeply grateful for Miss March's book.
Her theme is sex-education and education for parenthood. She endeavours to show that such education involves much more than merely the giving of information; it means careful intellectual, moral and spiritual training. She suggests how this may be given. While not professing to be an exhaustive treatise on pedagogy, ethics or biology, the book will be found a sufficient guide for any person of ordinary education who wishes in this respect to do the best for the young people in his, or her care.
There are two excellent chapters on Nature study and biology to illustrate the contention that the child should be shown the universality of the racial powers and should be led to "realise that each organism is, in a sense, the trustee only of the spark of life." Early teaching is advocated, and there are hints about how to answer the questions of very young children. No undue stress is laidi on biology. The chapters on Ethical Training, Education for Parenthood, and Social Safeguarding, show not only a wide range of reading, but a discriminating judgment and a sympathetic understanding of many aspects of the problem. Indeed, the special value of this book is that it recognises so fully the complexity of the subject, and gives helpful suggestions on many sides, instead of laying undue stress on any one nostrum. The writer takes the Christian standpoint, and shows where and how the religious appeal may be related to the whole teaching, but this is not allowed to dwarf other aspects, and the book will be equally valued by those who, do not use that appeal.
Where there is so much to praise it seems ungracious to blame, but it is only fair to warn readers that the workmanship is on a lower level than the plan and purpose of the work. The style has no literary merit, and is often slipshod, while the author is too fond of coining unnecessary words, such as "youth-hood," which occurs with distressing frequency. These defects take away from the reader's pleasure, but they rarely, if ever, obscure the meaning. The book can be heartily recommended to those who can appreciate solid work in spite of faults of manner.
HELEN WILSON.
Redfleld, CASPER L. Dynamic Evolution: A Study of the Causes of
Evolution and Degeneracy. New York and London. G. P. Putnams Sons; 1914; price 6s. net; pp. 2IO. THE author starts from the position that " scientists think they believe in evolution, but they really believe in special creation," that is to say, if man has been evolved from Protozoan ancestors, something new has been created, and not merely unfolded from among the latent capabilities of the Protozoan. His line of argument is that all capabilities are energy, and that what has happened in evolution has been the storing up of energy at higher and higher potential, and the object of the book is to set forth how this has been brought about. The result is very disappointing. In the first place, the writer does not seem clearly to understand what the physicist means by energy. The statement (p. 7) that "the amount of work performed by the energy is K= FVT, in which F is the force which

