The Neuroses and Psychoses in relation to
Conscription and Eugenics.
B-Y S1RFREERICK MOTT, K.B .E., IM.D., L.L.D., F.R.S.
Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen,
The title of my paper. "The Neturoses and Psychoses in Relation to Conscription and Eugenics" might have been amplified by the addition of calling it "Neuroses and War," but I have purposely avoided this, because there is no essential difference between the Neuroses and Psychoses which affected the soldiers and the Neursoes which are met with in the civil population. Again, I have purposely
omitted the term "Shell Shock," for it is generally agreed by all those who are comnpetent to speak on the subject, that it is a misnomer, and it was unfortuniate that it was ever introduced inlto the nomenclature of the College of Phvsicians and adopted by the Army. The term could have been applied to a verv small percentage of cases in which there was concussion or Cerebral cominotioni caused by the tremendous
forces generated in the air by the (letonation of large amounts of high explosives whether containe(d in large shells or mines. These forces
were most effective in p)roducing cerebral commotion witheout any
evidence of injury or, contusion of the body, when the cxplosion occurred in closed spaces, such as deep ravines and dugouts where
percussion and repercussion effects upon the central nervous system
were imlore severe. It has been calculated that not more than 5°i,, were due solely to commotion; 10 to 15 per cent. were combined commotional and emotional, but the vast majority were purely emo-
tional in origin. All kinds of neuroses and psychoses occurring in soldiers have nevertheless been designated "Shell Shock. " With this brief statement I shall dismiss the term, yet in doing so, I must call attenltion to the fact that in no previous war have such vast numbers of men been subjected to such terrible experiences; they were:-
(I) Unprecedented exposure to the continuouis physical effects of hiah explosives and poison gras and to all the developments of scientific barbarism. Moreover, the periods to which men have been exposed to the terrifyina effects of niodern trench warfare have exceeded all previous records. Such cofiditions are quite dirferent from a war of movement.
(2) The conscripted army has included all sorts and conditions of men, and we have now found ouit, bv the immense number of soldiers discharged from the service as permanently unfit, what a large proportion of the nmale population of a highly civilized country possesses a neuirotic or neturopathic predisposition. In 1917 it was calculated
* An address delivcred to the Eugenics Education Society on January 17th,
1922.

14 1EUGINICS RZVIJ.W.
that one-third of the unwounded and one-seventh of the total army discharges, including the wounded, were p-ermanentlv unfit oni account of fun tional nervotts or menital diseases.
WAR IN RELATION TO NATURAL SELECTION AND SURVIVAL OF THE FITTEST.
Butt b)efore considering the subject of Nculroses and Psychoses in relation to Conscription anid Eugenics. I woild lil-e hrietlv to refer to "WVar ill Relation to Natural Selection and Survival of thie Fittest." The primal instincts cominon to men and animnals are self-preservation, propagation, and the instinct of the herd. 'The great struggle forexistence is among animals of the sanme species and has its source in these primal instincts, to which man is no exception.
The great centres of eivilizationi and hutiman progress have in the past especially been buiilt up in those regions of the earth where Natuire has provided a great store of energy which caTn readily be utilized and converted into human einerav, e.a., throuigh ages and ages thie Nile provided by its fertilizing agenec food for millions of huiman beings. The simsple instinctive group mind ol the herd developed in tinme ilntoa highly complex social collective mind with its traditions, religions, superstitions. usuages and customs, and all through Il istory we find the important )art the character and (quality of this group mind played in wars and in the rise and fall of nations. But the fundanmentalbasis of war was and is over-population, and o.verflow into adjacent countries to satisfyr the primal instincts of se! f-preser- ation and propagation especially by the capture of food or its equivalent in Natuire's
stores of ener.yv.
In modern times the co-existence of coal and iron in a country has
enabled tte l)op)ulation to multiply enormrlously beyond its capacitv
for growing the food Arequired. Especially is this the case with Great Britain. the population of which is five times as great as it woulld have been able to mainitaini if it had to rely upon the food tlie land was capable of producing. This great store of energy in the fomi of coaland of iron constituting two areat kevy induistries, has not only enabled a vast population to live in the British Isles, but has enabled it to over-flow into every part of the world.
But where with lavish hand Natur e has thus provided the measiis for unlimnited indiv'idual lives, and therefore of almost unlimited propagation of the species, it has enforced a constant an(d severe strugglc for' existence, by which (if Nature's miethods are not interfered with), otly those possessing such mental and bodilv conditionis suitable for the struggle, survive.
History repeats itself. The social organisnm like the individual organism, has its peeriod of birth, youth, manhood, old age, decay and dissolution. Wlhen owing to political and religious strife and dissensions and to moral and physical decav, previous civilizations have passed away, usually the disintegration and destruction have been hastened by the invasion of a younger warlike race with less culture and a sinmpler civiliation.-Alood thirstiness, craftiness, and ferocious courage combined with physical strength, vital resistance to injury
and disease were the endowments which led to survival of the fittest

CONSCRIPTION AND ECUGENICS.

iS

in the struogle for existence in earlier wars. Pestilence, famine and disease killed off the areat majority of the weaker tvpes that were not massacred, leaving the warriors who survived to l)rocrcate, often with the women of the conquered race. and form a new civilization which sooner or later underwent the same process of decav. In the recent
Great WV'ar, courage, I)hysical strenigth, and endurance were important
factors, bhut intelligence and inventive genius ex-ercised even a inore decisive influenice: for if we had not been able to destroy the submarine we should have been starved out, if wve had not been able to (lestroy the
Zeppelins the nation might ha-ve been terrorized into defeat, and if we had not inventted nmeans of defence against poison gas. olur armies
would have been overthrown. In all previous wars of this and all other nations, except in the case of the Japanese in their war with Russia, far greater numbers have perished from disease than from battle casualties. The scourges of war, typhoid, dysentery, small pox, malaria and typhus, have been successfully combated by the R.A.M31.C. in the late war by prophylactic and therapeutic measures. Would that venereal disease had been likewise combated bv successful prophylaxis, on the contrary there has been a great increase and owing
to conscrilption it has penietrated into rural dlistricts where it is alinost
un'known. Its iIttimate effects fronm a Eugenic point of view are much more serious than the otlher diseases.

PREVALENCE OF WAR NEUROSES AND PSYCHOSES IN THE GREAT WAR AND CAUSES.
A striking fact about this war as compared with presvious wars was the number of cases of militarv disability, inefliciency, discharges, -aind pensions due to war Neu\roses and Psychoses. I will now trv to analyse the causes of this. rl'he lirst anid most obv' ious enrquirv to mal;e is whether there wvas a difference in the incidence of WVar Neuroses and IPsychoscs in the voluntary l)rofessional army and the later formed conscript army. Although isolated cases of shell concussion occurred in the Expeditionary Force, also numnerous cases of neurasthenia from the e.Thaustive stress anid strain, yet hysterical paralysis, contractures, mnultisin, blindniess and cleafness. were comparatively rarely met with, and this was in spite of the fact that in the first and seconid battles of Ypres the conditions in the trenches were awful, our men were outgiunned, and outmanned, but these neuroses and psychoses were not prevalent and "Shell Shock " was as such. unrecognized, althoutigh commotionial shock without signs of injury on the body was knowii to have occurred and even to have prbved fatal. This would suggest that the mental attitude towards War of the mlan who voluntarily enlists in
the army is different to thlat of the cotnscript, wihio in a large proI)ortion
of cases is forced to serve against his incliniation, and will endeavour by every means possible to avoid military service. The conscripted therefore in considerable numbers produced certificates of subjective unfitness, where adequate objective evidence was wanting. Now, how can any distinction be made between the man who does not want to serve for selfish reasons, and the man who is genuinely neuropotentiallv unfit for military service? Moreover, the difficulty is increased by the fact that through contem-

16 EUGXN`CS RXEVIEW.

plative fear of being recruited, he mayr develop all the signs and symp-
toms of Neurasthenia. It is urged that mental tests should be applied
to eliminate the imbecile, family and personal histories taken to avoid recruiting neuropathic individuals, and Wassermann reactions in order to reject syphilitics who might develop vascular or nervous disease. The United States of America, having unlimited numbers of young men to draw upon, instituted such a systenm, but the results showed that
they had relatively as large a proportion of cases of "Shell Shock, " and Neuroses as we had. The principle adopted in our arnmy was to conscript all who were not physically unfit, or who on account of epilepsy, imibecility, or those known to have been certified insane, were a source
of danger if admitted into the army, This system of not rejecting
recruits on account of funictional nervous disordlers or potenitial neuropaths or psychopaths, which if not econonmical as regards pensions, was from a eugenic l)oint of view sounder. Unfortunately, the recruited epileptics, imbeciles, and linatics are the very men who are most likely to have epileptic, imbecile, criminal, or insane offspring; nevertheless from a military point of view they imust be exempted from service. Experience shows however, that a large nimber of epileptics, imveciles, and potential lunatics were coniscripted, and were drafted into, or transferred to the Labour Corps where thev could not do much harm. A man who is seen bv a niedical officer in an epileptic fit is at once put down for discharge. It is not at all uncommon however, for
such men to re-enlist even three or four times. I have heard of an
epileptic who escaped from one of the London Asylums. after havingw
been an inniate for eleven years; he enliste(d in the carly days of the
war, and later returned with a pocketful of Prussian biuttons. Cer-
tain imbeciles, and ne'er do wells often make brave soldiers. About 18 to 21) per cent. of the admissions to nmilitarv Mlental Hospitals were
mental defectives, a small proportion of these were high grade imbeciles of the criminal type; the remainder were mentally and physically so
inrerior that although they had no criminal propenisities, yet ex)erience has shown that they were (quite useless in active service. Sometimes they had proved dangerous to their comrades and were permitted to load their rifles only when an attack was made.

WAR IN RELATION TO THE PRODUCTION OF EPILEPSY AND INSANITY.

I came to the conclusion that neither true epilepsy nor permanent

insanity were, except in a small percentage of cases, caused by mili-

tary service at the front, and this opinion is shared by most authori-

ties in this country and on the Continent. Certainlv however, tem-

porary exhaustion psychosis, called confusiolnal insanity, did occur

fairly frequientlv, and even in neurol)otentially sound individuals as a

result of a fever or exhatistion from prolonaed stress, It is pretty

generally admitted however, that nmilitary service did not produce true

inmanity, but only ex(ited, revealed, or exaggerated it. In respect

to General Paralvsis of the Insane, it is possible that the stress of war-

favoured the active dev-elopment of
the mental decay on at an earlier

tahgees;ypb)uhitlimtiilciotragraynissermvaicned

brought
was not

the causal factor. Indeed the war has shown that epilepsy alid insanity

CONSCRIPTION AND EUGcENICS.

if

ai dle -in the great maj-ority of instances to inborn germinal condfitioirs. This important Eugrenic fact is supported by a serv reliable
Gernan psvehiatrist, Bonhbffer, who found only 5 insanc men among 10,000 Serbian prisoners who had been subiected to everv form of stress and strain of war, starvation. and epidemic diseases It might be argued that among these Serbians survival of the fittest had occlurred, buit in the women who fled from Galicia and East Prussia when those countries were invaded by the Russians and in the civil population of the iiivaded territories of Northern France, no great increase of mental disease occulrred. I am therefore in agreemenit with Bonh6ffer and Afschaffenberg. two distinguished German alienists, that the acute exhausting influences of malnutrition, lack of sleep and depressing
in.9uences generally, do not of themselves lead to the development of, psychoses. Even with reaard to emotional causes. Bresler in 1914
showed that the so-called mobilization psychoses were all either the reaction in patients who had formoerly stuffered with nmental disease or who were potential psychopaths. An interesting fact which I have obsers e.d in re'ation to insanity is this:-The nmtmber of cases of Dementia Praecox (that is an incurable form of insanitv coniinv on in adolescencee, admitted to the London Ayslums prior to the War was equal
in both sexes. but during the p!eriod of the war the number of cases of Dementia Praecox in males admitted to the London County Asvlums
was reduced to one haif. It miay be presumed that about '04% of
these cases had been conscripted either before the disease was manifest. or in its early stages. Frequientlv the first evidence of the oniset of the nmental affection was tt series of minor delinoullenices followed by punishment which had no deterrent efrect. Maniy of these cases. discharged from the Army as suffering with Shell Shotk or Neurasthenia are now in thc Asylums. It is caleculated that 14%$X of the soldiers who became insane suiffered with this inborn germiinal disease.

INBORN AND ACQUIRED EMOTIVITY A CAUSE OF NEUROSES.
I have hitherto dealt with the psvchoses and I have emphasized the fact that the important cauisal factor was an inborn psychopathic tenxdency. I.ikewise in the neuroses lIvsteria and Neurasthenia an inborn neuropathic tendency existed in a large proportion of the cases, but there were other cauises, and among these may be mentioned an acquired emotivitv bv imien neuropotentially souind, as a result of nervous exhaustion due to prolonged exposure in the trenches to shell fire, to the nervous exhaustion of arsine gas poisoning, to the painful discomfort of mustard gas, and the wearing of protective masks. All these factors combined with the continuous infernal noise, the wet, the mud, the vermin, and loss of sleep, and in officers also the constant anxiety caused by responsibility for the lives of their men would sooner
or later lead to a nervous breakdown even among the best soldiers.

TRENCH WARFARE COMPARED IN ITS EFFECTS WITH A WAR OF MOVEMENT.
Experience showed that the rank and file, as a general rule, suf-ferred with various forms of hysteria, while the officers suffered with

is I8UGINICS REMVIEW.
Neurasthenia or Anxiety Neturosis. There is a psychological explanation of this fact, and it -is bound up with the primal instiniets, viz., self-prcservation, and the amour propre of the social instinct.
'lclie nattiral defensive reaction of the gre(ariolis aniimal to an enemy is either offensi've or defensive, the forimer is associated with the emotion of anwer, so wonderfiilly described bv Slhakespeare in Henry V. and ulloted bv Jarwin inl his "Expression of the Emotions," Now. in a war of inovenient an offensi v e reaction is the natural methiod
of self-preservation of the aood soldier. but the poor and timid soldier
would if he dared run awav or fall down. arid that remindls onie of a storv of a British General who said that teii per cent. of a regiment
would follow voui to the gate-. of hall, ten per cent. wotuld fall down or ru.n away. and eigrhty per ce)t. wouild follow either. The arny regulation of the (leath penalty for cowardice in face of the enenm\ is therefore essential to avoid a panic. I)iscipline, mnorale and esprit de corps
are the great anitidotes as we shall see to Shell Shock conttagiors.
HYSTERICAL MANIFESTATIONS.
A soldier who has an inborn or acqluired emotixvity will sooner or later suffer with a psychoneurosis. A shell buirsts near him, he sees the flash, is blinded by it, and remains futnctionally blind; or some poison gas irritates his eyes and he is affected bv a continuous blepharo-
spasm (spasm of the evelids). Ile hears the explosion and is temporally deafened by the noise and remains deaf. Ile is blown up, and perhaps falls heavily on the grouind, or is buried with eartlh in a crater or dug out, or a sandbag hits himi . When he recovers consciousness he
mav be affected with a slpasmodic tic or convuilsive mnovement of a
defensive nature, such as the dodging reflex; or he may be affected
with oike of thle rrmany forms of hysterical tremor, paralysis or contracture. These Avalried and mnilltiforrm hsterical manifestations are psychogenic in origin and duie to emotional shock. They are curable by contra-suggestion.
The war has produced no new nervous disease; it is the same hysteria and neurasthenia which neurologists knew before the war and which w,ere curable by the samc methods. A fact which has been
brought home to all those who have had the care of %var psychomicuroses is that the signs and symptoms of hy'steria and neautrastlhenia or men who have been to the front and have beern invalided home (except those in which there has been definite e\vidence of cerebral or spinal commot,on or concuLssion, buirial or gassing), in no way differ essentiallv from the sig,ns and symptoms of hysteria and neurasthenia of
soldiers who have never been out of Fngland. I have secn both hvsteria and neuiasthenia arise from the fear of
conscription. or having been conscripted an hvsterical crisis, contracture or paralysis has ocecurred when it becamne known that the conscript wonld1( be in a draft for acneral service abroad.
Innioculation against typhoid has been followed by hysterical paralysis. As an illutstration I may inention onie case which was sent to Inc. He was innocuilated upon enlistment in MHarch 191.5, and a quarter of an hour later he lost the use of his legs. He was sent to -various hospitals and brine baths and after two and a half years he

CONSCRIPTION AND EUGENICS.

1%

was boarded out of the arrny with this functional disability and re-
ceived a pension of £2 12s. per week for himself, his wife antd familvy Hie was sent to me by the (Chelsea P'ensions 13oard, arriving with
crutches and a contracted knee. He was induced to walk in half an
hour and in a week was discharged cuired. In the later years of the war gas offensive was extensiv,ely used by
the enemv, especiallv mustard gas, which on account of its prungent and irritating- effects upon the skin and mucus nmembranie and conjunlc-
tiva of the eves, lproduced disablement. The aphonia due to laryrngi-
tis, and spasm of the evclids due to irritation of the eye, both defencemechanisns, became a fixed idea irn soldiers of a neurotic temperament, conseqiuently they lost their voice anid became dtumb, and the reflex spasm of the eyelids persisted. Treatment of the throat anid eyes bv gargles, eye washes and shades, only helped by suggestion to fitv the idea. Appropriate conitra suggestion led to immnediate or almost iinmediate recoverv. Five cases of gas mnutism were sent to me. I took the worst case first and told him that I never failed to restore the
voice, and he would not leave -the recoverv room until he had spoken: sometimes it took a few xninutes. and sometimes an hour or more. In a few minutes he was counting ten, and a few miinutes later singing "God save the King." The other four cases were rapidly cured. An atmosphere of cure is an essential element of success in treat-ment. But one reason why all men who are not physicallv unfit should be recruited is that a great number of cases of neurosis can be prevented by proper training and selection of men for serv ices for which they are best fitted, and by the establishmenit of morale.

INFLUENCE OF MORALE AND DISCIPLINE IN THE PREVENTION OF NEUROSES.
Although inborn and acquired emotivity are potent causes of neuroses, there are other important factors, notably morale, for it has been conclusively shown that regiments with good morale, discipline,
and esprit de corps, had comparatively few cases of so called Shell Shock, and in using this term I am including all the cases of neurasthenia and hvsteria. Now the morale of a regiment depen(ds, not only
upon the quiality of the soldiers and their previouis experience in war,
and the time and character of their training. btit also in no inconsiderable degree upon the personality of the Commanding Officer an(d the
Medical Officer, and the confidence they inspire by their efficiency and
by the interest they show in the welfare of the officers and men. Moreover, a good Quarter-Master, who as far as military exigences allow,
strives to obtain good well-cooked rations and comfortable billets,
exercises an important role in maintaining efficiency and contentment. Soldiers will put up with a good deal if they are properly fed .

TRENCH WARFARE MORE PRODUCTIVE OF NEUROSES THAN A WAR OF MOVEMENT.
Another reason, other than conscriptiorn. whv this war has pro--
duced such a great number of cases of neurosis, is doubtless due to the fact that it has been largely a static war, by which the soldier is unable to react to fear in a normal way, for he can neither fight, nor run away,

4Nn E{UGENICS REVIEW.
and often never sees the enemy. All soldiers, even the bravest, experience the emotion of fear, and those who by reason of a nervous ten-mperament, or an acquired nervous exhaustion, are unable to exercise selfcontrol were conse(quently liable to surfer with one or other of these functional nervous diseases. The terrible noise and the sudden explosion of a slhell near by, with the fear of being blown to pieces or buried, or of being poisoned by gas, combined with the feeling of helpless in-
activity, required either a high degree of self-control, or an insensitive
nature to withstand the prolonged nervous tension. It was not
surprisingr therefore that a conscript armv with recruits often imperfectly trained and rushed to the front, should have a larg,e number of
cases of Shell Shock. It may be remarked that in the later periods of the war the shell fire had enormously intensified; the human sacrifice was enormous and yet the war seemed no nearer its termination. These terrifying and disheartening conditions of warfare no doubt was responsible for a large increase in the number of cases of shell shock and war neurosis.
Experience showed that many nervous men who could not stand the monotonous inactivity, of defensive trench warfare, made good in
the tanks or as aviators, where there was more scope for their intelligence and individuality. As a gerneral rule the public school boy, who was good at sports and games made a good officer, but it not infre-
quently happened that an athlete was a poor leader and showed. lack of couiragre, whereas unexpectedly sometimes a weakly lad showed remarkable courage and staying power. T'he test of military efficiency
can therefore only be discovered by conduct in war. It was fouind that rest camps in France by the sea where there was
security anid comfort, and with complete exemption from military duties, lcd to comparativley rapid restoration of nervously exhausted soldiers. But if they were returned to base hospitals, and still more, was this the case, wheit thev were evacuated to England, rceo-very was retarded. A too readv misplaced svmpathy on the part of the public and the press fixed by suggestion the idea of disabilitv, and reinforced the wish not to return to an intolerable situation. This failure to diagnose and cure these funetional cases of which there were an enormous number, was a great economical loss.
Compulsorv military service to a nation has its advantages as well as its disadvantages, for experience has shown that many poorly nourished and ill developed youths in the course of training have improved physically and mentallv. It was the general consensus of opiniion of the witnesses who gave eviderice before the Shell Shoek Commission that in case conscril)tion were again nieces-sary for National safety, the only exceptions which should be made in
respect to neurotics or psychotics should be in the case of epilelptics,
imbeciles, and men who had been certified insane. It was urged that
in the course of training, p)rovided it was efficiently and judiciously
carried out, those wlho were likely to be of no use in any military capacity at home or in general service, could after trial be discharged as unfit. Much legitimate discontent among ex-service men has been aroused by the fact that many men exempted from militarv scrvice were able to earn high wages, lead a pleasant life, and sax e money.

CONSCRIPTION AND BUGENICS.

~21

NEUROSES AND EUGENICS.
It is an acknowledged fact that a nervous temperament and lack *of self-control as manifested by the existence of neuroses and psychoses is- liable to be transmitted to the offspring. Having regard to the great
nunmber of cases of functional nervous disease which occurred in our army, it appears at first sight an alarming fact for eugenists to conte.mplate. I say, at first siaht, because upon reflection coinsideratioin must be given to the following facts which show that it is not so serious as it would appear.
(I) These neuroses and psvehoses are met with in all races of men, even primitive people. The other nations with conscript armies engaged in the Great War also had similarly great numbers of cases of war neurosis.
(2) In our previous wars slhell shock and functional neuroses were almost uniknown or unrecognised as such in our armies, but this may be explained by the fact that they were professionally trained and there was not the prolonged stress and terrifying conditions of trench warfare causing an unprecedented strain upon the nervous system.
(3) As I have already indicated a large proportion of the cases of
war neuirosis could have been prevented had the Army authorities and medical profession known as much as they do Inow of the important influence of suggestion and contagion in the produuction of hysteria in its multiforrmt manifestations, and their ready cure and prevention by
approl)riate methods of contra sugggestion. Moreover, the prevention
of numbers of cases of neurasthenia could have been effected by timely removal to rest camps where there was security, comfort and freedom from all military exercises and duties when the early signs and symptoms of nervous exhaustion and irritability showed themselves.

FOOD AND FUEL IN RELATION TO EUGENICS.
In countries where an insufficienicy of food and fuel led to disease and death of those with a low vital resistance, particularly children and old people, it may be presumed that a nattural selection and survival of the strongest occurred. The chiildren born during the war in these countries, unless constitutionally strong, died, the remainder suffered from impaired nutrit;ion, and growth was interfered with, buit according to my investigations, the germ cells of the male at any rate, are protected in an extraordinary manner in disease, and I should be surprised if the epidemic discases, with the exception of syphilis, have any marked effect upon the next generation.
Moreover, there is always the tendency to return to the normal average of the race in growth and stature.
In this country insuifficient food, and especially a deficiency in animal fats and fuel, was not ne.arly so great as in the enemy countries, consequently did not play such an important part in devitali7ing the nation and in killing off weak types with a low vital resistarnce. But
that it did so, was shown by the very high mortality in the lunatic asylums of this country, where the death rate in the last year of the
war was in a great nmany instances three or four times as great as that in pre-war timies.
The predatory instinct of man, spurred on by over-population,

22 EIUGENICS REVEW.
will not be abolished by conferences of Nationis and it is too much to
*hope that jealousies and rivalries will not arise in anv League of Nations
that miay be constituted against barbaric methods of warfare. What is to hinder a nation then with a secretly prepared fleet of aeroplanes
manned by specially trained crews loaded with hiah explosives and
poison gas, disreaarding con-entions, and launching a war withoLt
any notice? Withiin twentv-four hours such widespread death and destruction in crowded cities couild occur that further resistance would be imp)ossible. There would be no q!uestion of Natural Selection and Survival of the Fittest, tlle weak and the stronig, the fit and the tunfit,
wouild alike perish.

