MR. LUTHER BURBANK-HIS METHODS
AND DISCOVERIES.'
By R. NEWTON CRANE.
WITHIN a few months past there has been published in the United States a compendious history of the life of Luther Burbank and of his methods and discoveries in the growth and development of plants. The history, filling twelve profusely illustrated volumes, has been compiled by the " Luther Burbank Society," which was formed and incorporated in California in 1912. It numbers more than six thousand four hundred members, active and honorary, drawn from all walks of lifefarmers, bankers, merchants, scientists, college professors, business men, city residents and dwellers in the open country, but all friends of Mr. Burbank and admirers of his achievements or grateful beneficiaries of their results. This record, prepared in this way, is remarkable in itself, but is still more remarkable when it is considered that beyond the limits of the United States Mr. Burbank's name is hardly known, while the knowledge of his achievements is confined to a very limited circle of European plant breeders. This is due in part to Mr. Burbank's modesty over what he has accomplished and in part to the fact that the demonstration of his processes has naturally been confined to gradual experiments covering years of patient toil and study. That his achievements have been remarkable cannot be doubted, for, measured by terms of money, he has added millions of dollars to the annual returns of the farmers and fruit growers of the United States.
Luther Burbank, who was born in Massachusetts in I849,
is still living a life of vigour and activity in California, immersed in new problems of plant breeding. His ancestors of Scotch, Welsh and North of England blood, emigrated to New England
X LUTHER BURBANK: His Methods and Discoveries and their Practical Application. Prepared from his Original Field Notes covering more than Ioo,oOO Experimenits made
during Forty Years devoted to Plant Discoveries. With the assistance of the Luther Burbank Society and its entire membership, under the editorial direction of John Whit son
and Robert John and Henry Smith Willianms, M.D., LL. D. Illustrated with 105 direct colour photograph prints. 12 volumes, each 300 pages. New York and London.
Luther Burbank Press, 1914-1915.

194 EUGENICS REVIEW.
in I635. His father was a successful farmer. From his mother he inherited a passionate love of flowers and of everything the fields produced. His education appears to have been superior to that which might, at that time, have been obtained from the limited facilities during his boyhood, as his father's house was the rendezvous of ministers, teachers and lecturers, to whose conversation he was permitted to listen. Referring to
this period of his life he says:
Following the publication of Darwin's Origin of Species in I859, the intellectual world was in a ferment, and nowhere was the influence of the new ideas more quickly felt or tumultuously argued than in New England. I was ten years old when Darwin's iconoclastic document was promulgated, and hence I grew into adolescence in the very period when it was most ardently bruited. The idea that animals and plants have not originated through special creation, but have evolved one form from another throughout long ages, and the logical culmination of that idea in the inclusion of man himself in the evolutionary chain-these are common-places to-day. They are familiar doctrines that might find expression from every orthodox pulpit. But in those stormy days of the sixties, such ideas were not merely heretical, they seemed absolutely revolutionary.
The influence of this new doctrine, received in immature youth, seems to have dominated Mr. Burbank's life. Instead of following vocations which were open to him and out of which a readier success might have been achieved, he devoted himself to the study of plant life and to the investigation of the forces of environment and heredity upon its development. How much this was affected by a comparatively trivial incident it is difficult to say, but it appears to have set his ideas working. In his mother's vegetable garden he found a potato seed ball. From this seed ball he produced twenty-three new potato plants. Each of these plants yielded its own interesting variations; its own interpretation of long-forgotten heredity. They represented, as he says, as many different stages in the history of

MR. LUTFIER BURBANK-HIS METHODS AND DISCOVERIES. 195
the potato family, and having no present-day environment to hold them in balance, all were unlike any potato which had ever been cultivated. Among the number, however, was one markedly better than the rest. It was selected to become the parent of a new race, which has added millions annually to the values of agricultural produce, in America. As his editors put it, "with the same work-indeed with less-both the pioneer settler who grew potatoes for his own sustenance and the potato grower who produced his crop on a commercial basis, were able to quadruple their output, to make four measures of food, four measures of profit, grow where one had grown before." But, perhaps, the greatest value of his discovery was to definitely direct his energies into the new direction toward which he had been inclining. He abandoned the study of medicine, to which he had turned after considering a career in physical science, and devoted himself to the study of plant development. He admits that it is not certain that he should have been led to put this knowledge to practical use had it not been for the stimulation and fresh enthusiasm that came from reading Darwin's Animals and Plants under Domestication. It came to him with a message that was not merely stimulating but compelling. It aroused his imagination and gave him an insight into the world of plant life. It developed in him an insistent desire to go into the field and find the answers to the problems that the book only suggested. He had not before understood to what extent species of every kind all about us vary, and what possibilities of modification of existing forms are contingent on such variation. Plant life immediately presented to him a sort of challenge to test its capacities, to investigate its traits, to invent new ideals of growth and to endeavour to mould the plant in accordance with these ideals. He says: "Thus, thanks to the inspiration of Darwin's work, my ideas were finally crystallized. The physical bent inherited from my father and the love of nature I owed to my mother were now to work in harmony."
The potato carried him from New England to California, for the profits realized on the sale of his new plants paid his journey money. He realized that the temperate climate, the

I96 EUGENICS REVIEW.
richer soils and the longer growing seasons on the Pacific coast would be better adapted to his experiments. He ariived a score of years after the gold fever was over and when the arable fields of the State were devoted almost exclusively to wheat farming. The vast industry of fruit growing had not yet been even contemplated, nor does it appear that until the success of his experiments the soil and climate were deemed capable of yielding fruit. Certainly no one had yet dreamed of the immense revenues which were to be derived from the industry which now largely engrosses the energies and employs the wealth of California and whose products are found in every market of the world.
Mr. Burbank's investigations in plant culture were begun in California at Santa Rose, and have been continued at Sebastopol, which appear to have become a Mecca for fruit and flower growers from all over the United States. As the investigations cover more than ioo,ooo experiments, it is impossible to refer to more than a very few of them. Fortunately from the earliest days of his study, Mr. Burbank was accustomed to keep a careful daily record of his work, and no matter what fatigue had attended his labours, his field notes were not only scrupulously written up, but have been carefully preserved. They show that the method was always the same. The plant, the subject of enquiry, was first carefully studied to see what possible development it would respond to. Its history was investigated and its ancestral surroundings in past ages. Its relatives and every possible species of its family were patiently sought for. Sympathetic correspondents in remote countries were besought for specimens. When they were assembled and cultivated, stocks were intermingled and, through intelligent crossings, new forms were obtained, all traceable back to heredity and former environment. Perhaps the most striking illustration is what has been accomplished with the cactus plant, which from being one of the aggressive enemies of animals has been trained to be their most useful servant. The cactus in the great American desert is armed with long spikes, dangerous to cattle and to the unfortunate travellers who are sometimes lost in this arid waste. It occurred to Mr. Burbank

MR. LUTHER BURBANK-HIS METHODS AND DISCOVERIES. I97
one day that every plant growing on the desert was either bitter or poisonous or spiny and that these qualities had been acquired. It was this simple observation which gave him the idea of a plant which already has shown its ability to outdo the most prolific fodder crops five to one, and which promises to support cattle on what has been the most hostile waste places of the world. These cactus plants in their original state have the hardiness to live and to thrive and to perpetuate themselves under conditions in which other plants would speedily die. Although there may not be a drop of rain for even ten years they contrive to get enough moisture out of the deep soil and out of the dry air to build up a structure which, by weight, is 92 per cent. water. They are plants which, as Mr. Burbank puts it, are veritable wells of water, growing in a land where there are no springs or brooks, nor even clouds to encourage the hope of cooling rain. They contain water for relieving thirst, and at the same time are rich in nutriment for man and beast in a desert where the demand for food and water is most acute and the supply is most scanty. Mr. Burbank's theory was that in the early stages of the world's formation there were desert sage bushes which were not bitter, desert euphorbia which were not poisonous, and desert cactus plants which had not even the suspicion of a spine, and that it was only the longcontinued danger of destruction from pedatory animals which could have produced so radical a means of defence. His conclusion was that if there was no need of such defence Nature would not supply it, and that, therefore, it was only necessary to take these plants back to a period in their history before defence had become a problem, in order to produce an edible sage bush, a non-poisonous euphorbia and a spineless cactus. Working upon this assumption Mr. Burbank has carried the cactus ages back to its ancestry, and by planting a thousand cactus seeds has proved that the spiny cactus is descended from a smooth slabbed line of velvet skinned forefathers. In its new and regenerated state it is a prolific and abundant growing fodder, giving a succession of crops in the year and affording both meat and drink to cattle in vast regions where no other crops can be cultivated.

ix98 EUGENICS REVIEW.
As an illustration of how plants protect themselves with almost intelligent care from hostile conditions, Mr. Burbank tells this story :-
" Along the Pacific coast, from Oregon well down into California, there grows a common wild flower of the pipewort family. Inland a little way, say ten or fifteen miles, the stalk of this plant is smooth and with hardly the suspicion of a hair. But along the shore, where the northwest winds pick up all the finer particles from the beach and form a sand blast, the plant has developed a stalk so covered with hairs that
it is as woolly almost as a sheep-perfectly protected
against the sand enemy."
" Which is all that the cactus did when the antelopes came to destroy it."
And he thus moralises:
" Let the cactus, battle scarred and inured to hardship, teach us our first great lesson in plant improvement: That our plants are what they are because of environment; that by simply observing their structures, their tendencies, their habits, their individual peculiarities, we can read their histories back ages and ages before there were men and animals-read it, almost, as an open book; that our plants have lived their lives not by quiet rote and rule, but in a turmoil of emergency; and, just as they have always changed with their surroundings, so now, day by day, do they continue to change to fit themselves to new environments; and that we, to bring forth new characteristics in them, to transform them to meet our ideals, have but to surround them with new environments-not at haphazard, but along the lines of our definite desires."
Further successes which have been obtained by the study of former environment and crossings are the production of a scented Easter lily, a white blackberry, a stoneless plum, an enlarged sugar prune, rhubarb which will supply the markets months before the ordinary spring growth, cherry trees which

MR. LUTHER BURBANK-HIS MIETHODS AND DISCOVERIES. 199
double the ordinary crops, an edible quince, a strawberry vine which will bear the year round, a cactus pear, plants which will yield useful chemical substances, " paper sllell " w,ralnuts, and certain entirely new fruits. Among the latter are the " plumcot, " a fruit which combines the best features of thle plum and the apricot, and the "sunberrv." The latter resulted from a hybridisation of two solanums effected after years of unsuccessful efforts.
Professor de Vries, of Holland, after a visit to Mr. Burbank's experiment farm, said:
" In the light of w-hat has been accomplished it seems quite possible to breed a new wNheat, a new barley, new oats and new Indian corn, which will produce one grain more to each head; or to bring out a new variety of potato which will surpass the original kind, by the addition of a single tuber to each plant, or to improve a tree to the extent of making it bear one more apple, one more pear or one more nut upon its branches. It is only when we contemplate the astounding monetary results that such apparently slight changes produce, that we realise their importance. The addition of a single kernel to the ear of Indian corn, would, for example, in the United States alone, produce an extra crop equal to 5,IOO,ooo bushels-an annual addition of millions of dollars to the farmer."
" The addition of a single extra kernel to the head means a fifteen million bushel annual wheat increase; or a twenty million bushel oats increase, or a two million bushel barley increase. . . . And if their direct monetary benefits run thus into the millions and the hundreds of millions annually, w%ho can estimate the broad upward influence Nrhich such plant improvements will have upon society at large?
How Luther Burbank has accomplished these things is revealed in the reply he gives to would-be plant experimenters who ask his opinion of matters connected with the old versus the new interpretations of heredity. He is accustomed to say:
" Read Darwin first, and gain the full comprehension of the

200

EUGENICS REVIEW.

meaning of natural selection. Then read the modern Mendelists
in detail. But then-go back again to Darwin." It is not surprising that Mr. Burbank, while pursuing his
interesting experiments on plants, has deeply considered the correlation of his work to human life. His conclusion is that continued observation of human genealogy shows that man himself is subject to precisely the same laws of heredity that apply to the lowliest vegetable or animal organisms, and that a wide range of experiments with many types of animals afford conclusive evidence that striking analogy are everywhere to be found between the manner of transmission of traits and characteristics in plants and animals. Fortunately, the Luther Burbank Society, having finished its interesting and elaborate account of Mr. Burbank's methods and discoveries in plant culture and development, and having the necessary funds at its disposal, is preparing a series of monographs for distribution among the members of the Society. These will deal " with the improvement of the human plant, and cover, as broadly as possible with the space at hand, the whole subject of heredity and environment as applied not only to the production of better races but the production of better individuals."
If these monographs are prepared with the same care which has been everywhere exhibited in the production of the work which they have just completed, their publication should be widely welcomed.

