STERILIZATION BILL

THE following is the Bill which Major their spouses, parents or guardians; not as

T A. G. Church will shortly introduce an Act to enable doctors to perform steriliz-

under the ten-minutes' rule. It will ing operations at their discretion upon

be noticed that it is described as an Act to defectives. The voluntary nature of this

enable mental defectives to undergo steri- measure is clearly stressed in this wording.

lization upon application by themselves,

C. P. BLACKER.

AN ACT
to enable mental defectives to undergo sterilizing operations or sterilizing treatment upon their own application or that of their spouses or parents or guardians.

THE STERILIZATION ACT, 193?

ArranAement of Sections

i. Sterilization of Defectives. 2. Sterilizing operations, etc. 3. Order of Judicial Authority. 4. Protection of Medical Practitioners. 5. Judicial Authorities: Regulations as to
procedure.

6. Notices, etc., to be dispensed with in certain cases.
7. Interpretation and Adaptation. 8. Short title and extent.

Sterilization of Defectives.

order as aforesaid shall be given by the

i. (i) It shall be lawful for a registered person making the application to all other

medical practitioner to perform a sterilizing persons authorised to make the application

operation as defined by this Act upon a except in cases where such notice is dis-

defective provided the following persons and pensed with under this Act.

bodies, namely:

(a) The defective, if he is capable of expressing himself as willing or unwilling to undergo the operation;
(b) The spouse (if any) of the defective; (c) If the defective is unmarried, his
parent or guardian (if any); and (d) The Board of Control,

Sterilizing Operations, etc.
2. For the purposes of this Act
(i) The expression " sterilizing operation " shall mean vasectomy salpingectomy and any other surgical operation whereby the patient is rendered incapable of procreation or child-bearing without the capacity to exercise the sexual func-

respectively consent to the operation being tions being otherwise impaired;

performed and the operation has been sanc- (ii) Any medical treatment which

tioned by an order of a judicial authority attains the same result as a sterilizing

for the purposes of this Act made upon the operation with the same limitation in its

application of the defective or his spouse (if effect as regards the sexual functions

any) or his parent or guardian (if any).

shall be treated as a sterilizing operation

(2) Notice of an application for such an for all the purposes of this Act.

153

I54 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Order of Judicial Authority.

be a judicial authority for the purposes of

3. (i) In any case where an application is this Act with the like jurisdiction and

made to a judicial authority under this Act powers as under those Acts.

for an order sanctioning a sterilizing opera- (2) The Secretary of State may make

tion, the judicial authority, provided it is regulations with respect to the procedure on

satisfied by such medical certificates or application for orders under this Act.

other evidence as it may deem sufficient and after such visitation or inspection as it may

Notices, etc., Dispensed with in Certain Cases.

direct and after hearing and considering 6. (i) In any case where the parent, guar-

any representations made by any person to dian or spouse of a defective

whom notice of the application is required to be given by this Act:

(i) Cannot be found; or (ii) Is outside Great Britain; or

(i) That the person to whom the appli- (iii) Is a person of unsound mind law-

cation relates is a defective;

fully detained under the Lunacy Acts

(ii) That there is no probability of the I890-I892, or a defective; or

health of such person being adversely (iv) Is undergoing imprisonment (except

affected by the operation; and

under civil process) or penal servitude,

(iii) That the several persons and bodies whose consent to the operation being performed is required by this Act have respectively given such consent,

the judicial authority shall have power to dispense with any notice to or consent by such parent, guardian or spouse which would otherwise be required under this Act.

shall have power to make an order sanctioning the performance of a sterilizing operation as defined by this Act.
(2) Such an order of the judicial authority shall be conclusive for all purposes as to:
(i) The person to whom the order relates being a defective; and
(ii) The consents to the operation being performed required by this Act having been given.

(2) For the purposes of this Act
(i) The expression " guardian" shall include any person who undertakes or performs towards a defective the duty of a parent or guardian or has charge of him;
(ii) The consent of or notice to any one or more of a number of persons who with reference to a particular defective come within the designation of parent or guardian shall be sufficient consent of or notice to a parent or guardian.

Protection of Medical Practitioners.

4. (i) A registered medical practitioner shall not in any case where he has with due

Interpretation and Adaptation.
7. In this Act:

care performed a sterilizing operation under (i) The expression " Mental Deficiency

the authority of this Act be liable to any Acts " means the Mental Deficiency Acts,

criminal or civil proceedings in respect of I9I3 to I927, as amended by any subse-

such operation.

quent enactment:

(2) Nothing in this Act shall render un- (ii) The expression " defective " has

lawful any surgical operation or medical the same meaning as in the Mental Defi-

treatment which before the passing of this ciency Acts.

Act could lawfully be performed or applied.

Short Title and Extent.

Judicial Authorities: Regulations as to

8. (i) This Act may be cited as the

Procedure.

Sterilization Act, I93?.

5. (i) Every judicial authority for the (2) This Act shall-not apply to Scotland

purposes of the Mental Deficiency Acts shall or Northern Ireland.

