A. E. MOURANT,
M. A., D. Phil., D.M., F.R.C.P., Blood Group Reference Laboratory
The International Biological Programme

T HE INTERNATIONAL BIOLOGICAL
PROGRAMME iS the successor in the bio-
logical field of the International Geophysical Year in the physical, and like the latter it is being organized and sponsored by the International Council of Scientific Unions (henceforth called ICSU). It is intended that the Programme shall comprise a series of large-scale biological surveys and investigations, of basic scientific importance, but particularly urgently needed because of their implications for human welfare, and of a kind or magnitude needing extensive international co-operation. Because biological research is in general a slower process than physical investigation it was decided to call the scheme a "programme" rather than to limit it by the name "year". A skeleton staff, previously working for the International Geophysical Year, has been seconded by ICSU to assist in the early stages of the Programme.
The Royal Society, as the relevant adhering body to ICSU, has set up a Provisional United Kingdom Committee under the chairmanship of Professor A. A. Miles, F.R.S.
The proposed activities of the International Biological Programme are to be classified under six headings, namely:

article, therefore, only applies specifically to this
project, though much of it is in fact applicable
also to the others.
The Convener for Project D is Dr. J. S. Weiner, Director of the Medical Research
Council Unit for Environmental Physiology, and President of the Royal Anthropological Institute. Dr. Weiner's appointment as Convener applies to the world as a whole, but he is naturally taking a special interest in British participation and, as a member of the Royal Society's Committee, he is helping to plan it. Communications on the subject of Project D should be sent to him at the Royal Anthropological Institute, 21 Bedford Square, London, W.C. 1.
One of the main ideas behind the project on Human Adaptability is that it is important, before the adaptations of practically all human communities become obscured in a world-wide uniform culture, to study the processes of adaptation in communities subject to as wide a range of terrains, climates and social environments as possible. For this purpose stress will be laid on the one hand on the physiological investigation of responses to the measurable characteristics of the environment, including a study of developmental biology, and on the other

A Productivity of Terrestrial Communities to surveys of all those individual inborn charac-

I Ecology II Physiology III Conservation B Productivity of Freshwater Communities C Productivity of Marine Communities

ters which, taken together and looked at from the hereditary standpoint, constitute the population genetics of the community. This will involve the collaboration not merely of persons trained

D Human Adaptability

in conventional physiology and genetics as such,

E Use and Management of Biological Reserves F Public Relations and Training

but will need the help of a great many other disciplines such as medicine, anthropology

It is clear that members of the Eugenics (physical and social) ecology and demography.

Society, and human biologists generally, will be The following headings have been listed pro-

interested chiefly in Project D. The rest of this visionally:

20 I
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1964, 55, 4.
ER-C

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Environmental Physiology Fitness, Growth and Physique Genetics of Populations Health, Epidemiological and Nutritional Aspects

3. Full scale study: This might last for two years or more and in certain cases would itself need to be divided into a number of stages.

It is contemplated that specialists shall all It seems likely that among the main United

work together, and as far as possible simul- Kingdom activities in the definitive phase of

taneously, on the selected populations. The Project D will be field studies of peoples living activities under Project D will be co-ordinated at high altitudes (Himalayan) and of adjacent with those under other projects so that, for lowland peoples; and co-operative work with instance, ships assigned to oceanographic re- local scientists in East Africa, and perhaps

search will probably also be available for South-west Asia: at the same time there would be transport to and from remote islands. In some similar studies of "reference populations" in the

cases, especially in relation to ecology, an United Kingdom.

aspect which is to receive special attention in all No precise estimate of the cost of the pro-

parts of the Programme, the association between gramme has been made, but the whole aim of the

different projects is likely to be very close indeed. scheme will be frustrated unless the advanced

The timing of the Programme must depend nations can agree to support it with the same

largely upon the response which it receives from sort of enthusiasm as they showed for I.G.Y.

governments and from the scientific world Much of the cost will have to be met from

generally. It is envisaged as falling into two Government sources but private foundations

main phases: a preparatory phase which appears and societies must be prepared to make available

likely to cover the next two or three years, and a very substantial sums.

definitive phase lasting a further five years or so, Such bodies, in so far as they are prepared to

during which the main investigations will be supply expert advice, money, or both, can expect

carried out. There must of course also be a final to have some say in guiding the development of

phase of working up results, preparing reports the Programme. Moreover, those bodies which,

and publishing them.

at the present time, before the outlines of the

Thus, both in respect to the scheme as a Programme have become firmly crystallized, are

whole, and to particular projects, it is important prepared to initiate and finance some of the

that certain preparatory investigations should much needed preparatory investigations, may

begin with the least possible delay. In relation reasonably expect to have a voice in planning

to the scheme as a whole, plans should be put and a share in manning the major investigations

into operation at once in such matters as the a few years hence.

standardization of measurements of all kinds, The Programme is, of course, a programme of

the testing and improvement of methods of investigation, not of propaganda or of adminis-

taking, transporting and preserving biological trative action, though if it is to be successful it

specimens, and the collection of basic data in must ultimately lead to both. There are, however,

certain fields, especially demography and among the fact-finding aims of the Eugenics

population genetics.

Society many potential points of contact with

In relation to particular investigations, a series the Programme: in particular, many facts much

of stages is envisaged, and in some cases the needed on eugenic grounds can be collected only

first stage could and should be begun at once. by internationally co-operative research. I would

The stages envisaged are:

therefore suggest that the Eugenics Society, as

1. A preliminary stage: defining of problem, collection of information, and planning of Stage 2.
2. Pilot study: investigation of feasibility of full scale study, obtaining preliminary information in the field, and organization of Stage 3.

well as its individual members, should consider, as a matter of some urgency, what part it might take both in the preparatory and in the definitive stages of the International Biological Pro-
gramme.

202

