EUGENICS PROBLEMS AFTER THE GREAT WAR.
THE GALTON LECTURE, FEB. i6th, I9I6.
By PROFESSOR E. B. POULTON, F.R.S.
THE justification of the Eugenics Education Society lies in the
fact that man, acting as a community, is continually letting loose, and cannot help letting loose, the forces that " improve
or impair the racial qualities of future generations." Every
law, custom, or tradition by which society helps or restrains any of its individual members must inevitably produce some effect for the good or for the evil of future generations. Unfortunately, too, the creators of law, custom and tradition are rarely able to foresee the result of the power they have called into being. Who would have supposed that increased luxury of living, primarily due to an increased rate of production, would, by creating new standards to which many would aspire, but only with difficulty attain, seriously imperil the due
proportion, jperhaps, even the very existence, of some of the
best elements in our population ? How different in this respect has been the course of the
last quarter century from that which Malthus laid down as the result of an increased food supply; and how rapid has been the sinister change. It seems only a few years ago-although I am afraid it is nearly thirty-that we were reading Cottar Morrison's " Service of Man," with its prayer that we might be delivered from the " devastating torrent of babies." What are thirty years for such an overwhelming change in our outlook?
We are, therefore, forced to recognise the value, and, indeed, the necessity of a body of men and women, like the Eugenics Education Society, who make it their duty to study the forces that are deliberately but generally ignorantly let loose, or that seem to spring up spontaneously in human societies, foreseeing so far as possible their real results and endeavouring to promote those that will improve, and check or modify those that will impair, the racial qualities of the future.

EUGENIC PROBLEMS AFTER THE GREAT WAR.

35

At the present moment, when the human race is suffering in the most terrible tragedy that has ever been enacted; when old predictions are found to be false, old safeguards useless, old beliefs shattered; when we realise that the mightiest war must be followed by the most gigantic efforts of reconstruction in history, we ought to feel that the vigilant guardianship of future generations is among the h-eaviest of our responsibilites. I propose to consider some of the eugenic problems that are ahead of us and will require for their solution all the effort that we can command.
First, then, the Great War itself. Victory in the past has often meant a new criterion of success or failure under which the lower qualities of mankind have been favoured and the higher kept down. Charles Darwin clearly recognised this result. On March I2th, i86o, only a few months after the appearance of the Origin, he wrote to Sir Charles Lyell:
" By an odd chance (for I had not alluded even to the subject) the ladies attacked me this evening, and threw the high state of old Grecians into my teeth, as an unanswerable difficulty, but by good chance I had my answer all pat, and silenced them." He then told his friend the answer that he gave, viz., that " in a state of anarchy, or despotism, or bad government, or after irruption of barbarians, force, strength, or ferocity, and not intellect, would be apt to gain the day."'
The same thing has happened again and again. History is full of such tragedies, from the Carthaginian physicist slain by the Roman soldier to the builders of Zimbabwe, swept out of existence by a lower but more powerful Bantu civilisation. But the world had to wait till the twentieth century for the fear of a tragedy darker than all. What the threat means has been clearly expressed in the letter of an American scientific man, although I do not doubt that the writer is much too pessimistic when he speaks of the probable result of the struggle :-
" I was greatly interested in what you said regarding the war. We are all thinking seriously and deeply on the question here. With great reluctance I am forced to the conclusion that Germany is deliberately aiming at 1'Life and Letters," I887, II., 295.

36 EUGENICS REVIEW.
world dominion and proposes to use every available means to gain that end. Knowing Germany and Germans as well as I do, I was very doubtful of this at the beginning in spite of what the English said. It becomes every day increasingly clear, however, that Germany of deliberate intent proposes to wage the most effective kind of war that the human mind can conceive of, namely a combination of the highest scientific organisation with pure barbarism. I very much doubt whether civilised means of warfare will ever win against this combination if relentlessly pushed to its logical and physical extreme, and so far as I can see Germany has every intention of pushing it just that far. We are unquestionably witnessing the most stupendously interesting step of human evolution that has occurred since that which differentiated man from the anthropoid-this, of course, on the assumption that Germany wins, which it seems to me every day more likely that she is going to do. I wish I could think otherwise, but it seems to me that civilised warfare has no chance whatever against uncivilised warfare, plus the most superb scientific organisation that has ever been put into operation in respect of military affairs."'
The first problem before us is to win the war and prevent "the most stupendously interesting step of human evolution " from carrying the world backwards to lower and more brutal ideals, favouring the success and increase of lower and more brutal types of man. Having won the war we must act so as to prevent any such danger from threatening civilisation a second time. We have taken the risk once, we know what it means. We know, too that security cannot be found in International agreements for the prevention and amelioration of war. These instruments have
benefited one party only-the belligerents who treacherously broke them. We cannot but deeply regret that the greatest neutral nation declined to honour her own signature by making
1 Written June igth, 1915, to an American friend then resident in England. I have already quoted this letter in the Romanes Lecture for x915, 'Science
and the Great War," Clarendon Press, pp. 36-37.

EUGENIC PROBLEMS AFTER THE GREAT WAR.

37

a protest. Had it been otherwise; had the United States
announced at the outset that, although neither committed to war nor committing herself to war, she could not be indifferent to the invasion of Belgium, International agreements would have
been rendered more secure than ever before, and the world might have been spared the whole tragedy. It is too late to
hope that these agreements may yet receive that strengthening
in the future which would result from the immediate action of the one Power that has been more than all others desirous of initiating and extending them ?
We are faced by facts as they are, not as we wish them to be. Facts as they are demand the organisation of the British Empire for security-security from within, self-contained,
independent of agreements.
Well-founded security can only be attained by some form
of universal service, and with it the scientific classification and scientific use of the human material at our disposal. The very thought calls up a vision of wastefulness, the utter inefficiency, yet withal the splendour of the voluntary system as we saw it at the beginning of the war. " Here I am, send me," are the words that express the spirit of our best and bravest, and " Very well, sort yourselves," the reply of those who had never realised the need for organisation. Then followed a year and a half of war: the flower of our manhood has been taken from us and for months British needs have only
been satisfied by methods which deprive the system of all right to be called voluntary.
The eugenic significance of these facts is obvious. Quite recently our President, in a paper before the Royal Statistical Society, stated that " war unquestionably killed off the better types, and was, therefore, highly dysgenic," and that "the anticipation of racial damage was strengthened by the deathrate amongst officers, who formed a still more highly-selected class of the community." If this be the tendency in all great wars it is strongly increased under the voluntary system and the want of efficient organisation which seems inevitable under it.
To-night I see in the evening paper" that Professor Arthur
I Pan Mall Gazette, February x6th, 1916.

38 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Keith, disputing Major Darwin's conclusions, has attempted to draw a distinction between our best and our bravest men:
" The men wlho are most eminently fitted for our modern civilisation-for our industrial civilisation-are not the bravest men of the nation at all. The extremely brave man is of no use in business whatever; he is of no use in industrial life. It is nonsense to talk about war being the cause of the catastrophe of eliminating the best men."
Professor Keith is wholly wrong. Our experience in Oxford is that of Cambridge, and of every place from which our young men have willingly gone forth, for their country and for the liberty of the world. They are far from the type described by Professor Keith. The great majority hate war and intensely dislike the idea of killing: their courage is intellectual and moral rather than physical. They are precisely the men we most need in the great social reconstruction that is coming. Numbers of them have taken a leading part in the Boy Scout movement and in Boys' Clubs, and those who have come under their influence have been led by the same high motives to risk their lives and to die.
At the recent Headmasters' Conference' Mr. Francis (Blundell's) moved, and the headmaster of Cheltenham seconded, and it was carried unanimously, " That in the opinion of this conference very grave loss to the country is caused by the employment of young students of exceptional mathematical and scientific ability as subalterns in line battalions." The mover spoke of the unnecessary waste of human material suffered in the formation of corps d'elite of men who were needed as officers. He spoke of science scholars known to him who had been claimed for the Munitions Department, but refused permission by their commanding officer in a service battalion. In the controversy2 which was bound to arise in a country permeated by our voluntary system or want of system the mover of the resolution wrote: " There are fighting men and thinking men. It is simply a question of economising what is necessary
1 Report in Times, December 24th, 1915. 2 Times, December 27th, 1915.

EUGENIC PROBLEMS AFTER THE GREAT WAR.

39

for the country's well being, or even existence, and of calling upon every man for the best service he can render, whether to live or, if need be, to die."'
Mr. S. E. Longland also argued, in the same controversy, that " a nation at war must organise its resources; in this war we have to calculate and to invent; and it seemed to those who voted for the resolution that it is a misapplication of our resources if we put into line battalions young men who have the mental equipment necessary for military work of another kind."
We are encouraged to look hopefully on the future when we find the Headmasters' Conference unanimous in support of these principles; but in the present, we can only mourn that the neglect to apply them has meant the sacrifice of our best and reduced efficiency in the conduct of war. The eugenic and military needs have here been the same, and both have suffered. As regards eugenics our great hope, as the President urged in the paper already referred to, rests on those members of the community born in the last eighteen years, and whatever sacrifices have to be made in consequence of the cost of the war, we must insure that they are brought up under conditions that will encourage the best that is in them. Above all " it would be increasingly necessary for the next twenty years to inculcate a belief that where both parents were fairly healthy it was immoral and unpatriotic to limit the size of the family, except in view of bringing up the children in comfort, though not necessarily in luxury. The racial damage would be at its worst when peace was declared, and the checking of the multiplication of the unfit would never be more needed than then."2
It will be essential for the State to act and act resolutely if the results here briefly stated are to be attained. As regards the first of these-security based on universal service and the scientific use of our population there cannot be much doubtthe threat has been too deadly and has come too near success.
1 Times, December 29th, 1915. 2 Report in Morning Post, February i6th, 1916, of Major Darwin's paper before the Royal Statistical Society.

40 EUGENICS REVIEW.
The attainment of the necessary results spoken of by Major Darwin will require State action based directly on eugenic considerations. What are the prospects of such action ? Well, we may comfort ourselves with the thought that the signs of the times have been for some years far more favourable than in the past. Encouragement is afforded by the consideration of State action, or rather inaction, nearly half a century ago.
A good example is to be found in a subject which closely touches our history. When Francis Galton was advocating the formation of the Eugenics Education Society, he wished to show that marriages might and probably would be influenced by eugenic considerations. He pointed as evidence to marriages between first cousins, which were fewer than the calculated expectation, not because they were known to be undesirable, but because of the belief that they were so. If, then, people were educated to believe-and on sure grounds-in the injurious effect of dysgenic marriages, we may feel confident that this belief also would cause a reduction in the proportionate number of such unions. But I allude to marriage between cousins not because it provided the basis for Galton's convincing and hopeful reasoning, but because it happens to have been discussed from the eugenic standpoint by a Parliamentary Committee more than forty-five years ago.
On July 17th, I870, Charles Darwin wrote the following letter to Sir John Lubbock:
" As I hear that the census will be brought before the House to-morrow, I write to say how much I hope that you will express your opinion on the desirability of queries in relation to consanguineous marriages being inserted. As you are aware, I have made experiments on the subject during several years; and it is my clear conviction that there is now ample evidence of the existence of a great physiological law, rendering an enquiry with reference to mankind of much
importance. In England, and many parts of Europe, the marriages of cousins are objected to from their supposed *injurious consequences; but this belief rests on no direct evidence. It is, therefore, manifestly desirable that the belief should either be proved false, or should be confirmed, so that

EUGENIC PROBLEMS AFTER THE GREAT WAR.

41

in this latter case the marriages of cousins might be discouraged. If the proper queries are inserted, the returns would show whether married cousins have in their households on the night of the census as many children as have parents who are not related; and should the number prove fewer, we might safely infer either lessened fertility in the parents, or, which is is more probable, lessened vitality in the offspring.
" It is, moreover, much to be wished that the truth of the often repeated assertion, that consanguineous marriages lead to deafness, and dumbness, blindness, etc., should be ascertained; and all such assertions could be easily tested by the returns from a single census.'91
The result of this letter appeared on July 26th, I870, when the Census Bill was considered in Committee and " Sir John Lubbock moved to insert the words 'whether married to a first cousin.' It was of great social importance to ascertain the number of consanguineous marriages, and the result on the health of their offspring."2
Dr. Lyon Playfair strongly supported the Amendment, arguing that whatever conclusion emerged from the facts " the information sought for could be acquired with little trouble, and would prove important in its negative or positive result." In
the one case a prejudice would be removed, in the other it would
be shown to rest on solid grounds. Mr.. Gathorne Hardy " did not see the desirability of
holding up families where such marriages had taken place to the public, and the children being held up to be anatomised for the benefit of science." And yet, as another speaker observed, the census would have given no names, only results.
Mr. Beresford Hope stated that " the demand for such statistics . . . would be over weighted with a prejudice against that class of marriage, and would be felt to be so by those on whom the call was made. On the other hand, there would not be any compulsion to make the return, while, in many instances, the previous relationship of husband and wife might be unknown in their neighbourhood, and the risk of being found out, there-
1 'Life and Letters," III., 129. See also p. 130.
2 Hansard's "Parliamentary Debates," Third series, Vol. cciii. From July xitb
to August ioth, I870, pp. 1002-1010.

42 EUGENICS REVIEW.
fore, nil. Thus, all the temptation would be in favour of acknowledging the marriage where there was a healthy and sound-minded progeny, and of concealing it where there were unhealthy children or none at all." Therefore, he argued the
test would be worthless. Mr. Locke said, "this was a piece of the grossest cruelty
ever thought of. . If on this occasion the philosophers were allowed to have their way, he was perfectly satisfied that this Census Bill would be one of the greatest misfortunes, for every species of mental torture would be applied. Did they intend to introduce a Bill to forbid first cousins from marrying?
Every year a Bill was brought in to enable a man to marry his
deceased wife's sister, and if there were to be legislation about the marriage of first cousins also, the whole time of the House would be taken up in deciding who was to be allowed to marry
anvbody else." Mr. Collins said: "It would be far more valuable for
legislative purposes to require that there should be a column for persons who had married their deceased wife's sisters or deceased husband's brothers. That would be a practical question, whereas this was purely inquisitorial. The only object could be to stigmatise certain marriages, to which he personally objected, but upon which he did not think Parliament ought to cast a slur."
Mr. Melly also maintained that " the proposed return would be in the highest degree inquisitorial, and . . . would be perfectly useless . . . unless it was followed up by further inquiries as to the number, health, and mental condition of their children."
Dr. Ball said " that the proposal was defended on physiological grounds; but if that were sufficient ground for inquiry there ought to be another inquiry as to the number of cases in which there were twins."
Mr. Bruce, though not against the Amendment, advised that it should not be pressed " as the opinion of the Committee did not appear ripe on the question."
Mr. Bruce, Mr. D. Dalrymple, and Mr. Rathbone spoke
in favour of the Amendment.

EUGENIC PROBLEMS AFTER THE GREAT WAR.

43

Sir John Lubbock pointed out that the statistics alluded to by Mr. Melly " could be obtained from hospitals, lunatic asylums, etc.; but they threw no light on this question, because we did not know the proportion of marriages of first cousins. That proportion was the clue, and would be supplied if the Committee adopted the Amendment."
The result of the voting was Ayes 45; Noes 92. That is the way in which a serious scientific question, bearing on the well-being of the people was treated by a Parliamentary Committee in I870. It is distinctly encouraging to compare with the above record the treatment received by the Mental Deficiency Bill.' The comparison affords good grounds for the hope that State action will co-operate efficiently with private effort on behalf of survivors from the great war as well as of those who were too young to take part in it. We must also hope that the particular form of State action will be decided after careful study, in which it is to be expected and desired that the Eugenics Education Society will have a large and beneficient share. In the time of financial pressure and stress which is immediately ahead the admirable suggestions of Mr. and Mrs. Whetham will have increased force. I refer especially to the following passages: " Exemption from income tax of all moneys spent in any rank of life on the maintenance and education of children would,
in the end, greatly benefit the one real souirce of national credit,
the composition and character of the life of the people."2 " It is the amount a man receives, not the sum his father
leaves, that should be taken as a basis (of taxation). A fortune divided among ten children should be taxed less than one which goes to an only son or daughter."
The great problem of problems after the war, fof-ithe
Eugenics Education Society as for every other society which
I Mental Deficiency Bill. The new Bill was issued on March 31st, 1913. April ISt, 1913: Introduction of Measure. Mav 28th, I9I3: Second reading of Bill moved in the House of Commons. July 24th, 1913: Scotch Mental Deficiency
Bill discussed in Committee. July 28th, 1913: Discussion in the House of Commons, in which Mr. McKenna and Mr. Wedgwood took part. November Isth, 1913: Mr. McKenna spoke on "the new Act." August 7th, 1913: House of Lords.
2"The Family and the Nation," i9og, p. I94.

44 EUGENICS REVIEW.
aims at the well-being of the community, will be the attempt to create an atmosphere sympathetic to the teachings of science. Success in this will mean success in the reasonable teachings of eugenics as well as in other directions of the utmost national importance; and with all the efforts to ensure progress in our own special province, we shall be wise to unite with others who are striving that science shall have far greater influence in national affairs of all kinds. Now is the appointed time: if the opportunity be allowed to pass our doom is certain and will not be long delaved.
"It is universally acknowledged," said Professor J. A. Fleming on a recent occasion, " that the outcome of the present war must be an entirely new chapter in human history and a point of fresh departure in social, economic, and intellectual life."' Mr. H. J. Mackinder, M.P., had similarly said that " the force of tradition and convention had been broken as it had never been since the Civil War."2 In one sense, indeed, the present break with the past is bound to be far greater than that of nearly three centuries ago; for the Civil War was a terrific struggle between two small armies with the rest of England looking on; while into this mighty conflict the whole
nation must enter as an actor. When all are convinced that this is the time for change, and
when so many are agreed upon the general direction which must be taken, the only danger lies in the dissipation of energy and the weariness brought about by endless discussions on education-the subject which of all others lends itself to talk. It is, therefore, most fortunate that a clear and definite policy should have been brought before the country in the daily Press of February 2nd last. The published memorandum, which is signed by many scientific authorities, maintains that the entrance examinations for Oxford
and Cambridge, and for appointments in the Civil Services and the Army "are among the greatest determining factors in settling the kind of education given at our public schools."
1 In a lecture delivered October 6th, 19I5, at University College, London,
piublished in Nature" of October 14th. ' At the meeting of the Geographical Association, Morning Post, January 7th,
I9I6.

EUGENIC PROBLEMS AFTER THE GREAT WAR.

45

The result of the system of examination hitherto followed, " not merely upon the successful candidates, but upon all the great schools and the old universities which necessarily (as things are at present arranged) work with them in aim and interest, is a neglect of the study of the natural sciences, and to some extent an indifferent, not to say contemptuous, attitude towards them."
"The one and effective way of changing this attitude and of giving us both better educated Civil servants and a true and reasonable appreciation of science in all classes is in the hands of the Legislature, and of it alone. If a Bill were passed directing the Civil Service Commissioners and Army Examination Board to give a preponderating-or at least an equal-share of marks in the competitive examination to natural science subjects, with safeguards so as to make them tests of genuine scientific education and not an incentive to mere " cram," the object we have in view would be obtained. Science would rise in our schools to a proper position and gain the respect necessary for the national welfare. A popular appreciation and understanding of science would begin to develop; and our officials of all kinds, no less than members of Parliatnent, would come to be as much ashamed of ignorance of the commonplaces of science as they would now be if found guilty of bad spelling and arithmetic. Not at once, but little by little, the professional workers in science would increase in number and gain in public esteem. Eventually the Board of Trade would be replaced by a Ministry of Science, Commerce, and Industry, in full touch with the scientific knowledge of the moment. Public opinion would compel the inclusion of great scientific discoverers and inventors as a matter of course in the Privy Council, and their occupation in the service of the State.
" With this object in view we urge the electorates to insist that candidates for their suffrages should pledge themselves to aid by legislation in bringing about a drastic reform in the scheme of examinations for all the public services in the sense we have indicated.
" Our desire is to draw attention to this matter not in the interests of existing professional men of science, but as a

46 EUGENICS REVIEW.
reform which is vital to the continued existence of this country as a Great Power."
Here, then, is a simple and definite policy, which I trust that the Eugenics Education Society will promote to the utmost of its power. Mr. T. E. Page replying in the Times, of February 4th, to the memorandum of the scientific men, deprecates discussion at the present moment, and asks " is this an hour for raising contro-versies?" But we do not wish to raise any controversy or discussion; we propose a policy, and we believe that the object-lesson of the war will be sufficient to ensure its adoption. The past fifty years have been full of discussion and controversy. The neglect of science in national education and national affairs generally has been proved again and againfrom Huxley's eloquent and convincing addresses to the constantly repeated and patriotic warnings of " Nature " and the British Science Guild-by the statements and protests of our most distinguished scientific men during many years.
We initiate no controversy, but we do say " Who is on my side?" We know full well that enemies of the efficiency and safety of their countrv still exist among us. To them we may address the warning recently uttered by Sir Ray Lankester:
" A terrible responsibility rests upon those who, owing to sheer ignorance and misapprehension, or to fatal tenderness for vested interests, may endeavour to prevent altogether or to delay the drastic reform which alone can save the nation's life.'"
" It seems almost incredible," writes Mr. C. R. Darling, "that at the present time boys who receive commissions immediately on leaving school are devoting their time to the dead languages, and enter the Army without a scrap of scientific knowledge." And when the writer tells us that the offer to
teach military science to such boys-already begun at Harrow
and a few other schools-was gratefully accepted by the Director of Military Training at the War Office; when we learn that an officer returned from France, speaking at the recent meeting of Public School Science Masters, stated that " to his own knowledge hundreds of lives had been needlessly lost through the
1 Times, January I4th, 1916.

EUGENIC PROBLEMS AFTER THE GREAT WAR.

47

lack of information that should be in the possession of every officer," there must be few, indeed, who can doubt that " any headmaster who permits this state of things to continue is an enemy both to the boys and to his country."'
In putting forward this policy of efficiency and security, it is of vital importance to remember-and here I am pleased to feel that Mr. T. E. Page will be with us-the very much that is
unique and splendid in the results of our educational methods. The quality of the material at the disposal of authority has been wonderful, the instant answer to the call of the nation magnificent. In all the bitterness and indignation aroused by ignorance and want of organising power in those who took the responsibility of knowing and of organising, let us never forget the educational forces which have given us the men themselves.
In a recent address2 to the Workers' Educational Associa. tion the Rev. William Temple has clearly pointed to the strong features in our public school life, and has contended that the same advantages should be provided for all classes. While freely admitting that the traditional English intellectual training " has often been very amateurish in method, and very feeble in result," the speaker claimed, and rightly claimed, that " education by means of a corporate life, whose main expression is through organised games," has had as its product " a body of men who, not always learned, and seldom able to formulate their principles of action, are undoubtedly the best colonial and
imperial administrators of whom history holds record." On the
same lines Mr. A. L. Smith has recently maintained that " the social sense needed to be extended to the elementary and secondary schools, where they were not only ready, but hungry, for it "3-a statement thoroughly borne out by the success of the Boy Scout and Boys' Club movements.
It cannot be doubted that the results so justlv appreciated by Mr. William Temple are in large part due to a system of administration, under which the young Englishman is
1 For the quotations in the above paragraph see "Nature," January 20th, i9I6, pp- 564-565.
2"Tradition, Policy, and Economy in English Education," delivered October
15th, 1915, published by Workers' Educational Association., London. 8 Address to Association of University Women Teachers. Morning Post, January 3 1st,
19I6.

48 EUGENICS REVIEW.

inspired to do his best by the possession of responsibility and

power. It is a system which solves the problem so well stated

by Sir Oliver Lodge:

"How to continue real education throughout life, and

develop the powers of every human being, or at least to devise

conditions which should not seriously crush out such develop-

ment, was a problem worthy of an exalted patriotism; for

nothing could be more beneficial to the country."'

The candidate who gains an appointment in the home Civil

Service is, as a rule, abler than one who seeks work in distant

parts of the Empire, but it is to be feared that the conditions of

the former service do not help a man to become the best of

which he is capable, so that in a few years he will fall behind

his less gifted fellow-student whose real education has been

continued and powers developed.

A fine example of the power of the young Englishman " to

win the confidence of those over whom we rule " has been

recently brought forward by Mr. F. H. Ruxton, writing on the

behaviour during the war of the Mohammedan chiefs and

peoples of the part of Northern Nigeria bordering on the Sahara,

with Lake Tchad at its north-east corner.2

" Since our advent in I903 they have been directly ruled by

a gentlemanly, but phlegmatic Shaikh, and administered-very

indirectly-by some six or seven young Englishmen.

"There are no police other than the Emir's own unarmed

men, and the handful of men representing the dominant power

has been still further reduced. Yet from the first the people

never wavered; though famine reigned in the land last year,

great quantities of corn were somehow. produced and sent to the

Front; thousands of men, pack oxen, camels, and donkeys, were

got together without difficulty for transport. The Emir and

chiefs, from their private purses, sent meat and other luxuries

to the British and French black troops. They protested their

allegiance to the King, in letters to the Governor-General;

prayers were offered daily for the success of our arms-even in

the Shaikh's harem prayers were ordered to be said-and,

perhaps most significant of all, the taxes continued to be paid

I 2

"TTihmees,CoJmamnounawreyal4tthh,,"19IJ6a.nuaryj

I96,

pp.

I1-I6.

EUGENIC PROBLEMS AFTER THE GREAT WAR.

49

as in times of peace. And throughout the native States of the Northern provinces the attitude was the same. The wellconceived Arabic proclamations of the Germans, urging a jihad on behalf of the Sultan of Stamboul, attacked by the English, fell flat; and, though the enemy was held within his borders, still no news of immediate victories came to reassure the people. To one who has lived amongst them for eighteen years the moral success of our administration came as something long wished for, but scarcely anticipated in such fullness. It is not so much our system of administration as the moral force of the average administrator, the respect in which he is held, that has produced this result: it is rule based on righteousness and not on the sword."
Among the great results reaped by a State which develops the powers of its servants to their full extent we must not forget that eugenic advantage is included. It is only by education, using the term in its broadest sense, that each man and woman is given the chance of finding and developing all that is best and strongest in him or her. And individuals capable of attaining this ideal, will, on the average, exert a stronger influence upon future generations when the ideal is realised than when, owing to unfavourable conditions, it is never reached.

I recapitulate in conclusion the chief eugenic problems
which will confront the nation at the end of the war
(i) Security from the menace of low ideals, such security only attainable by universal service and the scientific classification and use of our population.
(2) Special care, encouraged by the State and Society, of the generation that is too young to take part in the war, never forgetting the extraordinary powers that will then be possessed by the agencies through which racial qualities are improved or impaired.
(3) The creation of an atmosphere favourable to science, a condition essential for full success in solving the problems stated
above.
(4) In securing necessary reforms to hold fast to the strong and admirable features in our existing systems of education and
administration.

