DEPOPULATION AND EUGENICS.
By LUCIEN MARCH (Directeur de la Statistique Generale de la France).
(Translated from the French in " Eug6nique," January-April, 1913, by the Hon. H. Onslow.)
FROM the fact that France is ready to make considerable outlay it inay be concluded that she is at last paying attention to all the impending dangers of depopulation. It is true that her chief cause for anxiety is the weakening of her military power; there, indeed, lies the immediate danger, but not, perhaps, the only one; because this evil, of which the general causes are so closely connected with the progress which we value so highly, acts injuriously not only on the political and economic power of the nation, but also on the value and vitality of the generations to come. Therefore, our society may render true service to the country and to humanity by helping, in its proper sphere, to measure this action, and, putting aside all preconceived notions, by endeavouring through methodical study to discover the best means of preventing it.
The surest way of accomplishing this object is to make an attentive and impartial examination of the facts, which in this case are particularly complex. It appears to me that one of the
first tlhings needful is to organise this examination. Such are
the general views which, with the assistance of concrete examples, I shall try to elaborate, endeavouring to give the exact value to each example.'
I.-France and Europe; the reproductive powers of the race.
Let us first observe, from Fig. I., the reduction of our population, since the beginning of the nineteenth century, compared with the populations of the other countries of Europe. In i8ii the population of France alone constituted more than i6 per cent. of the total population of Europe; to-day it does not represent 9 per cent. Further, this relative reduction would
'The plates illustrating this article have kindly been lent by the Revue d'Anthropologie and by its editors, Messieurs Alcan and Lisbonne.

DEPOPULATION AND EUGENICS.

PRANQA I S

IN IUROPI, AU CANADA, IN AL!tEIS

1811 l 8 1 1KUIt ROOPHB < >

99 11 1

235

~~~4t'~~~N _ ^~~~~4

Populatio totCalAeNApaDr Auationlitd 4 _1871 Aoroiusaqt d. 1871 1901L

Provinces
Ontario 4/5 inglais

Aai
loossais
Ir lsa

|

QuEbeo 4/5 Prugails.

76aiff

Diven _

Population Iuropdenm d. 1l'Agrio 1856 M Acoroisment de 1856 & 1911
*~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
1a _Slton*_apwgaiild 1tiess _-

FIG. I.
Fig I.-At the top of the figure, the area of each circle represents the population of Europe. The area of each sector is proportional to the size of the population of each European country. Below, in the diagram referring to Canada and Algeria, each nationality is represented by a rectangle, part of which is light and part dark. The dark part represents the number of inhabitants at the earlier date, the light part the increase in this number. The width of this portion represents the relative growth per x,ooo inhabitants at the earlier date.

236 EUGENICS REVIEW.
be greatly increased if the countries of North America and of the Far East, which have so rapidly come to the fore-front of civilisation, were taken into consideration as well as those of Europe. I will not recall the situation with respect to the distribution of power, languages or intellectual centres, in the time of Louis XIV., for the allusion has grown stale; and it is of little use to regret the vicissitudes of history. If, as Renan suggested, the soul of a nation is the synthesis of its common memories, these memories should not be an incentive to melancholy, but a stimulus to action. As a matter of fact, our vitality seems intact, our sway extends over wide territories peopled by a hundred million human beings. But of these, the French do not compose the larger part, and the question arises, whether, being deficient in numbers, we shall remain strong enough in relation to the subject races or to possible rivals?
On the other hand, France is by no means the only country whose birth-rate is falling; yet, as this fall is partly due to the lowering of the death-rate, in these other countries the number of inhabitants continues to increase, in some cases even faster than before, as may be seen from Fig. II. If this is not so with us, it is because our birth-rate is by far the lowest. For what reasons it is so, it is our present object to account. Let us dismiss at once the idea that the reproductive power of the people is waning. In Canada, the population of French origin is increasing far more rapidly than
the populafion of English origin, though the latter is in the majority. And it is calculated that, excluding the two million people of French origin who live upon Canadian soil, those
who have crossed over into America number more than a million. The case is the same in Algeria, where, it is true, the French are politically the most powerful.
If then the physiological faculty of reproduction has not weakened, the number of births can only have been diminished by reason of voluntary restriction, and the question arise&What are the causes of this restriction? As a matter of fact, ever since man has recognised the necessity of regulating his
sexual instincts-for example by the institution of marriagethe restriction of his progeny, or their systematic destruction,

DEPOPULATION AND EUGENICS.
N A T A L I Ti7
"- - - - - -0- -S-^- - - -M0RTALIT9. EXC9DBNT DRINAISsANCS

237

e n d i v e r s p ay a

Allemagne
40

Azagleterre

Prance

40

s0 30

20

10 10

00

,o..s. co
CO oc-og.4o0 cnS

-O ° °CS ° a8t
CeD0_CO2 CO C C

..

° 98 ° ° 80°

....

fn-S4SS r-I

r-I8 r-

Sga&de
40 -.

Autricl

Italie

40

30 30

20

10 - o10

0
es

Aq-

e-

t5,.-is-c4

,C a4t
r-4e=i

.z_- b_

.

IM00
a Cocao,
_#

FIG. II.
Fig. II.-For each country, the height of the corresponding rectangle represents the number of births per I,ooo inhabitants. The height of the lighter part of each rectangle represents the excess of births over deaths per I,OOO inhabitants. The dark part represents the number of deaths per x,ooo inhabitants. (Taken from la Statistique Internationale du Mouvement de la Population.)

238 EUGENICS REVIEW.
has been considered in all ages the most convenient way of avoiding some of the consequences of having too many children."
The number of births and the mortality among children are the two terms of which the balance gives the number of new existences, for the time being at the charge of the family or the community.
II.-The Death-rate as a factor in the Birth-rate.
Infant mortality, therefore, is one of the most important factors in the limitation of births. Each one of us knows instances where the loss of one child has been replaced by the birth of another. Speaking generally, the curves of the birthrate and of the death-rate are often approximately parallel. The objection has been made, it is true, that this parallelism is due, not to the fact that the death-rate regulates the birth-rate, but to the fact that the birth-rate regulates the death-rate, on account of the enormous number of infants that die at an early age.
We are in a position, however, to show that for France, the first factor has a far greater influence than the second. From I872 to I9II, that is for forty years, when comparing the births of one year with the deaths of the next, the variations in the death-rate are as often equal as they are unequal to the variations in the birth-rate. If, on the other hand, the number of deaths in one year be compared with the number of births in the following year, then the variations between the birth-rate and the death-rate are in the same direction for three-quarters of the total number of years, and in the contrary direction for one-quarter only.
Thus, the death-rate governs the birth-rate far more than the birth-rate governs the death-rate: this is an essential fact that must on no account be lost sight of.
III.-The Burden of a Family.
The death-rate has this marked influence on the birth-rate because parents weigh seriously the material and moral cost of
lIt is unnecessary to recall the names of Lycurgus, Plato, and Aristotle. Concerning the present customs of the South American Indians, see the account of Nordenskjold, in La Gdographie (1912).

DEPOPULATION AND EUGENICS.

239

their children. So it has always been, and it will never be otherwise.
We have evidence to show that in France, since the seventeenth, and even the sixteenth century, the limiting of families was already looked upon as a wise course among certain classes of society; and Madame de S&vign6's letters to her daughter advising her to avoid having another child are often quoted.
Even before that time, Montaigne, a careful and shrewd observer, explained in a few words why in certain families it is wise to marry late and have few children, whereas in others it is wise to marry early and have many. " Therefore, should not we marry so young . . . This I speak," he adds, " chiefly unto the nobility which is of an idle disposition, and which, as we say, liveth only by her lands or her rents: for else, where life standeth upon gaine,' plurality and company of children is an easeful furtherance of husbandry. They are as many implements to thrive and instruments to grow rich."2
These few words give, rather crudely, the key to the average attitude in all ages towards marriage and the family. It expresses a care of an economic kind, natural enough in the opinion of Montaigne. Motives of another sort do, of course, intervene to differentiate between families of the same class. But since a constant cause (namely the cost), apparent in all ages, overshadows the variable causes which depend on political conditions, on moral and sentimental influences, and on customs and beliefs, that cause should be kept constantly in mind, in order to understand the facts properly.
Together with the aristocracy, the upper middle classes have practised this restriction from an early date, and even in the eighteenth century, various authors, Moheau for example, as well as many priests and other clergy, tell us that the practice of restricting the number of children was extraordinarily common.
After the Revolution, the contagion spread. On the one hand it spread to the lower middle classes, since, as their position improved, the same cares beset them. For them,
'Where the living has to be earned. 2Essays, Book II., chap. 8.

240 EUGENICS REVIEW.
the child was no longer an " instrument," it had become an expense, and an expense which was especially heavy in the towns. On the other hand it spread to the country, especially among landed proprietors and business men of a certain standing, because in their case the too numerous children of a family could not all find positions equal to their father's in the same profession. Moreover, the abolition, whether voluntary or legal, of the right of primogeniture and the splitting up of legacies, due in many cases to the action of the Code civil, but generalised by the doctrine of equality, have made the responsibility of fathers particularly heavy, at least wherever there exists a sense of duty attached to this responsibility.
Since France, of all modern countries, has the oldest civilisation, the bad effects which accompany progress in power and progress in thought are there earliest manifested. " There everything takes place a hundred years sooner than anywhere else."1
Unfortunately we are not in a position to present any general statistics for the preceding centuries. It has been shown, however, that in Paris, in spite of the growing adult population, there has been a decline in the birth-rate since the eighteenth century.
The classes of the population with which we have beelt dealing up till now, comprise capitalists and those who have at their command certain assets either material or intellectual. They are not by any means the most numerous; consequently if the contagion had been limited to those classes, the fertility
of the nation would not have perceptibly decreased. For if that were the case, it would mean that the advantages of civilisation, characterised for our purpose by the improvement in the standard of life, by life in towns, by education, by improvement in hygiene, by the care of children and by the emancipation of women, would have been restricted to those classes alone. But, by degrees, the movement which has raised more and more families to the level of the rich and intellectual classes has been
extended to the lowest of those classes, where, as Montaigne
IJules Lemaitre. 4es Rois.

DEPOPULATION AND EUGENICS.

241

says, "life standeth upon gaine." In those classes children were looked upon as a good investment; as soon as they could work they began to yield profit. As, moreover, a comparatively large number died, the birth-rate was considerable. In these classes may be placed artisans and labourers both in town and country, agriculturalists on a small scale, and farmers, etc., who, taken together, form four-fifths of the population of France.
Among twenty millions of employed persons it has been calculated that sixteen millions might claim benefits under the law concerning labourers' or peasants' pensions, and the proportion of taxpayers whose annual income is below 2,500 francs can thus be estimated at three-fourths.
In the case of all these families the child has gradually ceased to be a means of future profit, becoming instead, up to a more or less advanced age, a burden, just as is the case in the families of the middle classes or of the nobility. M. Cauvin has lately brought this fact to the notice of the Senate.
The laws regulating labour and the laws of compulsory education have taken away from the father the power of turning the work of his child to profit before it has reached a certain age, and the laws connected with old-age pensions have made it unnecessary that people should take the precaution of having children, in order to insure their being provided for in their old age.
The most important laws with regard to the employment of
children were passed in England in I867, I876, and I8gI; and in France in I874, I892, and I9oo. Education was made compulsory in England in I870, and in France in i882.1 Referring to Fig II. it will be seen from the two curves for the birth-rate,
plotted for periods of io years (they are, it should be noted, practically parallel with the curves which can be traced to represent the legitimate birth-rate), that the birth-rate in England, after having risen until the period of 187I-I880, has

lIn France education is compulsory up to the age of I2 or I3 years; in England up to the age of 14. Since I899, children of 1z to 14 (of II to 14 in the country) were exempt under certain conditions.

242 EUGENICS REVIEW.
fallen rapidly ever since. In Germany there is the same fall, but it is less marked; and in France the birth-rate ceased to diminish during the periods I85I-I860 and 176I-I870, but since then, the decline has never ceased. It is also noteworthy that, in France, those departments which contain the greatest number of large families are also those in which there is the greatest number of young illiterates. Thus the limitation of births may be seen to have become generalised to an alarming extent, and to have grown indeed in proportion as the burden of the surviving children of each family became more heavy. It has taken place either, as in the case of the minority, by a restriction that is entirely voluntary; or, as in the case of the majority, as an effect of either social or legal constraint.
IV.-Other Factors participating in the Fall of the Birth-rate.
Of the other factors we will say a few words only concerning the most important, namely, town-life and feminism.
Everyone is aware of the difficulties which surround families living in towns, such as expenses connected with housing, clothing, travelling and amusements. Quite apart from the question of wages, it is easier for a family of twelve children to live in the country than it is for a family of six in Paris, because in the country, life is simpler and less luxurious. In Paris expenses are by far the heavier.
Feminism has also an economic point of view, because the employment of married women is a considerable obstacle to their having children. But this factor assumes another aspect which is becoming more and more emphasised. " We want to keep our wives young" say the workmen of Berlin, if they are asked why they have fewer children than formerly. And again, " We will not be like cats," say the modern young American women; and finally, Dr. Emil Reymond has made this melancholy assertion in the Senate, " We are living in an age when women have passed on themselves a judgment which is dangerous in the highest degree to the development of the population . . . We have the right not to conceive, say some . . . We have the right to do what we will with the

DEPOPULATION AND EUGENICS.

243

C O N S O M M A T I O N D E L' A L C OO L en litres d'alcool pur, par habitant et par an
Litres 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 Danemark

Allemagne Pays-Bag
Autr cbe SuMse France

Belgique Russie
state-Unis
Royaume-Uni

--

Norvige

Italic

Litres 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18

Alool per (epirituenu) Adlacnoso'laIaconitletnsu

187140 _ 1901-10

1901-10

Aldcaonoal 1c.onvtiennu
1901-10

FIG. III.
Fig. III.-From l'Annuaire statistique for I91i.

244 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Ip 100.000
350

A L I B N 1 S DA N S LE S AS I LES pour 100.000 habitants

p. 100. 000 -350

300 300

250 250'

200 200

150 150

100

50 50

0
FIG. IV.
Fig. IV.-From l'Annuaire Statistique for I9I1.

0

DEPOPULATION AND EUGENICS.

245

life that is in us, say others."' In fact, women look upon the burden of motherhood with that same individualism which actuates parents when they regard the economic cost of their children. Yet, is it not exertion and the effort to exert oneself that gives to human life its value? It may be said, therefore, that the question of population is above all a moral question; indeed, many religions have had for their object the preservation of the race, by means that are in harmony with the laws of nature. But morality has changed. Without going back very far, indeed, only as far as last century, serious authors, economists of repute, have advocated the limitation of births.2
To sum up, the decline of the birth-rate keeps step for step with regard for life and the progress of hygiene, with the improvement of the standard of living and the increase of wealth, with the tendency to live in towns, and the progress of education, with the protection of the weak,, and the advance of individualism, especially of the individualism of women. There is no doubt that social co-operation is advancing also, but in co-operation which is restricted to special objects, the individual runs the risk of losing sight of its highest aim.
These progressive movements can be described by the one word, Civilisation. But civilisation has its excesses and its evils. In order to become acquainted with them, it will be sufficient to observe the other movements which accompany those we have already mentioned.

V.-Some Signs of Degeneracy.
We are enabled to observe these disquieting changes by statistics of the following facts: the respective amounts of alcohol drunk in France and in the United States, the number of lunatics in asylums, the number of suicides, the number of criminals, etc. (Figs. III., IV., and V.)
LThese are also the opinions which prevail among the Indian populations (see the note on page 238).
2In his Principles of Political Economy, Stuart Mill has gone as far as to say "One can hardly hope that morality will make progress, so long as one does not look upon too numerous families with the same contempt as upon drunkenness or any other physical excess." Quoted by Sicard de Plauzelles in la Fonction Sexuelle.

246 EUGENICS REVIEW. SUICIDES, CRIYINALI7'i

SBicides par miUia d'hbbitsnt a a&iers pmy
260 240 220
260
180
180 140
100 80 60 40 20
0

260
240
220 200
160 140 120
80
60 40 20
0

Orme

Mute iADip su a hv=w

FIG. V.
Fig. V.-The numbers of suicides have been printed from a table published by Professor von Mayr, in the third volume of his work, Statistik und Gesellschaftslehre, p. 279. With regard to the amount of crime in France, the curve represents the total number of persons indicted at the Assizes, those appearing before police magistrates, and the number of crimes reported, the perpetrators of which have remained undiscovered. The rapid rise from I841I 45 to I851-55 has partly been attributed to an increase in the number of police;
the marked fall in I85I-55 to the abolition of prosecution for the infringement of
many of the game laws.

DEPOPULATION AND EUGENICS.

247

The figures in the following illustration should, of course, not be accepted without reserve. The means of observation have varied and the criteria have broadened. It is not possible here to enter into further details, but when every reservation has been made, it seems beyond doubt that the change in the figures corresponds, in some degree at least, to a change in the facts.
It is true that this increase, which has kept pace with the development of riches and the means of communication, with concentration in towns, etc., does not appear to be more rapid in those countries where the birth-rate is low, than in those where the birth-rate is high. On the other hand, there is no evidence to show that the morality or the energy of the individual or of the society, necessary to resist effectively these evil tendencies, reaches a higher level in the former than in the latter.
In order to explain this invasion of defects and the reduc-
tion of families, a sort of senescence or decadence of the nation, analogous to the senile decay of living beings has been invoked.
In fact, it has been asserted that the extermination will be com-
paratively rapid among those families who belong to the social classes which have reached a sufficient degree of culture. For
example, Sundbairg1 has adduced significant figures from the
history of the ruling families of Europe; and Fahlbeck2 has studied the aristocracy of Sweden. Extinction has always been preceded by some such circumstances as the following: a diminishing marriage-rate and birth-rate, a smaller proportion of male births, sterile marriages, and increased
mortality among children. This may be seen from Fig. VI. It is generally admitted, notably by Dr. Jacoby who has
published a large volume of observations on this subject,3 and also by Professor Fahlbeck, that this reduction does not depend upon a voluntary restriction of births, but upon certain mysterious physiological causes. But there is nothing to show, in the greater number of cases at least, that these families have not suffered directly or indirectly through a reaction from the mis-
"G. Sundbarg, Maisons Souveraines de l'Europe (Ekonormisk Tidskrift). 2p. Fahlbeck, Die Adel Schwedens (Jena, 1903). 3Dr. Jacoby. Etudes sur la sJlection chez l'homme. (Paris, Alcan, I904.)

248 EUGENICS REVIEW.

PA VI L LIS N O B LE S S U t D 0 I SS ( P. Fahlbeck )

( G6n4rations S, II, III. IV V. VI, do 17e au 19 sibcle )

hri6e p. 100 hoes saje8ur

Survie des fmilles nables
lcmbre de families

60 40 20
, X,sz l, b, g0

larispe st6riles p. 100 mriage

INV[75
50

iI1-FI.H"_i

IIII

I

1-1E""I

I

1III'1I

1. III

ka.1 Ij .'.I25 IL
0 4l 1':

.i *

_o .

K

Ida wivnts p. 100 aiage. fdcondu 50Q

250

0

Garqons n4s p. 100 fill.s

,50 I

Garas aorta de O & 20 &rnw 1000 ds

I.

&. I

MP

_. .'

.i

'j- II LLL

1E11EI_0 | '.^ 'inmiVTu

* iri-uwmw * iwU_nXI.V

5,

II

FIG. VI.
Fig. VI.-The illustration has been drawn from a communication of Professor Fahlbeck to the Institut International de Statistique in I9OI. From left to right are represented the families who have become extinct after I, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 generations. On the right hand side of the figure, the principal curve represents the number of families still extant out of a hundred observed in the seventeenth century, after 25, 50 . . . 250 years. After 70 years the number is
reduced by about one-half. In the right-hand bottom corner is shown the result of a research made in Mannheim by Dr. Schott (Alte Mannheimer Familien). The curve represents the number of families extant after I, 2, 3, 4, 5 generations, out of the 3,000 families observed at the beginning of the nineteenth
century.

DEPOPULATION AND EUGENICS.

249

direction of their own voluntary acts.' Thus, Sundbarg, comparing, age for age, the fecundity of married women of the reigning families with the fecundity of French married women, found that the former was less than the latter, especially over the age of 35 years. This is essentially the same as is found in France, when a comparison is made between the fecundity of married women at two different periods. It always diminishes by reason of voluntary limitation as the age increases.
It requires a very mild form of limitation to cause a family to become extinct at the end of a very few generations, simply through deaths, through sterility, physiological or acquired, and through an excess of female births. In short, no matter what the explanation, extinction is the established fact.
To show that the qualities of the father are in a large measure inherited is not sufficient to justify the opinion that an increased birth-rate should be encouraged more particularly among the richer classes or even among those who are intellectually superior. There is nothing to show that from such people are produced strains whose superiority is generally of a lasting kind. It is, however, probable that the restriction of births which is habitual among such people is in itself one of the causes of degeneracy. The children of restricted families seem in fact to be more liable to have ancestral taints transmitted to them than those of other families, among which originality is more likely to spring up. Various authors, in observing different groups of families in England and Germany, have proved that certain defects such as myopia, tuberculosis, feeble-mindedness and criminality, attack the earlier born members of a family rather than those born later. This is illustrated by Fig. VII. In France Dr. Belb6ze2 has noted the alarming progress of neurasthenia in the country surrounding the Garonne, where the restriction of families has been for some time general; Dr. Labarte3 has published similar observations.

'Herbert Spencer's argument is also familiar. Physical and mental hygiene of people in the same social class has rather improved. To be overdriven is the fate of a small minority.
2Dr. Belbeze. La Neurasthinie Rurale. (Paris, Vigot, I9II.) MDr. Labarte. En Gascogne. (Revue des deux Mondes, I9io.)

250 EUGENICS REVIEW.

F R E Q U B N CE D E S D I V E R S E S D t F E C T U OS I T t S suivant l'ordre de la naiessance
-l-s-able dos eufmnt des fillos dout n sabre a dtt obabrt. - Individus atteiitut do itfeotuoitte

100

11111111111
111_lTuberelllosle I

100

75

.(Peareon. 381 fmilles)

78

50 I I 1I -11 I I I I' b50

25 __ __ <_ -

0

*b

minI UawlilNe

'1I

I aU atWP 1vm,A IPti#W

25 0

I|fi-a§T1-wSTUX]100 IIIIIIIIIIIIIII
.t,*Oristualiti

(coring. Etude. 385 failles)
]1 '.IEJIE11I,[,J.80 II'1 1.1 i1iI I I I I1I II
28

. ..: , ,.......
go,:.:S

1'

I11 .

0n g _-1

1

. ,.,'+i-f

Pasillee d'hin.o raa

w Zla

to ut io

tn

Familles d'ahome ronrquabl

Familloo
bonRroiso.
(Kbrbiy)

Prmiors -nd

aUYCes

or mleru n

FIG. VII.
Fig VII.-Tuberculosis: from Karl Pearson. A First Study of Pulmonary, Tuberculosis. Three hundred and eighty-one inmates of a sanatorium have
been classified according to the position of their birth in each family (thick line), and all the children from the same parents have been classified in a like manner. Among the tubercular there is a larger proportion who are first-born than among the total number of children, among whom are included the tubercular.
The same proceeding is adopted for insanity. (A First Study of the Statistics of Insanity, by David Heron) and for crime (a diagram given by K. Pearson

DEPOPULATION AND EUGENICS.

25 1

These first indications" are interesting since they confirm what might easilv be suspected: namely the relative weakness of children of restricted families, who are brought up with care, often reared with great difficulty, and who are protected from natural selection or social competition which appears, indeed, to be the only means of separating the strong from the weak.
It is, moreover, natural that in a large family the degrees of ability should be more varied than in a restricted family, and the individual who is exceptionally gifted is more often met with in the former than in the latter. This is borne out by the experience of every class of breeder.
Further, it has been observed that distinguished men belong more often among the last-born members of the family than one might expect. At least, that is what the publication of Mlle. Robinovitch2 seems to show. Thus it will be seen that the first-born children are more susceptible to hereditary taints, and that the last-born more frequently find a place amongst the distinguished members of society. In fact, it is easy to mention numerous examples of illustrious men who have been the last-born of large families in several genera-
tions.
'We say indications, because of the sXmall number of observations, and also because these observations have not been published with sufficient details for the reader to be able to appreciate the influence of the age of the individuals
included in the statistics. It is most important to consider (i) whether this influence is entirely eliminated, (2) whether these defects are more frequent in restricted families than in large families; or whether, in the same family, they attack the older members more frequently than the younger.
27ournal of Mental Pathology. 1907, Vol. 7, p. 228.

(To be continuted.)

from the work of Goring in The Scope and Importance of National Eugenics). The work published by Goring does not include the figures on this diagram.
These works are published by Dulau, London. For myopia, a curve has been used which was shown at the first International
Eugenics Congress (London, 1912, by Dr. Crzillitzer). In the lower portion of the illustration is represented the proportional distribution of the members of Hungarian families, the head of which died at Budapest in the years 1897-1900 (from a communication of Dr. K6rosy before the Institut Nationale de Statistique), according as to whether they are first-born, last-born, or other children. Above, this, the proportional distribution of noteworthy men collected by Mlle. Robinovitch from various biographies. It will be seen that the proportion of first-born among the latter is less than among the total population of the Hungarian town which is used for the sake of comparison.

