The Second International Congress of Eugenics.
By C. C. LITTIE, Sc.D., Carnegie Institution of Washington.*
I.-THE AIMS OF THE CONGRESS.
Although many of the aims of the Second International Congress of Eugenics have been clearlv and sufficiently outlined in the announcements issued prior to its commencement, certain matters of general policy may perhaps be further emphasized to good advantage at its close.
These matters of poliev forced themselves upon the attention of the officers of the Congress because of the none too gentle criticism which during the past decade has been focussed upon the Eugenics movement.
The criticisms worthy of note and of elinmination (if possible) were chiefly the following:
(1) The criticism of biologists in general, and of experimental geneticists in particular, to the effect that eugenists knew too little of the foundation of their science, and were engaged in the creation of a super-structure without sufficient attention to a firm base.
(2) The criticism of those, believing firmly in present marriage and social customs, to the effect that eugenists in too great a degree approved, or at least silently tolerated, belief in or practice of social customs and relationship between the sexes of a type widely divergent from those at present existing.
(3) The criticism of the general public to the effect that Eugenics, as a science, was impractical and in the hands of "faddists," and that it should therefore be treated only as a gigantic joke and its serious phases be ignored.
To meet these criticisms an effort to build a strong programme for the Congress in genetics and in anthropology was made. The personnel of the general committee and of the reception and entertainment committee was selected from those known to be free from those unbalanced radical tendencies which produce the faddist. The papers offered for presentation were considered before presentation, and whereever possible, sensationalismn eliminated. Finally pains were taken to interest the representatives of the press who attended in making a fair statement of fact and in avoiding jibes and distortions based on partial information.
The following paragraphs will outline briefly the methods employed in the organization and carrying out of the Congress. For
interpretation of mnotives and expression of opinion the writer is, of course, solely responsible. Since however, a mere statement of the
*Dr. Little acted as General Secretary to the Congress, a post he filled to the
admiration of all present.

512 EUGENICS REVIEW.
facts would only repeat the text of the program, I have ventuired to insert the personal viewpoint and hope that the readers of this article will recognize it as such and be charitable accordingly.
II.-PREPARATION.
When the Second International Congress of Eugenics was officially authorized by the National Research Council at Washington, those in charge in the United States namely, Doctors Osborn and Davenport, set to work.
The first step was the appointment of a general committee of approximately 113, and of a group of vice-presidents. For guidance, a list of members of a similar committee appointed in 1914, was available.
The general committee held an organization meeting in the American Museum of Natural History in April, 1920. This meeting was presided over by Doctor R. S. Woodward, then President of the Carnegie Institution of Washington.
At this meeting, matters of general policy were discussed and a Secretary-General and Chairman of the Finance Committee were appointed. Later. the fact that the Finance Committee did not function caused a shifting of its function to the treasurer, and still later lead to a division of its work to (1) the raising of funds, handled by personal efforts of the officers of the Congress, and (2) the matters of routine finance, handled by the Secretary-General.
Memberships of two sorts, sustaining at $100,00. of which there wNNere seventeen, and active membership at five dollars, $5.00, of which there were three hundred and seventy, added a considerable amount to the funds. The Carnegie Institution of Washington contributed $400.00 towards the expenses of entertainments and five patrons who contributed $500.00 each.
From the start it was planned to hold an exhibition in connection with the Congress, and for this most excellent purpose Mrs. E. H.
Harriman, with her characteristic generosity, gave $2500.00. The preparation of this exhibition was in charge of an Exhibits Committee, of which I)r. H. H. Laughlin, Asst. Director of the Eugenics Record Office of the Carnegie Institution of Washington, was chairman.
Doctor Clark Wissler and Mr. L. V. Coleman of the American Museum were the other members of the Committee.
To aid the Secretary-Geineral in the preparation of the program,
secretaries for eachi of the four sections of the Congress were appointed. Thus in the case of Section one, Hum-nan and Comparative Heredity, Dr. Helen Dean King of the Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology, was chosen. For Sectioni two, Eugenics and the Family, Dr. Howard J. Banker, of the Eugenics Record Office, was secretary. In the case of Section three, Human Racial Differences, the Secretary was Doctor Clark Wissler of the American AMuseum of Natural History. Doctor F. L. Hoffman of the Prudential Life Insurance Company started as Secretary of Section four, Eugenics and the State. When he was obliged to give up his duties, because of an unexpected trip to South America, Dr. F. S. Crum of the same company succeeded him. Doctor Crum's tragic death from drowning, a short time before the opening of

THE SECOND INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF EUGENICS. 518
the Congress, left this section without a leader. At the eleventh hour, Doctor Louis I. Dublin, of the Metropolitan Insurance Company, took up the duties and aided greatly during the Congress itself.
AArrangements for the entertainment of delegates and members was
left to the Committee of Reception and Entertainment. Special thanks are due to Mrs. C. C. Rumsey, Mrs. Walter Jennings, and to Dr. and Mrs. Henry Fairfield Osborn, As will appear in the accounts of the Congress, Mr. Sherwood, the Executive Secretary of the American Museum of Natural History, most graciously and successfully handled the lion's share of the work of preparation within the museum.
Little publicity work of an organized nature was attempted. Through certain well recognized channels however a small amount of advance publicity was obtained. Since, however, the Executive Committee had disapproved of professional publicity work, the limited amount of available funds necessitated only slight weight being given to this phase.
III.-THE CONGRESS.
Registration of the Congress began on Wednesday, September 21st, and continued until Wednesday, September 28th. A total of 393 registered as members, In addition, the general public could, by application in person, obtain tickets of admission to the various scientific sessions of the Congress. About 900 tickets were thus distributed.
On Thursday, Sept. 22nd, at three p.m. an informal assembly of members was held in the Exhibition Hall on the ground floor of the Museum. At that time members were able to visit not only the special Eugenics exhibits at the place of Assembly, but also racial exhibits and those dealing with primitive culture, general biology, and general anthropology in other halls.
At 8 p.m. in the large auditorium of the Museum with an attendance of approximately 600, the formal opening of the Congress was held. Addresses were given by President Henry Fairfield Osborn, Major Leonard Darwin, and Doctor Charles B. Davenport. The three addresses forming a notable contribution to Eugenic thought, were received with enthuisiasm by the audience.
PROC RAM OF SCIENTIFIC SESSIONS.
On Friday, September 23rd, the sessions for the reading of scientific communications began. At 10 a.m. in the Hall of the Age of Man, Doctor Lucien Cuenot, of the University of Nancy, Nancy, France, read the leading address of the Section on Human and Comparative Heredity. His subject was "Adaptation and Modern Genetic Conceptions." The list of papers given in the Appenidix show thb remaining program of this and all other sections. The support of the Congress by American geneticists was magnificent. Owing, as all geneticists do, a great debt to Doctor Cuenot, for his early and clear exposition of the factor hypothesis, it seemed fitting that on his first visit to the tUnited States, the geneticists of that country should takc the part they did in the program.
The importance of a strong genetic program to obviate criticism,

514 EUGENICS RVIMEW.
has been already mentioned. In this respect it was clear from the outset that the co-operation of the experimental biologists had made success complete and striking.
On Saturday, September 24th, two other sections of the Congress started their official sessions. In the morning at 10 o'clock, Dr. Lucien March, Chief Statistician of the French Government, delivered the leading address before Section II, Eugenics and the Familv, on "The Consequences of the War and the Birth Rate in France. " The sessions of this section were enthusiastically attended by a large number of members.
At 2-30 p.m. of the same day Major Leonard Darwin delivered the opening address of Section IV, Eugenics and the State, on "The Field for Eugenic Reform. " Approximately 500 people attended.
Indeed from the outset this section, dealing as it did with the applied and less technical phases of the subject, was largely attended. It was in this section that the appearance of faddists seemed most probable, Such fears, however proved to be unfounded. Discussion was, at all times, unhampered but was constructive and free from objectionable propaganda, thus removing another of the prime sources of criticism.
The last section to open was the Racial Section (III.) On Tuesday Sept. 27th at 10 a.m., Dr. G. V. de la Pouge, of Poitiers, France, one of the most prominent anthropologists of his country, gave the leading address on "Race among AMixed Populations." He was followed by Doctor Jon Alfred Mjoen of the University of Christiania, Norway, who spoke on "Harmonic and Disharmonic Matings or Crossings."
EXHIBITIONS.
A large general exhibition of research in Eugenics was held in connection with the Congress. For its arrangement, Dr. H. H. Laughlin, of the Eugenics Record Office, was primarily responsible. Space does not permit me to describe adequately the remarkable originality and diversity of the various sub-divisions of the material.
Over 800 people registered as being particularly interested in Eugenics and probably more thani ten times this number attended the exhibit. Through the courtesy of the American Museum it was possible to keep the exhibition open until October 22nd.
EXPEDITIONS.
Following the lunicheon on Wednesday, Sept. 28th, at the Piping Rock Club, Long Islanid, the members were taken by motor bus to the Department of Genetics, of the Carnegie Institution of Washington, at Cold Spring Harbor, Long Island. Hlere they were divided into
groups and visited the Station for Experimental Evolution and the Eugenics Record Office.
At the Station for Experimental Evolution were exhibitions of Mirabilis and Canna, by Mr. J. Belling; Variations in Datura, correlated with changes in chromosome number, by Dr. A. F. Blakeslee; Inheritance of Susceptibilitv to Inoculable Cancer in Mice, and Splenic Transplants in Mice, by Dr. C. C. Little; Inheritance and General

THE SECOND INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF EUGENICS. 51.5
Metabolism of Sex in Birds by Dr. 0. Riddle; Inheritance of Mental
and Temperamiental Differences in Dogs, and Effects of Alcohol on White Rats, by Dr. E. C. MacDowell; Sheep of a peculiar Twin Producing Strain, by Dr. C. B. Davenport.
At the Eugenics Record Office, the members were shown the system of filing and of family records, and cataloging by traits. There was also exhibits of the work of the Staff of the Record Office.
BUSINESS SESSION.
An International Congress is of necessity somewhat loosely organized from a business point of view. There were, however, several meetings of small groups and one executive session of the Congress as. follows: This Session was held on Tuesday afternoon, Sept. 27th, 1921, at 2 p.m., President Osborn presiding. He stated that at a meeting of the International Eugenics Committee, after advice of the Congress Executive Committee and representatives of foreign governments, certain rules had been adopted for the forrnation of a Permanent International Eugenics Commission. Doctor Davenport was then called upon to read the proposed rules, which will be found in the appendix following the programme. These rules were adopted.
Doctor Davenport read the list of the officers proposed for the Permanent International Eugenics Commission, as follows:
Chairman, Major Leonard Darwin, Vice-Chairman, Henry Fairfield Osborn, Secretary, Dr. Albert Govaerts. They were declared duly elected. Doctor Jon Alfred Mjoen then presented a resolution from the Consultative Committee of Norway, which was referred to the International Commission. Doctor Irving Fisher presented a motion for the formation of an ad interim Committee for the United States of America-to co-operate with the International Commission, the said committee to be appointed by the President. Doctor Little read the following resolution presented by Doctor Hrdlicka and it was passed unanimously:
RESOLVED THAT: Considering the excellence and the great general value of the two addresses delivered bv Major Darwin before the Second International Eugenics Congress: And considering further the high desirability of bringing these addresses to the attention of not merelv the widest circle of the American public, but especially to that of all students of both sexes in institutions of higher learning in this country: Those participating in this Congress recommend that suitable steps be taken bv the Organizing Committee not merely for assuring the widest publicity for these addresses, but also and above all for placing a copy or copies of the same in all the colleges and seats of higher learning in the United States, with the request that thev be brought fully to the attention of the students.
Doctor Remos, the delegate from the State of Cuba, invited the Congress next to be held in the Western Hemisphere to meet in Havana.

616 EUGENICS REVIEW.
This and other invitations were referred to the International Committee.
Doctor Lucien March proposed and Doctor Mj6en seconded a vote of thanks. The session then adjourned.
ENTERTAINMENTS.
Following the opening addresses of the Congress, delivered in the Auditorium of the Museum on the evening of the twentv-second, a reception was held under the auspices of the Committee on Reception and Entertainment in the Hall of the Age of Man. The inspiring and beautiful surroundings, the exhibition of anthropological material, and the mural decorations of prehistoric mammals and of Man, by Knight, helped to make the occasion a notable one.
On Friday the 23rd, over one hundred members attended a formal dinner at the Hotel Majestic. Dinner arrangements were in charge of Dr. C. B. Davenport. President Osborn presided. Brief after-dinner addresses were given by Major Darwin, Doctor Mjoen, Doctor March, Doctor Govaerts, Doctor Ramos, and Doctor Davenport. The greatest good will and friendliiness prevailed.
On Sunday, one group of members visited the New York Zoological Park. while a small number chose to visit the Metropolitan Museum of Art. About sixty members were invited by Doctor and Mrs. Osborn to luncheon at their estate, Castle Rock, Garrison-on-Hudson, New York. After driving up the beautiful winding roadway to the top of the steep wooded hill on which Castle Rock is situated, the members were met by their host and hostess, here to admire for a time the magnificent outlook both up and down the Hudson. After luncheon, small groups walked about the grounds or chatted on the porches. At about 4-30, all gathered together again while Major Darwin gave a delightful -speech of appreciation to Doctor and Mrs. Osborn, for the many pleasures which the trip had afforded. After afternoon tea, the party proceeded to New York by a special car, which arrived at about 7 p.m.
On Monday evening, Sections I and III, held an informal dinner in the Restaurant of the American Museum. Doctor A. F. Blakeslee of the Carnegie Institution of Washington presided. Brief after,dinner speeches were made by Doctors L. Cuenot, A. Govaerts, Woods Hutchinson, H. J. Muller, C. Zeleny, J. A. Harris, C. B. Davenport, G. H. Shull, E. M. East, C. C. Little, and others. The dinner being attended chiefly by geneticists with a common interest, was most genial.
A dinner of a similar type was held simultaneously at the Hotel Manhattan Square by members of Sections II and IV. This dinner was presided over by Doctor H. J. Banker, of the Eugenics Record
Office, of the Carnegie Institution of Washington and by Doctor A. H. Estabrook. Among the speakers -were Judge Harry Olson, C. E. Seashore, Dr. Lucien March, Miss Maude Minor, Prof. Roswell Johnson, Rev. Hugh Dogson, Mrs. Ruth Moxcy Martin, F. A. Woods, A. Ireland, Louis I. Dublin, and Doctor Woods Hutchinson.
On Wednesday, September 28th, as already mentioned, over 100 members proceeded by motor busses from New York to the Piping Rock Club, Glen Cove, Long Island. Arriving here, they were enter-

THE SECOND INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF EUGENICS.
tained at luncheon as guests of Mrs. C. C. Rumsey. Mrs. Walter Jennings acted as hostess in Mrs. Rumsey's enforced absence. Immediately after luncheon the members were taken to Cold Spring Harbor, Long Island, where they made the detailed inspection of the Eugenics Record Office and the Station for Experimental Evolution, already described. Afternoon tea was served in the grounds of the Eugenics Record Office. at the invitation of the Long Island Reception Committee, of which Mrs. Walter Jennings was Chairman. Finally Major Darwin spoke a few words on behalf of the members who were present, expressing gracefully and aptly their appreciation of the success of the Congress and at the close Doctor Davenport in the absence of President Osborn pronounced the Congress at an end.
PUBLICITY.
After the first day of the Congress, the problems in connection with publicity became chiefly those of controlliiig the material used by the press. For this purpose, in addition to the ordinary precautions, Mr. C. M. Sheridan of the firm of Edward L. Bernay's Inc., was employed. The regular publicity channels of the American Museum were also used. On the whole, the press treated the communications seriously. This represents a distinct advance from the former well known attitudeof lampoonery. A few of the Hearst papers retained the primitive attitude.
IV.--SUGGESTIONS FOR FUTURE WORK.
1. THE NEED OF A CONFERENCE.
From the outset, an effort was made to keep the Congress free from the Conference attitude and point of view. In this connection the stand was takeni that communications should whenever possible have as their subject matter the results of accurate experimental or statistical work. Little or no provision was made for discussion of programs of future work or policies. The executive session was purposely held as near the close of the Congress as possible, and certain of the Executive Committee would have been glad to have had none at all.
The fact however, that the Conference attitude was in so far as possible eliminated does not nmean that such a viewpoint is either negligible or without great value. Indeed it would seem that the calling of such a conference in the United States is a need of the immediatefuture.
A conference of this type however, should be closed and by invitation only. It should give opportunity for a sane and unprejudiced committee to consider and if desirable. act upon, such matters as are here treated under headings 2 to 4; and other mnore radical proposals.
The time is niot ripe for such a conference to be International. Rather it should be only National in scope. It could profitably occur at least once a year in order that its work could keep pace with the times.
The results of the research work initiated, encouraged, and perhaps. supported by organizations arising from these conferences would form the type of legitimate material for consideration at the next International Congress.

518 EUGENICS REVlEW.
2. THE NEED OF A COMMITTEE ON TEACHING.
The point of contact between the untrained and the trained eugenist is where the highest standards of uniformity, accuracy, and efficiency are needed.
The point of contact is of course the field of instruction in eugenics as practised in Institutions of higher learning. Since Eugenics is of necessity a composite, resting upon a basis of genetics, medicine, anthropoloag, and sociology, it will be necessary to take particular pains that students either receive standardized instruction or a proper pers)ective of their own training and limitations in relation to the field as a whole.
A committee should be appointed therefore at any such coniference as that above suggested or by any National Organization properly constituted, such as the Euigenics Research Association; to collect information on, and to deal wiselIy with this matter.
S. TIIE NEED OF AN INTERNATIONAL EtJGENIC RESEARCH ORGANISATION .
As research in Eugenics proceeds its field is bound to broaden anid to conme to include studies of racial hybridization and of geographic distribution or anthropology which lead the investigator into foreign countries. The organization of these interested anid active in Eugeiiical Research in the various couintries so as to forimi an International Organization, would greatly facilitate the progress of a scientist of one country upon his arrival in another. Such an organisation could also profitably putblish a jourrnal dealing with discoveries of Internatiolnal Interest.
The benefits or denmerits of racial inter-crossinig will become a matter of increasing interest and of clear international im)ort. An organization for International Research could not only further greatly the collection of the data in this field but could also help gather the allimportant facts of the biologv of the parent races in their natu-ral environmenit.
Matters of immigration and emigrationi could also be studied to
great advantage by such an organisation.
4. AN ANNUAL REVIEW OF LITERATURE.
Because of the distinct and diverse nature of the foundiation sciences of Eugenics, and because of the rapidity of progress in research in the Biological and Medical Sciences, and annual digest, review. and biblio-
graphy of literature bearing on Eugenics would be of the greatest value.
The preparation of such a volume could rightly be a function of an International Research Organization. Not only would such a work be of aid to the student desirous of obtaining training in Eugenics, but it would hell) greatly the research worker, who has specialized in one field, to become acquainted with the work and progress in allied fields, and it would be a useful place in which to hunt references of past work for a Eugenist of any and all types.
All the above suggestions need funds and personnel for their practical development. They also undoubtedly need modification.

THE SECOND INTERNATrIONAL CONGRESS OF EUGENICS. 519
IBoth funds and advice might well result directly or indirectly from a -well-planned conference by properly trained individuals. Such a conference in each of the larger nations is therefore a tnatter greatly to be desired and one which I hope, may see rapid aid successful ful-filnent.
APPENDIX.
PROGRAMME.
SECTION I,
Sessions for presentation of papers in Human and Comparative Heredity. Friday, September 23. 11 a.m. to I p.m.
Dr. A. Franklin Shul!, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich. "Sex Determination in Rotifers."
Dr. A. M. Banta and Mr. L. A. Brown Carnegie Institution of Washington, Cold Spring Harbor, Long Island, N.Y. "Some Data on Control of Sex in Cladocera.
Dr. T. H. Morgan, Columbia University, New York City. "Physical Basis of Inheritance."
Dr. H. J. Muller, University of Texas, Austin, Texas. "Mutation." Dr. E. G. Conklin, Princeton University, Princeton, N.J. "The Role of Cyto-
plasm in Heredity." Dr. Louis Legrand, Tunis, Africa. "A Simple Explanation of the Hereditary
Mechanism."
Friday, September 23. 2-30 p.m. to 5 p.m.
Dr. H. S. Jennings, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Md. "Inheritance in Unicellular Organism."
Dr. A. F. Blakeslee, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Cold Spring Harbor, Long Island, N.Y. "Variations in the Jimson Weed (Datura Stramonium) Caiused by the Difference in the Number of Chromosomes."
Mr. J. Belling, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Cold Spring Harbor, Long Island, N.Y. "The Attraction Between Homoloaous Chromosomes."
Dr. C. S. Bridges, Columbia University, New York City. "Abnormal Behaviour of Chromosomes."
Dr. C. E. McClung, National Research Council, Washington, D.C. "Evolution of the Chromosome Complex."
Dr. George H. Shull, Princeton University, Princeton, N.J. "Linkage with Lethal Factors, the solution of the Oenothera Problem."
Dr. J. A. Detlefsen, TJniversity of Illinois, Urtana, Ill. "Variable Linkage
Values and Selection." Dr. P. W. Whiting, The Iowa Child Welfare Research Station, State University of
Iowa, Iowa City, la. "The Analysis of Genetic Differences through Haploid Parthenogenesis. " R. A. Fisher, M.A., Joint Honorary Secretary, Eugenics Education Society, London, England, and Statistician at Rothemsted Experimental Station, Harpenden, England. "Darwinian Evolution by Mutations."
Saturday, September 24. 11 a.m. to 1 p.m.
Dr. Halsey J. Bagg, Dept. of Anatomy, Cornell University Medical College, New York City, and Huntingdon Fund for Cancer Research. "Disturbances in Mammalian Development Produced by Radium Emanation."
Dr. E. C. MacDowell, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Cold Spring Harbor, Long Island, N.Y. "The Genetic Significance of the Alcoholic Treatment of White Rats."
Dr. C. R. Stockard, Cornell University Medical College, New York City. "A Summary of the Effects of Excessive Alcohol Treatment on Heredity and Development in Mammals."
Dr. R. Ruggles Gates, University of London, King's College, London, England. "A New Type of Variability in Plants."
Dr. -Sewall Wright, Bureau of Animal Industry, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C. "Effects of Inbreeding on Guinea Pigs."

520 ]UGXNICS RRVIIXW.
Saturday, September 24. 2-30 p.m. to 5 p.m.
Dr. Henry A. Cotton, Medical Director, New Jersey State Hospital, Trenton, N.J. "Inheritance in Mental Disorders."
Dr. Abraham Myerson, 483, Beacon Street, Boston, Mass. "Inheritance of MentaI. Diseases."
Dr. A. J. Rosanoff, Clinical Director, Kinas Park State Hospital, Kings Park, Long Island, N.Y. "Inheritance of Mental Disorders."
Dr. R. J. Terry and Dr. Lee D. Cady, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Mo. "Comparison of the Incidence of the Supracondyloid Process in Groups with Normal and Abnormal Mentality."
Dr. Leo Loeb, Department of Comparative Pathology, Washington University, St. Louis, Mo. "The Inheritance of Cancer in Mice."
Dr. C. C. Little, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Cold Spring Harbor, Long Island, N.Y. "Inheritance of a Predisposition to Cancer in Man."
Monday, September 26. 11 a.m. to 1 p.m.
Dr. Paul A. Lewis and Dr. Sewall Wright, The Henry Phipps Institute, the University of Pennsylvania, and the Bureau of Animal Industry, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Washington, D.C. "Inheritance of Resistance to Tuberculosis."
Dr. Lucien Howe, 520, Delaware Avenue, Buffalo, N.Y. "Hereditary Defects of the Eve."
Dr. C. H. Danforth, Washington University Medical School, St. Louis, Mo. "The
Frequencv of Mutation and the Incidence of Hereditary Traits in Man." Mr. E. J. Lidbetter, London, England. "Pedigrees of Pauper Stocks." R. A. Fisher, M.A., Joint Honorary Secretary, Eugenics Education Society,
London, England, and Statistician at Rothemsted Experimental Station, Harpenden, England. "New Data on the Genesis of Twins." Major C. C. Hurst. Burbage, Leicestershire,England. "The Genetics of Fecundityin the Domestic Hen."
SECTION II.
Sessions for presentation of papers on Eugenics and the human family. 11 a.m. to 1 p.m.
Dr. Helen Dean King, Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology, Philadelphia, Pa. "Is Inbreeding Injurious?"
Mrs. Ruth Moxcey Martin, Woo'lbury, Conn. "Intermarriage of Blood Relatives in Three Old New England Communities."
Dr. Herbert J. Spinden, Peabody Museum of Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass. "Formal Inbreeding in Human Society with South American Examples."
Prof. W. S. Anderson, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Ky. "The Effect onthe Germ Plasm of isolation in a Mountain Section."
Dr. Howard J. Banker, Eugenics Record Office, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Long Island, N.Y. "An Ideal Family History."
Miss Sarah Louise Kimball, State Registrar, D.A.R., San Francisco, Calif. "TheMayflower Pilgrims."
Saturday, September 24. 2-30 p.m. to 5 p.m.
Dr. David Starr Jordan, Leland Stanford Junior Universitv. Stanford University, Calif. "Same Scientifc Aspects of Genealogy."
Dr. J. J. Izquierdo, M.S.A., Mexico City, Mexico. "A Brief Genealogical. Sketch of the Izquierdo Family."
Dr. E. L. Thorndike, Columbia University, New York City. "Measurement of Family Resemblances in Intellect."
Miss Hazel Stanton, State University of Iowa, Iowa City, Ia. "An Experimental Investigation of Musical Inheritance."
Dr. Howard J. Banker, Eugenics Record Office, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y. "The Learned Blacksmith-An AristogenicType. "
Dr. Frederick Adams Woods, Lecturer on Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston, Mass. "The Conification of Social Groups; Evidencefrom New England Families."
Dr. Corrado Gini, Editor of "Metron, " Rome, Italy. "The War from the EugenicPoint of View."

THE SECOND INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF ElJGENICS. 521
Dr. Frederick S. Crum, Assistant Statistician, The Prudential Insurance Company of America, Newark, N.J. "The Size of Families in the United States from 1680 to 1890."
Prof. W. F. Willcox, Cornell University, Ithaca, N.Y. "Distribution and Increase of Negroes in the United States."
Monday, September 26. 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. Dr. Hilda Herrick Noyes and George Wallingford Noyes, A .B., Kenwood, N.Y.
"The Oneida Communitv Experiment in Stirpiculture." Dr. Amos W. Butler, Secretary, Board of Charities, Statc of Indiana, Indianapolis,
Ind. "Some Families as Factors in Anti-Social Conditions." Dr. Arthur H. Estabrook, Eugenics Record Office, Carnegie Institution of Washing-
ton, Cold Spring Harbor, N .Y. "The Tribe of Ishmael; a Study in Cacogenics." Miss Elizabeth Greene, Waverley House, New York City. "A Study of 150
Adolescent Runaways." Dr. Wilhelmine E. Key, Race Betterment Foundation, Battle Creek, Michigan.
"Heritable Factors in Human Fitness and Their Social Control." -Dr. Roswell H. Johnson, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburghi, Pa. "Mate
Selection." SECTION III.
Sessions for presentation of papers on Human Racial Differences. Tuesday, September 27. 11 a.m. to 1 p.m.
Dr. Jon Alfred Mjoen, Christiania, Norway. "Harmonic and Disharmonic Matings or Crossings (Nordic race types and hybrids with Lapps)."
Dr. Frederick L. Hoffman, Third Vice-President and Statistician, The Prudential Insurance Company of America, Newark, N.J. "Race Amalgamation in Hawaii . "
Dr. Leslie C. Dunn, Storrs Agriculture Experiment Station, Storrs, Conn. "Some Results of Race Mixture in Hawaii."
Dr. Maurice Fishberg, New York City. "Intermarriage Between Jews and Christians ."
Dr. Radcliffe N. Salaman, Barley, Herts., England. "Some Notes on the Jewish Problem. "
Dr. Paul Radosavljevich, New York University, New York City. "Eugenic Problems of the Slavic Race."
Tuesday, September 27. 2-30 to p.m. 5 p.m. Dr. Ales Hrdlicka, U.S. National Museum, Washington, D.C. "The Physical
and Physiological Characteristics of Old Americans." Dr. Earnest A. Hooten, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass. "Observations
and Queries as to the Effect of Race Mixture on Certain Physical Characterr-
istics." Miss E. M. Vicari, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Cold Spring Harbor, Long
Island, N.Y. "Genetic Basis of Behavior in a Racial Cross of Japanese Waltzing and Albino Mice."
Dr. Robert Bennett Bean, University of Virginia, University, Va. "The Distri-
bution of Human Types " Dr. Louis I . Dublin, Statistician, Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, New York
Citv. "Mortality of Foreign Race Stocks." Dr. C. E. Seashore, State University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa. "Racial Differ-
ences in Musical Ability." Prof. W. McDougall, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass. "The Correlation
Between Native Ability and Social Status." Dr. Emery Filbey, University of Chicago, Chicago, Ill. "Vocational Problems
with Respect to Racial Groups."
SECTION IV.
Sessions for presentation of papers on Eugenics and the State.
Saturday, September 24. 8-30 p.m. to 5 p.m. Dr. Raymond Pearl, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Md. "Some Eugenic
Aspects of the Problem of Population." MDr. E. M., East, Bussey Institution, Harvard University, Jamaica Plain, Boston
Mas. "Population in Relation to Agriculture.''

522 ZUGHNICS RXVIEW.
Dr. D. F. Ramos, University of Havana, Havana, Cuba. "Homiculture in ite
Relation to Eugenics in Cuba." Dr. Ladislav Haskovec, President, Eugenics Society of Prague, Prague, Bohemia.
"The Eugenic Movement in the Czecho-slovak Republic." Mr. Paul Popenoe, Thermal, Claif. "Eugenics and Islam."
Monday, September 26. 11 a.m. to 1 p.m.
Dr. Rudolph M. Binder, New York University, New York City. "Health and Eugenics.
Dr. S. Adolphus Knopf, 16, West 95th St., New York City. "Eugenics in its Relation to the Tuberculosis Problem."
Dr. Horatio M. Pollock, Statistician, New York State Hospital Commission, Albany, N.Y. "Eugenics as a Factor in the Prevention of Mental Disease."
Dr. Sante Naccarati, New York City. "The Morphologic Characteristics of Psychoneurotics and their Prophvlactic Teaching."
Dr. Wm. S. Sadler, Professor at the Post-Graduate Medical School of Chicago, Senior Surgeon to Columbus Hospital, Director Chicago Therapeutic Institute, Chicago, Ill. "Endocrines, Defective Germ-Plasm, and Hereditarv Defectiveness."
Dr. S. J. Holmes, University of California, Berkeley, Calif. "The SelectiveElimination of Male Infants under Different Environmental Influences."
Dr. Bird T. Baldwin, Research Professor in Educational Psychology and Director of Iowa Child Welfare Research Station, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Ia. "The Scientific Prediction of the Physical Growth of Children."
Dr. Harriette A. Dilla, Smith College, Northampton, Mass. "Parenthood in
Relation to Eugenics."
Monday, September 26. 2-30 o.m. to 5 p.m.
Dr. Louis I. Dublin, Statistician, Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, New York City. "The Higher Education of Women and Race Betterment."
R. A. Fisher, M.A., Joint Honorary Secretary, Eugenics Education Society, London, England, and Statistician at Rothemsted Experimental Station, Harpenden, England. "The Evolution of the Conscience in Civilized Communities in Special Relation to Sexual Vices."
Milton Fairchild, Chairman, The Character Education Institution, Washington, D.C. "Pure Science Work in Higher Eugenics as Related to Education."
Sir Bernard Mallet, K.C.B., Late Registrar General for England, London, England. "Registration in Relation to Eugenics."
Dr. A. B. Wolfe, Universitv of Texas, Austin, Texas. "Eugenics and Sociat Attitudes."
Mr. Alleyne Ireland, Catskill, N.Y. "The Nature-Nurture Issue in Its- Bearing Upon Government."
Dean W. R. Inge, St. Paul's Cathedral, Lonidon, England. "The Interest of the State in ER,ugenics."
Dr. M. P. E. Groszmann, Educational Director, Nationial Association for the Study
and Education of Exceptional Children, New York City. "Some Limitations of Present Theories."
Tuesday, September 27. 11 a.m. to 1 p.m.
Dr. Arthur Wallace Calhoun, White Plains, N.Y. "The Economic Factor in the Problem of Eugenics."
E-. A. Bedwell, Honorary Secretary, Society of Comparative Legislation, London,
England. "Eugenics in International Affairs " George Adami, C.B.E., F.R.S., Cice-Vhancellor, University of Liverpool, Eng-
land. "The True Aristocracy." Prof. W. McDougall, Harvard Univeristy, Cambridge, Mass. "A National Fund
for a New Plan of Remuineration as a Eugenic Measure."
Dr. H. H. Laughlin, Eugenic^s Record Office, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Cold Spring Harbor, Long Island, N.Y. "Nativity of Institutional Inmates in Relation to Social Adequacy."
Prof. A. E. Jenks, Director of Anthropology, University of Minnesota, Minne. apolis, Minn. "Some Aspects of Amalgamation in America."

THE SECOIND INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF EUGENICS. 528

Tuesday, September 27. 2-30 p.m. to 5 p.m. Dr. Frederick L. Hoffman, Third Vice-President and Statistician, The Prudential
Insurance Company of America, Newark, M.J. "The Problem of NegroWhite Intermixture and Intermarriage." Otto E. Koegel, D.C.L., Associate Counsel, United States Veterans' Bureau, Washington, D.C. "Common Law Marriage and Its Development in the United States." Dr. H. H. Laughlin, Eugenics Record Office, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Cold Spring Harbor, Long Island, N.Y. "Eugenical Sterilization in the United States." Dr. Stewart Paton, Princeton University, Princeton, N.J. "Medical Training and Centre Essential for the Students of Eugenics." Dr. A. F. Tredgold, F.R.S., Edinburgh, Scotland. "Educability and Inheritance.*" Miss D. B. Johnson, Fort Smith, Ark. "Life Stories of a Class of 27 High-School Graduates in Relation to Longevity and Social Progress." Dr. V. Giuiffrida-Ruggeri, University of Naples, Naples, Italy. "The HeightWeight Index of Build amongst the Italian Adolescents of 50 Years Ago.'"

PROPOSED RULES.

"WHEREAS the advancement of eugenical science and education demands

-a permanent international organisation which shall provide for international con-

gresses in eugenics, and undertake such other duties as may be imposed upon it by

any

such Congress: be it "THEREFORE RESOLVED,

by

the

Second

International

Congress

of

Eugen-

ics, held in New York City, Sept. 1921, that a permanent International Com-

mission of Eugenics be, and hereby is, established and constituted as follows:

1. The Permanent International Commission of Eugenics shall consist of a

-Chairman, a Vice-Chairman, and Secretary, and not more than three members from

each of the co-operating countries, of which the present list is given in paragraph 7.

2. The business of the International Commission of Eugenics shall be to

determine the place and time of the next ensuing Congress. It shall also function

as an interim Committee, authorized to act on other international eugenical matters

-that require action in the interval'between Congresses.

3. The Chairman and Secretarv of the International Commission of Eugenics

shall be elected at each International Congress of Eugenics by the members thereof;

and they shall hold office until their successors are elected. These two officers may

reside in different countries. Thev shall not be ineligible for re-election by suc-

cessive Congresses. Vacancies in the chairmanship or secretaryship may be filled

by the Commission. The President of the Congress at which the election of officers

occurs shall be, ex-officio, Vice-Chairman of the Commission until the assembling

-of the next succeeding Congress.

4. The country in which the Chairman of the Commission resides shall be

,designated the headquarters of the International Commission of Eugenics.

5. It shall be the duty of the Chairman of the International Commission of

Eugenics to call a meeting of the Commission at least once in each calendar year

(except the year of the Congress) and at such other times as may appear desirable.

*The Chairman shall decide to what extent the business of the Commission shall be

carried on by correspondence.

6. The Secretary of the Commission shall as soon as possible after the close of

the Congress send an invitation to the leading national eugenical society and the

leading national eugenical institution in each co-operating country to nominate

one person each as a member of the commission; provided that each such society

and institution was qualified to nominate for membership to the Commission at the

assembly of the last precedina Congress, and that no motion had been brought before

such Congress and carried by a 4/5ths vote to the effect that such society or institu-

tion should not be invited to nominate to the Commission. When in any co-opera-

ting country no society or institution was thus qualified to nominate to the Com-

mission, the Commission shall ascertain which is the leading eugenical society or

institution; and an invitation to nominate to the Commission shall as soon as pos-

sible after such decision has been made be sent to the selected society or institution.

A decision as to which is the leading national society or institution in any co-opera-

524 EUGENICS REVIEWW.
ting country shall be made by vote of the Commission upon presentation of the facts of the case by the Secretarv, advice of a leading disinterested scientific society
or such co-operating country (e.g., a national academy of science) or the govemment
therefore being taken wherever possible. One, or at the most, two other persons from each country may be nominated to the Commission by the Chairman and Secretary of the Commission; they may be added to the Commission by a majority of the members voting; advice in this case also being sought in a similar manner from the co-operating country.
7. The following countries are hereby considered as qualified for representation on the International Commission and are named as "Co-operating Countries."t In Europe, Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, France, Great Britain, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden; In America, Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Columbia, Cuba, Mexico, Venezuela, United States of America. Also Australia and New Zealand.
The Commission may add to this list in request of three members of the Com-
mission by a 8/5ths vote of the Commission, or drop from the list of a 4/5ths vote,
n both cases of the votes cast. S. For meeting the expenses of correspondence and of consultations with the
Chairman, each Secretary is authorized to make requisition of not to exceed five dollars or one pound sterling, or their approximate equivalent, upon each society or institution represented on the Commission. He shadl make a report of his inancial transactions to the Congress next following his election."

