THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

T HE ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING more about this, and those Fellows and

was held at 69 Eccleston Square,
S.W.i, on Tuesday, June i6th, I942, at 5 o'clock, with the President, Lord
Horder, in the Chair.

Members who were present were asked to send in to him the names and addresses of
anyone whom they considered would be suitable speakers. It was agreed that a

special meeting of the Emergency Com-

mittee should be held in July, on a date to

MINUTES. The Minutes of the Annual be arranged, in order that the matter could

General Meeting held on Tuesday, June I7th, be discussed.

I94I, which were contained in the Annual HONORARY OFFICERS AND COUNCIL FOR

Report for I94I-2 (copies of which were THE YEAR I942-3. Following the procedure

distributed at the Meeting) were taken as of the two previous years, it was proposed

read and signed as correct.

by Miss Robertson, seconded by Mrs.

ANNUAL REPORT. The Chairman pre- Jenkins, and carried unanimously, that the

sented the Annual Report, the formal Honorary Officers and Council should re-

adoption of which was seconded by Mr. main as appointed on May i6th, I939, with

Titmuss and carried unanimously.

the exception of the following: Lord

STATEMENT oF ACCOUNTS AND BALANCE Salvesen (whose death had been recorded),

SHEET. The Honorary Treasurer presented Sir Charles Arden-Close (who resigned last

the Statement of Accounts and Balance year), and Professor Fisher, Dr. Fraser

Sheet for the year ended December 3Ist, Roberts, and Dr. Thornton (whose resigna-

I94I. These were unanimously adopted. tions had already been reported and ac-

The Honorary Treasurer said that he would cepted); and that the Emergency Commit-

like to point out that for the past year the tee for the ensuing year should consist of the

Society had been able to live within its following: The Lord Horder, Mr. Cecil

income, partly because its activities had Binney, Mr. B. S. Bramwell, Mr. C. F.

been greatly reduced on account of the war. Chance, Miss E. Corry, Hon. Mrs. Grant

Arising out of this statement, Mrs. Hodson Duff, Mr. W. T. J. Gun, Mrs. E. M. Hubback,

asked if the question of lectures to members Dr. A. J. Lewis, Mr. R. Martin, and Mr.

of H.M. Forces from the Society had been R. M. Titmuss.

considered. Dr. Lewis said that a panel of ELECTION OF AUDITORS FOR THE YEAR

lecturers, on various subjects, to H.M. Forces I942-3. Messrs. West & Drake were unani-

was in existence, and undertook to find out mously re-elected.

ANNUAL REPORT, 1942-3

In this Report, the accounts relate to the period December 3ISt, I94I, to December 31st, I942. The rest of the Report covers the period from March 3Ist, I942, to March
3Ist, I943.
The Report has been made as brief as possible owing to existing conditions.
General.-During the past year, the affairs of the Society have been carried on by an Emergency Committee formed from the

Council. The names of the members of this committee are starred in the list of the Honorary Officers and Council which is given
on the inside of the front page of the cover. Six meetings of this committee have been
held in the period under review. It has been the general policy of the
Emergency Committee to reduce activities
and expenditure during the war. In the last six months, however, there has been a revival

22

ANNUAL REPORT, I942-43

23

of certain activities which have been suspended since September I939. These are described below.
In October I942, Dr. C. P. Blacker, the
Society's General Secretary before the war, returned to London, having been temporarily seconded from the army, in order to work under the Emergency Medical Services.
During this period he will act as the Society's Honorary Secretary.
Population.-The Population Investigation Committee, of which Mr. A. M. CarrSaunders is Chairman and Dr. Blacker Honorary Secretary, has been revived. Dr. M. J. Elsas has been appointed its General Secretary. Its headquarters will continue to be at the Society's house, at 69 Eccleston Square. The Society has made a grant of
£5oo a year for two years.
The Population Policies Committee, which before the war was jointly composed of members of the Council of the Society and of P.E.P., and was financed by the Society, has also been revived. Mr. Fran,ois Lafitte continues to act as its secretary and he will be assisted by Mr. Julius Isaac. The Society has made a grant of up to £450 for a period
of a year.
Family Allowances.-Sir William Beveridge, in his report, recommended a flat-rate scheme of family allowances, beginning with the second child, payable to families in all income groups. In his Galton lecture, Sir William made it clear that it was in his view not only possible but desirable that graded family allowance schemes, applicable to families in the higher income groups, be administered concurrently with his flat-rate
scheme.
The graded family allowance has long been advocated by the Society, and has been espoused since the publication of the Beveridge report by the Family Endowment Society, to which a grant of £250 has been made.
Society's Premises.-The second floor has continued to be occupied by the Family Planning Association rent free.
The self-contained maisonnette on the
third and fourth floors, which suffered somne

damage from enemy action in I94I, has been put in order.
Galton Lecture.-The Society was fortunate
in securing as the Galton Lecturer Sir William Beveridge, who, on February i6th, I943, addressed a meeting of Fellows, Members and guests at Manson House, on Eugenic Aspects of Children's AUlowances. The lecture was followed by a spirited discussion. A full report appeared in the January I943 issue of the EUGENICS REVIEW.
Major Leonard Darwin.-The Society has suffered the grievous loss of its honoured and beloved Honorary President, Major Leonard Darwin, of whom appreciations were published in the EUGENICS REVIEW of January
I943.
Lectures.-Seven lectures have been given
on behalf of the Society, four by Mrs. Poole and one each by Mrs. Grant Duff, Mrs. Tamplin and Mr. B. S. Bramwell. The Society's film, From Generation to Generation, has been out on loan six times. The Paddington Health Week was held at Whiteley's Store from April 20th to 25th, and Mrs. Poole was in attendance at the Society'sexhibit.
Finance.-The usual statement of Income and Expenditure, Balance Sheet and List of Investments will be found at the end of this Report, with corresponding figures for the previous year. It will be seen that last year there was an excess of income over expenditure of £I,484 I2S. The Society has received notice of a legacy of £2,000 from the late Mr. J. H. Curle, whose death is recorded elsewhere in this Report.
Library.-Twenty-seven new books have been added to the Library during the year. The Society is again indebted to Miss Corry for her valuable services as Honorary Librarian.
EUGENICS REVIEW.-The circulation of the REVIEW has again dropped slightly during the year, due chiefly to a reduction from IOO to 50 in the copies sent each quarter to the Eugenics Society of Victoria.
Dr. Newfield's improved health enabled him to resume the editorship of the REVIEW in the early summer of I942; and the Society

s4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

is most appreciative of the able editing of the
issues for January and April I942 by Mr.
R. M. Titmuss during Dr. Newfield's absence.
Obituary.-We regret to record the deaths of the following: Mr. F. L. Bland, Mr. J. H. Curle, Major Leonard Darwin, Sir Daniel Hall, Miss Marion Holmes, Mrs. Lethbridge, Rao Bahadur Natesa Aiyar, Dr. Charles Pinching, Mrs. Standfield, and Dr. Styles.
Register of FeUows and Members.-An analysis is presented of the Society's Register

for the period April ist, I942, to March 313t,

I943:

Life

Fellows Fellows Mbrs.

Total, March 31st, I942 67 I85 2I9

Elections, 1942/3 ... I

4 I5

Total 471
20

68 i89 234 491

Less-

Deceased ...

3 4 3 I0

Resigned ... ...

5 6 II

Lapsed or Suspended - g g i8

Total, March 3ISt, 1943 65 17I

Affiliated Societies

--

2I6 452 -3

