HISTORY IN YOUR BLOOD*

By J. A. FRASER ROBERTS, M.D., D.Sc., F.R.C.P.

EVER since man first came to Britain goig to deal with one system only-the

there has been a continual influx familiar ABO grouping, which is so important

of new arrivals. In fact, to quote in blood transfusion. Some of the others

those memorable historians Sellar and may help later ... but most of them are too

Yeatman, in xo66 And All That, the British new and we do not yet know how much

Isles have been subjected to "... that long variation there may be within the relatively

succession of Waves of which History is small area of the British Isles.

chiefly composed." But it is not only the The units of heredity in the cells of our

waves that make the racial history of bodies, the genes, work in pairs, and we get

Britain complicated. There have been one of each pair from each of our parents.

intricate movements between different parts If we get two 0 genes we belong to blood-

of the country. In xo66 And All That we group 0; if we get two A genes, or an A

find this " Important Note ":

and an 0, we belong to blood-group A; if we

" The Scots (originally Irish, but by get two B genes, or a B gene and an 0, we

now Scotch) were at this time inhabit- belong to blood-group B; if we get one A

ing Ireland, having driven the Irish and one B we belong to blood-group AB.

(Picts) out of Scotland; while the Picts Now if we know the proportions of people

(originally Scots) were now Irish (ling in belonging to the different blood-groups it is

brackets) and vice versa. It is essential to easy to work out the underlying proportions

keep these distinctions clearly in mind." of the genes. And it is these figures-which

But anyway, complicated though all this are simpler to remember anyway-that I am

may be, a great deal has been found out. In going to give you. Taking the British Isles

addition to the later written records, there is as a whole, sixty-eight per cent of our

the evidence of archeology-from monu- blood-group genes are 0; twenty-six per

ments and the like; or from physical anthro- cent are A; and only six per cent are B.

pology-that is, measurements made on This is the average, but there are variations

ourselves and on the remains of our remote from place to place; and it is the variations

ancestors.

that are interesting.

During recent years there has been a very In Southern England there is less gene 0

important addition to the methods of than the average and more A: the actual

physical anthropology. This is the discovery figures are sixty-six per cent for 0 and

of the blood-groups. The blood-groups do twenty-eight for A. As we go northwards 0

not replace older methods, but though it is becomes commoner and A rarer. By the

early days as yet, they have already provided time we have reached the northern counties,

valuable additional information.

say Cumberland or Durham, 0 has risen to

The chief reason why the blood-groups are sixty-nine.

so valuable is that they are entirely deter- The interesting thing is that the rise in

mined by heredity. If then two populations 0 as we go northwards is not regular and

differ in the proportions of their blood-groups gradual. It tends to occur in steps and it is

it follows there is a difference in their interesting to see, where the first big step

ancestry.

occurs. It is close to the line of the River Aire

So far, nine different blood-group systems in Yorkshire. Now this ties up well with.

have been discovered and all show variations what was known before. The prehistorians

from place to place. But in this talk I am talk about the River Aire. In historical times

the Aire was the most important military line

* The text of a talk broadcast in the " Science Survey " series of the B.B.C.'s Home Service on October x8th, I95I.

in England. This is because it bridges the narrow gap between the mountains and the

28

HISTORY IN YOUR BLOOD

9

marshes lining the estuary of the Humber. Welsh people are rather a mixed lot-

Together with the corresponding and equally considerably more mixed than either the

narrow Stockport gap on the opposite side Scots or the Irish. I am not referring to

of the Pennines, it is the natural boundary recent movements of population. What

between north and south.

I am referring to is Wales before the fifteenth

We also know, in considerable detail, where and sixteenth centuries, at least. In general,

the next step comes. This is because a big North Wales shows the same very high 0 as

count has just been made in the northern Scotland and Ireland. But in South Wales

counties of England, thanks to the help of very high 0 is confined to one or two remote

the officers of the National Blood Transfusion mountain. regions. It seems clear that South

Service at Newcastle upon Tyne-Dr. Boon, Wales-long before the Industrial Revo-

Dr. Murray and Mr. Holland. At the eastern lution-was much affected by migrations

end the line of division follows the River Tyne that left the northern half of the country

pretty closely. But in its western part the untouched. By the way, Cornwall and

line drifts. rather south, so that Hexham, Brittany are like South Wales. Cornwall is

Carlisle and the industrial coast of Cumber- no higher in 0 than the rest of Southern

land lie to the north of it., As I mentioned England; nor is Brittany higher than other

a moment ago, the figure for 0 south of this parts of France.

line is sixty-nine; north of it 0 rises to Now here is another point. Watkin finds

seventy-two. I suppose that if we drew clear evidence of Viking settlement. In a

boundaries according to the blood-groups, well-known area of Viking settlement in

Northumberland and North Cumberland Pembrokeshire, 0 is very low and A very

would have to be given to Scotland.

high, just as in most of modern Scandinavia.

I shall be surprised if the next step is not Anglesey is lower in 0 than the rest of North

the line of the River Forth, though we have Wales and there are areas of lower 0 round

not yet enough information to be sure about the mouths of estuaries, like those of the

this. Farther north, however, we have some rivers Clwyd and Conway. We are told that

very interesting figures for the Highlands of there was an important Viking settlement

Scotland. They are not published yet and I around Chester, and 0 is indeed particularly

am indebted to Dr. Kirkpatrick, of Inverness, low in this region. The difference from

for allowing me to quote them. His figure for neighbouring parts of Flintshire is very great.

his area as a whole is seventy-four per cent While it is no longer true that the city

for 0; but in some places it is a good deal ordinances of Chester forbid the marriage

higher. In Easter Ross, it is no less than of English women and Welsh men, the effects

eighty-one per cent. This is much the of such things are still faithfully reflected

highest 0 yet reported in the whole of in the blood-groups of the peoples of today.

Europe; just as the corresponding figure Another example of the persistence of

for A, only thirteen, is the lowest.

ancient barriers is seen in the upper valley

Genes 0 and A, then, show very clearly of the Severn. This was once an impenetrable

indeed a northward movement of peoples swamp. The peoples of the hills to right and

to the periphery-a movement of high 0 left, who were separated by the river, were

peoples, followed by high A peoples-with very different. When they moved into the

the steps at just the sort of places where we valley, they tended to keep separate so that

might have expected to find them.

today, in that valley, there are particularly

Now let us turn to Wales. It is here our big variations from place to place.

knowledge is most complete, thanks to the I have not mentioned gene B yet, but

work of Dr. Morgan Watkin, who is allowing I must not leave out the most striking

me to quote some more unpublished results B story of all. Thirty years ago the distin-

obtained with the help of Dr. Drummond guished anthropologist Professor Fleure

and his colleagues at Cardiff. Actually, showed that in the Black Mountain of Car-

the blood-group evidence shows that the marthenshire and in Plynlimmon there was

30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

evidence of the survival of a palaeolithic I do not want anyone to think that

physical type. To a lesser extent this is also because I have only talked about ABO,

true of the Denbighshire moors. He pointed the other eight blood-group systems are not

out that these are the kinds of areas to which going to be useful too. So I will give just one

earlier arrivals tend to be driven by later example from abroad. In Negroes there is

invaders. Now in just these three areas no less than sixty per cent of a Rhesus gene

Watkin finds very high B; in the Denbigh- of a particular kind, whereas no other people

shire moors nine per cent; in Plynlimmon not affected by Negro influence has more than

twelve; in the Black Mountain no less than three or four. This enables us to estimate the

seventeen. This figure of seventeen per cent Negro contribution in modem Egypt as

is an astonishing one; it is higher than rather more than twenty per cent and to

anything yet found in Europe west of Poland. follow the steadily increasing proportion of

One cannot believe that it is all a coinci- Negro blood as we proceed up the Nile

dence. In these areas the blood-groups point valley.

to the survival of something going right back It is perhaps surprising that the British

to the Old Stone Age.

population today still shows so many differ-

Now just a word about the relation of the ences in spite of all the movements that must

British Isles to Europe as a whole. Scotland, have taken place. But no doubt the differ-

Ireland and North Wales have the highest 0 ences are becoming less clear with every

and the lowest A in Europe. If we look for year that passes. So we must hurry up. And

other populations with similar blood-group now we shall be able to do this. The Nuffield

proportions, as Mourant and Watkin have Foundation has just made a. grant of

done, we find them clustered round the fourteen thousand pounds to establish .a

Mediterranean: in Sardinia, Crete, parts of blood-group centre at the Royal Anthro-

Greece and the Greek islands, in one or two pological Institute. One of the tasks of the

places in Italy, and, most striking of all, new centre will be to map thoroughly the

perhaps, in some of the Berber tribes of blood-group variations throughout the whole

North Africa. We are told that some Berbers of Britain. The material is there, because

could easily pass for Scotsmen or Irishmen. eleven or twelve thousand new blood donors

There are affinities in language too. The are being registered every month by the

association doubtless goes back to megalithic National Blood Transfusion Service, who

times-the era of the great stone tombs have promised their help. So I think we

and of Stonehenge, when there was much can conclude that what we know now is only

coming and going between the Mediterranean the beginning of the story, and that the

and Britain. So there survives round the history in your blood today will enable

Continent and in North Africa, on the fringes, historians to work out a fuller story of

something of the peoples who once occupied "the Waves of which History is chiefly

most of Europe.

composed."

Society for Constructive Birth Control and RACIAL PROGRESS The First Birth Control Clinic in the World

There is also a

MOTHERS'THE CLINIC
Founded by DR MARIE STOPES, March 7th, £921.

aSpnedcialInstrLuec6ttiuorneasl

Reference Library
which may be con-

From the beginning deamlairnrgiwaigtehparllobalsepmesc.ts

of birth

control

and

Demonstrations to
Members of the

sLsuiLlbttreeaddrryaannfddfoorrLnMMieegmm-- OPEN DAILY (not Sats.) 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. FREE MareedirceagllaPrrloyfegsisvieon.n

bers of the Society. Address: 1o6/1o8, WHITFIELD STREET, LONDON, W.

TaON r

Eugenlos Review, Vol. XLIV, No. 1

