OBITUARY.
MR. MONTAGUE CRACKANTHORPE, K.C.
BORN, I832; DIED, 1913. In the death of Mr. Crackanthorpe the society has lost an original member, a pioneer in the eugenic movement, an ex-president, and an ardent supporter of the cause. Montague Hughes Crackanthorpe was born on February 24th, I832, being the son of Mr. Christopher Cookson, of Wellington, Somerset. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School, and at St. John's College, Oxford, his university career being one of great brilliancy, including a double first in classics and mathematics in moderations, a mathematical and a law scholarship, and finally a fellowship at his college. He was called to the Bar in I859, and here he succeeded in securing a large practioe and in winning a very high reputation. His work lay at the Chancery Bar; and, after being made Q.C., in I875, he acquired the leading practice in the different Courts to which he attached himself. Finally his energies were devoted to the home appellate tribunals and the Privy Council, where he also obtained
a oonsiderable practice. But to the surprise of his legal friends, who recognised his most exceptional legal talents, he was never elevated to the Bench.
Mr. Crackanthorpe, who took that surname on succeeding to the Newbiggin estate in Westmorland in i888, had many other interests besides those connected with the law-possibly too many for this professional sucoess. He twice stood unsuccessfully for Parliament as a Liberal, eventually, however, beooming a oonfirmed Unionist. He
wrote several articles irn the magazines, and in the Encyclopedia
Britannica on political and social subjects. In short he was a man of wide and varied culture and of great personal charm.
It is rather, however, with his career as a eugenist that we are here concerned, and it is now interesting to note for how many years such topics had been in his mind. As early as I872 he wrote an article in the Fortnigktly Review on the Malthusian question and the limitation of the size of the family, a subject which his contemporaries at all events, thought that he did not treat with absolute discretion. This is hardly surprising, for the public admires courage in action but not in ideas; and the commonplace man will be longer in forgiving a disturbance to his mind than an interference with his bodily comfort. If Crackanthorpe's independence of thought was an impediment to his progress in the legal world, he paid heavily for his mental temerity. In this paper of I872 the high birth-rate of the poorest classes was noted, thus bringing the author to within but a short step of the many
modern problems connected with differential rates of reproduction. The essay was republished in 1907 in his book entitled, " Population and Progress."
This society in its initial stages owed much to Mr. Crackanthorpe, for it was he who brought it to the notice of Sir Francis Galton, and who induced him to become its Honorary President. Probably the most important meeting ever held in connection with our movement was

OBITUARY.

353

that which was organised by Mr. and Mrs. Crackanthorpe at their house, 65, Rutland Gate, on June 25th, I908. Mr. Crackanthorpe was in the chair, and Sir Francis Galton's address on the occasion was subsequently published, with the result that the membership of the society was largely increased. In fact the recognition of the society by responsible scientists and medical men may almost be said to date
from that meeting. At the termination of Sir James Crichton Browne's
presidency, Mr. Crackanthorp,e was nominated by the Council as
President in accordance with the expressed wish of Mr. Galton, the
election taking place at the annual meeting in I909. Owing to the close friendship which existed between the acting and the Honorary
Presidents, the society then received the full benefit of Sir Francis Galton's advice; and it was this combination between the founder of the science and his acute and courageous friend which led the society through those most critical periods of its early youth. During his presidency Mr. Crackanthorpe represented the society on several important deputations, including those to the Local Government Board in connection with mental defect and the Poor Law, and to the Home
Office concerning legislation for the feeble in mind. He also gave evidence before the Royal Commission on Divorce, presenting a memorandum prepared by the Council.
Mr. Crackanthorpe married a daughter of the Rev. Eardley C. Holt in I869. Mrs. Crackanthorpe is known to so many members of the society, both as a member of Council and as a hostess, that a widespread sympathy has been felt for her in her sad bereavement.

MR. EDWARD NETTLESHIP, F.R.S. BORN, I845; DIED, I 913-
In Edward Nettleship eugenics has lost a firm friend. He represented the Haslemere branch on the Council of the society, and was a most valuable and valued member of it. Many members of the society will recall with gratitude the care and thoroughness with which he helped them in their investigations, and the Research Committee, in particular, owed much to his advice.
Nettleship belonged to an able family, two of his brothers attained academic distinction at Oxford, and a third was a well-known animal painter.
He himself, after studying veterinary surgery, qualified as a surgeon and specialised in diseases of the eye. As an oculist, he was in turn appointed consulting surgeon to the Royal London Ophthalmic Hospital and consulting ophthalmic surgeon to St. Thomas's Hospital, and attained to a leading position in this branch of his profession.
From a very busy practice he retired somewhat early in life, in I902, and at once devoted a large part of his time to the study of heredity, as illustrated by various eye diseases and defects. In this work he was associated with opposing schools, for he was in close correspondence both with Professor Pearson and Professor Bateson.
The diseases and defects which he investigated-highly localised and definite in character-afford most interesting and clear evidence of heredity. He brought to the study of these, special knowledge and skill of the highest order, and, above all, a most uncompromising

