POSITIVE EUGENICS: A PROPOSAL
By C. P. BLACKER, M.A., M.D., F.R.C.P.

IT has always been difficult to devise age, and to say to them something of this

practical measures to further the aims of sort: " We have been watching the develop-

positive eugenics. A perusal of the sug- ment of your children, who have done

gestions in the standard books is apt to very well in the school. In fact, they are the disappoint the reader: they are apt to strike sort of children that we think the country him as unrealistic, impracticable or else in- could well have more of. If you have both

sufficiently worked out in detail. The theory felt that it would unduly strain your re-

of eugenics is impressive and convincing; sources to have another child, would it thepracticalproposals too often seem to peter make any difference to your decision if we

out in triviality or futility.

were to guarantee you a sum of £- a year

Recently there occurred to me a measure (say a fifth of the family's earned income)

upon which I would value comment and for fifteen years to help in rearing a third criticism. It is of such simplicity that I can or fourth child? "

hardly believe that it has not been thought of 3. I submit that 99 per cent of parents

before, yet I cannot recall having seen it in would feel profoundly flattered by such a

print or heard it put forward. In a sentence suggestion. Every parent is sensitive about

the proposal is that financial help should be his children. There are no forms of praise

given to the parents of, say, three children that touch parents more closely than praise

recognized as of superior type, in order to of their children: and in this case the praise

assist them in bringing up a fourth child. I would redound in the most agreeable manner

will try to explain this proposal in greater upon themselves. The father would feel that

detail.

a tribute had indirectly been paid to his wife

i. It must be a common experience of as well as to his children; and the wife

school teachers to see occasional sibships of would feel the same about her husband. The

two or three children who make an impression worst that could happen would be that the

of being highly promising and above the offer was refused, in which case no harm

average in abilities and character. The would have been done. If, on the other hand,

thought must occur to such teachers: the parents accepted the proposal, a guaran-

"What a pity that we cannot have more tee would be given that the transaction

children like the X's: they are a pleasure to would be treated as secret by the sponsoring

teach; their influence in the school is good; body. The parents would be free to make the

they promise to do well in after-life; their arrangement known or to keep it secret as

parents are of superior type, and their home they preferred. From the eugenic standpoint,

is excellent. The country could do well with it would be best if they did not keep it a

more children of the X type; and it could secret. The principles of positive eugenics

readily dispense with tle all-too-numerous would benefit from the publicity and the dis-

children of the Y or Z type."

cussion which would be provoked. It is, I

I have been informed by two persons with think, conceivable that some parents would

teaching experience in elementary schools be pleased if an arrangement which so re-

that they have encountered children about dounded to their credit were made known.

whom they have felt in this way.

Subsidies would begin with the birth of the

2. If appropriate funds were available, child, or perhaps when pregnancy had been

would it not be a good thing to be able to definitely established.

approach the parents of the X children, if 4. If arrangements of this sort were

these (the parents) were still of reproductive reached with parents of children at elemen-

25

26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tary or secondary schools (rather than with instead of two, or four instead of three. The

parents of children at expensive preparatory fourth (or third) children born in this way

or public schools), there could be no question would stand excellent chances of being valu-

of class bias being involved. It could not be able assets to the nation. There would,

said that the scheme benefited primarily the doubtless, be occasional mishaps. The fourth

upper and middle classes-a reproach in- child might turn out to be a Mongolian

curred by certain proposals for furthering imbecile or a social failure, or he might die.

positive eugenics. The less the earnings of But isolated instances of this character

the parents, moreover, the smaller would be would not invalidate the general results,

the annual subsidy (based on a fraction of the which would be to augment the nation's most

earned income), and the less the cost of the valuable wealth which resides in the quality

scheme as a whole.

of its best citizens.

5. The sponsoring body might, in the first 7. The scheme would not depend, as do

place, be some central organization like the some of Galton's proposals, on elaborate

Eugenics Society. But no scheme of positive eugenic assessments whose significance is

eugenics could ever operate on a wide scale predictive; I refer to assessments of people

if it remained entirely centralized. Galton before they get married. The outcome of

strongly advocated the formation of local such evaluations is unknown at the time they

associations for promoting eugenics. If the are made, because no children have yet been

scheme caught on, such local associations born. In the cases here considered the

could perform a most useful task. They could assessment of the eugenic value of the

appeal for funds and subscriptions with good parents would be immediately to hand. It

prospects of success. It is notoriously diffi- would exist in the concrete form of the two

cult to spend money constructively on or three children already born. The assess-

" charitable " causes. The big trusts for the ment would not be made by some obscure

public distribution of money, such as the form of expert. It would be made primarily

Nuffield, Carnegie and Rockefeller Trusts, by the teachers or other-education authorities

are prepared to spend very considerable sums whose standards are easily understood, and

on obtaining the best expert advice on how are indeed obvious to everyone. There

funds should be allocated to the best advan- would be no question of giving autocratic

tage. Here would be a " charity" which powers to " experts " centred in anthropo-

would have in it nothing of the charitable, metric laboratories or in " eugenic courts"

in the sense in which that word is commonly on the Nazi model.

used. It is difficult to imagine any " cause " 8. The scheme would require very tactful

which would yield more certain and more handling, and many persons would have to be

valuable dividends.

consulted before it was put into operation.

6. It is one of the aims of a positive The people whose judgment I would value

population policy to encourage large families, most at this stage would be educationalists

to induce parents to have -three children and medical officers of health.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXVIII, No. 1

