THE FEEBLE-MINDED CONTROL BILL
Houise of Commons Meeting, December 5th, I9II
A NON-PARTY meeting was arranged by Mr. Walter Rea, M.P., to consider the Feeble-Minded Control Bill prepared by a Joint Committee of this Society and the National Association for the Care of the Feeble-Minded. The circular calling the meeting was signed by the following Members of Parliament: Mr. George N. Barnes, Mr. Charles Bathurst, Mr. Noel Buxton, Mr. Arthur Henderson, Mr. J. W. Hills, Sir Alfred Mond, Mr. Walter R. Rea.
Sir Alfred Mond took the chair at 5 p.m., and after drawing attention to the importance of the Feeble-Minded problem and the urgent need for action, called on Sir William Chance, President of the National Association, to open proceedings.
Sir William Chance gave a general survey of the present conditions, and demonstrated the need for powers of detention being granted.
Dr. Langdon-Down followed, giving an account of previous action taken by the National Association, tracing the growth of the movement in the country and giving the reasons for the introduction of the Feeble-Minded Control Bill. It was freely admitted that the Bill was only the minimum demand, and in no way pretended to deal with the problem completely, but sought to confer the necessary powers on existing authorities pending the adoption of the larger measure.
Dr. Tredgold gave a short exposition of the Bill itself, and as our readers have not seen the draft of the Bill, his statement follows in extenso: Dr. Tredgold said
" I think we may best consider the clauses of this Bill under three chief
headi'rgs, according as they relate to i. The personis it is proposed to detain. 2. The establishtmentts to be used for their detention.
3. The procedure to be adopted.
i. The personts it is proposed to detain. With regard to their intellect,
htiman beings are divisible ilnto two great groups-the tormal and the defective. The normal group consists of individuals of very varying capacity, ranging from extreme brilliance to dullness. The defective group likewise consists of persons of very varying intelligence, but for convenience it is
divided into three degrees, namely, idiocy, imnbecility and feeble-mindedness.
The feeble-minded are thus the class of mentally defective persons who are the least mentally deficient-who approach most nearly to the normaland this fact, together with the fact that there are various grades even of feeble-mindedness, may possibly give rise to the impression that the diagnosis of the condition to which our proposals relate is impossible, and that, consequently, the administration of the Act would not only present great practical difficulties but might even result in the detention of persons who were not defective.
I believe such a view to be entirely wrong. I admit that, in theory, it may not be easy to draw the line between the normal and the abnormal;
between those, on the one haind, who are merely the dullards of the ordinary
population, and those, on the other hand, who are definitely defective. Asa matter of fact we find the same difficulty in defining any form of disease. But the difficulty is theoretical rather than practical and it is my deliberate opinion, after twelve years' experience and close investigation of these con-

356 THE FEEBLE-MINDED CONTROL BILL
ditions, that practical difficulties of this kind are very rare and that in the
overwhelming majority of feeble-minded persons there should be no diffculty
of diagnosis whatever. Since the question of diagnosis is essentially a medical one, it hardly
seems necessary to deal with it at further length in this place; but it has seemed to me essential to make this brief allusion to it in order to remove any possible misapprehension which may exist.
The contention that, because there are borderland cases, we should therefore refrain from any attempt to deal with those which are pronounced, seems to me hardly to merit discussion. It would almost be equivalent to refusing to deal with the pronounced forms of lunacy because it was impossible to draw a scientific psychological line between sanity and insanity.
But it is not the intention of the framers of this Bill that it should apply to every person who may even be definitely feeble-minded. It is recognised that a person may be feeble-minded and still not in need of segregation in an institution. He may be under proper control at home. All that we desire to do is to secure control over those persons whose condition or surroundings are such that their liberty is a source of injury and misery to themselves or a menace to the welfare of the community.
That persons of this class exist in large numbers, is a fact which is only too well known, and which has been proved up to the hilt by the Report of the recent Royal Commission. I said recent, but it is now over three years old.
2. The establishments to be used for detention. At the present time feebleminded persons, who are not at home or at large, are resident in three kinds of establishments, namely, private, choritable, and rate-supported.
It is proposed that these, or any other establishments, institutions, colonies or homes which may now exist or which may subsequently be erected, may be utilised for the detention of the feeble-minded, provided they fulfil certain conditions. These conditions are:
Firstly, they must be considered suitable by a responsible authority. Secondly, they must be periodically visited by, and Thirdly, they must make certain statutory reports to-that authority. A few words are necessary as to the most suitable central authority for carrying out these duties. I am in agreement with the recommendation of the Royal Commission, that it would be more economical and would greatly facilitate administration, if the whole mentally affected population were placed under the care of one body-a Board of Control. This, however, would necessitate extensive legislative action for which I understand no time is now available. We have therefore to consider which existing body could be most readily adapted to carry out this work in an efficient manner. Three bodies suggest themselves, namely, the Local Government Board, the Home Office, and the Lunacy Commission. If all the institutions capable of being used for the detention of these patients were Poor Law establishments, then the Local Government Board might possibly be considered the most suitable authority. But they are not; many of them are private or are supported by voluntary contributions, and it is hoped that the number of these will considerably increase, so that they are naturally quite out of the jurisdiction of the Local Government Board.There is no fundamental objection to the Act being administered by a department of the Homte Office until such time as a Board of Control can come into being; but it would necessitate the formation of an absolutely new department with a new staff, and its work would inevitably overlap, at many points, that now being performed by the Lunacy Commission. In the Lunacy Commission there exists a body of legal and medical experts who are already familiar with the requirements of the feeble-minded, and whose duties consist entirely in the licensing, visitation and general

THE FEEBLE-MINDED CONTROL BILL

357

supervision of institutions for the reception of the mentally abnormal, including idiots and imbeciles.
It is obvious that not only is the Lunacy Commission, by its very constitution, the most suitable body to be entrusted with the administration of this Act, but also that the duties would be discharged by the Commission with the least possible readjustment of machinery and with the minimum of
expense.
We therefore suggest that this is the most suitable authority-and it is proposed that the Lunacy Commissioners shall be empowered to license, for the purpose of detention under this Act, any institutions, etc., which, in their opinioin, are suitable for the purpose. (Clause 4.)
Such license must specify the number of persons who may be detained, it imust be renewed annually, and it may be refused at the discretion of the Coinmissioners. (Cl. 5.)
It is proposed that the Superintendent of any such licensed place should be under obligation to forward to the Commissioners notice of the admission of every patient (Cl. ii) together with copies of the medical certificates and order upon which he has been admitted. He must also forward a notice
of death (Cl. I3) and must keep a journal in a form prescribed by the Commissioners (Cl. I5). It is further proposed that, at least once a year, the
Commissioners should visit every licensed institution and inspect all the
certified patients therein (Cl. I4.) We consider that these clauses will effectually secure the good conduct
of the homes and the proper treatment and control of their inmates. It is considered that it might prevent recourse to institutional training
and treatment if the admission of every case were necessarily dependent upon a detention order; it is proposed, therefore, that feeble-minded persons may still be received into homes as heretofore without such order; but that no feeble-minded person should be detained against his will or the will of his guardians elsewhere than in a home, etc., licensed and visited in the manner just described. and only then when certain legal formalities have been complied with. (Clause 6.)
At this point it is necessary to say a few words regarding the Provision of accomitmodation for persons detained under this Act.
Until quite recently the accommodation available for the feeble-minded has been woefully inadequate. It is still inadequate, but during the last few years several homes and colonies have been started, and there is no doubt that the number of these will increase. One great reason for the failure to provide accommodation has been the absence of any legal power to detain, and years of training have often been undone by wilful caprice on the part of the patient or the selfish greed of his relatives. This will be remedied by this Bill and it will undoubtedly lead to an increased provision. It is
gratifying to notice that not only is there a tendency to more voluntary effort in this direction, but that Boards of Guardians are beginning to take a
much greater interest in the question. Whether these two forces will be
capable of making sufficient provision, I do not know. They may or they
may not. 3. The procedure to be adopted. In framing this we have been actuated
by the guiding principle that the machinery for detention must be as simple as possible compatible with securing the safety of the individual and of the genieral poiblic. In other words it must not be so costly or elaborate that recourse to it will be impeded, whilst it must be of such a nature that it cannot be made use of for improper purposes.
It is therefore proposed that no feeble-minded person shall be detained except uinder the order of a Justice of the Peace, who must have seen the patient; and unless there has been an examination by two independent
medical men who have each filled up a certificate in a prescribed form. (C1. 8.)
These certificates must state (a) The evidence of feeble-mindedness. (b) The evidence of need for detention. (Form 2.)

358 38THE FEEBLE-MINDED CONTROL BILL
In the case of persons of mature age we suggest an additional safeguard. Clause g provides that no such person shall be detained for more than a period of eighteen months without the sanction in writing of the Commissioners, and this consent can only be given after personal investigation by a Commissioner. (Cl. 9.)
I may say that the period of eighteen months has been fixed in order to allow of such patients being seen at the next visit of the Commissioners.
It is further provided that the Commissioners may, at any time, order a patient to be discharged, or sanction his transfer to another licensed institution (Cl. io) ; and it has been considered wise that the management of the institution should also have the power of discharging a patient should they think such a course necessary. (Cl. I2.)
These are the essential matters dealt with by this Bill. There are in addition a few subsidiary clauses referring to penalties for non-observance, property, etc., which are self-explanatory and which need not therefore here be discussed.
Such is the Bill. It will, I think, be seen that not only are the safeguards proposed ample to prevent any improper use being made of the act, but that it is hardly correct to speak of the detention which it empowers as being permanent in the sense of being irrevocable. The fact that each patient must be seen annually by the Commissioners, who may at any time order his discharge, converts the detention into nothing more or less than a system of supervision which is continued so long as is necessary for the welfare of the patient or the good of the community.
In conclusion, may I say that it is not for a moment suggested that this Bill is a complete solution of the problem of the feeble-minded. This is far from being the case. It does not go so far as I believe the bulk of the people of this country desire us to go, nor so far as we must go within a very short time. It is to be looked upon as a temporary measure only, not intended in any way to be a final settlement, and not intended to delay or in any way replace more complete legislation. It is merely a stop gap until such time as Parliament can deal with the whole matter in a comprehensive way. Our only object in bringing it forward is because we feel that the problem is so serious and so urgent, that something should be done at once. At the same time, although put forward by these two societies as the minimum measure which is likely to be of any use, we do believe that it will really be a stop gap, inasmuch as it will allow us to obtain control over the most urgent and most dangerous cases. Consequently it cannot fail to prove an economic advantage and to do something towards stemming the increasing tide of degeneracy.
It is simple and practical, inasmuch as it introduces no complicated or even new machinery, but simply extends the use of that which already exists. It is strictly non-party and suggested solely in the interests of the nation and of the unfortunate feeble-minded persons themselves. May I earnestly commend it to your sympathy and careful consideration."
As a result of the meeting a Committee, to watch the interests of the Bill was formed, on which the following members have consented to serve. Sir Godfrey Baring, Dr. Chapple, Mr. Hills, Sir Alfred Mond, Mr. Pike Pease, Mr. E. M. Pollock, Mr. J. Pointer, Mr. Walter Rea.

