CORRESPONDENCE

GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS IN HUMAN ABILITY

To the Editor, The Eugenics Review Sir,-In his review of the Society's second Symposium volume,* Halsey writes:

Once granted that environment contributes to the outcome to a significant
extent, it follows that many of the unsolved problems lie completely within the social and moral arts and sciences. (My italics.)

Halsey is referring to the complex problem of the causes of phenotypic variance of in-

telligence test results though his statement, if true, could apply to any phenotypic variable

of incomplete heritability.

I would like to point out that for this statement to hold there must be no genotype-

environment interaction, and no relevant genetic difference affecting the means of different

sub-groups of the population under consideration. Neither of these restricting conditions

is known to be true of any heritable continuous variate in any human population, so that

we cannot know that non-genetic causes of variation can be adequately studied except

in association with study of genetic variables. Biologists can sometimes study genetic and

environmental causes independently because they can use genetically uniform populations,

(e.g. inbred lines) to study environmental variables and use controlled environments to

study genetic variables. We cannot do this with human populations so that critical studies

of environmental and genetic causes of, for example, mean IQ differences distinguishing

social classes cannot be made independently.

It is implicit elsewhere in Halsey's review that he believes that collaboration between

sociologists and biologists is desirable. It is a pity that the statement quoted above appears

in his review for it cannot but persuade some readers that such collaboration is not

essential

J. M. THODAY

Department of Genetics University of Cambridge

DR. HALSEY, who is at present abroad, hopes to reply to Professor Thoday's comments

in the December number of the REVIEW.

EDITOR

TOP PEOPLE HAVE LARGER FAMILIES
To the Editor, The Eugenics Review
Sir,-I thought at first that your heading Top People have Larger Families for the Notes of the Quarter, March 1967, was a bit of light-heartedness, and just meant as a witty sideglance at the advertisements for The Times. I never dreamt that a scientific journal could mean such a conception of topness to be taken seriously.
But apparently you are serious! On page 70 you again note, with emotional and non-objective approval, that "top professional" people are having more children than other groups, without defining "top". All your comments and attitudes seem to bristle with non-scientific prejudices and opinions that could be debated, and counteracted with some facts.
"These trends are beneficial to the nation as a whole" you say. "In a competitive world the best possible quality of thought and action is needed". Would they not be needed
* Genetic and Environmental Factors in Human Ability. Ed. J. E. Meade and A. S. Parkes. (See THE
EUGENICS REVIEW, 59, 49-51).
216

CORRESPONDENCE

in a non-competitive world? Is it your idea of best possible thought and action to con-

tribute to the competitiveness, and win at it, or do you hope from the Winchester Scholars

that they will end the competitiveness? If it is competitiveness, and success at it, that you

value, are you thinking that these offspring will devote all their competitive qualities to

the good of the nation, as against the world and other nations, or to the good of their

"top" class in competition with other classes, or do you foresee that they will win in

competition with each other and others, on an individual basis?

If you were just writing in a slipshod way that we needed intelligent people to conduct

the affairs of the country, then how about the mothers of these children with Winchester

fathers? You would appear to assume (though do not explain to your readers if this is

the case) that the mothers are intelligent and of "top" standard too. If this is not the case

then your whole ground for rejoicing collapses. But if it is the case, then these women

with "top" abilities, competitive or otherwise, are withdrawn from professional and

working life for a longer period, by reason of their larger families, than perhaps the nation

can spare them for. We might, in either a competitive or a co-operative world, hope for

more of a contribution from a woman of high intelligence quotient, than the raising of,

say, four. instead of two children.

Whether these "top" children are desirable or not is a matter of opinion. What is

not a matter of opinion is that they will use up a great deal more of the nation's and the

world's resources, renewable and non-renewable, than the children of "bottom" people.

It is resources that are in short supply-room to live in a civilized manner. It is in the

nature of poverty that the children of the poor use less resources than the children of the

rich. It is the essence of poverty that in material things it is skimped and meagre. To be

rich means to use the resources of the world lavishly.

I would commend to you the writings of two professors. First, Dr. Lincoln H. Day of

Yale University. He has called upon professional and intelligent people of the USA to

limit their families to two or three children. "No longer can we defend excessive repro-

duction by saying 'Well, they can afford it'. The question is now whether society can

afford it." He has pointed out that already the population increase in the United States

has necessitated greater restrictions on individual behaviour, crowded schools and recrea-

tion areas, vanishing countryside, air and water pollution, endless traffic jams and a steady

loss in time, solitude, quiet, beauty and peace of mind. If this can all be truly said of the

United States-how much more truly of Great Britain. "The difference between a typical

family of two children and a typical family of three is the difference between a population

that is stable and a population that is doubling itself every fifty years," Professor Day

has said. He also chided professional and wealthy people for not realising their responsibility

in setting patterns and examples of family size. Bobby Kennedy is a much admired

American, and his family, now numbering about a dozen, I believe, is not a good example.

Imagine the swimming pools, sports cars, country houses, and gallons af gasoline that all

these young Kennedys are going to grow up and use, and are using every day. They can

afford it, and their highly competitive old Grandfather Joseph Kennedy has achieved it

all for them, but can America afford it? And even less can Britain afford such families?

The second professor I invite you to study is Professor Carmichael of Edinburgh

University, who has done interesting work on what happens among colonies of rats and

colonies of cats when they are over-populated. The "top" cats, with the highest IQ,s

become gangsters, marauders and raiders. All become vicious. Cat and rat morality, as

expressed in care of the young, disappears. Lowly, non-top cats give up and die, sometimes

eaten by the top cats and rats.

It is assumed standards of superiority of class and nation that got the science of

genetics such a bad name in the past, from which it is only just beginning to be free. Shame

on you for starting the downhill path again.

BARBARA CADBURY

159 Forest Hill Road Toronto 7

217

