THE POSSIBLE EUGENIC BEARING OF
CERTAIN EXPERIMENTS WITH POULTRY
By RAYMOND PEARL, PH.D.
DURING several years past there has been conducted in the Biological Laboratory of the Maine Experiment Station, in connection with a general investigation of the physiology of reproduction in the domestic fowl, a study of certain of the factors which influence the hatching of eggs. The results of a portion of this work have recently been published.' It is the opinion .of the writer that some of the results of this experimental study of the hatching of hens' eggs have a suggestive inferential bearing on certain of the most fundamental problems of eugenics. It is the purpose of the present paper very briefly to discuss this matter from the eugenic standpoint.
At the outstart a little preliminary definition of terms is necessary. By " hatching quality " experimenters with poultry understand the relative ability of a given lot of eggs known to have been fertilised by the union of sperm with ovum to produce living chicks. If under proper conditions of incubation a given lot of fertile eggs produces few chicks these eggs would be said to be of poor hatching quality. In other words " hatching quality" denotes both germinal viability and developmental vigour. The measure of hatching quality usually employed is the percentage of fertile eggs which hatch.
In the experimental study already referred to the attempt was made to obtain answers to the following specific problemsinteralia.
i. To precisely what extent does the female bird (as compared with the male) determine the hatching quality of her eggs ? Unfavourable environmental conditions are known, for example, to affect adversely the percentage of fertile eggs hatched. In what degree is this due to the bad effect of environment on the female as compared with the male bird ?
I Pearl, R., anci Surface, F. 'M. Data ott Certai n Fiactors Influencing the Fertility
and Hatching of Eggs. Maine Agr. Expt. Station, Biilletin i68, pp. I05-I64, I909.

26 R. Pearl :
2. What degree of correlation, if any, exists between fecundity (here measured by winter egg production) on the one hand and the hatching quality of eggs on the other hand? Will the eggs of the bird that has been above the average in fecundity during the winter produce eggs during the breeding season likely to show a hatching quality (measured by percentage of fertile eggs hatched) above or below the average ?
3. To what extent is the hatching quality of her eggs an innate unchanging characteristic of the bird ? If a pullet produces eggs above the average for pullets in hatching quality will the same bird's eggs laid during the second year of life be above the average for yearling hens in this respect ?
4. Is the character " hatching quality of eggs" as measured by the percentage of fertile eggs hatched inherited in any appreciable degree ? To what extent, in other words, is this a fundamental character " bred in the bone " ?
It will be impossible in the present paper to give the detailed statistical evidence from which answers to these questions were obtained. For this evidence the original paper already referred to must be consulted. It need only be said here that it is believed that the evidence obtained warrants conclusions which may be categorically stated in the following way. In the first place, an examination of individual records indicates that there are great individual differences among different female birds in respect to the hatching quality of their eggs. A particular degree of hatching quality of eggs appears to be almost as definite an attribute of a particular female as any physical character. Some birds seem constitutionally unable to lay eggs which will hatch, even though they be properly fertilised and start development.
In the second place there is a distinct and sensible negative correlation between fecundity and the hatching quality of the eggs produced. It is the fact, in other words, that the bird whose egg production preceding the breeding season has been above the average will, in the long run, be below the average in regard to the number of chickens hatched from a given number of her fertile eggs. High fecundity is here shown by exact experimental investigation to be distinctly inimical to germinal viability or vigour.

CERTAIN EXPERIMENTS WITH POULTRY

27

A particular degree of hatching quality of eggs is, within limits, characteristic of the same bird throughout life. If a young bird's eggs hatch poorly it may be expected in the long run, or on the average, that when she is old her eggs will still show the same characteristic.
Finally, it is found to be the case that the hatching quality of eggs is a definitely inherited character. Data presented in the original paper indicate the existence of this inheritance in the female line. Evidence is also brought forward which makes it probable that hatching'quality of eggs may be transmitted through the male bird just as milking qualities are known to be in the
case of dairy cattle.
The eugenic bearing of the results which have been thus briefly set forth is suggested by a consideration of the biological meaning or basis of the "hatching quality " of a hen's eggs. Other things being equal (as they were, so far as possible, made to be in these experiments) the determining factors which settle whether a given bird's eggs shall hatch relatively well or ill lie within the eggs themselves. A fertilised egg is a complex piece of mechanism endowed with a relatively large amount of energy which is used up as development proceeds. If this mechanism is perfect, and contains an adequate amount of energy, the egg when placed under proper environmental conditions ought always to produce a healthy living chick. But this by no means always happens. Now, whether the developmental mechanism which we call an egg is perfect and contains an appropriate amount of energy is shown, by the series of experiments here under discussion to depend in very large degree upon the bird which produces the egg. She, in a sense, endows it with both structure and energy. The same thing is probably true for the mammals, including man, but it has been experimentally demonstrated for the domestic fowl. Should it be shown to be true in general, that the pre-natal and post-natal viability and vigour of the offspring are directlydetermined in the main by the parents, the eugenic consequences would be obviously very important.
If the foregoing analysis of the biological basis of hatching quality of eggs is correct, it would appear that the analogue of "hatching quality " in a mammal is pre-natal and post-natal via-

28 R. Pearl:
bility. In other words, a high infant mortality in man, biologically corresponds in some measure to poor hatching quality of eggs. The developing organism in both cases dies early in its development because it lacks the proper constitution and reserve energy to meet successfully the vicissitudes of its environment. It is usual to attribute almost the whole of human pre-natal and infantile mortality to bad environmental conditions. The unhygienic eonditions under which the mother lives and works during pregnancy are held responsible for much of the heavy pre-natal mortality in certain social classes. Bad environment in the broad sense is blamed for nearly all of the postnatal mortality not due to specifically inherited diseases. But the results of these experiments with poultry make one wonder whether the trouble may not, in part at least, lie further back. Some hens under the most favourable environmental conditions cannot produce eggs which will hatch. Is not the heavy pre-natal and infantile mortality in the economically poorer classes of society, due in considerable measure, to constitutional weakness in individual stocks? In these classes of society all offspring are probably on the whole about equally " exposed to risk," to use a convenient actuarial designation. Yet is it not likely that investigation would show that deaths were not by any means distributed at random over all families, even in those urban sections where the conditions as to infantile mortality are the
worst known ? Granting that germinal viability, or developmental vigour, is
in some degree (probably a considerable degree) dependent upon constitutional conditions in the parents, we have to ask what factors are of significance in influencing those conditions, either for better or for worse ? The poultry experiments suggest that three factors are of paramount importance here. These are:
i. Environment: acting, not on the developing organism, but on the parents during the development and maturation of the germ cells which are later to produce the offspring.
2. Fecundity. In the poultry experiments it was found that high fecundity was associated, on the average, with poor hatching quality. This is probably to be explained as the result of a reduction of constitutional vigour following heavy laying.

CERTAIN EXPERIMENTS WITH POULTRY

29

Continued heavy egg production involves great metabolic activity on the part of the female in the transformation of matter and energy, and must fatigue the organism. It is not surprising that under such circumstances the eggs produced are not perfect developmental machines. Does not a similar relation probably hold true for man ? High fecundity and high infant mortality (and probably also pre-natal mortality) are very generally associated, when whole social classes are dealt with as units. I have been much interested to learn, while writing this paper, that the same relation holds for individual families within a single social class. I am indebted to Dr. Alice Hamilton' of the Hull House, in Chicago for the information that in some investigations which she made bv personal collection of statistics. she finds an infant mortality rate of 268 per I,OOO births in families of six or more children, and a rate of ii8 per i,ooo births in families of four or fewer children. These returns are based on i,6oo families. The figures bear out most remarkably thesuggestion made by the poultry experiments.
3. Heredity. The poultry experiments show that the constitutional character of the parents which ensures good hatching quality of eggs, is definitely inherited. Hatching quality can be improved by selective breeding. Are not the innate characters in the parents which determine the constitution of the fertilised ovum, and hence in some degree the viability of the developing human foetus, or growing infant, probably also definitely inherited? And, if so, may not the discussion of these factors, properly make up a part of a eugenics education propaganda ?
In closing it should be said that all that has been attempted in this paper is to call attention to some suggestions along. eugenic lines which have come to the writer in connection with a biological investigation conducted with quite different ends in view. These suggestions may be of some value, or, on the other hand, they may not. Time and further investigation must settle this as well as so many other questions. In the meantime it would seem that in so new a science as eugenics any suggestions which originate in definite experimental inquiries are at least worth consideration.
1 In lit.

