PAUL BLOOMFIELD
A Note On Malthus*

U NLESS MY EARS deceived me, Mary himself. He was at the time sixty years old.

Stocks in her most interesting 1959 Though this quiet, truth-loving person had

Galton Lecture said of Malthus: "He been, as John Stuart Mill had said, for the last

wanted the poor to starve." Perhaps my ears twenty-five years "the best-abused man of his

did deceive me, because in the reprint of the age", later ages have not been content to let

Lecture in this REvIEw (51, 11) I can only find: that record stand: he has been one of the best-

.. . he wanted the poor law abolished alto- abused men ever since, and of course not in

gether." He wanted, as a matter of fact, some- England only. When Shelley had declared in his

thing even more unthinkable.

Preface to Prometheus Unbound, a poem chiefly

The population problem, to which Malthus written among "flowery glades and thickets of

had begun drawing attention in 1798 in the first odoriferous blossomingtrees", that he would

edition of his famous essay, did not much rather go to hell with Plato and Bacon than to

disturb Government or the educated public till heaven with Paley and Malthus, Malthus had

after Waterloo, seventeen years later. By then already for many years been teaching history

the failure of the Speenhamland system of poor and cogitating in the less idyllic environment

relief was becoming increasingly apparent, of Haileybury College. The great reproach

though that system was hardly as economically used against him, by those who did reproach

profane as it has been represented; the incentive him-and that meant almost everybody except

it offered to the poor to have large families John Stuart Mill, some of the younger genera-

was not glittering. The children, quite simply, tion of Benthamites and Sydney Smith-was

were born, and more and more of them were that his "principle" was a piece of class Jesuitry

surviving infancy. By the early 'twenties James aimed at the liberties, such as they were, of the

Mill cautiously, and the amazing breeches-maker labourers, the poor, the paupers. A good many

of Charing Cross, Francis Place, boldly, were people everywhere at last realize that even if

advocating contraceptive methods for "the the relation between numbers and resources

people". They had not the slightest chance of is not regular in the way Malthus made out,

success. An alternative relief for over-popula- he was not saying too much, and that, on the

tion, sending men and women to the colonies, contrary, the need for birth control has become

seemed hardly less unpalatable to the Tory more urgent since modem medicine has achieved

ministers, to the exiguous Colonial Office staff such wonders of death control. It is one of the

or to Cobbett, the most vigorous radical Malthusian ironies of the present century that

propagandist of the day. (Whigs as well as during the sixty years which have included the

Tories then and later were haunted by the loss two world wars world population has doubled.

of America.) And yet something had to be tried. In 1826, therefore, a Select Committee was appointed to discuss the possibilities of emigration. The Colonial Under-Secretary, WilmotHorton, presided.
The most impressive witness called to give

The ideal check on population increase, Malthus said, was "moral" restraint. Husbands were not to sleep with their wives! But the result of the lack of restraint that he deplored was not just more people, but more paupers. It was at this point that the kindly, worried Malthus seemed

evidence before this Committee was Malthus to show the cloven hoof, for obviously it was

* With the permission of my publishers, Longmans, l am including in this note some passages from my forthcoming life of Edward Gibbon Wakefield.-P. B.

not the rich who usually created paupers when they had large families. The Whig chief, Lord
Grey, for instance, with his eight sons and two

87

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1961, 53, 2.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

daughters, was getting on very well without
assistance out of the rates. If there was going to be legislative action, it was with the paupers' connubial affairs that society- would interfereto stop them begetting more paupers. In fact in the last year of Malthus's life, 1834, Chadwick's Poor Law Amendment Act segregated husbands and wives in the institutions for paupers and set the seal on the unpopularity of "Malthusian-
ism
All the leading Whigs were for a time tarred with the same brush. On one occasion O'Connor,
the Chartist orator, delighted his audience with a picture of Lord Brougham and his wife being sent to a workhouse of which he was overseer. "I shall be sorry for Lady Brougham. I know no harm of her. But I would have no pity for him. 'No, no, Harry' I will say to him, 'you may not go with my lady; this is the way for you; otherwise you might breed.'" But resentment against the Act of 1834 did something else -made it for a long time a tradition with the
English left wing to confuse the harsh statute with the harsh natural principle, and, by condemning the one, they seemed to be exposing the falseness of the other. This in spite of the fact that the radical Francis Place a rationalist with compassion for human "weakness", was one of the pioneers of "Neo-Malthusianism". As I said above, he made propaganda for artificial methods of birth-control which it remained impossible to discuss openly in polite society for another hundred years.
The condom, commonly known as the French Letter, often made of goldbeater's skin, had been in use since the seventeenth century, if not before. Carr-Saunders believes that Place may have been the author of the "diabolical handbills" circulating in the 'twenties; these leaflets were meant to instruct the poor how to limit their families, and whether Place had written them himself or not "he was prepared to sacrifice much popularity" in this cause. It was not indeed a hopeless cause, but the difficulties can be imagined if one considers that in despite of the sex-sophistication we have to-day, and the clinics, and the informative books and the talk that goes on, there are believed to be at least a hundred and fifty thousand illegal abortions a year in this country.

After all, there is no disguising that it was a "shovelling out of paupers" that was being meditated. Malthus, to do him justice again, was trying to formulate that concept of optimum numbers which is the beginning of demographic wisdom. Suppose resources to be unlimited: it
does not follow that the ideal size of population would be unlimited also. If the poor people confined in the Black Hole of Calcutta, a
hundred and forty-six of them in a space of twenty feet square, had had as much roast chicken and champagne as they wanted, and arrangements had been made to air-condition their living room, they would still have lacked something-namely freedom consistent with the requirements of the spirit as well as of the body
and its members. A high material standard oflife is not by itself a guarantee of social health.
In their report, Wilmot-Horton's Committee recommended a scheme of emigration as a relief for "redundant" able-bodied paupers. This was to be an alternative to the heavy poor-rates. According to Malthus the present arrangement was most uneconomic and, economically speaking, of course he was right. But he did not want
the poor to starve: giving evidence before the Committee he spoke with strong disapproval of looking on the unemployed as a convenient labour reserve, an attitude that many people complacently took for such a long time to come.
Neither he nor Wilmot-Horton was exactly proposing to "shovel out" the paupers against their will. They were to go voluntarily. But suppose they preferred to stay at home? There was the rub. Malthus's opinion was that if they were offered a chance of emigrating and refused to go, their claim to relief in the parish would be even less valid than he considered it was under actual circumstances.,... One gets a vivid impression of the conflict that was agitating his methodical soul, the conffict between a good heart and a mind groping for the irrefragable economic principles on which the poor laws should be reformed, if necessary (for the good of the greatest number?) with a new bureaucratic ruthlessness. The kindness in him had flashed out in his answers to questions relating to the poor in Ireland. For instance he was asked: "What circumstances in your opinion contribute to produce a taste for com-

88

A NOTE ON MALTHUS

fort and cleanliness among a people ?" He The Wakefield system would have satisfied

answered: "Civil and political liberty and Malthus because the aid given under it to

education." The half-truth in a nutshell.

working-class emigrants was "independent of

Then if there was to be this scheme of emigra- any question of repayment."

tion, who was to say which paupers were If Mrs. Stocks did not say that Malthus

redundant? And how was it to be financed? wanted the poor to starve there have been plenty

The paupers' fate was to be decided by "the of others to make the indictment. But the true

district, parish or individual who may consider charge against him is that he, who in the teeth of

such emigrants redundant, either as tenantry hatred and vilification stood so bravely by his

or as labourers". To speak of "such emigrants" "principle" (which was one day to inspire

in that context was begging the question, how- Darwin's principle of "natural selection"),

ever. If anything significant had come of all this should have been ingenuous enough to believe in

there can be little doubt that the scheme would "moral restraint"' as the poor man's contra-

have been abused. Would it have been easy ceptive.

to stop a harsh magistrate, a callous landlord, a We are often in a quandary more serious than

Scrooge of the counting house, from presenting most of us realize when we try to evaluate the

any poor devil he had a grudge against with a greatness or the goodness of eminent men.

ticket-but not a return ticket-for the anti- How, for instance, do we balance Malthus's

podes? As to the question, what the financial wisdom against his naivete'?

arrangements were to be, the answer was that When in the early sixteenth century the good

the districts, parishes and individuals that ear- Las Casas, Bishop of Mexico, found that the marked the redundant paupers for-let us Spaniards' Indian slaves were constitutionally

call it by its right name-deportation, were to unfit for working in the mines, he recommended

find the money. They were to pay with lump that they should be replaced by Africans, who

sums, loans to the "emigrants", from whom were hardier. His intentions were entirely

they were to get their money back when these merciful. Though he lived to be sorry for what

had made good.

he had proposed we might feel he should have

Asked what he thought, Malthus had said: come out against slavery at the start. But the

"If it can be shown that the expense of removing trouble, of course, was a "principle". The

such labourers by emigration is less than that principle of slavery seemed to him to be in nature

of maintaining them at home, no doubt can -not to mention that like some other Spaniards

exist of the expediency of so removing them"- he had sincerely believed that enslaving the

and one is glad to know that he added: "and this Indians was the first step towards christianizing

independent of any question of repayment." them. So Malthus believed that unsexing the

In the upshot, the Wilmot-Horton Commit- paupers was a first step towards assuring them

tee's Report had little effect. Two streams of not indeed of life everlasting but of a living wage.

emigration nevertheless began flowing in the Or take the case of the kindly Darwin. He too

'thirties. The one was directed to North America, was obsessed by a principle-his own, inspired

especially to the United States, and was practic- by Malthus. In 1881 he wrote in a letter: ". . . I

ally spontaneous, though in 1840 Russell set up could show fight on natural selection having

a Board to try to regulate it. The other and lesser done and doing more for the progress of civiliza-

movement was extremely important for the tion than you seem inclined to admit.... Look-

British Empire and Commonwealth; it had been ing to the world at no very distant date, what an

carefully organised by a young man who, while endless number of the lower races will have been

the Wilmot-Horton Committee was sitting, had eliminated bythe higher civilized races throughout

got himself gaoled for abducting a girl heiress. the world." Nobody could suspect that Darwin

Largely owing to him, Edward Gibbon Wake- wanted the elimination of a single man or woman

field, Canada was kept loyal to the Crown, and -any more than Malthus wished a single pauper

Australia and New Zealand were opened up for to starve. Unfortunately these good men, like

systematic colonization by the British people. Las Casas lovers of humanity, believed in the

89

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

force majeure of supposed natural laws without Sydney Smith, that nonpareil among English

sufficiently taking either human psychology wits and parsons, a chance of alluding to him

or human ingenuity into account-an error in a letter. Writing from Combe Florey in

into which Darwin's cousin Galton did not fall. Somerset to Lady Holland in July 1831 Smith

That Darwin was a "good" man is sufficiently says: "Philosopher Malthus came here last

clear from his own and his biographers' evidence. week. I got an agreeable party for him of un-

Less is known about Malthus, though copies married people. There was only one lady who

of Bonar's Life, first published in 1885 and last had had a child; but he is a good-natured man,

reprinted nearly forty years ago, are not hard to and, if there are no appearances of approaching

lay hands on; but one may doubt whether it is fertility, is civil to every lady, Malthus is a real

often read.

moral philosopher, and I could almost consent

What was he "like"? An intelligent old lady, to speak as inarticulately, if I could think and

Mrs. Herbert Martin of Hampstead, described act as wisely."

him in her memoirs as "a polite, handsome, When Malthus died, an aunt of Mrs. Herbert

kind old man, tall and slender, with dark eyes". Martin's wrote to a friend: "I want to talk to

The attractive portrait by John Linnell shows you of the good man who is gone ... No one

him a benign and scholarly figure, "erect and who knew him could help loving him"; and to

cheerful" says Bonar. One cannot notice from it another friend: "We have just lost a man of

that he had the hare lip to which the defect in whom it might be said that no one was more

his speech was due. He was married and had beloved and no one more abused.... His

three children, and his domestic life seems to temper was proof against all the ill-treatment

have been happy. He was not ambitious- he met with, whether in print or in viva voce

"there is no sign that he desired more money or debate amongst his brother political economists;

wanted to be more in the sun". More money, his conversation was particularly elegant, clas-

that is to say, than he had inherited, together sical and engaging. His friends justly, I think,

with his salary as Professor of History and upbraid the pusillanimity of the late ministry in

Political Economy at Haileybury. As for being omitting to confer some mark of their esteem

more "in the sun"-surely he had enough of on a man they so loudly extolled, and by many

being so much in the limelight!

of whose ideas they had profited, but whose name

One is grateful to him for giving the Reverend had the vulgar cry against it."

90

