R. H. S. ROBERTSON
M.A., F.G.S.
The Output of Scientists in Scotland, I 600- I90*

Introduction

production of outstanding men had been very

A CHIE CLEMENT, fresh from Glasgow much higher in relation to its population than

University and then expatriate, and I met that of any other nation of the United Kingdom.

on a war job in 1943 and wryly asked "Is The time had come we felt for a much more

your journey really necessary?" We asked each detailed study of the subject.

other many more questions but knew not the We had first to delimit the fields of activity

answers. What proportion ofjobs were available engaged in by our savants. These we listed as to the scientist in Scotland? Is emigration of the follows: chemistry, pure and applied; physics,

best brains of the country as serious to-day as it pure and applied; mathematics; astronomy and

seems to have been in the past? Or has Scotland meteorology; biology, botany and zoology;

ever held a fair number of her savants? And, geology; medicine in any of its branches;

perhaps most importantly, is Scotland still psychology, medical or otherwise (but not

producing people of exceptional brightness? sociology); engineering; and agriculture (in the

These were clearly questions of moment, and last two including prime inventors and those

in respect of our own field, the scientific, they responsible for especially significant develop-

exercised us so strongly that we set out to deter- ments). We decided to omit those whose contri-

mine the answers in as objective and statistical a butions had been to geography, social anthro-

study as we could make it, however long it would pology and sociology, political economy and

take. economics (among whom w4s of course Adam

It soon became apparent that in a broad way, Smith). from the Renascence to the present day, Scotland The field delimited, we now had to decide how

had made powerful and original contributions to to select our sample and how to judge their

the developing arts and sciences. We were Scottishness. It would have defeated our object

immediately faced with the problem of selecting to have the lists of scientists, as we came to call

our savants without personal judgement. We them all, swelled with scores of minor figures or

needed a sieve, albeit one with funny shaped of dubiously Scottish ones. We wanted to obtain holes. We rejected the method of Havelock a reliable picture of the emergence of really first-

Ellis who measured a man's worth by the number rate minds from Scottish stock in different fields,

of inches describing him in the Dictionary of at different places and at different times. As a National Biography, although this method has guide to social background, we noted the father's the virtue of objectivity, because we soon found occupation and that of the mother's father; and that some most remarkable men are not to be the place of work and the place of death gave

found in that great work. Yet Havelock Ellis in information about centres of opportunity and

his Study ofBritish Genius is the forebear of our migration.

studies; among other things he showed that, in

science and soldiering especially, Scotland's Method of Selection

* A paper read at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics Society on January 20th, 1960.

The all-important sieve which we constructed consisted of a series of criteria. As I cannot give

7' THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1960, 52, 2.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

you the names of the 229 characters who were William Fairbairn-one of the four founders of

retained on the sieve I shall give a few examples mechanical engineering; John Leslie and Robert

of those who were caught in each category. We Stirling-refrigeration.

said that to each one of them at least one of the

following statements must be applicable:

Definition of a Scot

Most of the Scots recorded in our files were

that he discovered a significant theorem, law, effect, function, coefficient, rule, equation, formula or test, with which the discoverer's name is permanently associated, as with MacLaurin's theorem, Ivory's theorem, Watt's law, the Kelvin effect, Maxwell's rule, Crum Brown and Gibson's rule, Rankine's formula;
that his name was associated with a physical condition or a process, as with the Beilby layer, the Brownian movement, the Clark process, or Buchan's cold spells;
that his name was borne by an important apparatus or instrument, as with the Nicol prism, Gregorian telescope, the Liston splint, the Stevenson screen or the Dewar flask;
that he discovered an element: Rutherford, Hope, Ramsay, Cranston;
that a unit or scale ofmeasurement had been named after him, as with Clark, Clerk Maxwell, Napier (Neper), Twaddle and Watt;
that he was awarded a Nobel prize or a moeity thereof; J. J. R. Macleod, C. T. R. Wilson, Sir Alexander Fleming, Sir Alexander Todd;
that his name was immortalized in the language, as in Macadam, Mackintosh, the Douglas fir;
that he contributed significantly and by general recognition to the development of an important invention;
that while responsible for no major discovery or invention he had been acknowledged by his contemporaries, or his later peers, as the most distinguished man in his branch of science in his generation--a group we took to include also
those who were founders or fathers of sciences.

born in Scotland of Scottish parents; a few have a Scottish father only. Of the few born outside Scotland of a Scottish father only, we have rejected some and retained others, roughly in equal proportions; thus Sir Ronald Ross was accepted and Sir J. Ambrose Fleming was not. This arrangement was made for statistical
reasons. In dealing with those born outside Scotland
to Scottish families but with less recent connections with the homeland, we have erred, if anything, on the side of exclusion. We do not include the "Scots-Americans": Henry (electricity), Edison (electricity), Fulton (steamboat), and McCormick (reaper); but do include Bell who left Scotland only six years before inventing the telephone. Nor do we include McLeod of the vacuum gauge, nor Lord Rutherford, though both were of Scots descent. And among Englishmen who claimed to be of Scottish descent we have ruled out J. Russel Wallace, George Stephenson, J. J. Thomson and Isaac Newton himself.
We gathered our information from many people and from many books; and in due time wrote a history of the development of science, technology and medicine in Scotland set in relation to contemporary world science. Here the fairness of the sampling can bejudged, but to-day

we shall deal more particularly with the statis-

It is in selection only for the last two require- tical examination of our findings. ments that subjective judgement had of course to Figure 1 shows the number of Scots inventors

play its part. For example, to the evolution of the and discoverers born in each decade since 1500;

steamship a number of important inventors where we did not know the birth date we have

contributed. If the contribution was a major one subtracted 30 from the date of discovery. The

we recognized it. If it did not lead to further last of our sample was born in 1908 and we

advance we discountenanced it.

recognize that some bright Scots have not yet

Of the fathers or founders of sciences we have been recognized, but the general shape of this

John Milne-seismology; John Pringle-modern diagram is only too obvious; there was a notable

military medicine; C. Wyville Thomson- peak in output of great scientists born between oceanography; James Clark-veterinary hygiene; 1705 and 1850. The subsequent decline is as

James Hall-experimental geology; Thomas remarkable as the earlier rise. The best decade

Graham - colloid science; David Ferrier - was 1810 to 1819.

modern neurology; William Smellie-midwifery; Before attempting to analyse the causes of this

72

THE OUTPUT OF SCIENTISTS IN SCOTLAND

FIGURE 1

and Mearns, where in the West of Scotland,

NUMBER OF SCOTS INVENTORS AND

called Clydeside in our table, this has increased.

DISCOVERERS BORN PER DECADE

The Highlands have never been prominent as a

20 . source of scientific genius and examination of

* *

A'hoWn
bfrthdut.

the list of those born in Highland counties shows

0 tstmaoted that nearly half of them came from places near

IS - e 0 blrthdqte the boundary.

* -o * .o

More detailed work would be needed to

* mo

compare the output of scientific genius in

10 _ .e

*o _

* *

o__ieemmioeoe

different regions on a population basis, but it is fairly clear that Buchan has had a high yield quite apart from the famous Gregory family.

Dr. J. F. Tocher of Aberdeen, one of the pioneers

* * meeeomo

01* a.~. ~~ _

_ mo

of statistical science in Great Britain, held that this issued from Buchan being the meeting place

of Picts, Scots and Norsemen, this mixture

1Soo 1600 1700 1600 1900 2000 having in the course of centuries produced a strain of exceptional ability. Even certain villages

rise and fall we shall consider where our char- and small towns in this district have produced a

acters were born and in what social circumstances. remarkable number of famous men, if we include

soldiers and divines. Forcing-grounds of this

Place of Birth

kind are of course not unknown in other

To show the changing pattern of birthplaces countries: Dr. John Plesch has called attention

we arranged our characters in order of birthdate to a district in Hungary which has produced an

and then divided them into four almost equal abnormally high proportion of great men, and

lots. Those whose birthplace is unknown or breeding grounds of exceptional talent are

abroad have been left out; they number 6, 1, 8 recognized in the United States. Such areas

and 5 in the four quarters. For the purpose of require to be more closely studied.

this study the country has been divided into Flinders Petrie in his remarkable essay on the

seven geographical regions, not of equal size. Revolutions of Civilization maintained that a

TABLE 1

peak of civilization occurred some 800 years after conquest and miscegenation. In Buchan

First Second Third Fourth then we might expect the reaction to have been

Regions

quarter quarter quarter quarter completed by about A.D. 1640, 800 years after the

to 1754 1754 to 1800 to 1837 to 1799 1837 1908

Picts and Scots united. Though many Aberdeen graduates became professors on the Continent,

Highlands

2

Buchan & Mearns 10

EPdinburgh

16

3 11 16

4 5
21

2 7 13

often in their early twenties, they often returned home to rear a family and the breeding stock was

Central & Fife

663

5 not depleted. In the exceedingly fertile parts of

Clydeside Ayr & Galloway Borders

11 3 4

9 8 3

10 4 2

18 5 2

Aberdeenshire, families would be careful to preserve their heritage; it is not surprising that

Total .. 52

56

49

successful farming and intelligence went together 52 for so long. Here there would have been a

distinct class differentiation for centuries, and the

The trends which can be seen here are not very production by selection of an exceptionally

sharply marked, but they do reflect the drifts of virile and intelligent upper crust.

population which have occurred in Scotland In the Highlands there resides a people who

over the centuries.

belong to an ancient civilization which is different

The figures show a gradual decline in output of from that of the rest of Western Europe. Tradi-

intellect in the once prolific districts of Buchan tionally all Highlanders tried to play the same

73

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

role in their society; much was done in common; it was unsocial to be exceptional in many respects. For one to become much richer than his neighbours would have been to invite hostility. Only in the Highlands has it been continuously possible for any young man to marry any girl of his choice; there has been no selection there for intellectual pursuits; though physical prowess, memory, humour, courage, will have influenced the choice of a spouse. We believe that this lack of specialization has resulted in the small number of savants coming from the Highlands.
Homes
The second question we attempted to answer was whether any class of society had provided a greater number of scientific inventors or innovators than the others. Here the answer is quite unequivocal. The number provided by the middle classes, which we define as professional men, business men and farmers, is certainly higher than that provided either by the landed gentry or by manual workers. Table 2 shows the occupational groups of the fathers of our characters arranged in the same way as Table 1, in the same four equal lots.
TABLE 2

Father's occupation

First Second Third Fourth Quarter Quarter Quarter Quarter to 1754 1754 to 1800 to 1837 to
1799 1837 1908

Landed gentry 8 6 4 3

Professional men 15 13 25 22

(Ministers)

(5) (6) (7) (5)

Business men,

farmers and

employers of

labour

12 18 10 19

Manual workers

and other

employed

persons

8 7 10 4

Total .. 43 44 49 48

It appears that it has become gradually less fashionable for the landed gentry to engage in
scientific pursuits; and genuine instances of sons of toil rising to scientific pre-eminence are rarer to-day than formerly. It is of interest to note that the ministry and clergy-the figures for which are

given in brackets-provide more inventors than any other occupation; and it is a remarkable tribute to a profession whose members have not greatly exceeded 0 1 per cent of the population at any one time that sons of the manse should form an eighth of the country's scientific genius.
The Golden Age
In Table 3 we give the number of Scottish scientific discoverers who made their first important contributions to knowledge in the periods which we chose for our chapters. We are not concerned here with their birth dates because we are considering the historical changes in the frequency of invention and discovery by Scots. The first line of figures shows the actual number of inventors and scientists recorded in the time intervals given; the second line shows these figures reduced to the number per decade so that the true rate of production can be seen. Here we can see that there is a peak of scientific output in the period 1830 to 1870; a peak so marked that we can justifiably speak of a Golden Age.
The population ofScotland was rising throughthe period covered by our survey, as is shown in line three. In line four, we have divided th;e figures of line two by those of line three to obtain the number of discoverers per million inhabitants per decade. These results are probably of more fundamental significance and should be of interest to human geneticists. The true peak of production is now seen to be in the period 1800 to 1850; the most prolific birth-period would be some thirty years earlier- 1770 to 1820.
The last two rows of figures have been plotted on Figure 2. Here we see in a most dramatic way what an extraordinary efflorescence of talent occurred in Scotland in the century 1765 to 1865, or roughly the period generally known as that of the Industrial Revolution, 1750 to 1850.
From 1725 to 1900 the curve is roughly symmetrical; but since 1915 it has fallen below the level of the seventeenth century. Indeed, the rate of output of genius had fallen by 1925 to about a sixth and is now at about a ninth ofthe maximum, and about a half of what it was before the Golden Age opened. Doubtless the rate of decline will slow up and the historian of A.D. 2000 may be able to revise the section 1900 to 1950 slightly,

74

THE OUTPUT OF SCIENTISTS IN SCOTLAND TABLE 3

Period Dates of discovery

1600 to 1699

Number of Scottish scientific dis-

coverers

11

Number per decade

1.1

Population of Scotland, millions

0-85

Number of discoverers per million

inhabitants per decade .. . . 13

1700 1750 to to 1749 1799
9 41 1P8 4-1 1P13 1P36 1-6 3 0

1800 1830 1850 1870 1900 to to to to to 1829 1849 1869 1899 1949
39 36 33 25 30 13-0 18-0 16-5 8-3 6-0 1P93 2-6 3-1 41 4 85 6-7 6-9 5-3 2-0 1-2

but that is a poor consolation for the glories that have departed.
The Diaspora In our early researches we were moved to
suspect that the emigration of the best Scottish brains would turn out to be a major factor in recent Scottish history and at the root of the country's present problems. But it was only towards the end of our task that we realized, having collected, tabulated and plotted the relative figures, just how far this was actually the case. The point is made clear beyond all question in Figure 3, which shows the changing proportion ofscientifically gifted Scots who died in their own country. Since one supposes, and indeed knows,

that many Scots of mark have returned home only to retire and die, the real trend may well be even more alarming.
FIGURE 3 RESIDENT IN SCOTLAND AT DEATH. PER CENT
100
90
800
70

FIGURE 2

INVENTORS PER MILLION PER DECADE

60 /

6I
it ~ ~ ~ oktlo5/

o0
5

40

20

I0

1600 1700 1800 1900 2000
-Dodts ofInvention and Discovery

0 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900 2000

1THE EUGENICS REVIEW

There were so few of our characters in the first of all, produced this Golden Age?

sixteenth century that one cannot accept as The latter half of the eighteenth century was a

statistically meaningful the fact that all of them period of great advance in scientific thought

at least returned to Scotland to die. With the throughout the Western world. In the beginning

Regnal Union came the beginning of the trek of the century Newton had laid the foundations

south. Until then, England had no monopolistic of modern physics; in chemistry in mid-century

attraction for Scottish brains, but the canaliza- discovery was made of many elements and gases;

tion of Scottish genius began in 1603. At first the in medicine discoveries were numerous, and

migrants were a mere handful surrounding King these went hand-in-hand with and stimulated

James VI and I, in search of preferment, honours further chemical advance; and theoretical ad-

and grants of land.

vance had almost immediate practical effect on

The formation of the Royal Society in 1660 industry.

marks a revolution in thought: modern science In this general advance Scotland was vitally

had begun. Many Scots went south to play their involved. Men like the Hunter brothers played a

part in this exhilarating period of new ideas. major part in the medical field, and other medical

Though the actual numbers who crossed the men like Cullen and Black were among the

border at that time were not large, proportionally foremost developing chemistry and physics.

the rate of emigration was as great as in the And Scots talent found particularly marked out-

nineteenth century.

let in directing the new theoretical gains to

The Union of Parliaments did not have any practical technological ends, as Watt, for

effect on the exodus for a long time. It was not instance, so pertinently applied Black's new

until 1750, the beginning of the Industrial concept of specific heat. The Scottish universities

Revolution, that the trend of exodus reversed. played a leading part in training the leaders of

From then until 1825 more opportunities arose what has been called the Chemical Revolution.

or were created for Scots to remain in Scotland.
In 1750 about 48 per cent ofour selected scientists managed to die at home, but in 1825 about 71 per cent, a most remarkable improvement.
We should define the "Golden Age" in this respect, reading from the graph, as 1795 to 1850; during these years 60 per cent of Scottish inventors and discoverers died at home.
From 1815 until to-day the scattering has proceeded at an alarming rate. The curve shows a slight evening-off and perhaps even a recovery in recent years.

Not surprisingly, Scotland had now become more prosperous than ever before, and there was a great literary and artistic revival which earned for Edinburgh the renowned cich6 "the Athens
of the North." (Did the originator of this phrase foresee a decline similar to that of the ancient city of Greece?) When B. Faujas de Saint Fond came to Scotland in 1784 he called on John Aitken, Joseph Black ("as often as possible"), William Cullen, James Hutton and James Watt; and he mentions also in his book James Gregory, Sir James Hall, Alexander Munro secundus,

The Rise and Fall

John Playfair and John Hope. Whom would he meet there to-day ?

Before we try to explain the rise and fall of the The period was one, too, of civil and religious

output of Scottish genius in the eighteenth and peace. Given latent technological genius in the

nineteenth centuries, we should say that we have Scottish people, these would appear to be the

given much thought to the validity of our figures. conditions to call it forth. Here at last were

Although in choosing our characters it was, as tremendous opportunities for developing the

we have explained, impossible to rule out personal and natural resources of the country.

entirely a subjective element, we ourselves are Coal and iron were the most important mineral

satisfied that the method of selection by criteria resources; to water-power was added steam-

outlined at the beginning is in fact reasonably power; salt pans gave way to acid works; kelp

objective.

provided much of the country's alkali; the

The facts then would seem to be irrefutable. chemical and engineering industries were born.

But the causes require an explanation. What, The activity was so great that Scotland attracted

76

THE OUTPUT OF SCIENTISTS IN SCOTLAND

many visitors from abroad in this period; and it is no coincidence that the only two Englishmen of the calibre of our subjects in this book ever to settle in Scotland, namely Roebuck and Lister, did so in the Golden Age.
The outward signs of all this burgeoning
activity carried well into the late Victorian era. At the same time as science flourished, the community enjoyed great material prosperity, so
much so that, as seems remarkable to-day, by the end ofthe century the average income per head in Scotland was greater than in England. Nevertheless the output of Scottish scientific genius began
steadily to decline. And this diminution was paralleled too by a decline in literary and artistic quality. The Scottish school of painting, for instance, sustained by commercial well-being, faded into relative obscurity.

evidence is rather like a spot test of the chemist and other evidence more in the nature of a complete titration. Evidence of the second sort is not easy to come by, and the nearest approach to it seemed likely to be found in analysis of the Fellowship of the Royal Society, the results of which are shown in Figure 4.
To ascertain whether every "possible" Scottish Fellow was so or not would have taken months of research, but our task was shortened by the statistical methods used. We counted the first hundred Fellows with British names from 1663 on and noted those whom we knew to be Scots and those who we guessed were Scots. The two percentages were then counted for 1675 and every twenty-five years thereafter. As both curves have the same general shape, our conclusions drawn from them ought to be valid.

Fellowship of the Royal Society Much has been written about the Golden Age,
but few authors have addressed themselves to the period of decline. We cannot therefore quote from learned works to support our findings. Instead we have attempted to measure the decline numerically by studying other evidence. Some
FIGURE 4
SCOTTISH FELLOWS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY AS A PERCENTAGE OF BRITISH FELLOWS

16
15
12
II
10~

69 9.

....Probable
Scots

i cortaln

14SCt

future trend

~~1

TABLE 4
SCOTTISH FELLOWS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY

Proportion of Scottish

Scottish

F.R.S.'s divided by

Fellows

proportion of Scots

Proportion

in Britain

Cer- Pos- ofScots in

tain sible Britain Certain Possible

%/ % %/ __

%/

1663 6 6 14-4 0-42 0-42 1675 2 3 14-8 014 020 1700 6 9 15-4 0-39 0-58 1725 5 7 15-8 0-32 0-44 1750 5 7 159 0-32 0-44
1775 10 16 15-4 065 1*04
1800 9 12 14-9 0-60 0-81 1825 12 16 14-8 0-81 1-08 1850 10 12 13.9 0-72 0-86 1875 17 17 12-8 1-33 1'33 1900 12 12 12-1 0-99 099 1925 8 8 11.1 0-72 0-72 1936 6 6 10.9 0-55 0-55 1944 8 8 10-7 0-76 0-76 1950 3 3 10-5 0-29 0-29 1955 6 6 10.4 0-56 0-56

l

2.

\\

16I50

17.00

I
1750

1800

1850

1900

1950

2000

Y7ars

The story runs something like this. The Founder of the Royal Society was Charles II, and his brother James VII and II was a Fellow. Through the influence of Sir Robert Moray, a relatively high proportion of Scottish Fellows, many of them of noble birth, were elected in the Stuart period. When Dutch William acceded in 1689, doubtless London had temporarily lost some of its charm for Scots.
77

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

However, even before the parliamentary union support), and that the major cause of the emigra-

and the first of the Georges (1714), the propor- tion of these people has been an overwhelming

tion of Scots in the Royal Society grew fairly disparity ofopportunity as between England, and

steadily until about 1875. Thereafter the propor- in particularly London, and Scotland.

tion fell at about twice the rate of the upward

climb.

Patents

These curves are consistent with our main findings and reinforce them. They strongly suggest a falling off in the proportion of Scots capable of being elected to the Royal Society.
What lay behind the decline?

In search of further evidence against which to check our conclusions, we decided to see what had been happening as regards patents taken out over the period.
Our method here was to note the domicile of

Causes of the Rise and of the Decline

the inventor in the first hundred patents after April of the year stated. Foreign patentees were

Was it a fad, a fashion, for men of high intelli- excluded. If two inventors took out a patent

gence to "go in for science"? This seems hardly together, and only one had a Scottish address, he

probable.

was logged as a half. Figure 5 shows that Scots

Was it the Scottish educational system? This

undoubtedly contributed to the rise, but it could

FIGURE 5

hardly equally be regarded as a cause of the decline.
Was it easier at one time to make discoveries?

PROPORTION OF ENGLISH (- ) AND

BRITISH (

) PATENTS TAKEN OUT BY

RESIDENTS IN SCOTLAND (FOREIGN PATENTEES

OMITTED)

The fallacy in this argument is that each discoverer had far fewer well tested theories, methods and experience to draw upon, and more

8

G*2 SumplO. 200
0 Saple /00

surviving prejudices to cut through.

Was it connected with the religious disputes of >,6

2t

the time, leading to the Disruption of 1843 and

the great religious disputations for the rest of the

century? No, we should regard these experiences in the life of the nation as minor causes of un-

1620 ~~1~01~~~18~9./ 200

settlement, if indeed they did not act as a stimulant in the minds of creative people.

S'1 3

03

Our view is that the major cause in the decline of

Scottish genius has been excessive emigration.

From 1861 to 1951 about 1,586,000 people left

I

0/

England to settle elsewhere. Over the same period, Scotland, with only an eighth to a tenth of the population, lost practically the same

0 . ......... 0 ' ' B
1601 1701 1801 t901 ZOOI

number, namely 1,588,000. During the first fifty have never taken out patents as freely as the

years of this century the net loss by emigration in English; and that they did so most frequently

England and Wales, with a population eight about 1850 (when, even so, the top figure of

times that of Scotland, amounted to approxi- 6-3 per cent is just about half what might have

mately 550,000. Scotland's net loss in the same been expected from the population statistics.)

period was just over 1,100,000. The net emigra- Since then there has been a steady decline. And

tion rate for Scotland over these fifty years is this has taken place despite the fact that diffi-

thus sixteen times that of England and Wales. culties attending patenting from Scotland have

We consider further that a high proportion of if anything lessened. Up to 1852, the year of

those emigrating from Scotland has been made Patent Law Reform, a Scot wishing to protect his

up of her more gifted and highly trained citizens invention in England and Scotland had to pay

(a conclusion figures already adduced strongly £200 (then a large sum of money) as against the

78

THE OUTPUT OF SCIENTISTS IN SCOTLAND

£100 payable by an English inventor concerned with protection in England alone. Figure 6 shows that the number of chartered patent agents in Scotland has also declined since 1901.
The rate of decline suggested by our study of patents and patent agents is explainable not only by a decline in Scottish inventive capacity, but

the Haldanes and others, however, make it seem very probable that they do. We have a suspicion that such pronounced family traits were produced after a long period of assortative mating. From this it would follow that depletion of the stock by long-continued emigration of the most creative Scots must lead to an absolute decline in the

number of them being born. And what has

FIGURE 6

happened to the remarkable men we have

PROPORTION OF CHARTERED PATENT AGENTS RESIDENT IN SCOTLAND
8_

selected has also happened to thousands of other Scots of only slightly lesser (or differently orientated) gifts who would have figured in it if

7

we had slightly reduced the mesh of our sieve. As emigration has proceeded, the chances of inter-

6- marriage of the brightest citizens within this group has become very much less than formerly.

'a5 Even if the hypothesis of a specially productive

1.4

stock is discounted, the emigration of the more talented members of the community takes its toll

in the effects it has on the environment of the

next generation. Where inventive capacity is

2 - not "ploughed back" there is economic impoverishment, and hence less favourable condi-

tions for youthful intellectual develQpment-(as

0 1880 1900 1920 1940 1960
Year

Sir William, later Lord, Beveridge put it in 1944 "This talk about want being necessary for adventure is nonsense. Adventure comes not through the half-starved but from those who are

also by the fact that there are very much greater facilities in London for financing and developing invention itself. Many firms have their own patent departments. It must be true that many Scots inventors will already have emigrated to England before they reach the stage of taking out a patent, and will therefore have lost their Scottish domicile.
Effects of this Emigration on the Scottish Stock

full of beans."); the break-up of family ties to some extent destroys the background of social cohesion and stability; and the young who do not possess the advantage of a creative background now have fewer neighbours of a brighter sort who might fire their imagination.
Either way there is loss to Scotland of potential leaders of men or of thought or of action. It becomes less easy to pioneer new projects in any field, relying solely on native resources.

The question may now be asked whether the The Situation Now-Industry

continued emigration of Scottish men of science has deprived Scotland of the strain of genius genetically necessary to ensure that enough men of scientific ability are born to maintain the
standard set by previous generations. Here we

Figures up to the end of 1957 show the high rate of emigration continuing-the net loss from Scotland running at about 24,000 a year, a high proportion of all emigrants being from the more intelligent classes.

are treading on delicate ground, for no one can define the strain of genius which gives rise to men of scientific ability, or even prove that the neces-
sary genes exist. The occurrence of the Gregory family and the Munros, the Hunters, the Hopes,

How important it is to a country, from the economic point of view alone, to retain a sufficient proportion of just those classes has recently been put very succinctly by Mr. Angus Maude. There is a limited pool, he points out,

79

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

from which to draw the brains which modem counterparts, but the chemists too were not so

industry requires. In his estimation it is the top quick to investigate a new raw material, the

2 per cent of the intelligence range of popula- properties of which were rather difficult to

tion that is the mainspring of the social and understand and make good use of. The chemists

economic mechanism of the country. The next appeared to be only a third as bright as chemists

10 or 12 per cent in intelligence will provide in England.

the bulk of management, administration and the

professions, and a further 20 per cent of the Membership of Scientific Societies

population will provide the supervisors, the most Membership of scientific societies afforded

skilled operatives and the lower administrative another clue. Here again Scottish participation in

and clerical workers. Less than one in three of a new Society was found to be much less pro-

the population, in other words, can be expected nounced than in a long-established Society.

to contribute very much to industrial "know Mineralogy seemed a good field to examine,

how", and this section will only prove capable of since it is one Scots have made a very great

assimilating the required knowledge if there are contribution to in the past. To that the number of

teachers of the requisite quality.

minerals named after Scottish mineralogists

Seeking information in "measurable" terms testifies. We have only to mention aikinite,

about the present state of Scottish industry, we allanite, crichtonite, davidsonite, grahamite,

were fortunate enough to light on a method of hutchinsonite, jamesonite, thomsonite and many

comparing statistically the brightness of, as a others. It is reassuring therefore to find that in

sample, industrial chemists and the enterprise of 1953 the Mineralogical Society had thirty-one

the firms employing them.

members resident in Scotland, representing

When a firm is developing new uses for an 10l3 per cent of the United Kingdom members;

industrial raw material, it lets industry know the of these 7 per cent only were born in Scotland. In

possibilities by advertisement and articles in the Scotland, mineralogy is evidently holding its own.

technical press. Enquiries are received, samples When we came to examine the membership of

and literature sent out and eventually orders are a comparatively new scientific society-the

received. We examined the fate of samples of a British Society of Rheologists-we found that

raw material which has been on the market for residents in Scotland amounted to only 5 4 per

sixteen centuries but was still rapidly finding new cent of the U.K. membership in 1955, and only

uses in many industries in the early nineteen 1 5 per cent of the total membership were Scots

forties. The number of samples which went to working in their own country. We are inclined to

Scotland was only slightly less than 10 per cent, think that these low figures indicate that the

but the number of orders which followed was industrial chemists and physicists employed in

only about 3 5 per cent. We found that the Scotland are in some way discouraged, except at

Scottish membership ofthe Institute ofChemistry the National Engineering Laboratory, from

at that time was 10- 1 per cent. We concluded that assisting in the development of a new branch of

Scotland possessed the right number of chemists science. Two possibilities suggest themselves;

but that their work was not being made such either many Scottish firms employ second-grade

good use of as in England. Managements were scientists or they give their work less backing than

roughly a third as enterprising as those in the managements of English firms are wont to do.

England.

These-with the equally damaging ones from

When we made a similar survey of the samples the survey of industrial chemical activity-are

sent and orders received for a versatile chemical the conclusions evidently to be drawn about a

which had been marketed for only about six- country that led the Industrial Revolution, and

teen years, we found that under 4 per cent of the that is still-and here is the real anomaly to-day-

samples were demanded by Scottish firms and turning out from its universities and colleges of

subsequent orders amounted to a little over 1 per higher technology one fifth-twice the British

cent. Here again the managements appeared to average-of all the graduates in the sciences and

be about a third as enterprising as their southern higher technologies in Britain.

8o

THE OUTPUT OF SCIENTISTS IN SCOTLAND

Occupational Opportunities

Government bears a responsibility. To-day it is

It had long been plain to us, of course, that Government money that provides for the research

opportunity for these trained men and women in needs of a larger and larger slice of national

Scotland was limited. Just how little scope they activity. It directly supports the D.S.I.R. and the

could look for there was brought home forcibly research stations of the various ministries. And

as we began to collect further statistics.

though Government-supported research stations

A survey promoted by the Department of do exist in Scotland, they are conspicuous by their

Scientific and Industrial Research ofthe resources rarity. And unfortunately though naturally there

devoted by the British manufacturing industry to is a marked tendency for private or ordinary

scientific and engineering research and develop- industrial research to settle near the official

ment during 1955 showed that of all the research stations.

and development workers in private industry in It is not possible at present to say how much

that year Scotland had 2-7 per cent.

Government money is spent on research and

A count of the posts advertised in the journal development in Scotland. The figures we should

Chemistry and Industry in 1956 (to lighten the like to see are the numbers employed, their total

task we took the first issue in each month) gave salaries, and the total expenditure on research

results as follows: In the first six months of 1956, and development in Scotland as well as in

the number of Scottish jobs advertised was only England and Wales of the Ministry of Supply,

13 per cent of the British total. In the second half the Air Ministry, the Ministry of Power and of that same year, the relative number rose to other Government departments. The D.S.I.R. at

3-84percent. Forthe whole, it was only 2-38 per present shows the greatest sense of responsibility

cent. (This is less than half the 5 49 per cent of towards Scotland since it employs 8-5 per cent of

Scottish-based jobs published as open in 1951). its higher grade staff in Scotland; without the A count through the "appointments vacant" National Engineering Laboratory the figure

columns of Nature, to find out what the situation would be 3X8 per cent. The balance as far as the

was in respect of posts on the whole senior to Atomic Energy Authority is concerned has been

those advertised in Chemistry and Industry very appreciably redressed with the location of

showed that in the last half of 1956 only 1-7 per power stations at Dounreay and Annan. But it

cent of the jobs advertised were stated to be in is most improbable that any other departments

Scotland.

at present spend more than 3 per cent of their

Earlier enquiries in the late forties had revealed funds for research in Scotland, and some of them

that the rates of pay for comparable jobs were spend nearer 1 per cent.

frequently less and sometimes much less in

Scotland than in England. We understand that Economics of Emigration

the difference has been reduced over the last ten The economics ofscientific emigration provoke

years. Even so, careful search through Nature some interesting reflections. Various estimates

and Chemistry and Industry during 1956 failed to have been made of the cost of providing the

show any industrial scientific post open in the education, health service, and training of those

over £2,000 per annum class in Scotland whereas who emigrate, and it seems that the average

several have been available in England.

figure is about £2,500 for each person. With a

The situation as regards the universities is migration from Scotland of, say, 20,000 a year-

probably quite comparable with the rest of the and this is a low figure-the capital loss would be

United Kingdom, but industry, clearly, is giving about £50,000,000 a year, apart altogether from

the trained Scot less and less opportunity north the future potential loss incurred by the depar-

of the border. So-and this we conceive to be the ture of a trained citizen. We are concerned with

root of the matter-is the Government.

the highly trained. It is not at all unlikely that if

The major factor in the decline in the number two-thirds of the science graduates emigrating

of Scottish posts is in our view the unequal remained in Scotland the new industry which

distribution in Britain of research institutions. they could help to create would be sufficient to

And in mid-twentieth century this is where the give employment to the remaining men and

8I

ER-3

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

women who would have emigrated. There seems required to redress the balance. It would not be

to be no reason why the income per head in wise to bud off a tenth of each existing research

Scotland should be lower than in England; at the station; though a number of regional industrial

turn of the century it was higher.

research stations in Scotland might do research

It needs no excursion into mathematics, how- work, some of which would at present be done in

ever, to see that with Scotland producing 20 per England. But the difference would be that ideas

cent of the British output of scientists and highly born of research or in other ways would be

qualified technologists and only some 3 per cent developed up to the pilot-scale far more com-

of the British total of scientific posts available monly than is customary in Government

for them within her boundaries, Scotland is laboratories to-day. Inthis way Scottishindustry

paying too heavily to rear highly trained men could be revitalized and new industries created.

and women for export, in entirely dispropor- At present, the emigration of the best brains

tionate numbers.

from Scotland has led to the situation where very

Moreover, since the funds the Government has few new industries are pioneered there. Indeed,

at its disposal for sponsoring research and of the major post-war industrial undertakings in

development are contributed to by the Scottish Scotland, less than 1 per cent have been

taxpayer as any other, Scotland is in addition pioneered by Scots-66 per cent were English,

actually paying for these, its brightest citizens, 23 per cent American, 4 per cent Canadian and

to be attracted elsewhere.

3 per cent Dutch.

Just as rapacious hunters once raided the The Scottish Council (Development and

breeding grounds of the Southern fur seal in the Industry) has been forced to adopt the humane

Antarctic and brought these animals down an but in some other ways depressing policy of

asymptote of extinction, so do representatives of attraction of industry in order to provide

government and industry on their annual raids employment; but the wonderful range of goods

to the universities heedlessly cull the most so manufactured has been designed and created

mentally vigorous of Scots.

elsewhere-commonly in America. Not a due

If it is accepted that the provision of so over- proportion of scientists and development engi-

whelming a proportion of research opportunities neers will be thus employed.

in southern England is resulting in the rather rapid destruction of a fine stock of people in Scotland, then the continuation of such policies and practices would amount to genocide.

It cannot be certain that the provision of 10 per cent of research jobs in Scotland will heal the genetic damage wholly; it probably will not, but the life of Scotland, now sadly depleted of

The Cure

leadership and creative ability, will be greatly improved. We cannot expect another Golden

To prevent further disaster, research institutes Age, but we can expect to live in a country where

and posts in Scotland would have to be brought there is a reasonable chance for most of our

up to about 10 per cent of the British total. brightest sons to shine, and irradiate the

Government assistance would undoubtedly be community.

82

