POST-WAR FERTTLITY TRENDS IN FRANCE AND THE UNITED STATES

By JOHN BLACKER

Recent Population Trends and New Methods
of Analysis A SUBSTANTIAL increase in the birth-
rate, often referred to as the " baby
boom," has occurred in most western
countries during the post-war years. Much public interest has been shown in it, the
more so, perhaps, because it was largely unexpected and unforeseen. It is true that
the years immediately after the first world
war witnessed a similar upsurge of births, but to the demographers and economists of the I930S the possibility of any substantial revival of fertility seemed unlikely. Writing
at the time of the great depression, they were unable to appreciate how far the low ebb to which the birth-rate had sunk was in fact
due to the temporary postponement of marriages and births which would be made
up in later years. The population projections which they made at that time envisaged
neither the increase in the birth-rate nor
the striking reductions in mortality, especially in infant mortality, which have been such prominent features of the past decade. Thus many dire prophecies of depopulation were made which would seem to have been
falsified by subsequent events. This inability of the demographers of
the I930S to appreciate the full nature of the fertility trends of those years has since been shown to have been largely due to the fact that the statistical techniques of demographic analysis used at that time were inadequate and often misleading. Before the war the net reproduction rate was regarded by many as the be-all and end-all of such analysis; its calculation the last word the demographers could say. Since then, however, certain defects of this index have gradually been revealed. Not leaSst among these is its
over-sensitiveness to cyclical fluctuations in fertility-its failure to take account of possible postponements or advancements of

marriages and births which ultimately may
not greatly affect completed family size in a community where effective family planning is prevalent. Thus in their report, published in I949, the Royal Commission on Population lay greater stress on average family size as an index of fertility trends, and many demo-
graphers have now come to regard the net reproduction rate as having scarcely more
value than the crude birth-rate as a measure
of fertility and replacement. Thus the need for more refined measures
has led demographers in many countries to investigate new methods of analysis, particularly with a view to answering the important question-is the post-war rise in the birth-rate a mere " flash in the pan", due to a
temporary increase in the marriage rate, or does it represent a genuine reversal of the long-term downward trend in family size?
Important inquiries along these lines have been proceeding in France and in the United States; but it must be said at once that whatever the type of analysis that is used it is still not possible to give a definite answer to the above question. The majority of the women who were married after I943, and who thus contributed towards the rise in the birth-rate, are still well within the
child-bearing age-groups. Thus, since we cannot know how many more children they will have, we cannot know either what the completed size of their families will be. Much will depend, therefore, on the trend of fertility during the next two decades, and any conclusions which may be drawn now will clearly hinge largely on the types of projections that are made for this period.
In terms of the crude birth-rate, both
France and the United States have substantially higher fertilities than this country. After reaching a peak of over twenty in I947, the birth-rate of the United Kingdom now seems to be settling down between fifteen

242

POST-WAR FERTILITY TRENDS

243

and sixteen per thousand. That of France, at the end of each chapter do not seem to

however, is about nineteen, while that of piece together into a coherent picture, and

the United States is over twenty-four per the reader is left with the impression that the

thousand.

answers to many essential questions have

The research in the United States has been somehow been lost in the welter of statistics.

conducted at the University of Miami in the When one turns to M. Henry's work, on the

Scripps Foundation for Research in Popula- other hand, some of the methods of the

tion Problems, under the directorship of calculations he has used may be felt to be

Professor Paschal K. Whelpton. The results of inadequately explained, especially as regards

many years' work have now appeared in a the basis of his projections, but his con-

massive volume,* which, in order to expedite clusions are stated clearly, unequivocally,

publication, has been produced in the form and in italics.

of a typescript. There are seven chapters, It is not proposed here to describe in

covering some 280 pages of text, which are detail the techniques used either by Professor

followed by a further I00 pages of tables, Whelpton or by M. Henry. Both involve

and at the end of the book there are yet the analysis of births according to " parity ",

another I00 pages of appendices.

-i.e. whether a birth is the mother's first,

In France, work along similar lines is second, third, etc.-and these are then

being conducted in M. Alfred Sauvy's related to a given " cohort" of women.

Institut National d'Etudes Demographiques, Demographers use the term "cohort " to

and the results have appeared in a number of denote a group of individuals with some

the Institute's publications. As early common characteristic whose experiences

as I947, an article was published in the are followed over a period of time. An impor-

quarterly journal Population by M. tant difference between Professor Whelpton's

Paul Vincent, entitled " Comment Deter- and M. Henry's work is that whereas in

miner la Tendance de la Fecondite?"; the former the births are related to cohorts

this was followed in I950 by a " cahier " by of women born in a given year, in the latter

M. Jean Bourgeois-Pichat, entitled Mesure they are related to marriages of a given year.

de la Fecondite' des Populations, and in I953

by another " cahier" by M. Louis Henry, Results of the American and French Studies

entitled Fecondite' des Mariages-Nouvelle Of the seven chapters of Professor Whelp-

methode de mesure. The most recently ton's book, the first three are devoted to an

published results, however, are to be found introductory description of the techniques

in an article by M. Henry in the Population used and the assessment of error. The last

of April/June I954, entitled " Mise au Point four chapters then describe changes in annual

sur la Natalite Francaise

and " cumulative " fertility, the postpone-

The French and American publications ment, making-up and advancement of

make an interesting contrast. In Professor births, and finally prospective fertility trends

Whelpton's volume every effort has clearly in the I95os and later years. It is shown that

been made to put the full basis of the calcula- the post-war rise in the birth-rate has been

tions before the reader; massive and detailed due not to an increase in the proportion of

tables are presented, and estimates are large families, but rather to an increase in

made for all possible sources of error. When the proportion of women with one, two or

one looks, however, for the basic conclusions three children, with a corresponding decrease

that can be drawn, it is only with difficulty in the proportion of those with none. This

that they can be extricated from the body of trend is most marked among women in the

the work. Even the summarizing paragraphs younger child-bearing ages. At the same

time, Professor Whelpton shows that the

* Whelpton, P. K. Cohort Fertility: Native White
Women in the United States. Princeton University Press, 1954. (London: Geoffrey Cumberlege.) Pp. xxv + 492. Price 48s.

shortage of births between i929 and I943 was largely made up after I944: " Combining the estimates for all cohorts indicates

244 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

that the departures from the timing of years of matrimony, women married in

child-bearing 'expected' from the pattern I943 had produced as many children as had

of the I920S (a) decreased the number of been produced after fifteen years by women

births during I929-33 by between 730,000 married in I925; and even if in future years

and 850,ooo, during I934-38 by between the women married in I943 have very few

i,i8o,ooo and i,520,000 and during I939-43 children, the size of their families will never-

by between 200,000 and 89o,ooo, and (b) theless be substantially larger than those of

increased the number during I944-48 by women who married thirty years ago.

between 850,ooo and 2,100,000".

Such a fall in fertility, however, M.

In the final chapter, entitled " Fertility Henry thinks unlikely. Projections are

during the 1950S and later years", three made, based in some obscure fashion on the

forecasts of population trends, high, medium, fertility pattern of France in I907 and of

and low, are projected. Professor Whelpton pre-war Czechoslovakia, and he concludes

believes that future trends will in fact that the most probable average size of

lie somewhere between the high and the completed family will be about io to I5

low series, and he concludes: " Only with the per cent higher than that of marriages

high assumptions-a moderate increase in formed between the wars.

the size of completed families and a moderate The new trends in fertility M. Henry

decrease in age at marriage and child-bearing attributes primarily to the influence of the

-are somewhat larger numbers of births pro-natalist population policy promulgated

forecast during each of the three periods than by the French Government in July I939.

occurred during I944-48. Even the high The most important feature of this policy

series, however, shows a trend that is is the elaborate system of family allowances,

temporarily downward rather than upward. and M. Henry considers that the stability of

In the low series there is a large decrease the new fertility pattern will depend chiefly

in births from I949-53 tQ I959-63, the result on the stability of the pro-natalist legislation.

of the assumptions of a moderate decline in If this stability is maintained," he writes,

the average size of completed families, a rise "a rapid return to a more Malthusian

in the age at marriage, and the postponement [i.e. small family] pattern appears to us to

of births because of unfavourable conditions. be very unlikely. If this legislation is called

The medium series, which assumes the in question, or if the value of the allowances

stabilization of average family size near that is permitted to decline, it is, on the other

of the I900-09 cohorts and the continuation hand, probable that fertility will fall rapidly."

of rather high firgt birth-rates at the younger

ages, shows about i,ooo,000 more births

during I949-53 than 1944-48, but I,400,000 Conclusion: The New Trends and Eugenics

and 2,400,000 fewer during I954-58 and In conclusion, a number of important

1959-63 than I944-48 .

considerations may be mentioned.

As in America, the French rise in the Until about I930 the birth-rate in most

birth-rate has not been due to an increase western countries fell mainly because more

in the number of large families. While the and more married couples were beginning

proportion of childless couples has not to plan their families effectively, so that the

altered substantially, first births have tended ratio of small planned families to large

to come earlier in marriage than before the unplanned families was increasing. Thus

war, and second and third births have been the trend in the birth-rate was influenced

relatively more numerous. This, says M. chiefly by those types of factors that tended

Henry, constitutes a strikingly different to promote family planning-the growth

trend from that of the inter-war years. The of education and the spread of knowledge

new trend began to appear in the marriages of birth-control techniques, the growth of

formed in I94I and I942, and became most science and rationalism, the declining in-

marked in those formed in I943. After nine fluence of religion, the emancipation of

POST-WAR FERTILITY TRENDS

women, the widening of the horizons of in a broad sense, as being a measure of

social ambition, the general rise in the level positive eugenics. For the only people

of living, and so on.

whose fertility such allowances are likely

Since I930, however, family planning has to affect are, first, those who plan their

become so nearly universal, and large families families efficiently, and, second, those who

so rare, that what changes there may be in would like to have more children anyway,

the proportion of the population whose and both these characteristics are generally*

families are still unplanned can no longer considered eugenically desirable qualities.

affect the birth-rate appreciably. Instead, Secondly, we can now see how the demo-

small changes in what the majority of graphers of the I930S came to mistake what

parents feel to be a convenient family size was really only a temporary reflection of an

now have a noticeable effect. Thus the unfavourable phase of the trade cycle for a

fluctuations of the birth-rate are now shaped continuation of the long-term secular trend

chiefly by a new set of factors-those tending to influence the size of the planned family, such as economic depression and
unemployment, the cost of living and the economic remunerativeness of children, population policies and the Welfare State.
This distinction is brought out in the evidence of both the French and the American studies. The fact that in neither country can thelxpost-war rise in the birthrate be attributed to an increase in the
numbers of large families is clearly due to the fact that since the majority of these families

in fertility. Largely as a result of their failure, it has sometimes been said that the
most prominent feature of all population forecasts is that they are always belied by the turn of events. It is certainly true that, however elaborate our analysis of present and past trends on the basis of such things as age-specific rates, parity, spacing, or the experience of other countries, we still cannot know how many children married couples may have in the future. As Professor Whelpton says in his monograph, fertility

are in any case unplanned, they are unlikely trends are likely to be shaped largely by the

to be affected either by economic depressions fluctuations of trade cycles (the possibility

or by pro-natalist systems of family of future wars being excepted), and if the

allowances.

economists could tell us more about the

The eugenic implications of these develop- probable nature of these cycles, then we

ments are obvious, for it will be seen that any could see possible future population trends

system of family allowances may be regarded, in clearer perspective.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLVI, No. 4

