EUGENIC PROBLEMS NEEDING RESEARCH

By C. P. BLACKER, M.D., F.R.C.P.

I objects is divided into two headings:

O UR Treasurer is a man who imparts
to all the organizations which he
supports a healthy stimulus. Readers
of the REVIEW who have not skipped his page in the last three issues will have realized that he has big ambitions for the
Society. He strongly believes in the importance of eugenics and wants the Society
to play a part commensurate with this importance. In particular, he believes in the
urgent need and limitless possibilities of research. He would like to see the Society's financial resources quadrupled in order that
we might promote and supervise much more research than we can cover at present.
One of his many functions as Treasurer is to raise money; hence it is natural that
he should want to know for what purpose
money is to be raised. " If you had £20,000 a year for research," he recently wrote to me, " what would you spend it on? " I
asked for time before giving an answer, and the problem has been much in my mind during the last three months. The more I thought about it, the bigger and more important I recognized it to be. Finally I came to the conclusion that the question was of such magnitude that I could not myself undertake the sole responsibility for drawing up a programme of research which, though intended mainly to express my own views and not in any way to commit the Council, might be publicly represented as among the objectives of the Society. I therefore asked for and received help from several members of the Council. In preparing Part II of this article, I have been much assisted by valuable suggestions from Mr. B. S. Bramwell, Dr. Fraser Roberts, Dr. Julian Huxley and Dr. Thornton; but for the opinions expressed in Part III, I am solely responsible.

research and propaganda. The paragraph
dealing with research opens with the words:
" The Society encourages the study of all aspects of human heredity and differential
fertility." There follows a list of subjects which we regard as specially in need of further investigation. Through its Darwin
Research Studentships and by means of
other grants the Society has already pro-
moted and subsidized several of these items,
particulars of which will be found in the last Annual Report. These need not be recapitu-
lated. " All aspects of human heredity and
differential fertility." The subject is so immense that it is impossible to assign limits to it. How can the numerous and varied problems here raised be best formu-
lated ? Research on a given subject proceeds in
two distinct stages. In the first we must define what we want to find out; in the second we must devise a concrete scheme of how we are going to find it out. In the first stage we state the problem about which we require further information; in the second, we make detailed plans as to how many research workers are needed, exactly what
each of them is to do, where they are to work, and how much their work will cost. As concerns the need for eugenic research, we cannot at present go beyond the first stage of formulating general prob-
lems. It would be a waste of time to try to plan out detailed methods of how each item of research should be carried out and how much money should be spent on each. The reason for this is that the detailed features of
every scientific problem change from year to year. Hence I regretfully find myself unable to comply with the Treasurer's request for a detailed list of specific subjects needing

research, with estimates of the cost appended

II to each item, which would add up to £2o,ooo.

The Society's statement of its aims and Though the methods employed in scientific

i8i

i82 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

investigation remain but little changed, the exact scope of any given scientific inquiry, whether upon eugenics or any other subject, must be determined in the light of work which has already been done and of the researches which are being carried out by other people at the precise time that the inquiry is planned. These circumstances change quickly. A detailed scheme drawn up to-day might be wholly inappropriate in a year's time by reason of work undertaken by other investigators during the year. Overlapping and duplication of research must be avoided and collaboration must be established with other workers. The practical details of how each investigation is to be carried out must therefore be left to experts, i.e. to persons with special knowledge of what is being done at the time in question, and by whom.
In a sentence, the aim of eugenics is to promote the fertility of people with socially valuable inborn qualities and to discourage that of persons with the opposite qualities. But tremendous questions are raised by this simple statement. Here are some of them: What are the socially valuable qualities which we wish to propagate? How are they to be estimated and measured? To what extent are they hereditary or inborn? How far can such inborn qualities remain latent and, as it were, masked by an unfavourable environment?
Genealogical research may throw light on some of these questions. Although in each case we are arguing from the particular to the general, we are nevertheless dealing with definite facts.
Take the case of a certain man who died in 1792. His descendants in the last twenty years have held the following appointments among others: Chief of the Imperial General Staff, First Lord of the Admiralty, Ambassador in Washington, President of the Chamber of Shipping, President of Royal Society of Watercolour Painters, Chairman of South Wales Coal Owners' Association, Principal Woman Factory Inspector, Master of Caius, Fellow and Tutor of Balliol, Fellow of Trinity, Cambridge, M.P. for the City of London, etc. On the physical side there have been two rugby internationals, two trial caps and other athletic distinctions. Fifteen were killed in the war, 1914-I8. Many

of the women have been noteworthy and many have been able both to pursue a career and raise a family.*
This connection shows valuable social qualities which are reflected in the extraordinary list of honours conferred upon, and distinctions achieved by, its members. The change of environment which unmasked these qualities was a migration from a place providing little opportunity but where, nevertheless, the ancestors had risen to the highest posts available in a very limited sphere; another factor was the opportunity presented by the war. Much money might be profitably spent in employing genealogists to trace out the complete list of descendants of other noteworthy men who are known to have several descendants of eminence.
But connections like the above, which include many distinguished persons of high endowment, do not, in all probability, constitute more than Io per cent. of the population. The families they comprise, being unmistakably above the average, are fairly easily recognizable, as are the IO per cent. of families least endowed with socially useful qualities. What of the intermediate 8o per cent. ? How are we to evaluate the power of environmental processes to modify or override their innate genetic characters ? What social changes would be desirable in order to disclose the good qualities here latent, to bring them uniformly to light throughout the whole community, and enable us to recognize and deal with them appropriately? To what extent are they possessed by persons falling in different grades, occupations and professions ? To what extent do they manifest themselves in urban and rural populations, and what is the effect of migration from the country to towns ? What influences lead people to become grouped in different professions and classes ?
Other problems are raised. How far are the different social grades and classes now reproducing themselves? What are the influences which lead people in these different grades to breed at different rates
* A further account of this family will be published in our next issue.

EUGENIC PROBLEMS NEEDING RESEARCH

I83

-in a word, what are the causes of differ- are distinguished by an intelligence above

ential fertility? To what extent are the the mean. How does the fertility of the

existing differential fertility rates good or families from which they come compare

bad from the standpoint of the race? If with that of the families of average and sub-

they are bad, what steps should we take to normal children ? A good deal of work of

change them? How precisely are human this kind has been done both on feeble-

inborn qualities inherited? And how far do minded and scholarship children; but much

they conform to the recognized laws of remains to be learnt, and fertility rates are

heredity? In so far as human charac- changing. The organization of similar in-

teristics are inborn and also measurable, quiries, by which we could estimate the

what steps should be taken to have them fertility of stocks showing different kinds of

measured and recorded? What is the effect aptitude or talent, would be relatively

of different kinds of matings, such as con- simple, and much could be done by arousing

sanguineous matings and race-crossings? the interest of the teaching profession.

In the light of the answer to the last ques- Turning now from the facts about differ-

tion, what migration policies should be en- ential fertility to its causes, it can be said

couraged ? (This matter will come to the fore that, disregarding for the moment the

if a marked quantitative decrease takes problem of illegitimacy, which in this

place in our population.) What kinds of country is statistically small, the fertility

people (if any) should we encourage to leave of a given community or section of a com-

the country to go to different parts of the munity depends upon two separate factors:

empire or elsewhere ? What kinds of people the amount of marriage, and the fertility

should we encourage to enter and stay in within marriage.

the country ?

The first factor, the amount of marriage,

These questions are all touched upon in or nuptiality, is known to vary within wide

that part of the Society's statement of aims limits in different countries. Does it vary

and objects which deals with research. Is in the different occupations and grades with-

it possible to give them further precision ? in a country ? To what extent are restrictions

I think it is and will make an attempt, placed on marriage in different occupations?

starting with the problems of differential Actual prohibitions are sometimes in force,

fertility.

as for example among women school teachers.

What, in the first place, are the facts ? Of In what occupations do restrictions operate

these we are, so far as this country is con- so as to hinder marriage? This is by no

cerned, sadly ignorant; but the innovations means accurately known.

which the Minister of Health has promised The second factor-fertility within marri-

to introduce into the system of registration age-is influenced by a host of considera-

will be of great help. A private society with tions, among others, the age of marriage.

limited funds can do little to throw light on The restrictions on marriage above referred

this immense problem. The census and to have a bearing here; so has the remunera-

registration machinery must be invoked and tion provided in different occupations as age

adapted to the purpose. But limited in- advances, for instance the increase of pay

quiries might well be promoted into the which goes with seniority of rank in the

fertility of certain definite grades of persons fighting services. Our knowledge of the

characterized by the possession of socially operation of this age-scale of remuneration

valuable or socially burdensome qualities. is as yet unorganized.

Dr. Newth has shown that in Nottingham, Apart from factors affecting the age of

feeble-minded children belong on average to marriage, fertility is influenced by another

larger sibships than normal school-children.* definite event, namely the incidence of

What about scholarship children? These physiological sterility. How prevalent is

this ? Is it increasing or decreasing in the

* A Social Problem Group, London, 1937, p. 31. community as a whole ? Is it more prevalent

i84 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in certain social grades than in others ? How The Brock Committee was concerned with

far is it caused by dietetic factors? Are the negative aspect of eugenics. In chapter

the recognized sterilizing diseases (venereal 7 of its report it enumerated, under the

diseases, etc., the list is a long one) increasing following headings, nine items of research

in incidence ? Is so-called idiopathic sterility which it regarded as urgently needed:

i.e. physiological sterility unconnected with any recognizable disease or abnormalityincreasing? And how far, if at all, is it heredi-
tary? We know little about these problems. Then we come to the multitudinous
medical, socio-economic and psychological deterrents from parenthood which operate among fertile people after marriage. A brief outline of this immense field of problems has been given in a pamphlet, The Future of our Population, published by the Population

(i) Effect of vasectomy on development.
(2) Influence of consanguinity. (3) Investigation of twins.
(4) Classification of mental defect.
(5) Nature of defective inheritance. (6) Causes of mental disorders. (7) Influence of intra-uterine conditions.
(8) Study of germ mutation.
(9) Sociological research (particularly into
the social problem group).

Investigation Committee. It need not here These subjects vary much in scope. The

be repeated. Among which sections of the inquiry on the effects of vasectomy on de-

community are these deterrents operative velopment would be limited and could prob-

or inoperative ? A very extensive inquiry is ably be settled with an approach to finality

here called for into many important social by a series of carefully planned animal

problems such as housing, taxation, and the experiments. The nature of defective in-

cost of education. What steps can we take heritance and the problem of how far mental

to minimize or remove these deterrents if disorders are genetically determined are

we think that their influence is dysgenic ? huge subjects upon which very considerable

Here we enter the field of social legislation. sums of money must sooner or later be

Remedies of all kinds have been proposed spent. Some of the researches are already

ranging from the provision of family allow- being promoted, for instance, that into con-

ances to the abolition of the capitalist sanguinity by the Medical Research Council;

organization of society.

but the Society could give a most valuable

The problems of differential fertility above impetus in all the nine fields by appropriately

outlined are now engaging the attention of placed grants.

the Population Investigation Committee.

Further items of importance to eugenics

In the event of our concluding that the could be added to the list, such as the inheri-

high fertility of a given social element was tance of physical diseases and abnormalities.

dysgenic, what steps should we take to More detailed knowledge of the genetic

reduce it ? This is the province of negative mechanisms by which these are inherited

eugenics. The Society desires to see legalized might enable us to remove serious but

voluntary sterilization and termination groundless misgivings entertained by people

of pregnancy for persons suffering from or of otherwise good stock whose fertility is

carrying serious transmissible infirmities. socially desirable. But, as already pointed

It has supported research with a view to out, the Society encourages the study of all

discovering more practicable methods of aspects of human heredity. The basis

contraception and sterilization than now of our present knowledge of human heredity

exist and it has interested itself in the charac- was laid by experiments on peas. It has been

teristics and delimitations of the so-called widened by the study of fruit flies and many

social problem group. But knowledge of the other animals. Genetic studies of all kinds,

hereditary transmission of such dysgenic whether of plants or animals, have a possible

conditions as insanity, mental defect, epi- bearing on our knowledge of human heredity.

lepsy, criminality and sub-normal intelli- It is common knowledge that discoveries

gence could be immensely increased.

of the highest importance to human beings

EUGENIC PROBLEMS NEEDING RESEARCH

I85

are sometimes made unexpectedly in spheres
of inquiry remote from the direct interests of man. In the field of genetics such dis-
coveries have been made in the past, and will probably be made in the future. If sufficient
funds were available, the Society could make
grants towards research into various aspects of animal and plant genetics. Indeed, the Brock Committee, under heading 8 above quoted, recommended the study of germ
mutations. " Genetic research in Great
Britain," it said, " in so far as it has received public support, has been largely devoted to
practical agricultural problems. The need we stress is for at least one institution
devoted to research in the fundamental problems of inheritance in the widest sense."
The investigation of blood-groups holds great
promise; further theoretical and experi-
mental work on the efficacy of selection is needed; and in the field of cytology much
can still be done. The Society is well served
by people thoroughly conversant with these subjects. Through them, if funds were avail-
able, it would promote and inspire valuable work which otherwise might not be under-
taken. Turning now to the question of mating,
this will be seen to include not only the problem of consanguinity or the crossing of closely related types, but also the thorny subject of the crossing of distantly related racial types. This has become a political
issue in one European country, and it is of
the first importance in those parts of the Empire where mixed populations live close to one another. It is also of great importance in the formulation of immigration policies. The Society has allotted a Darwin Research
Studentship to the subject; but it is open to intensive and direct investigation in the Dominions and Crown Colonies, where it is desirable that scientific interest be focused
upon it. A stimulus in this direction could be provided by a few well-placed grants to genetical or anthropological societies or other scientific bodies in the Dominions or Colonies.
Among the problems of mating I would also include eutelegenesis or the application of artificial insemination to man. The Society
has not yet defined its attitude to this

subject, which is not mentioned in our statement of aims and objects. But the Society has given full opportunities to Mr. Herbert Brewer to describe and develop his ideas.
Eutelegenesis raises acute ethical problems and the subject is very new; its implications are so great that it surely merits further research. A small beginning might be made
by trying to ascertain through adoption societies how many children are adopted because of physical sterility on the part of the husband, or reluctance on the part of the husband to have children for eugenic or other reasons. The mother might well prefer to have a child herself by a father possessing
characteristics which she admires than to adopt a child of relatively unknown genetic quality, born to strangers. The identity of the eutelegenetic father would be concealed,
but the organization providing the facilities
would hold itself responsible for making a good selection, and in accordance with the mother's desires as to the type of father. At present we do not how many couples adopt children
because of the sterility of the father or because of the reluctance of the father to
have children of his own for genetic reasons. In the matter of the technique of insemination and the preservation of sperm knowledge has increased in recent years; but further
advances are clearly possible. Let us, then, suppose that our Treasurer's
most sanguine hopes were realized and that the Society became possessed of an income of between ten and twenty thousand pounds a
year. How would this money be spent on research? Three courses might be adopted.
We might, in the first place, repeat the procedure followed in the awarding of the first
Darwin Research Fellowship. That is to
say, the Society might, through its Executive
Committee or a committee set up specially
for the purpose, prepare a comprehensive list of subjects of eugenic interest and invite
applications from research workers, the award being made to the candidate with the best programme and qualifications. Secondly
the Society might name a subject which would be unlikely to attract research workers unless some specific stimulus, such as a research studentship or special grant, were

i86 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
provided. This course was taken with the unobtrusive and, to the general public, little second studentship. Or lastly, the Society known; yet it can enjoy a high prestige might decide that a given piece of research among people closely conversant with its which it wished to promote could be better activities, and it can exert a much wider organized and supervised by some society influence than might an egregiously pressor organization other than itself. To such noticed organization with similar aims. an organization a grant might be offered, Then, again, results of a substantial and provided that satisfactory guarantees were lasting character can follow from a single forthcoming that the desired work would be achievement that takes place in a culminaproperly planned and executed. The Society ting of time. The movement for votes for has on its Consultative Council and among women, though it was accorded immense its Fellows and Members a distinguished publicity and gained many adherents, did body of scientific men, and its constitution not obtain a single vote for any woman until is now sufficiently elastic to enable it to add the red-letter day when the enactment passed to the list by co-optations to the working into law; but the effects of this event were Council and by further appointments to the lasting and have changed the face of politics. Consultative Council. Money placed at the The same might be said of the Society's Society's disposal through donations and campaign for sterilization. How many legacies would be spent with all the caution dysgenic people have, up to now, been steriand discretion that the occasion demanded. lized as a result of the Society's activities ?
I do not know. Possibly few. But our past III efforts will be justified on the day when A final word about how a Society like ours voluntary sterilization passes into law; they is to appraise its activities. It is very diffi- will be still further justified if the law works cult to know by which of many criteria we successfully and provides definite eugenic are to estimate success. We might, in the results. first place, aim to increase our membership For these reasons I do not much reproach and to appear as prominently as possible myself that our membership has increased before the public. An augmentation of our but slowly. I believe that, largely through roll of Members, an increase in the popularity our activities, a eugenic conscience, stronger of our meetings, more references in the press and more discriminating than ever before, to the subject of eugenics, a rise in the sales exists in the country to-day. I believe, moreof our literature-all these events would be over, that our essential propaganda will be very welcome. They would be the outward readily done for us by others if we can estaband visible signs of success. But it is possible lish our contentions on scientifically solid to imagine all these agreeable things happen- grounds. Indeed, I doubt very much ing without any progress being made towards whether the " outward and visible " success the achievement of what we may call our of the Society will ever be commensurate real aims-namely the promotion of eugenic, with its real success. I would even go farther and the discouragement of dysgenic, births. than this. Real eugenic results-the favourHow many eugenic births have been pro- able influencing of the trend of births and the moted and how many dysgenic births pre- appropriate guidance of legislation-will not, vented through the direct agency of this I believe, be mainly attained through the Society since it was started twenty-five years publicly recognized agency of the Society; ago ? I have not the least idea. But of this they will rather be achieved by other societies I am certain; that with nothing more solid and organizations which our Society can
behind us than a skilful and stentorian influence. publicity, the Society could have been ten A large part of the task of negative
times its present size and have achieved much eugenics will doubtless be fulfilled through less. the agency of birth-control organizations.
Then, again, a society can be small, These in recent years we have helped in the

EUGENIC PROBLEMS NEEDING RESEARCH

matter of research; we may also have succeeded in giving to their activities a eugenic orientation. Most of the programme of social research described in this article has been
taken over bodily and in its entirety by the Population Investigation Committee - an
organization which was called together and at first financed by the Society but which is in no way subordinate to us. The Society's
declared policy as to sterilization, as set forth in our now out-of-date buff pamphlet, was very closely reproduced in the report of the Brock Committee. But the task of implementing this Committee's recommendations is not now in the Society's hands; it is
in the hands of the Joint Committee for
Voluntary Sterlization, which we largely subsidize and house, but which, like the
Population Investigation Committee, is in no way subordinate to our Council.
For the communication to those who, on
eugenic and personal grounds most need it, of a workable contraceptive method; for the collection of data at present non-existent on differential fertility; for the legalizing of voluntary sterilization, the Society does not want, and will not get, the credit. For
our purposes it is enough that the desired results are achieved. If, by well-planned and
carefully executed research, we can purge o-ur principles of prejudice and establish them upon an objective basis of scientific fact, the necessary propaganda will be carried out willingly enough by others. The Society's influence will be unobtrusively exerted through its members who have made themselves experts and whose guidance will, accordingly, be sought.

Our President, Lord Horder, has said that the real abilities of a medical man are often in inverse proportion to the frequency with which his name appears in the press-a modest statement from one who, despite himself, is kept so much before the public eye. I believe that the same thing holds of the intrinsic value of societies, particularly of those with scientific aims. The avidity of the press for copy relating to sex problems, and the unavoidable concern of the Society with these problems, have given me good opportunities for getting myself publicized; but I have avoided these opportunities and my name has appeared very rarely in the columns of the popular press. For this, I
have been criticized by those who regard
propaganda as our main function. Inevitably
there will be differences of opinion as to how
much energy we should devote, and how
much money we should spend, on the two
functions of research and propaganda respec-
tively. I am in a better position than any-
body to appreciate the excellent work done by Miss Pocock, the Society's Propaganda
Secretary, through her lectures, exhibits and propaganda literature and through the film
which she was largely instrumental in plan-
ning. Indeed, I regard her work as an essential feature of the Society's activities,
and I believe that, if our contentions are
substantiated by properly grounded re-
search, no one would be more pleased than she. Hence, our Treasurer's ambition that the Eugenics Society should be enabled to
inspire and promote much more research
than is now possible is very welcome to me.

Eugnics Review, Vol. XX, No. 8.

