THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and also the possible influence of relaxation of

natural selection through civilization. The sup-

posed colour blindness of many mammals, pig-

mentation and colour vision, colour blindness

in art and industry, and colour naming in

different languages are among the further

problems considered in Chapter XII. It is not

necessary to add that this is a most valuable

book.

R. W. PICKFORD

SOCIOLOGY
Benjamin, Harry and Masters, R. E. L. Prostitution and Morality. London, 1965. Souvenir Press. Pp. x+495. Price 70s.
THIS BOOK IS sub-titled "A definitive report on the prostitute in contemporary society and an analysis of the causes and effects of the suppression of prostitution". Some qualification of these words is needed, however, if an accurate description of its contents and the authors' intention is to be conveyed. "Contemporary society" means, for all practical purposes, the United States; and the reference to "the suppression of prostitution" discloses the themefor this is, in essence, a frontal attack upon the official legal attitude of all the states in the Union, which is Prohibitionist. The Prohibitionist system aims at the prohibition of prostitution in all its aspects, and is now the policy of only a few states other than America; most countries favour the system rather confusingly termed Abolitionism-that is, the abolition of all regulation of prostitution, whether specifically by law or by the establishment of brothels and the operation of a police des moeurs. Abolitionism is the system favoured in this country, and the authors regard it as the least obnoxious method of dealing with prostitution by the conventional means and processes of law; but in reality they would accept nothing less than complete toleration of the prostitute and all her works, and their final chapter, "Sex as Service" indicates concisely their view of the matter. Most men, they contend, need regular coition; but not all can obtain it. The prostitute can offer a coital service which could buttress the cooling marriage, assist the therapy of the psychiatrist or physician, minister to the prisoner and the member of the armed services, and contribute to the education

of the young-if only moralists and the like
were not so blindly prejudiced towards her!
The case for toleration is supported by what may be felt to be a needless volume of "porno-
graphy" (using the word in its strict sense).
Neither the material nor the tone are those of
a "report"-an objective, factual statement in
the neutral language of a sociological document.
All aspects of American prostitution are racily
depicted, and are garnished with case histories;
we certainly learn a lot about the subject, but
it is not so certain that we are the wiser, or that the authors' plea for toleration is enhanced
thereby. The historical aspects of the question are also briefly treated, but unfortunately the complete absence of specific and detailed documentation makes it difficult to check the state-
ments made, some of which appear to one historian of sexual relation to be of doubtful
accuracy. The weakest feature of the book, however, is
that though it purports to deal with the moral aspects of prostitution it never, in fact, shows any sign of coming to grips with the real issues. The word "morality" appears in the title, but not in the index, and any references to the subject are incidental. It is assumed that sexual gratification is an almost universal human need which
must be met, and the authors follow the logic of their argument to the point of justifying a "sex service for the female". But this assumption is not subjected to any rigorous criticism. Coition, like all else involving two human beings, is a personal relation-and one of a peculiarly intimate and searching kind; yet there is no discussion of the nature of relation as such, and of sexual relation in particular-and no attempt to examine seriously the contention that prostitution is essentially an exploitive relationship in which man and woman betray their humanity. It has been argued that coition should always be an act of love (in other than the sentimental or superficially romantic sense) and an expression of a common life. Such a view of coition implies an outright rejection of prostitution as a moral
act, and it has been seriously propounded by others than the straight-laced fanatics whom the authors condemn. It is a view certainly open to discussion, and no book dealing with prostitution and morality in a responsible way should neglect

32

REVIEWS OF BOOKS

to consider it. This and other moral questions over half imagined themselves well. The experi-

raised by prostitution should have been treated ment also demonstrated how much could be

with the seriousness that they deserve, and done to correct and prevent these common but

curtailment of other material would have en- little appreciated deviations from optimum

sured that this was done without enlarging the health and fitness, by skilled medical supervision

book. and the inculcation of better hygiene and living

SHERWIN BAILEY habits. When one regards the thousands of

millions squandered on drink, tobacco, gambling,

dissipation and frivolity, with misery, frustration

Williamson, G. Scott, and Pearse, Innes H. and impaired well-being as the outcome, it is

Science, Synthesis and Sanity. London, 1965. clear that the diversion of a few hundred millions

Collins. Pp. 352. Price 45s.

from those channels into health conservation

and promotion on the lines foreshadowed by

THIS BOOK IS the work of two doctors who the Peckham Experiment might represent an

inspired the Peckham Experiment which first excellent bargain, from both the social and the

took off as a pilot project in 1926-29. This later individual point of view.

developed into the Pioneer Health Centre, a This book presents the basic philosophy which

scheme which combined the recreational ameni- underlay the Peckham Experiment. Accepting

ties of a family club with facilities for education fully the contribution science has made to an

in healthy living, regular medical overhaul and understanding oforganic mechanisms, its authors

supervision with an integrated approach to question the adequacy of the quantitative

positive health based on the study of the indi- approach to healthy living. Many qualitative

vidual in relation to the ecological background factors, including feelings, relationships and

of the family. When the centre closed in 1951 activating motives remain poorly defined and

from want of funds, Dr. Williamson began the outside the scope of the essentially quantitative

preparation of this book, but died before its methodology of science to-day. They claim that

completion, since undertaken by the co-author, qualitative as well as quantitative aspects must

his wife.

be taken into account in relation to the whole-

The Peckham Experiment was an immensely ness that is health.

important pioneering venture, which has paved In synthesis alone lies the sanity which

the way for far-reaching future developments maximizes the well-being of the individual in

involving not only the National Health Service integrating it with the interests of society. An

but the whole matter of healthy living in the hypothesis combining these conditions is pre-

widest sense.

sented which is open to verification by experi-

When the scope, purpose and validity of the ment. In this there is offered a definition of the

National Health Service is being subjected to dimensions of quality and of the conditions in

scrutiny and reassessment, the light shed by the which it becomes manifest, and the possible

Peckham Experiment is highly relevant and correlation of these dimensions with those of

significant. Despite some successes, the NHS the Space Time Realm is explored.

remains less a programme of promoting health The potentiality and promise of the Peckham

than of palliating disease, though the existence Experiment sprang from the background of

of the large "submerged iceberg of disease" hypothesis presented in this book, which deserves

shows how far it is from doing even that. It was consideration of all who are concerned to ad-

in fact the Peckham Experiment which was vance the ideals of positive health and creative,

largely responsible for first drawing attention integrated living. One may note with satisfaction

to the problem of unrecognized and untreated the promise of a further book which will review

disease. Thus figures drawn from overhaul of in additional detail from the qualitative angle

the first and second 500 families examined, the material which has been observed in terms

revealed that only about one person in ten was of that hypothesis.

free from some disorder or other, although well

HERBERT BREWER

ER-C

33

