AMERICAN EUGENICS.
By ARTHUR E. HAMILTON. Little can be said concerning Die Rassenhygiene in den Vereinigten Staaten von Nordamerica that has not been admirably summarised by Geza von Hoffmann in his valuable and comprehensive review of about a year ago. A part of the little that remains to be told is here presented in the hope that it may prove helpful in bringing about a more sympathetic understanding between those who, in England and in the United States, have the welfare of eugenic research and education at heart.
At the second annual meeting of the Eugenics Research Association, held in Schemerhorn Hall, Columbia University, on June igth and 20th,
1914, a major part of the field work done during the past year was brought to a focus, and the principal features of that conference may serve well as a background for this brief report. If the atmosphere of the assembly seems laden with the dysgenic and pathological, it must be borne in mind that most of the field workers engaged in research are connected with institutions for the mentally deficient or else engaged by the State in surveys of its socially inadequate classes. The problem of isolating the genuinely unfit and handling them for the immediate benefit of the community, and thus for the good of generations to come, lends itself better to actual grappling than any other in the eugenic programme at present, and if the energies of our young men and women are tapped off in that direction just now it is not necessarily an indication that Galton's ideal has been lost sight of, or that cacogenic problems have been selected by preference. The work chooses the worker in most cases and the investigator must usually go and do what he is told. Happily, heads of institutions are slowly beginning to see the vastly greater value there is in giving a maximum of liberty to their field staff and allowing a pursuit of tangential lines that seem at the time inconsequent and not directly concerned with the immediate problem in hand, but which may have scientific value later. However, the fact that so great a part of eugenic research lies in the domain of the morbid has resulted in a tendency to synonimise eugenics with psychopathology, and our most pressing educational problem is that of placing before people the magnificent vision that Galton had of a genuine and fundamental race improvement through conscious eugenic selection.
But the Jukes are not dead; the Tribe of Ishmael flourishes; Kallikaks still are abroad in the land; little has been done to lessen the number of Nams and Hill Folk and Hucks; and in the Pineys of New Jersey Miss Kite's return is awaited by people with swords and staves in their hands, for some of them are of sufficiently high order of intelligence to resent her revelations. Doctor Estabrook is trailing the Jukes east and west, north and south, wherever they have spread-and it is far and wide. He has found some 2,100 members of this famous family and has grouped them as (a) those who have succeeded in overcoming an unfavourable environment and achieving a fair measure of success; (b) those who, when placed under especially favourable conditions, have been able to rise from mediocrity to about the average level; and (c) the remainder who are still typical Jukes, backward, subnormal, incapable of responding to however stimulating a mileu they may be provided. A supplement to Dugdale's study of these people will appear before long from the pen of Doctor Estabrook, bearing the details of his research in full.
Another intensive study of one American family was brought before the association in preliminary form by Miss Isabelle Kendig, who calls

AMERICAN EUGENICS.

309

her subjects " The Hucks." "sComing to this country from England in

I623, the progenitor of this line landed at Plymouth. From there his

descendants moved inland and finally settled among the hills of Western

Massachussetts. There, in an isolated and unfavourable environment,

they intermarried and multiplied, till to-day their blood has impregnated

the entire community and rendered the town of B- a byword for shift-

lessness and poverty, for alcoholism, immorality and feeble-mindedness."

Miss Kendig's chart, showing over six hundred of these Hucks, was too

large to hang before her audience. It is one of the kind which even our

more fossilised legislators regard with expressions of surprise.

Doctor Davenport, whose contributions to eugenics have been by no

means negatively limited, brought showing the appearance, generation

before after

gtehneercaotniofne,renofceersootimsem,pepdeirgiroedeisc

bad temper, wanderlust and alcoholism. The serious student of human

heredity who has gone beyond the kindergarten stage is the last person

in the world to claim wanderlust or tantrums as "unit characters," or

to hold that the presence of a saloon on every other corner of vast sections

of New York has no bearing on an individual's getting drunk. And yet

there are those who will read into a presentation of such pedigrees as

Doctor Davenport showed an attempt to unit-characterise traits that are

manifestly exquisite in their complexity and by no means reduced to

uniformity of behaviour in inheritance. The charts showed periodic

tantrums, or outbreaks of violent temper, cropping out in father and

son, motber and daughter, father and daughter, mother and son, in such

a fashion, and for so many generations, that the behaviour of this trait

was startlingly unit-like. The only point their author wished to make,

however, was that here we have a field rich in possibilities for further

study, and that after the fact of hereditability and the manner thereof has

been established, there still remains the fascinating problem of its

psychophysic cause.

Wanderlust appeared much less often in women than in men. There

was a faint suggestion of sex-linkage in the charts, and this called for

various interpretations on the part of the environmentally inclined.

Doctor Woods Hutchinson, for instance, thought that women wandered

less than men because women are more afraid to go home in the dark.

A lady added that women whose arms were burdened with babies would

be less likely to take to the woods than men whose impedimenta was

hardly more than a pipeful of tobacco. Perhaps it is a wholesome ten-

dency, this of flying off on entertaining sociological tangents, but it

certainly raises the question of the limitations of eugenic research.

Periodic alcoholism may be caused by an over-hormonisation of the

blood with a consequent paralysing of certain nervous centres of inhibi-

tion. The glands which pour these hormones into the blood stream may

be influenced in their behaviour by the rhythmic attraction of the moon,

as the tides are, for all we know-but shall we therefore include bio-

astronomy in our eugenic programme? It may be that what we inherit

is not a predisposition to alcohol, but the lack of a determiner for the

mechanism of inhibition that prevents a ductless gland from responding to

the attraction of the moon, and that we would not even then get drunk

were it not for the corner saloon and inadequate wages, but what have

these things to do with eugenic research? What Doctor Davenport wished

to show was that a certain form of alcoholism bubbles out in certain

families much like blue eyes or blond hair, only not yet so definitely

mnendelising, if mendelising at all. These pedigrees were typical of the

rough, pioneer work that must be done before refining measures are in

order.

The function of the Eugenics Research Association is the gathering

and presenting of just such pioneer data. The time is not yet ripe

for generalisations, except in respect of those few traits or characters in

human heredity that behave in such an obviously classifiable fashion that

310 EUGENICS REVIEW. there can be little danger in labelling them, and while it is sometimes stimulating and suggestive to indulge in hypothesis regarding casual relations, one cannot help feeling that a great deal of time is lost, when, at such a gathering as this, a thousand and one environmental factors that might possibly bear on a man's leaving his wife and children and taking to the road, are brought up for discussion. That outbursts of temper, wanderlust, and periodic alcoholism characterise individuals in
certain family strains and do not characterise others in a like environment, and that these things crop out in the manner shown by the pedigree charts, should be enough for the present to encourage much more work, inclusive of as many factors, social and biological, as can be gathered along these special lines. It was gratifying to note that, on the whole, the association stood primarily for the gathering of data within its limited field and presenting it as succinctly as possible without much attempted generalisation or recommendations for immediate action.
The number of insane persons confined in institutions per IOo,OOO of the general population of the United States has increased during the past four decades from 86'5 to 230o0; and to-day the number varies much in different States, from 67'o in Oklahoma to 4I3-4 in Massachussetts. Doctor Rosanoff told the association that these variations appear to be in correlation, direct or reverse, with the following factors: Per capita wealth production, percentage of urban population, general prevalence of illiteracy, accessibility of institutions, intra-mural conditions as reflected in the per capita cost of maintenance, and the percentage of foreign-born population. Surely, if eugenics is the study of all those agencies under social control that may improve or impair the racial qualities of future generations, such considerations as these are legitimate grist for the investigator's mill, but to some of us it seems increasingly apparent that if eugenics is to make the progress that we hope for it there must be both limitation and concentration, for, while it would prove fatal to the ideal of eugenics to have its workers put on blinders and become completely heredity-minded, nevertheless the prayer of those engaged in actual field labours must needs be more and more-" Lord, teach me to omit I " The American field worker is a novitiate of the greenest order in a new world that seems composed almost wholly of obstacles, labyrinthine paths leading nowhere, and countless will-o'-the-wisps. It is rather disconcerting to such an individual to be told that his hard gleaned data is worthless for eugenic purposes until it is somehow correlated with the number of foreign children in our schools or with the incidence of the income tax. One young woman, who has done excellent work in
connection with one of our State hospitals, seemed at one time thoroughly discouraged with her methods of investigation and thought of going to England to absorb statistical methods and even some higher mathematics. Doubtless this discouragement and ambition both sprang from a wholesome soil, for it is not easy for one overflowing with energy and aspiration to settle down to digging in a little hole or furrowing deeper a narrow and shallow groove. However, this young woman was fast learning her novel line of work and on the way towards rendering a useful service by evolving from the first hand material and experience of the field itself, plans and methods that could never come from the psychological laboratory or the tabulations of the statistician. What we need to realise is that the time and effort now sunk in eugenic research is a longtime investment, and that, even if only negative results are obtained, conscientious and unremitting work along any of the main lines already mapped out by our pioneers is assuredly worth while, and that there is no golden rule to follow and no path of roses to tread, but only solid work to be done with the reward almost wholly in the working.
The problem of the dangerous immigrant is one that lies along a very definite track of research. The Surgeon-General of the United States Public Health Service and the Assistant Surgeon-General are both

AMERICAN EUGENICS.

31I

members of the Educational Committee of the American Genetic Association, and their interest in all that pertains to immigration from a eugenic standpoint is vital. Under the direction of the Surgeon-General is the work of testing suspected immigrants for mental and physical defect, and the recent crop of papers and reports from Ellis Island have been indicative of a real interest on the part of the physicians in charge in the eugenic aspects of their work.
As an example of this interest, the questions asked by Howard Knox, who brought a report of the work at Ellis Island to the conference, might be cited as typical:-" How may we detect the emotional, volitional, moral and criminal defectives who are normal intellectually? How may we detect the psychopathically predisposed who are for the time being normal by all known tests? How may we say which apparently normal individuals are capable of producing insane or defective progeny? " Anybody could ask these questions. The reason they are significant here and now is because those who are in a position to do something toward solving them are alive to their importance. Already at least one talk on the hereditary significance of immigration has been given to our Congressmen in the House of Representatives, and Mendelism, illustrated by tables and ample references to an abundant literature on the subject, has found itself on the pages of the Congressional Record /

