NOTES AND MEMORANDA

ARABELLA KENEALY

lower correlation between occupation and in-

DR. MICHAEL ROE, Senior Lecturer in History at the University of Tasmania, is studying the beliefs of Arabella Kenealy, the medico-cumnovelist-cum-philosopher, who was a member of the Eugenics Society in its early years. He would be grateful to hear from anyone who shares this interest, or who has some particular knowledge
of Miss Kenealy. Dr. Roe's present address is 120 Union Lane,
Cambridge.

telligence for the probands than expected. This correlation increased in the son's generation but the overall picture was that, partly due to the paucity of industry, Cambridge was further back in time than the population as a whole.
In the second pilot survey it was hoped to investigate a larger sample in a more industrialized town but preliminary work indicated that only a national representative sample would be suitable. Financially, this was not
possible and it was decided to concentrate

RESEARCH GRANTS

resources on the two socio-economic groups that had proved to be most informative in the

THE COUNCIL OF the Eugenics Society is pre- previous pilot.

pared to consider applications for grants for Differential fertility data, which included non-

research in specialized fields.

reproducing probands, had shown a bimodal

Previous grants have covered subjects ranging relationship between measured intelligence and

from the factors determining occupational selec- fertility and over all classes there was a slightly

tion and success to the low temperature preser- positive and significant correlation between in-

vation of spermatozoa.

telligence and family size. The relatively high

Applications, giving an outline of the pro- fertility found for the high intelligence groups

jected research, should be made to the General was extremely interesting and warranted de-

Secretary of the Eugenics Society not later than tailed study. Thus the present work has con-

March 31st, 1966.

centrated on a comparative survey of differential

fertility and social mobility in a high intelligence

DIFFERENTIAL FERTILITY AND SOCIAL MOBILITY
Interim Report of a Survey by John B. Gibson

group (Cambridge Scientists) and a group taken from the manual/non-manual socio-economic boundary (Laboratory workers).
The total grant obtained through the auspices

THE PREVIOUS PILOT survey in the City of of the Eugenics Society was £3,390 and they

Cambridge confirmed that the paradox of the have recently made a further grant of £200 to

measured intelligence level of the population the present survey. The experimental approach

failing to decline despite an apparent negative was changed to take into account a difficulty

correlation between intelligence and family size apparent in the previous pilot, i.e. sons did not

was due to the high proportion of unmarried readily welcome being contacted via their

and/or married but non-reproducing people in fathers. Thus the present proband samples are

the lower socio-economic classes.

of sons aged between twenty-six and thirty-two,

The social mobility data suggested that contact then being made with their sibs, their

amongst the probands in our sample (who were fathers (if alive) and with their father's sibs. In

all sixty-five years old) a high proportion had this way fertilities can be measured and it is

migrated into the City of Cambridge from the hoped to generate 100 probands whose fathers

surrounding villages early in their working lives are alive in each of the comparative samples. A

and to them this was social promotion. How- further change, made in collaboration with Dr.

ever, many had taken occupations that were C. 0. Carter of the Eugenics Society, was to

below their capabilities and thus we found a include in the questionnaire a much more detailed

23

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

section on birth control. Consultations with
psychologists suggested that the "Weschler
Adult Intelligence Scale" (WAIS) would be a
more informative test than "Raven's Progressive Matrices" used in the previous pilot. As in all
the previous work the information is obtained by personal interview which, including the
WAIS test, takes two hours to complete and a further hour to report and score. A research assistant was appointed for one year from 1st
July 1965. The start of the survey was delayed, but
eventually began on 1st July 1965. The questionnaires and the intelligence test to be used in the
interviews were piloted in Norwich with the
generous help of the Vice-Chancellor of the
University of East Anglia, Dr. Thistlethwaite and Professor Emmerson of the Department of Sociology in the University of East Anglia. Appropriate changes were made to the ques-
tionnaires after this small but valuable pre-pilot
survey. The "Cambridge Scientists" sample has been
concentrated on since the Norwich work and contact has been made with all the probands in the original sample of 170 apart from those absent from Cambridge during the vacation. Interviews have been completed on seventy probands whose fathers are alive and a number of interviews have also been completed on fatherless probands but although such interviews provide valuable information on some aspects ofthe work they will have to be restricted. One member of the sample has refused to be interviewed.
The work is at too early a stage for a report to be made on the data obtained but it does show that the questions and form of interview are providing the answers required. Work is also being carried out on methods of analysis of the data by computer and the coding systems to be used. The Mathematical Laboratory in Cambridge is being extremely helpful and we are co-operating with a clinical psychologist in the analysis of the WAIS data, of which we will have an extremely useful collection. Much interest has been shown in the "Cambridge Scientists" sample by educationalists and psychologists as it provides information on the origins and careers of scientists. For these

reasons I have been asked to try to complete interviews on all the fatherless scientists in the sample; however, these requests will have to be turned down unless the people interested can help to finance this aspect of the survey.
INTERNATIONAL PLANNED
PARENTHOOD: CHINA
IN NOVEMBER 1963, Mr. Henrik Beer, SecretaryGeneral of the League of Red Cross Societies, paid a visit to Mainland China and reported that a major campaign to promote birth control was being launched.
After some months of correspondence and discussion between the International Planned Parenthood Federation and the Chinese health authorities, the Chinese Medical Association invited a group of Japanese doctors and other personnel, under the leadership of Dr. Kan Majima, in company with Mr. Tameyoshi Katagiri, the Regional Secretary of the IPPF for the Western Pacific Region, to visit China in March and April 1964, when a comprehensive tour of the larger cities took place. Among the main impressions gleaned during this visit were the following:
Family planning was being promoted as part of the maternal and child health programme.
Doctors, nurses and midwives gave guidance on the conventional methods of family planning and on sterilization and induced abortion. Oral contraceptives were under study and a subject of great interest.
All contraceptives were dispensed through hospitals, clinics, pharmacies, and were also on sale in some stores; in women's associatons, trade unions, and in people's communes there were representatives to whom people could go for guidance.
There was considerable interest in family planning methods in use in other countries and Mrs. Lee Dua Chuen, the Minister of Health, expressed eagerness to co-operate with the Japan Family Planning Association.
Definite statistics on fertility and mortality were generally unobtainable.
Following this first visit the medical committee of the IPPF issued an invitation to the Chinese Medical Association to send a group of

24

NOTES AND MEMORANDA

doctors to Japan or some suitable point for similar to these being followed in other countries

further discussion and demonstration of the where the IPPF is active.

contraceptive methods which are being developed

all over the world. It is clear that there are many interesting experiences both in China and else- AUSTRALIA AND THE PROBLEM

where which could be exchanged with advantage

OF RETIRED PEOPLE

to all parties.

IN THE STATE of Victoria, an organization

Mr. Tameyoshi Katagiri paid a second visit called the Over-Fifties Association with its

to Mainland China in July 1965 and was able headquarters in Melbourne, is doing much to

to strengthen the existing contacts. He also make new opportunities for elderly and retired

made the following observations which show people.

the considerable advances which are being made The Over-Fifties Association was formed ten

in China in the field of contraceptives:

years ago by Mr. Stan Gilmour, who was

Increasing confidence in family planning is shocked one day to hear a man aged sixty-five

apparent among health workers. Family plan- remark that it was "pretty hard to wait to die".

ning is quite independent of demographic or To-day, the association has a membership of

statistical considerations; it is promoted as 1,200 men and women and every year it finds

advantageous to socialism, to maternal and useful occupation for several hundred older

child health, to the next generation, and to the people in the State.

individual, for planning daily life, with concen- Mr. Gilmour estimates that the people who

tration on learning and production.

have been found work by the association in the

The ideal age for marriage is considered past ten years have earned about £A0O,000,000 in

between twenty-five and thirty, since by this age wages. Theyhave paid about EA1,250,000 in taxes

people are sufficiently mature to deal with family and have saved the nation about £A2,500,000

welfare, development and education problems. in pension and health costs.

The most popular method is the intra-uterine Throughout its existence, the Over-Fifties

device (in nearly every case the metal Association has tried to convince society in

ring). general that people are not necessarily "over the

The number of induced abortions seemed to hill" when they reach retirement age.

be decreasing and advice on family planning is The Federal Department of Labour and

given to women after abortion, when intra- National Service has come to the conclusion

uterine devices are in most cases fitted.

that although most workers reach their mental

Oral contraceptives were still under study at and physical peak at about twenty to twenty-

the time of Mr. Katagiri's visit.

five years, age is not a reliable guide to the

It was reported that the Ogino (safe period) selection of employees either for skilled or un-

method was responsible for most cases of failure. skilled positions in factories or for a variety of

On one typical commune that Mr. Katagiri positions in administrative offices; older people

visited, over 50 per cent of the people were are often more reliable than the young or middle-

practising family planning.

aged in work that calls for consistency of output,

Training programmes are run at certain accuracy and the ability to remain in a position

hospitals for doctors, who return to their areas without becoming discontented, and they can

and provide training for midwives. Each district cope with industrial training courses and adjust

health leader receives training in family planning. themselves to the new skills required by techno-

It was stressed that contraception was essentially logical advances.

a matter for the individual to decide, using the Mr. Gilmour now believes that in general

widespread health insurance scheme.

terms there is no age at which a person is too

It is now clear that parallel and very similar old to work. One of the main objects of the

developments, though with slightly different Over-Fifties Association is to abolish the fixed

emphasis and stress on different methods, are retiring age-this arbitrary age of sixty-five

taking place in Mainland China on lines broadly which was fixed by Bismark when he was forming

25

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Germany's public service in the nineteenth century. To-day, some occupations insist on an even lower retiring age.
Sir John Eccles, Professor of Physiology at the University in Canberra, agrees that people should be given the opportunity of continuing to work, at lower wages if necessary, and cites Charles de Gaulle and Winston Churchill as examples ofmen who continued to play a leading role in public life long after they had turned sixty-five.
Although many Australian employers continue to advertise for staff on the basis that they will not employ people of more than forty or fortyfive, the Over-Fifties Association and the Federal Government are trying to break down the belief that it is not a good risk to employ older workers. As a result, the number of firms
which realized that employment of elderly people is by no means a charitable affair is steadily increasing; they have found that what these people lack in speed, they compensate for in experience,
reliability, tolerance and loyalty.
PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED
Abortion: An Ethical Discussion. London, 1965. Church Information Office for The Church Assembly Board for Social Responsibility. Pp. 70. Price 4s. 6d.
Abortion Law Reform Association-Birmingham Group. Survey of Abortifacient Drugs. November, 1965. Pp. 14. Price 2s. 6d.
Abu-Lughod, Janet. The Emergence of Differential Fertility in Urban Egypt. Reprinted from The Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, 1965. 43, 235.
Aspects of Family Mental Health in Europe by various authors. Geneva, 1965. WHO. Pp. 123. Price 8s. 6d.
Bertram, G. C. L. Socio-Biological Responsibility. Hull, 1965. University of Hull Publications. Pp. 22. Price 5s.
Bonner, John Tyler. Size and Cycles: An essay on the structure of biology. Princeton, N.J., 1965. Princeton University Press (London, 1966, Oxford University Press). Pp. viii+219. Price 60s.
BRA Review. Journal of the British Rheumatic and Arthritis Association.
Butler, J. A. V. The Life ofthe Cell: Its nature, origin and development. Second edition. London, 1966. Allen and Unwin. Pp. 167. Price 21s. Paperback.
Crew, F. A. E. Sex-Determination. London, 1965. Methuen. Pp. viii+ 188. Price 21s.
Day, Michael. Guide to Fossil Man. London, 1965. Cassell. Pp. 289. Price 42s.

Draper, Elizabeth. Birth Control in the Modern World. A Pelican Original. Harmondsworth, 1965.
Penguin. Pp. 333. Price 5s. Family Service Units. Annual Report, 1964-65. Fisher, Joseph L. and Potter, Neal. World Prospects
for Natural Resources. Baltimore, 1964. Johns Hopkins Press. (London, Oxford University
Press.) Pp. vi+73. Price 12s. in UK only. Fryer, Peter. The Birth Controllers. London, 1965.
Secker and Warburg. Pp. 384. Price 42s. Galton, Francis. Finger Prints. New preface by
Harold Cummins. Unabridged republication of the 1892 edition. New York, 1965. Da Capo. Pp. XXIII+xvi+216. Price $6.95. Goldstein, S. and Mayer, K. B. Residence and Status Differences in Fertility. Reprinted from The Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, 1965. 43, 291. Gregory, I. Retrospective Estimates of Orphanhood from Generation Life Tables. Reprinted from The Milbank Memorial Fulnd Quarterly, 1965. 43, 323. Guerrin, R. F. and Borgatta, E. F. Socio-Economic and Demographic Correlates of Tuberculosis Incidence. Reprinted from The Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, 1965. 43, 269. Health Information Foundation. An Inventory of Social and Economic Research in Health. Fourteen edition. Chicago, 1965. Pp. 108. n.p. Italy: Documents and Notes. Italian Information Service. King, Robert C. Genetics. Second edition. London, 1965. Oxford University Press. Pp. xiv+450. Price 68s. Kiser, Clyde V. Types of Demographic Data of Possible Relevance to Population Genetics. Reprinted from Eugenics Quarterly, 1965. 12, 72. Kiser, Clyde V. The Use of Official Statistics for Thesis Topics in the Field of Sociology. Reprinted from The Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, 1965. 43, 7. Lipset, S. M. and Bendix, R. Social Mobility in Industrial Society. Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1963. University of California Press. (London
agents, Cambridge University Press.) Pp. xxi+ 309. Price $6.00; 48s. cloth, 17s. paper. Mears, Eleanor (editor). Handbook on Oral Contraception. London, 1965. Churchill. Pp. xv+ 107. Price 20s. National Central Library. 49thz Annual Report of the Executive Committee for the Year ending 31st March 1965. Noonan, John T., Jr. Contraception: A history of its treatment by the Catholic theologians andcanonists. Cambridge, Mass., 1965. (London, Oxford University Press.) Pp. x+561. Price 64s. Paniagua, ManuelE. etal. Medical and Psychological Sequelae of Surgical Sterilization of Women. Reprinted from American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 1964. 90, 421. Peel, John. Birth Control and Catholic Doctrine. Reprinted from The London Quarterly andHolborn Review. October 1965.

26

NOTES AND MEMORANDA

Potter, R. G. et al. A Fertility Differential in Eleven

ADDITIONS TO THE LIBRARY

Punjab Villages. Reprinted from The Milbank Memwrial Fund Quarterly, 1965. 43, 185. Rele, J. R. Trends and Differentials in the American

Beijer, G. et al. Characteristics ofOverseas Migrants. 1961. Pp. 319.

Age at Marriage. Reprinted from The Milbank Butler, J. A. V. The Life of the Cell. 1966. Pp. 167.

Memorial Fund Quarterly, 1965. 43, 219.

Cattell, R. B. The Scientific Analysis of Personalitv.

Sharma, Arun Kumar and Sharma, Archana. Chromo- 1965. Pp. 370. Paperback. Presented by Professor

some Techniques: Theory and Practice. London, P. E. Vernon.

1965. Butterworths. Pp. x+474. Price 87s. 6d. Dobzhansky, Th. Heredity and the Nature of Man.

Sonneborn, T. M. (editor). The Control of Human Heredity and Evolution. New York, 1965. Macmillan. (London, Collier-Macmillan.) Pp. xiii+ 127. Price 15s. Paperback.
Srb, Adrian M., Owen, Ray D. and Edgar, Robert S. General Genetics. Second edition. London, 1965. Freeman. Pp. x+557. Price 50s.

1965. Pp. 179. Presented by Sir Robert Platt.
Draper, E. Birth Control in the Modern World. 1965. Pp. 333.
FAO. The State of Food and Agriculture for 1965.
1965. Pp. 273.
Fryer, P. The Birth Controllers. 1965. Pp. 384.

Studies in Family Planning. New York. The Popu- Glass, D. V. and Eversley, D. E. C. (editors). Popu-

lation Council.

lation in History. 1965. Pp. 692.

Sutton, H. Eldon. An Introduction to Human Genetics. Hauser, P. M. (editor). The Population Dilemma.

L-ondon, 1965. Holt, Rinehart and Winston. 1965. Pp. 187.

Pp. x+262. Price 48s. Thorpe, W. H. Science, Man and Morals. London,
1965. Methuen. Pp. xii+ 176. Price 25s. Tietze, Christopher (editor). Bibliography of Fertility
Control, 1950-65. New York, 1965. National Committee on Maternal Health. Pp. iv+ 198. Tietze, Christopher (editor). History of Contraceptive Methods. Reprinted from The Journal of

King, Robert C. Genetics. Second edition. 1965. Pp. 450.
McKeown, T. Medicine in Modern Society. 1965. Pp. 234.
Nortman, D. L. The Population Problem. 1965. Pp. 51. Presented by Mr. P. R. Cox.
Schofield, M. The Sexual Behaviour of Young People.

Sex Research, 1965. 1, 69. National Committee 1965. Pp. 316.

on Maternal Health Publication No. 25.

Sonneborn, T. M. (editor). The Control of Human

Tietze, Christopher and Lewit, Sarah. Intra-uterine Heredity and Evolution. 1965. Pp. 127.

Contraception: Effectiveness and Acceptability. Srb, A. M., Owen, R. D. and Edgar, R. S. General

Reprinted from Exerpta Medica International Genetics. Second edition. 1965. Pp. 557.

Congress Series No. 86. National Committee on Maternal Health. Publication No. 24. Vernon, M. D. The Psychology ofPerception. London, 1965. University of London Press, Pp. 235. Price 25s.
Whitflghill, Maurice. Human Genetics and its Foundations. New York, 1965. Reinhold. (London, Chapman and Hall.) Pp. xvi+431. Price $8.95.

Sutton, H. E. An Introduction to Human Genetics. 1965. Pp. 262.
United Nations. Demographic Yearbook 1964. 1965. Pp. 752.
Whittingb:ll, M. Human Genetics and its Foundations. 1965. Pp. 431.
Williamson, G. Scott and Pearse, Innes H. Science,

WHO. The Biochemistry and Microbiology of the Synthesis and Sanity. 1965. Pp. 352.

Female and Male Genital Tracts. Technical

Report Series No. 313. Geneva, 1965. WHO. Pp. 15. Price 3s. 6d.

ELECTIONS TO THE SOCIETY

WHO. Health Problems of Adolescents. Technical THE FOLLOWING HAVE been elected Fellows*

Report Series No. 308. Geneva, 1965. Pp. 28.
Price 3s. 6d. Obtainable through HMSO.

and Members of the Eugenics Society:

Wlliamson, G. Scott and Pearse, Iunes, H. Science, *C. E. Blank, M.B., B.CH., PH.D.

Synthesis and Sanity. London, 1965. Collins. Pp. J. A. Lourie, B.A.

352. Price 54s.

R. M. Mackessack

27

