84 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in a curve that, sooner or later, would take a downward course again. All that can be said with confidence is that up to the war the Nazi drive for population made an appreciable advance; though apparently it did not reach its objective of a net reproduction rate well above unity. Still, to have pushed the
rate up from o 698 in I933 to very little
short of the full replacenient level in I938 was not bad going; even if it was not a complete victory it hardly deserves to be described-as it was recently by a correspondent of The Times (in what was in general an unexceptionable and, indeed, brilliant
communication)-as a " signal defeat."* For the better ordering of our own
demographic future we must be quite honest about this. We do not compromise in our detestation of Nazi policies and of their objectives by admitting that some components of these policies were well conceived and could with advantage be incorporated into policies of our own. We reject such measures as the suppression of birth control
or the enforced domestication of women not because they are ineffective but because they are barbarous; but that is no reason why we should not estimate the demographic consequences of marriage and household loans, family allowances, free education, and other expedients for mitigating the economic deterrents to parenthood; or why we should not consider how and on what basis a propaganda campaign for more and larger families
* October 5th, I942.

should be conducted. We know that the Nazi appeal for more soldiers did not strike a responsive chord in every mother's breast.; but are we sure about what we have to offer in the way of moral inducements ourselves ?
***
How has the war affected the German birth rate ? According to the correspondent of The Times the figure for Greater Germany stood at 20 4 in I939 and remained at that level in I940. In I94I the birth rate fell to i9.i, which represented a loss of ii6,ooo live births; and the decline continued, more steeply, in the first four months of I942, when there were I20,000 fewer births than in the corresponding period of I939. If, as seems probable from a study of the birth rates which prevailed in 62 towns of Greater Germany up to July I942, the same trend persisted throughout the year, the total loss of births (taking 1939 as the standard year) must have amounted to 450,000.
It is too early yet to estimate the significance of this relapse; the correspondent of The Times may be right in holding that " the war has already inflicted on Hitler a crushing defeat in the Nazi battle of the birth rate," but a guess is not a diagnosis, and for that we simply have not the data. All we can say now, comparing crude oirthrate figures, is that the Nazi demographic trend does not seem at the moment as favourable as our own. The number of live
(Continued on page I04)

THE EUGENIST
COME, human dogs, interfertilitateBlackfellow and white lord, brown, yellow and red!
Accept the challenge of the lately bred Newfoundland terrier with the dachshund gait.
Breed me gigantic pigmies, meek-eyed Scots, Phlegmatic Irish, perfume-hating Poles,
Poker-faced, toothy, pigtailed Hottentots, And Germans with no envy in their souls. ROBERT GRAVES.

