REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

171

ledge of biology and physiology, who would be able to supply them with

the fuller particulars which would certainly be required by a child who

had read the book with intelligence. It is an excellent handbook for

parents.

G. M. CHAMBERS.

Chesser, E. SLOAN. From Girlhood to Womanhood. London. Cassell and Co.; 1913; price 2S. 6d.; pp. 142.
THIS book can be given to any girl abo-ve I2; it explains simply the stage of development from girlhood to womanhood and gives her sensible and practical advice as to the best means of becoming a happy, healthy, and attractive woman. Dr. Sloan Chesser puts forward a high ideal of life.
G. M. CTHAMBRS.Q

Chesser, E. SLOAN. Woman, Marriage and AMothierhood. London. Cassell; 1913; price 6s. net; pp. 287.
WE have here another of the popular books of the day dealing with social questions affecting marriage and motherhood, written chiefly from the point of view of women. There is much good work in it. The earlier chapters are historical and treat briefly of the evolution of motherhood, of marriage laws and customs, and of the legal position of the wife and mother at various times and places. The results of sweated labour, the social effects of factory work on the homes and of our prison system are clearly stated. There is an account of the attempts, both on the Continent and in England, to provide pure milk for infants, to feed nursing mothers, and to establish schools for training in the art of home making and baby rearing.
The most obvious omission is the absence of any reference to religious
ideals and sanctions as influencing matters connected wvith sex and social
reform. There is also no attempt to deal with the extremely important variations in outlook upon all these questions which result from the physiological and psychological differences of sex. It is the necessity for the constant readjustment of these two points of view-a readjustment required by the ever varying pressure on one or the other of a changing civilisation-that constitutes the extreme difficulty of handling these problems.

It is to be feared that more better organisation of society, with increased inspection and training and more humane treatment on all sides, although it might achieve considerable temporary improvement and is
therefore worth working for, would not really help mnuch to a more
permanent solution of the eternal problem which confronts humanity. r. n xv

Sandeman, GEORGE. Social Renewal. London. price 2S. 6d.; pp. I50.

WV. Heinemann; 1913;

pwdtifMibwMro"."ttorooeaerrrnTssTl.irnf.n.eehrneuHolterk.cefilnrsSdeeE"Stiacmraus"iaa(pabieslw;pnbplno.ranopeg.our"cdstrdnosa"oanwiekaesltndontem3laiemodanu3reAa(nnfa)rsnscpfg.dnae.tn,tcatc,iioh"eentvcfeptprsde1orrhahoh9tTueeeoifn)ohenhpasln:tedwotoiceaollr,nsishoninymo.nfiebttaecsotsasshs!wigiteig;draitnrhrngoehlhhdtTeivigrptiiierhfahenaishsvrtpnisgsveieor,sataoadyfuhossttutnowtiobhaehmrdw"ygncla,loe.eaibaihtiteusahnn-osdyefilgm.ttwtidlaacgheaslynran.tnbcttsemtdnooedetefodo.vhreioeoresger-evscftrbrexioareeomymarelrrsno.Sieaeclyuteoworptrespbe.wcelrdtvknpiuryeooiotoe"paspfoiwtrtRloeo;trHenhtylcfteuhen.e,eyiesuleasted.yaoe.letrtcixeraysc.es.ieorabasouergn.lyiorinpatlogisetncteiypnrisethfirbsosdtseoer"eausoo'atir.ketfmcsottyopyethdh¢offi".o;daueeos"r,tiowb.nsohiiiienrhetsttettelfaasyahyshoraode.t"fseergnsir"eroirhoedoreeoofiwuaiaeup!nnnr.tplmisa;oas,reyadTtftogooteanhecepgthanTeiiaaBltahciehrtnnuehenentt5ieey,ddte,ytg.syo

