EUGENICS AND THE DECLINE IN POPULATION

By D. CARADOG JONES

T HERE is an acid test which the The concluding chapter in the book sums

eugenist can apply to discover whether up the position in the first sentence: " Now

any measure concerned with popula- that people are beginning to realize the

tion is to be judged good or bad. He asks danger of the present situation we may,

whether it is likely to ensure that the best within the next few years, see most of the

types of infants are born, whether it helps governments of Europe attempting, in their

these types to survive, and whether it en- turn, to stimulate the birth-rate. The ques-

courages them later in life to become parents tion that arises is, what kind of action is

themselves. At first sight we seem to have likely to have such a result ? " The danger to

here three separate ends in view, but in which the author alludes, of course, is the

reality they are so intimately related that, if coming decline in population, progressive in

we succeed in taking measures to secure the its rapidity, which threatens most European

third, we shall be well on our way to gaining countries. Analysis of the anticipated trend

the other two. By giving every possible of the age-distribution of the population of

encouragement to the best types in the com- England and Wales indicates that the

munity to become parents, we shall be responsibility for the production of goods

tackling the problem where it ought to be and supply of services will rest on. the

tackled, at its source. The best human shoulders of a relatively much smaller

material is most likely to be produced from proportion of able-bodied persons; this in

the best stock and-if " best " be all- turn will mean a higher rate of taxation per

embracing, applying to body as well as mind head. Moreover, the writer goes on to

and soul, to adopt an old-fashioned but suggest that the effect of recurrent trade

convenient division-the offspring from cycles will be much more severe; the con-

healthy stock is most likely to have a high structional industries in particular will suffer

survival rate.

badly. As the market shrinks, we may have

Readers of The StruggleforPopulation* may to return to small-scale methods of produc-

be surprised to find no clear reference in it tion and the whole costs structure of industry

to eugenic principles, seeing that the book may be radically altered; in that event a

has been prepared under the auspices of the serious rise in prices and fall in the standard

Eugenics Society. Presumably the explana- of life may result for everybody. It was high

tion is that this aspect of the subject is time, therefore, that an examination should

reserved for future discussion, and the author be made of the steps being taken by countries

has advisedly confined himself at present to other than our own to avert the impending

his terms of reference, as defined for him by disaster, if we are to profit by their experi-

the Population Investigation Committee. ence. Unfortunately, however, the time has

As the first-fruit of the Committee's activi- been too short for the schemes adopted by

ties he has produced a most valuable piece of them to be fairly and fully tested. Much of

work, and he is to be congratulated on having the legislation enacted only came into force

summarised in small space and in so readable within the last year or two and it is obviously

a form the main facts relating to the popula- too soon to base any certain conclusions

tion position in five of the chief countries of upon such slender evidence. This being

Europe.

so, it would be well worth while for the

* Glass, D. V., The Struggl for Population. London,
I936. Oxford University Press. Pp. 148. Price 7s. 6d.

Committee to ask Mr. Glass to keep his figures up to date and to report upon the

213

214

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

position again after the lapse of a reasonable interval.
The present volume ought to be read in conjunction with Professor Carr-Saunders' study of World Population,* just published by the Oxford University Press. The problem that confronts us can then be seen in a larger setting and in its full complexity. Mr. Glass has conducted a careful and detailed enquiry into the effect of the efforts made in Germany, Italy, France and Belgium to stimulate the birth-rate, and one chapter in Professor Carr-Saunders' book is devoted to a re-statement of the evidence and the conclusions which one can venture to derive from it. Cautious as both writers have been, the present reviewer is disposed to be still more hesitant in deciding whether or not the results -of most of these efforts are likely to remain as negligible as they appear to be up to the present.
It is unnecessary to cover the same ground again, but particular attention may justifiably be drawn here to two important considerations:
i. The remarkable variety, and yet at the same time lack of originality, in the schemes devised in different countries for the promotion of marriage and the increase of fertility;
2. The no less surprising fact that attacks upon the population problem have been directed almost entirely to the quantitative aspect alone.
In Italy there is a tax on bachelors, while marriage and birth premiums are offered in some of its northern cities with special prizes for exceptionally large families. In Germany loans free of interest are given to couples who contemplate marriage but cannot afford to furnish a home, and part of the loan becomes a gift on the birth of each child. Both countries discriminate in their taxation against the childless and in favour of the larger families. In certain areas preference is given to the heads of large families in the allocation of employment and housing accommodation and in social
* Carr-Saunders, A. M., World Population. Oxford,
1936. The Clarendon Press. Pp. xv+336. Price
128. 6d.

services. The laws against the practice of abortion have been tightened and the open
advocacy of birth-control has been made a
punishable offence in France, Belgium and Italy, though not yet in Germany. Finally, family allowances and maternity and child welfare services each play a part in the
formation of the larger-family ideal. This list does not exhaust the devices
adopted to increase the birth-rate, but how
familiar they sound and how conspicuously
absent is any attempt at eugenic selection!
With few exceptions it would appear that all who belong to the working or middle-
classes of the population receive equal encouragement to beget children and all who respond are equally applauded. A reserva-
tion must be made in the case of Germany, where it is true that beneficiaries as a rule
have to satisfy certain medical as well as racial requirements. Applicants for marriage
loans, for instance, must be of " Aryan " extraction and " free from inheritable mental
or physical defects, infectious diseases, or
other illnesses threatening their life and appearing to prevent their marriage from
being in the interest of the community." Also, these loans were designed to reduce unemployment by taking women out of
industry; accordingly they are granted only if the women concerned have been in employment for at least nine months in the last two years or i-f they are replaced by domestic servants when they have been engaged in housework. In so far as women in fairly regular work and free of inheritable defect
are superior types we have here an example of a strictly eugenic principle introduced which deserves to be followed. When family allowances are paid in respect of older children who remain in school beyond the normal leaving age, a similar principle is at work in a small way, because parents whocan appreciate the advantages of further education may as a general rule be judged to belong to types which deserve to be encouraged to bring more children into the world. At the same time it must be added that it is extremely doubtful whether in practice family allowances have had any substantial effect upon the birth-rate. This

EUGENICS AND THE DECLINE IN POPULATION

2I5

perhaps is not surprising in view of the fact people in the political and economic govern-

that the amount of the allowance is usually ment of the nation."

quite inadequate to cover the extra expense We come back, therefore, to the point

involved in bringing up a child. The con- where we started. It is not enough to aim at

clusion to which Mr. Glass comes, after an the mass production of human beings, for,

impartial examination of the evidence, is assuming we succeed, we shall not be satis-

that the most that can be said of them is fied. The best results are never produced by

that they may have prevented a still sharper such methods. In a fine passage from a

decline in fertility.

chapter on " The Small Family Problem "-

If other countries fail, by such methods as a chapter that deserves to be widely read

they are trying, to reverse the impending and pondered-Professor Carr-Saunders has

trend of population, it will be either because put his anger unerringly upon one of the root

those methods are wrongly conceived or causes of the present situation, and this brief

because they are not sufficiently drastic. article may fittingly end with the following

The present writer is inclined to think that quotation :* " Upon attitude to marriage

there is truth in both these views. It may be depends the end to which it is directed. No

possible to persuade some people to marry institution has been so degraded and vul-

and become parents by offering financial garized as marriage; it would almost seem as

inducements on a large enough scale, but though all the artifices known to a sensational

the danger is that in the main the wrong press and to a commercialized literature

kind of people will be open to such persuasion. have been employed to emphasize every

That is not to say that the provision of aspect of marriage except the duties which

marriage loans and family allowances and it imposes and the opportunities of self-

tax discrimination in favour of large families discipline which it offers. What sort of

are wrong in principle. It is right that the guidance have young people to-day when

income-tax burden should be eased, for they approach the age of marriage ? It is

example, to the man with heavy family as certain as anything can be that, where

responsibilities, but such assistance is un- families are voluntary, a community, in

likely to be the decisive factor in determining which marriage is regarded as it is to-day in

whether parents of the best type elect to western civilization, will die out. For it is

have more or fewer children. To such parents held up to be no more than a mode of self-

the appeal must be put on a higher plane. gratification. Those who are concerned about

There may indeed be something in Dr. the small family problem should address

Burgd6rfer's claim, at the International themselves earnestly to a reform of the

Population Conference in Berlin last year, outlook upon marriage. If this outlook is

that the decisive factor in Germany has been changed, the parental instinct may grow

" the new outlook brought about by the stronger and the power of attraction,

National Socialist revolution, the funda- exercised by superficial and short-run satis-

mental transformation of the political and factions, may grow less."

moral (geistigen) atmosphere . . . in short,

the return of confidence on the part of the

* World Populationt, p. 256.

gics Review, Vol. XXVII No. 8.

