INTELLIGENCE AND FAMILY SIZE OF COLLEGE STUDENTS
By JAMES MAXWELL
Moray House, Edinburgh
(With a comment by Dr. H. Himmelweit)

IN an article published in I948 (EUGENICS
REVIEW, 40, PP. 77-84, July I948), Dr.
H. Himmelweit reported a negative
correlation of the order of r= - O'I3 between
the Intelligence Test scores and the size of the sibships of 450 students attending the London School of Economics. It has been the custom to administer to the incoming students of Moray House Training College a verbal group Intelligence Test known as
Moray House Adult i. As a result of the
issues raised by the I947 Scottish Mental Survey and by Dr. Himmelweit's findings, the students taking this test were asked to state both the size of their own sibships and the size of the sibships of their parents.
These students, 40I in number, were a fairly homogeneous group. Six only were men, the remainder being women who were entering upon a three-year course of training as non-graduate teachers. All had obtained the Scottish Education Department's Senior Leaving Certificate, awarded after five years' successful secondary education, but none had proceeded to the University. There is not therefore much variation of educational standard achieved. Virtually all were within the age range of 17-20 years, the average age being just over i8 years. Though no information about the social class was obtained, it is known that the great majority of these students come from what can in general terms be described as middle-class homes.
The students tested were those entering on three successive years, I948, I949 and I950, all being tested at the end of the first term of college training. The test given was one of IOO items, the mean score of the 40I
students being 67.3, with a standard deviation of I5;0. In terms of IQ, this gives a

mean of about II7 IQ, with a standard deviation of IO5 IQ.
In Table I below are given the data for the size of the students' sibships and the size of the students' parents' sibships. In all cases either the student or the parent is included in the sibship. The size of the parents' sibship was obtained by averaging the paternal and maternal sibships.
TABLE I
SIZE OF SIBSHIPS OF STUDENTS AND STUDENTS' PARENTS

Mean size

No. of

of sibship e cases

Moray House ... ... Dr. Himmelweit ... ...
Scottish Mental Survey (ii-year-old children) ...

2.47 I72
3-75

1.47 401 I.56 450
- 74,386

Mean size
of parents' a sibship

No. of cases

Moray House ... ... Dr. Hitnmelweit ... ...
Scottish Mental Survey

5.3 3-86 320
3-6 2.35 450
not known

There is a difference between the Moray House students and the London School of
Economics students in respect of both students' family size and parents' family size, the figures for the London students being smaller in both cases. Both groups of students, however, appear to come from
smaller families than the unselected group of Scottish eleven-year-old children tested in the I947 Scottish Mental Survey. Explanation of the differences between the London and Moray House students is not possible in view of the limited amount of data available. Rigour of selection, parental age and social
class may be influencing factors. The relationship between family size and
Intelligence Test score is given in Table II.

209

2IO THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE II CORRELATION BETWEEN FAMILY SIZE: AND
INTELLIGENCE3 TEST SCORE
Studetnts' family size by test score

factors, namely, differences in the composition
of the two groups and differences in the methods used to estimate intelligence. The groups differed from one another with regard

r

No. of
cases

to age and sex. The Scottish sample consisted of younger students who were nearly

Moray House .. .. .. +0°03 ± °05 401 all women. The London sample, which

Dr. Himmelweit

... - 0_1 3 ± .05 450

Scottish Mental Survey

(uI-year-old children) ... - O'28

70,200

included a considerable number of exservice men and women, contained a higher

Parents' family size by stude-nts' test score
No. of r cases

proportion of men and of students who were above 20 years of age. It is unlikely, however, that these differences would account for the discrepant results which were

Moray House .. .. .. +0°04 ± 05 348 obtained.

The results for the Moray House students fail to show any correlation between family size, though a negative correlation was
obtained from the Scottish Mental Survey data, and a smaller negative correlation by Dr. Himmelweit. Similarly, the correlation between student's test score and parent's family size does not, for Moray House students, differ significantly from zero.
Finally, Dr. Himmelweit reports a correlation of r= +o0O2 + 05 between students'
and parents' size of family. The corresponding value for Moray House students is r= +o-Io + *o6. Both values do not differ significantly from zero.
It is not possible to draw any conclusions of general application from a group highly selected for intelligence. The results show, however, that within such a group the relationship between Intelligence Test score
and family size is in the one case nonexistent and in the other case very tenuous.

While there is not sufficient information to
indicate the other ways in which the two
groups differed from one another, there is
evidence that the methods of determining
intelligence differed considerably. In the two investigations the students'
intelligence was assessed in rather different ways. In the Scottish inquiry the assessment was based on the results of one verbal test
only. In the London study the assessment was a more searching one and was based on
the combined results of eight tests, four verbal and four non-verbal. It is conceivable
that only such a comprehensive assessment will bring to light the relationship between the two variables, especially when investigating groups which are relatively homogeneous with regard both to intelligence and size of family.
In the London inquiry correlations between size of family and intelligence were worked separately for the four verbal tests and also for all eight tests combined. In the former

Dr. H. Himmelweit comments:

case the correlation was significant only at
the 5 per cent level ( - o0o98), in the latter

Mr. Maxwell found no relationship between case it was significant at the i per cent level

family size and intelligence in his inquiry on ( - O.I33). These figures provide some con-

Scottish students, in contrast to the nega- firmation of the view outlined above. It

tive, though small, correlation which was would be of interest to determine whether a

obtained in a similar investigation on London similar relationship between intelligence and

students. Differences of this kind, especially size of family could be shown to exist for the

when the relationship between the two Scottish group of students by basing the

variables is likely to be a slight one, are assessment of their intelligence on a number

probably the result of an interplay of two of tests.

Review, VoL XIM, No. X

