WORLD POPULATION CONFERENCE I954
A general view of the inaugural meeting of the World Population Conference in the F.A.O. Building at Rome.
204

THE WORLD POPULATION CONFERENCE
1954

By PETER R. COX, F.I.A., F.S.S.

A PRELIMINARY account of the Con- to think, the agricultural and biological

ference held under the auspices of the problems of food production. It can be

United Nations Organization in Sep- subdivided into various sections, and those

tember last year has already been given in who drew up the programme very sensibly

the REVIEW.* Members of the Society will decided to separate two main groups of

thus be aware that a considerable number topics, which might briefly be characterized

of participants from all parts of the world by the words " happenings "and " methods."

attended in Rome, that there were thirty- The principal contents, of each of these

one meetings spread over eleven days and groups may be briefly classified under eight

that the mass of papers and other documents heads as follows:

presented was very voluminous. They will Happenings

also know that the Conference was arranged Mortality trends

in order that demographers could exchange views on topics in which they have a special interest. Individual experts were nominated by national Governments and by various

Fertility trends Migratory movements Distribution of population Prospects for future population Ageing and its consequences

societies of which the principal was the

Social aspects of demographic changes

International Union for the Scientific Study- Population in relation to resources

of Population, not as official representatives Methods

with negotiating or voting powers but as persons who could impart useful knowledge

Concepts and definitions Evaluation of the quality of demographic
statistics

and at -the same time learn something from

Techniques of measurement

their fellows. The aim of the organizers was

Legislation and administration

to bring them together, formally in the meetings and informally in the intervals between the meetings, and in this modest

Genetic factors Intelligence and fertility Actuarial and other studies Recruitment and training

aim they can be said to have achieved a considerable success. Political and other
differences were not pressed to the point of acrimony, and a scientific spirit prevailed. As a result there should be a raising of the general standard of demographic work all over the world, particularly in the less-
developed countries.

No one delegate could attend all the meetings, for the two types of material were discussed simultaneously in different halls.
Few could claim to be sufficiently expert in all fields of demographic inquiry to be able
to give a comprehensive account of all that took place. Not many had the time to read or the luggage accommodation to take

Subjects Discussed The field of population studies spreads
extensively, including as it does subjects ranlging from narrow technical exercises to
the broadest questions affecting the welfare of the whole human race, though it does not incorporate, as some journalists seemed

away copies of all the four hundred papers that were made available, in the main,
only during the course of the Conference, and not before its start. It is not proposed, therefore, to attempt in this note to describe every written contribution or the complete history of the debates; all that is .possible is to give a few salient impressions of the

* 46. I'3o.

events of the fortnight, describe some of

205

206 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the striking facts observable from among work. One example of differing meaning that

the mass of.statistical data analysed and became apparent in Rome was the word

outline some of the trends of thought on " malthusian." In England it is thought of

demographic matters that were revealed. as relating to the historical figure of Malthus

and his theories, including such well-known

Special Documents

features as his " ratios " and advocacy of

Before passing to the details of the official moral restraint. In France the word is used

programme, mention may be made of one to describe, among other things, the popula-

or two of the volumes and pamphlets that tions of Western countries that limit births--

were specially prepared for issue to the in contrast to those of other countries where

delegates. First, there was a historical fertility is largely unrestricted. In Russia it

account, by the Institut National d'Etudes has a serious moral, anti-Marxist flavour.

Demographiques, of past international meet- The third and last of the special documents

ings on population subjects of all kinds, referred to here gives a Summary Chapter

including the World Conferences held in of the long-awaited Report on the Family

I927, I93I, I935 and I937. This volume Census of Great Britain in I946. Any

of forty pages contains a formidable list of detailed review of the Summary Chapter

congresses but gives little more than the would be inappropriate until the complete

bare facts of their existence. What one Report and Statistical Tables have been

would like to know would be their principal issued. These have been promised, in two

effects and their achievements. To analyse volumes, for a date before the end of I954.

these is, however, hardly possible. They It may be said, however, that a clear account

cannot be measured from the papers and of the developments in family size in this

discussions of the time but must be scattered country during the past forty years has

indistinguishably throughout the subsequent been presented and that some new infor-

work of the participants and their pupils, mation on differential fertility and birth

finding their expression also, perhaps, in spacing is available. It is concluded by the

legislation and in an improved scope of authors, Professors Glass and Grebenik,

published data. No doubt the same will be that the spread of the small family pattern

true of the I954 Conference and, for this throughout the community has reached a

reason as well as those previously given, period of stability, and that although there

the account now submitted cannot tell the may have been some upturn in fertility

whole story of the assembly.

since World War II, "nothing so far

The second special document to be visible in the statistics foreshadows a

mentioned is a provisional edition of a major departure from that pattern in the

Multilingual Demographic Dictionary; this near future."

consists at present of an English, a French

and a Spanish volume, each being a transla- Trends in Fertility, Mortality and Migration

tion of the other. The principal contents The material before the Conference

are eight chapters of text in which series brought out clearly the exceptional dif-

of definitions are given linking the many ferences in demographic, social and economic

words used in the study of population. The characteristics that exist between countries

words are numbered and underlined and are of higher fertility. In India, in spite of a

gathered together elsewhere in an index. widespread desire for family planning and a

Comments have been invited on the dic- rising average age at marriage, fertility

tionary. After certain improvements have may even increase because of such factors

been made, it should be of great value in as improved vitality, an easing of the ban

unravelling the subtle differences of thought on remarriages and a reduction in the

and usage that exist between one country length of the period after the birth of each

and another, and so in helping to promote child during which abstinence is practised.

international understanding in demographic In Japan the birth rate has suddenly declined

THE WORLD POPULATION CONFERENCE,. I954

207

from 33 per thousand in I949 to 2I per in age and also a more rapid fall for women

thousand in I953, largely owing to the than for men. Differences between countries

legalization of abortions by an Act passed in have diminished but there has been no

1948. Representatives from Eastern Europe substantial change in their relative vitality.

spoke proudly of rising birth rates in their Mr. Spiegelman was taken to task by

countries in the last few years but did not M. Sauvy for not mentioning in his summary

say to what extent these were merely the a communication by M. Ledermann, of Paris,

effect of a recovery from the devastation of concerning the relation between cancer

war. In Brazil social factors are important and alcohol. The startling part of this

and there is a wide urban-rural difference communication was introduced at a late

in fertility. The control of malaria in Ceylon, stage as an appendix giving a brief pre-

British Guiana, Mauritius and Venezuela liminary account of a study of 3,500 files

has been accompanied by some increase in of cancer cases including details of tobacco

birth rates.

and alcohol consumption. It claimed not

For regions of lower fertility much of the only to verify the findings of investigations

discussion turned on internal differentials in Britain and U.S.A. as to the relationship

and their trends, but no very clear picture between smoking and lung cancer but to

emerged. Indeed, two representatives from discover a similar relationship between heavy

the U.S.A. registered disagreement on drinking and tumours of some sites, and the

whether or not there had been a reduction author asseverated further that the risks

in the differences in their country between attributable to each of these habits separately

the fertility rates of various categories of were powerfully increased when the habits

population in recent years. The gap between were combined. The tally of " discoveries "

occupational groups and types of commune seems a long one for such a small-scale

may have widened a little in France but on inquiry but a fuller account of methods

the whole there has been no pronounced and results will be awaited with interest.

movement together or apart of the birth An extensive investigation, still in progress,

rates among the social classes in Western of social and biological factors in infant

Europe. Some speakers tried to predict mortality in England and Wales was

future developments by reference to the described by Dr. Morris and Messrs. Heady

results of inquiries in which women were and Daly. Notwithstanding the sharp fall in

asked to say what family size they wanted or the incidence of death and the levelling of

thought to be ideal, but other delegates the living standards of the social classes

were critical of the value of such investiga- during recent years, their relative positions

tions. This was one example of the refresh- with regard to the incidence of death in early

ingly independent attitude adopted by life have remained unchanged; much the

demographers on certain topics in Rome; same was shown by Dr. Logan to be true

it is just this sort of attitude that provokes for adult ages. It is unfortunate that other

a reconsideration of standard methods and Western countries are not able to produce

is likely to bring about improvements in occupational mortality analyses of a quality

knowledge and technique. It seems probable comparable to those in Great Britain,

that the discussions on fertility and family although it must be admitted that the

size generally will have an important vitality of their populations shows marked

influence on the drafting of the questions improvement without the aid of these

to be included in the census schedules at studies.

several forthcoming enumerations.

A comparison made by Dr. Pascua,

In his rapporteur's survey of downward Director-Consultant on Health Statistics

mortality trends in areas of lower death to the World Health Organization, of the

rates, the American actuary Mr. Mortimer death rates of I952 with those of the later

Spiegelman drew attention to a general nineteen-thirties in parts of the world where

lessening of the rate of decline with advance mortality is high and yet measurable. with

208 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

reasonable accuracy showed some rapid statistics are bedevilled by differences of

changes. The number of recorded deaths definition. The' experts disagreed on the

per thousand population has been approxi- question of whether or not there should be

mately halved in Mauritius, Costa Rica, more standardization in the form and content

British Honduras, Ceylon, Singapore and of census and registration particulars; this

Malta, and considerably reduced in Mexico, is not so simple a matter as might appear at

Chile, Ecuador and India. The index used first sight, for the data are not normally

is very crude and the detailed figures may collected purely for 'demographic purposes

be open to question, but expectations of and reflect customs and social structures

life have increased and there can be little that differ from one country to another.

doubt of the power of the development that Under the heading "Techniques of

has occurred mainly as the result of the Measurement and Analysis'' three subjects

control of malaria and other diseases.

were discussed, two of which were concerned

Migratory movements were discussed from with fertility and the third, somewhat

the point of view both of the countries who incompatibly, with economic density. Dif-

supply the emigrants and of the receiving ficulties rather than achievements were

nations. A communication from the Regis- stressed in relation to the study of economic

trar-General for Scotland gave the facts density and also the assessment of fertility

about recent departures from his country, in places where registration of births is

which have approximately offset the natural incomplete or non-existent; no secret was

increase of the population. An occupational made of the fact that much remains to be

analysis of male emigrants in I953 showed done in these fields. In the analysis of

that the country was losing an unduly high fertility generally, and especially in dis-

proportion of the professional and managerial turbed periods-the third subject taken-

class and also of engineers, builders and there is little trouble due to the absence of

carpenters; it would thus appear that past data; the problem arises rather from the

traditions are being maintained.

multiplicity of possible methods of analysis

The Population Division of the United and the difficulty of determining which is

Nations presented a background survey the most effective among them.

of intercontinental movement since I945, A record number of papers-nearly forty

showing that this has been largely confined in all-was submitted to the meeting on

to emigration from Europe to America and ''Concepts and Definitions in Demographic

Oceania. The effect of outward flows of this Statistics," reflecting the high proportion

kind on the age-structures and economic of delegates who were officials whose business

situations of the countries concerned, and in it is to define population closely with regard,

particular their role in alleviating population for instance, to marital status or occupa-

pressure, were discussed. One delegate tional activity and to distinguish between

emphatically warned the Conference, how- the numbers of people present in an area on

ever, that population pressure was only the day of a census and the numbers who

" a state of mind," and it certainly does not normally live there. Some of the smaller

seem that migration can provide a solution countries, such as Holland and Sweden,

of present world problems to the satisfaction have maintained in recent years continuous

of everyone.

registers of population, on strict accounting

rules, covering all births, deaths and migra-

Technical Matters

tion; it is interesting to learn that while these

The first of the methodological meetings registers have many uses and potentialities

was concerned with evaluations of the they sometimes run into difficulties and that

quality of demographic statistics, and this censuses are still necessary as a check on

was an appropriate beginning. Published their working.

data are rarely perfect and frequently Another of the technical meetings was

deficient, and comparisons of two sets of devoted to an examination of the relationship

THE WORLD POPULATION CONFERENCE, I954

209

between demographic research and the small, will give ranges of alternative pro-

formulation of population policy. Dr. jections and warnings about the difficulties

Douglas of Scotland argued that, in spite of assessing the prospects; most laymen will

of family allowances and other welfare try to select only one projection as their

schemes, children from larger families are guide, ignoring the ranges and the warnings.

still handicapped in Great Britain in many The point was well made that the very

ways, and advocated further studies of family existence of forecasts is liable to influence

expenditure so as to determine how to public action and so to falsify the forecasts

remove the handicaps. M. Bourgeois-Pichat, themselves.

of France, suggested more specifically that A similar' tone of caution and scepticism

family allowances should not consist of a about population projections was heard at

flat sum per child but should be varied in the following meeting, when the subject

amount to correspond broadly with the size had changed from methods of calculation

of the financial burdens falling on the parents to the prospects revealed by the application

from time to time. The French contributors of the methods. The Population Division

gave an interesting account of the activities of the United Nations had put in two sub-

and influence of the Institut National stantial contributions dealing ambitiously

d'Etudes Demographiques in Paris, a unique with the past and future population of the

organization which to some extent includes world and its continents and giving projections'

within its scope both the promotion of for every country at quinary points of time

demographic research and the formulation from I950 to I980. These were poorly

of population policy, and they tend to see in received, little being said in their favour

the enhanced birth rate in France since the and criticism going as far in one instance as

war a practical justification of the labours the expression of the opinion that the pro-

of the policy-makers.

jections should never have been made.

Certainly, the figures given for the United

Population Projections

Kingdom, supposedly based on " medium"

It was intended that a further three-hour assumptions, were surprisinig, showing as

session should be devoted to discussions on they did an expected rise of no less than

methods of making population projections, I7 per cent in the total population, from

but in fact much of the time was very just over 50 million to nearly 6o million,

properly given to a witty appraisal of the between I950 and I980. This advance is

value of projections generally and to an very much more "optimistic" than in even

assessment of whether they are worth while the most extreme of the sixteen projections

making at all. An analysis by Mr. Myers, prepared under the auspices of the Royal

Chief Actuary to the Social Security Admini- Commission on Population.

stration in Washington, showed where and to

what extent technical exercises of this kind Recruitment and Training

made at various times within the last twenty A number of qualitative influences were

years have been unsuccessful in representing discussed such as genetic factors and the

the actual populations of today in various relationship between intelligence and ferti-

European countries and in the U.S.A. In lity; 'some reference was made to these

spite of this lack of success, attributed in subjects in the last issue of the REVIEW.

part by Mr. Hajnal-Konyi as being due to The technical side of the meetings was then

" the failure of human history to repeat brought to a close with an interesting

itself," it was considered that projections session on methods of recruitment and

are likely to continue to be demanded by the training of demographers. This had two

public, and something of a battle of wills main facets: the normal procedure, and the

may be waged between experts and laymen. satisfaction of the special temporary needs of

The experts, knowing that the chances of Latin American and other countries with

complete success of a single projection are demographic programmes ahead of the

210 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

supply of skilled personnel necessary to them. The demand and also the productive capacity

The second facet has so far largely been a of the population are influenced by its age-

matter of rapid training courses generously distribution, and this aspect occupied two

provided in the U.S.A. and these have raised sessions of which the second was devoted

unusual problems that have been effectively to the problems of old age. Finally another

dealt with by Dr. Jaffe there. Consideration three-hour period was taken up with investi-

of the normal procedure involves a reassess- gations of the interrelations between popula-

ment of the concept of a demographer and tion, economic development and social

of his place in the academic system. He is change, a complex field on which the United

often grouped with the economists and Nations Organization has recently produced

perhaps still more often with the social a voluminous report.

scientists. Some delegates considered, how- There were some amusing exchanges when

ever, that the time had come for the demo- the question of ageing was before the Con-

grapher to become independent of these ference, and lively occasions such as these

associated subjects. Actuarial representa- stand out in the memory in a fortnight of

tives emphasized the beneficial effects for prepared speeches of set length. Some

population studies of their professional representatives had been seeking to establish

training.

a difference between actual age and what

It was somewhat surprising to hear the they called " physiological age," in order

Russian delegate, Mr. Pisarev, describing to make the point, for instance, that on

an Academy in Moscow where statistics -attaining the age of sixty-five some men are

and demography are taught on a large scale; ready for retirement and others still fit for

many of those present had not realized the work. Many of the older delegates showed a

extent of the attention being paid to these close personal interest in the matter; Pro-

subjects in the U.S.S.R. In the U.S.A., fessor Hersch, the President of the Con-

Mr. Eason is making a special study of the ference, spoke of a man having several ages

population of Russia and receives a fair for different faculties and in particular

amount of statistical information from that justly claimed that he himself had a mental

country for the purpose. Other American age far younger than his bodily appearance

delegates are currently keeping a watch on would suggest. Pere Vallon emphasized that

demographic developments in all the conti- whatever the theoretical concepts might be

nents. These activities are no doubt a there was only one age that was capable of

reflection as much of the political situation being measured accurately, and therefore

to-day as of the heightened interest in world only one that was really useful in

affairs prompted by the existence of demography.

the United Nations Organization. Indeed, While ageing is almost inevitable in

M. Sauvy went so far as to suggest that Western countries the total size of the

the continuation of the post-war boom in population everywhere is capable of being

births in the U.S.A. was attributable, at controlled in the long run through the

least in part, to rivalry with Russia.

restriction of births. Differences of opinion

were expressed not only in the method by

Populations and Resources

which control should be attempted but also

Comparisons of consumers and consump- on the need for such control, and it was

tion are far from being the matter of simple noticeable that the views of the representa-

arithmetic that they are sometimes suggested tives varied very much according to the

to be. Resources are of many different kinds, situations of their countries. India and

and were in fact considered at three meetings Japan with their pressing problems are

devoted respectively to non-biological ele- interested in birth-restriction, but Russia

ments (such as minerals and manufactures), with its great potentialities for development

agricultural products, and finance (capital could see little virtue in matching the

formation, investment and employment). population to the available resources. Mr.

THE WORLD POPULATION CONFERENCE, I954

2ii

Ryabushkin put forward the superficially strong antagonistic feelings. Delegates will

attractive idea that the population does not remember most, perhaps, three things-

exist for the production but the production the criticisms that were made not only of

for the population, and that whatever the outmoded concepts but also of immature

population happened to be the aim should new ideas, the tolerant and helpful attitude

be to provide adequately for it.

shown towards nations that have not yet

The prospects for the future production properly developed their demographic tools,

of energy and materials to meet the expand- and the emphasis placed on the need for

ing needs of growing populations seem more research in all fields. They may also

reasonably bright; none of the participants have noticed that some subjects were con-

foresaw immediate obstacles to the achieve- spicuous by their absence from the dis-

ment of substantial improvements in the cussions-for instance, population mathe-

next twenty-five years. It was pointed matics and the measurement of rates of

out, however, that the difficult problems reproduction. Although theoretical

were regional rather than global in nature; approaches were not altogether overlooked,

conventional sources of energy are insufficient on the whole there was an invigorating

for densely settled areas with low standards return to reliance on practical investigation,

of living, and although the development of in comparison with the nineteen-thirties.

international trade should help greatly it is One delegate did, however, express disap-

unlikely to provide the whole solution. There pointment that the historical approach to

will thus have to be an intense search for demography found no part in the programme.

cheaper energy resources and cheaper Although the organization of the Con-

materials if there are to be rapid rises in ference was successful, a few lessons may

living levels in these areas.

have been learnt by those in charge and some

Expectations for an improved agricultural knowledge gained which may be put to

production were similarly rated as hopeful, use on a subsequent occasion: meetings

provided that the necessary capital resources varied considerably in effectiveness; the

could be found for the development of poor attempts to sectionalize subjects were not

soils. The finding of the capital is likely to be always a success; speeches were too often

the serious problem, again regional in read from documents prepared in advance

character; its solution will involve some and had to be fitted to a procrustean bed of

degree of sharing between the richer and five minutes' length which was too long

poorer countries.

for some and not long enough for others;

the total duration of the Conference was

Conclusion

greater than it need have been. These were

In conformity with its generally cautious, not very grave faults and it was more impor-

scientific approach to problems of population, tant that the pervading spirit was one of

and in accordance with the decision not to honest inquiry. Memories will remain of

pass any resolutions, the Conference did not the high seriousness of the French representa-

deeply commit itself to any particular tives, the humour and modesty of the

view about prospects or desirable aims for Americans, the friendly attitude of the

the future. If some of those present were delegates from the British Dominions and

not entirely satisfied with this indefiniteness, Colonies, and of the helpful exchanges that

at least no one went away from Rome with were possible with them all.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLVI, No. 4

