THE SOCIAL PROBLEM GROUP

As Illustrated by a Series of East London Pedi,rees

(The Galton Lecture, I932)

By E. J. LIDBETTER

mT HE term "the social problem
group " first appeared in the report

be placed under care and control." (Part III, para. 9I.)

of the Departmental Committee on Mental Deficiency, published in I929, in the following paragraph:

The idea contained in this paragraph is not new-at least to members of this Society-for as long ago as November I9IO

" Let us assume that we could segre- there appeared in the EUGENICS REVIEW a

gate as a separate community all the number of articles from which the idea so

families in this country containing clearly emerged that the following com-

mental defectives of the primary amentia ment was made upon it in a leading article

type. We should find that we had col- in The Times of November 7th, I9IO:

lected among them a most interesting " The general effect of these reports

social group. It would include, as every- is to show the existence among us of a one who has extensive practical experi- definite race of chronic paupers, a race

ence of social service would readily admit, parasitic upon the community, breeding

a much larger proportion of insane in and through successive generations,

persons, epileptics, paupers, criminals and only to a small extent recruited

(especially recidivists), unemployables, either from the ranks of unskilled labour

habitual slum-dwellers, prostitutes, in- or from the sufferers by the ordinary

ebriates and other social inefficients than fluctuations of industry or employment.*

would a group of families not containing The existence of families of habitual

mental defectives. The overwhelming criminals, preying upon the public in a

majority of the families thus collected somewhat similar mianner, has long been will belong to that section of the com- known . . . but the analogous facts in

munity, which we propose to term the relation to pauperism have perhaps never ' social problem ' or ' subnormal ' group. before received the full recognition to This group comprises approximately the which they appear to be entitled."

lowest io per cent. in the social scale of

most communities. Though the large THE METHODS OF APPROACH

majority of its members are 'not so low The reports referred to and this comment

grade mentally that they can be actually were made upon research which had then

certified as mentally defective, it is been commenced and is still continuing,

possible that a not inconsiderable number and the data which I propose to submit are

of them might prove, if examined by taken from the results of that investigation.

expert and experienced medical practi- Two points should be mentioned at the out-

tioners, to be certifiable and subject to set: firstly, that this investigation was not

undertaken in relation to pauperism, as

NOTE: Mr. Lidbetter has kindly expressed his might appear from the quotation from The

willingness to deliver this lecture, illustrated with

numerous pedigree charts, to any group or organiza- * At the time this was written unemployment

tion which would care to hear it. Communications meant very largely the intermittent employment of

on this subject should be addressed to the General casually-employed men. This was very different

Secretary of the Society.

from the post-War chronic unemployment.

7

8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Times, but was an investigation into the per- These pedigrees were instructive and sug-

sonal, family, and collateral relationships of gestive. Valuable experience was gained in

persons in a particular district in East Lon- this earlier work, but from the criticism of

don who were in receipt of assistance from it there emerged a much clearer understand-

private or public funds.

ing as to what was necessary if the final

For this purpose, authority having been results of such an investigation were to be

obtained, the records of charitable organiza- accepted. Among these was a recognition

tions and of the local Board of Guardians that if valid conclusions were to be reached

were examined, and it soon appeared that the work must rest upon a statistical basis.

the records of the latter body were so com- Accordingly, on a date in I923 a complete

plete that they included most, if not all, return was prepared of the individuals to be

of the persons assisted in the district, or included in the research-some 2,500 in all

that if by any chance such persons were not -and the work has been so planned that

included in the official records, some other it is hoped to measure the social problem

dependent member of the family was group against the sum of the population in

included, and these gave the necessary con- the district concerned. I am not prepared,

nection. The method gave the impression however, at this stage to deal with the

that pauperism was the subject of the statistical aspect.

investigation, but the inquiry was directed Since the publication of the report of the

to the biological relationship of defectives, Departmental Committee the question has

and their dependence upon public or private been raised as to whether there is such a

funds was the method employed to discover thing as a social problem group. lt is this

them. question that I propose to discuss here, and

Secondly, although the conclusions for the purpose I have selected, from the

reached in these separate investigations are large number in my possession, some of the

identical, they have been arrived at by diagrams showing the inter-relations of the

entirely different methods. The Depart- people comprising the social problem group

mental Committee reached their conclusions in the district concerned-pedigrees of the

from an examination of material in the families who were dependent upon charity

mass-the cumulative effect of statistical or public funds upon the selected date.

data gathered by direct investigation in a In considering these pedigrees it should

number of districts.

be remembered:

In this investigation we have built up the data from investigations into the personal, family, and collateral relationships and con-

(I) That the figures and other particulars mentioned have reference to a date early

ditions-the result produced in biological in I923.

form. The inquiries are complementary (2) That persons in receipt of relief on

and the conclusions are the same, but the the grounds of unemployment were rigidly

methods we have employed enable us to excluded from the inquiry. It will be

indicate the possible line of development in remembered that unemployment relief was

these groups, to suggest some causes of at the peak in I923; and it was felt that the

their existence, and to make some general inclusion of such cases would prejudice the

observations upon the conditions found to acceptance of the results of research, since

exist. the unemployed class could not generally or

It is intended as soon as possible to make legitimately be said to belong to the social

the results of the investigation public in a problem group. It should be borne in mind

complete form and when this is done an that if the effect of this was to preserve

attempt will be made to deal with the work the original character of the investigation,

on a statistical basis.

it also resulted in excluding from considera-

At the commencement the work consisted tion a number of cases properly belonging

of a collection of pedigrees in selected cases. to the problem group.

THE SOCIAL PROBLEM GROUP

9

"A RACE OF SUB-NORMAL PEOPLE"

INSANITY AND BLINDNESS

The pedigrees reveal that there is in
existence a definite race of sub-normal
people, closely related by marriage or parenthood, not to any extent recruited
from the normal population, nor sensibly diminished by the agencies for social or individual improvement.
These families are closely inter-married, they breed together in successive generations and have undoubtedly a higher birth rate than that of normal people.
An examination of the pedigrees reveals that, broadly speaking, defectiveness tends to segregate into three main groups:

Diagram A20 of my collection illustrates
insanity with destructive eye disease in
four generations, with much collateral and associated pauperism. The diagram was first published, but with much less detail,
in I9I3 in Brain, reporting the observations of Mr. E. Nettleship and myself. Those interested in the optical details are advised
to look up that volume. There have since been many developments in the case, and
much additional information has come to light, most of which is here included. The
association of mental disability and ocular defects had not been described before this
case. The ocular defects are partly develop-

i.-Insanity and mental defect.

mental, partly morbid. The pathological changes are chiefly detachment of the

2.-Physical disability, tuberculosis, etc. retina, based upon disease of the choroid,

3.-The mildly incompetent, " the spiritless and dull people," not pronouncedly defective, but not able to compete with normal people so as to be at all times selfsupporting.

but with iritis, and secondary cataract in some cases. Both the mental and the
ocular conditions are hereditary. Both conditions are due to a common underlying
cause, and do not stand to one another as cause and effect or as accidental coinci-

dences. Syphilis, whether acquired or con-

Some sample pedigrees will be found genital, does not seem to have been a factor

folded into the back of the REVIEW in such in causing either the mental or the ocular

a way as to enable them to be consulted degeneracies.

while reading this article. They represent The paupers shown in this diagram,

the conditions in these family groups as whether in this immediate stock, or

they were found, by subsequent inquiry, to collaterally, undoubtedly became charge-

be early in I923. The data are calculated able because they were so poorly endowed

to a date in March in that year.

mentally or physically, or in both respects,

I regret that one diagram (A6 of my as to prevent them competing with the

collection) is too large to be printed here, normal individual so as to be always self-

since it illustrates a family with collateral supporting. The numbers in the group are

connections, in seven generations from I770 as follows:

to 1923. Naturally the information is more In receipt of relief:

complete in respect of recent years. There For long periods ... ... ... *IO

are 262 individuals shown on it, 136 of Intermittently or for short periods ii8

whom have been maintained for long or Children in Poor Law schools ... I6

short periods out of public funds. The Insane and Imbecile ... *- .. t25

group is of the mildly incompetent type and Mentally deficient ... ... ... 3

very little sickness is shown. There are,

however, nine insane and two mentally Total .. ... ... ... ... I72

deficient, nine tuberculous, six epileptic,

and one blind. The first chart actually given here illustrates the burden on public

* One of these, born I825, was in the workhouse on I09 occasions, between I862 and 1892, when he died. Precise particulars are not available prior to

funds of a small group of able-bodied members of this family.

I872, but since that date he spent 3,092 days in the workhouse.
t Including 7 blind and insane.

THIE EUGENICS REVIEW

It is not possible to reproduce here the added that if defectives must marry or

whole of this diagram, but the part showing become parents it is better that they should

insanity and eye disease is given in Chart II be associated in that matter with other

and in Chart VI.

defectives than that they should vitiate

good stocks or use the strength of such

ASSORTWE MATING AND INBREEDING stocks to carry on their defectiveness to

These pedigrees show that not only does further generations.

like produce like, as we should expect, but The high-grade defective and the mildly

that there is some subtle and unexplained incompetent, but apparently normal, person

attraction of like for like in marriage and present a social problem of the utmost

parenthood amongst the various forms of importance and urgency. They far out-

defectives. Members of insane stocks number the definitely defective; they con-

marry into stocks similarly affected-the tribute largely to the population of our

potentially insane marry the potentially hospitals, prisons, and other public institu-

insane. Feeble-minded inter-marry with tions. They maintain the birth rate of

the feeble-minded; tubercular stocks inter- illegitimate children; they assist the propa-

marry; whilst the mildly incompetent gation of venereal disease and, in this and

people in a wider, more general way show in other ways, they lower the standard of

the same tendency, but show also bad life and health. They also lower the

patches where they inter-marry with the standard of employable labour because, in

more definitely defective. This tendency these days of standardized hours and wages,

would no doubt be found amongst normal they cannot earn the wages in the time

people, and on this side contributes towards allowed.

the intensive segregation of sub-normal Wherever these people come into contact

people-to reject is to select.

with the administrative machine they clog

The pedigrees show quite conclusively and hamper it in a variety of ways: they

that there is a social problem group. They create the need for much administrative

also enable us to form an opinion as to the machinery that, but for them, would not be

reasons for the existence of that group and necessary, and finally, because they are

enable certain generalizations to be made. insensible to either public or personal

I think that there is no doubt that the iesponsibility, their birth rate is higher than

reason for the existence of this group is that of the normal members of the com-

inbreeding-the repeated inter-marriage, munity. The very need to provide for them

generation by generation, of defective and for the social amelioration of theirp

people. In some of these stocks inbreeding conditions inevitably leads to methods

has been so persistent that defectiveness is which increase their survival value, both

a general condition of the members; many in the sense of production and preservation.

of them are actually defective, most are At this point it should be remembered

sub-normal in some respect, and all are that a large proportion of this group,

likely to transmit to their offspring one or although apparently normal, are carriers of

other of the defective qualities observable defective genes in the recessive form and,

in the stock from which they come. The if they become parents, are likely to have

surprising thing is, not that they produce a proportion of defective children.

defectives, but that they ever produce a normal child.

"INDIRECT TRANSMISSION "

This inbreeding is sufficient to account The indirect transmission of mental dis-

for the existence of a social problem group order, which is illustrated in Charts III and

and, in relation to the attraction of like for IV, presents another problem of much im-

like, explains the segregation into family portance, and I doubt if sufficient attention

groups of the different forms of defect has been paid to its frequency or signifi-

already mentioned. It should, I think, be cance. It is at present impossible to

THE SOCIAL PROBLEM GROUP

II

estimate the relative frequency of the notice the effect of the phenomenon in rela-

phenomenon, but it certainly occurs very tion to insanity and other forms of mental

often and possibly as often as does direct disease. The clear distinction between the

transmission.

imbecile and idiot on the one hand, and the

Chart V (Aii), printed in symbols, illus- insane on the other, has long been recog-

trates at once the inter-marriage of insane nized both in law and medicine. I need

stocks and the difficulties of drawing correct not dwell upon this distinction; it is suffi-

inferences from the particulars shown.

cient to say that the character of the

The insane shown upon this pedigree distinctioni is such that if the defect is

were diagnosed as follows:

hereditary, the difference must have its

ii. i. General paralysis of the insane. ii. 3. Do.

origin in the gamete-it is distinctive and
a true inheritance. The operation of the law of anticipation

iii. i. Do.

(or ante-dating) in cases of insanity is such

ii. 4. Non-systematic delusional.

that if the defect appears in the third or

ii. 5. Puerperal insanity.

fourth generation, there is in many cases

iii. 2. Recurrent melancholia. iii. 3. Melancholia. iii. 4. Do.

nothing to distinguish the patient from the case of the ordinary congenital idiot or feeble-minded-and this although the insanity in the previous generations may have

In the case of the mentally defective this problem is peculiarly difficult because it

been typical in all respects. Chart VI (from diagram A2o) illustrates

would appear that transmission is even less this.

direct than in the case of the insane. The I have no doubt that before I close I

point is often made that many mentally shall be expected to say something on the

defective children have normal parents. subject of remedial measures. I regret,

Whilst it may be doubted, in some cases, whether the parents are really normal, the

however, that I can add little to what has already been said upon the subject. The

fact remains that in a large proportion of more I learn about the social problem group,

others the parents are normal in all the less inclined I am to make suggestions respects. But an examination of these cases for dealing with it. My function in this reveals, at some point in the history, article, as in the investigation, is one of evidence of defect; and in a large number diagnosis, and this is much more important

of families there are collateral defectives, at the present time, and in the present state who show that, although there is no family of our knowledge, than attempts to suggest

history of defectiveness in earlier genera- remedies. A case has been made out for

tions, there are sufficient in recent genera- voluntary sterilization, and I have no doubt

tions, in different branches of the family, to indicate the defective quality of the stock in
which the child appears.

that in certain cases segregation will tend also to limit, if not reduce, the burden the community has to bear. But when the most has been made of these proposals, the

"THE LAW OF ANTICIPATION"

major part of the problem remains. We should avoid undue emphasis upon the

There has been much discussion upon value of either of these as remedies, remem-

the subject of the " Law of Anticipation," bering that whoever suggests that the prob-

as expounded by the late Sir Frederick lem can be dealt with by a single remedy,

Mott in relation to the insane and as shown must, by that fact alone, be wrong. The

in the work of the late Mr. E. Nettleship present position calls mainly for more

in optical cases.

thorough investigation. We need a com-

It seems clear that there is some process prehensive and intensive investigation,

of ante-dating and it is important here to carried on in an atmosphere of inquiry and

12 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
discussion, under proper authority and by human heredity has been neglected. Invescompetent persons-if they can be found- tigation on the lines I have endeavoured to effectively supported and properly financed. suggest would not only indicate the dimenWhilst ameliorative and palliative social sions of the problem, but would also afford measures have been widely and fully some indication of the possible lines of developed, this great field of research into remedial measures.

THE SOCIETY'S FURTHER PROJECTS

IN introducing Mr. Lidbetter at the and to assist, any Fellows or Members who

Galton Dinner, the President, Sir might feel inclined to set up investigations

Bernard Mallet, said there was a special of a similar kind in the neighbourhood in

appropriateness in his subject to a piece of which they lived. It seemed that a diagnosis

work to which the Society was now turning of this kind, which would, as it were, focus

its attention-namely, an attempt to inves- or localize all this social inefficiency, should

tigate, so far as a private, unofficial body make the treatment to be applied to the evil

could do so, the existence of'a sub-normal easier than it was at present. The connec-

class (or social problem group) in the com- tion of this investigation with the researches

munity, supposed to comprise about one- on which Mr. Lidbetter had been engaged

tenth of the population, or some four for many years into the relation of heredity

million persons, as was suggested by the and social inadequacy in an East-end of

Mental Deficiency Committee in I929, fol- London area would become very apparent

lowing on the investigations of Dr. E. 0. from his address.

Lewis. It had been suggested in their In remarking generally on the work of

report that, " if we could segregate as a the Society, Sir Bernard said it was some-

separate community all the families in this times reproached with a neglect of positive

country containing mental defectives of the eugenics in its propaganda. If that meant

primary amentia type, it would be found to that they ought to advocate something like

include a much larger proportion of insane the breeding up of a race of super-men, he

persons, epileptics, paupers, criminals must say that he shared the doubts ex-

(especially recidivists), unemployables, pressed the other day as to positive eugenics

habitual slum dwellers, prostitutes, in- by Sir Oliver Lodge. There was no

ebriates, and other social inefficients, than " mould into which we can or ought to

would a group of families not containing attempt to fit human beings," and variety

mental defectives."

was of the essence of growth.

Sir Bernard did not wish to go into He feared that there was not much to be

details of the Society's scheme, but said done in these days by advocating further

that among the results expected were those relief from taxation of the classes the limi-

from local investigations, such as had been tation of whose families they deplored; but

instituted by Mr. Caradog Jones of Liver- he did not see any reason to despair of the

pool. It was suggested in an article, which influence which the spread of eugenic

he had signed, in the October number of knowledge, and of the real danger arising

the EUGENICS REVIEW, that the Society from the differential fertility of the social

would be very glad to get into touch with, classes, might have, in time, in encouraging

