J. B. S. HALDANE ON EUGENICS

By C. P. BLACKER, M.A., M.D.

P ROFESSOR HALDANE has thought
and written much on evolution.
His latest book* is recorded as the eighteenth to be published in the course of some thirty years. Heredity and Politics,
The Inequaity of Man and Possible Worlds have been among earlier titles. In most of these eighteen books the author has discussed eugenics.
Everything has a History, like several of its forerunners, consists of essays previously published in other journals, chiefly the Daily Worker. But the last essay, called Human Evolution: Past and Future, which will most interest readers of the EUGENICS REVIEW, differs in origin from the others, for it was delivered as a discourse at a conference on Genetics, Palaeontology and Evolution held at Princeton University as part of a commemoration of its bicentenary.
Unfortunately we are not told when. The essays are not dated.
But all are written with the lucidity, persuasiveness and charm which are familiar features of earlier writings; they exhibit, furthermore, the customary encyclopaedic range and impressive learning; and they reflect that quality of imaginativeness which is the author's chief asset as a popular writer. With a unique didactic skill he can bring seemingly remote subjects near to his reader. He can unveil that which is recondite and abstruse, and can demonstrate how it makes contact with the ordinary man. A young adolescent recently remarked to me that Haldane was an " eye-opener." The
term was used in a wholly underogatory
sense to mean that the author had opened his eyes to things around him and had made him ask " Why have I not realized that
before ? " The reader of the last essay of Everything
has a History who has been duly impressed by what has gone before may feel that the
*Everything has a History. 1951. Allen & Unwin.
i6s.

claims of eugenics to be regarded as a serious
subject are irremediably shattered. Such an
impression, if received, is mainly produced
by a weapon which, upon the minds of those
who have been adequately prepared, no one
can wield more effectively than Haldane-
an aggressively modest nescience. The fact
might perhaps be overlooked that the
conference to which the author delivered this
discourse was concerned with paleontology. Projected into the future, the time-scale of
paL:ontology takes us forwards millions of
years. In such a perspective, meek nescience
is fitting. In earlier essays, particularly those
assembled in the volume Fact and Faith,
published in I934 by the Thinker's Library, this weapon of derisive nescience was devastatingly employed as a form of counterattack against religious dogma. None is better equipped by scientific attainments and literary skill to use against eugenics the same weapon, the derisory tones muted but none the less perceptible, than Haldane. In his authoritative voice, science proclaims nescience.
What then does Haldane say in this essay ? In the first of eight headed sections we are reminded of some important dates which the
study of radio-active minerals enables us to establish with about I0 per cent of error. They delimit the palaeontological conspectus of the discourse. About 350 million years ago, our ancestors were fish; 270 million years ago, amphibians; 200 million, reptiles; and 70 million, mammals somewhat like shrews, we are told. The last 20 million years are more difficult to date, but the Pekin man (Sinanthropus) lived about half a million years ago. In a section of this essay headed " Controlled Evolution as an Ideal," Haldane contends that if this ideal were
ignored our descendants half a million years hence might differ from us, for better or worse, about as much as we differ from the Pekin man. At present, we do not know how to control our evolution; but the power to

146

HALDANE ON EUGENICS

do so may be acquired, in which event develops the argument that polymorphism

changes might be speeded up a hundredfold, (diversity) is valuable and should be

so that conditions otherwise expectable encouraged. Galton expressed the same idea.

in 500,000 years might be attained in 5,000. In his words-" There are a vast number of

This period is rather less than a thousand conflicting ideals, of alternative characters,

years longer than that which has elapsed of incompatible civilizations; but all are

since the first fixed and certain date in wanted to give fullness and interest to life."

human history, namely that of a total " The Political Implications of Human

eclipse of the sun which occurred in 2283 B.C. Diversity " (a heading) provokes a definition.

Five thousand years ago most men were " Liberty is the practical recognition of

savages, though there existed enclaves of human polymorphism"; otherwise stated,

civilization in Egypt and elsewhere. But for it is tolerance of human diversity. We are

three reasons we should not be deterred by polymorphic (diverse) " not only in our

these wide perspectives from thinking ahead. esthetic but in our intellectual abilities."

Power, in the first place, is less likely to be And " without postulating any overall

abused if, before it is in our hands, we think superiority of one race to another, we may

about how to use it. "About 2,500 years be fairly sure that some desirable genotypes

ago, the prophet Isaiah got the idea that all are commoner in one people than in others and

the nations would be at peace. Isaiah's idea that this difference is to some extnt reflcted

of universal peace was something like a in its cultural achievement" (my italics).

Jewish world empire. Ours is an association Polytypicism should, for the present, be

of friendly democracies" (my italics). preserved; but if tolerance widened and

" Secondly," says Haldane, " we shall not selective methods improved the need for it

get the required knowledge in a hurry. might disappear.

Even now we can only do a litte to alter the In a section entitled " The Evolution of the

inborn capacities of the next generation [my Meek," Haldane suggests that, in the last

italics]. Let us begin to think about what million years, man has become more cerebral,

sort of changes we want and criticize one more neotenic and more polymorphic. These,

another's ideas. . . ." Thirdly, something he thinks, are desirable evolutionary trends.

even more important may be discovered on But no sooner is this said than the author

the way. Columbus set out to find China, beats a retreat into nescience. " How are we

but discovered America instead.

to achieve these ends ? I do not know. We

Under the heading " Slow Development do not know in detail for what human

as a Major Evolutionary Trend " Haldane characteristics we want to breed." A

makes the same point that Dr. G. C. L. Martian zoologist knowing no more about

Bertram made in his Galton Lecture (I95I), evolution than we do, if asked at any time

namely that a man takes longer to reach in the past to pick the most progressive

maturity than other mammals. His develop- vertebrate, would rarely have hit upon the

ment is slower; he is " neotenic "-i.e. right one. During the Permian period, our

his youth stretches over a long period, ancestors were probably large and progres-

and when adult he exhibits characteristics sive reptiles; but during the Jurassic and

shown by related or ancestral forms when Cretaceous our forefathers, by this time

young. This neotenic tendency makes him mammals, were small, inconspicuous and

-the most plastic and educable of mammals, unspecialized, thus substantiating words

his behaviour patterns being less fixed by delivered in another context: " Blessed are

heredity. Man is also polymorphic (several the meek, for they shall inherit the earth."

human types breeding together in the same A section entitled " Negative Eugenics"

area) and polytypic (different types inhabit- discourages the hope that abnormalities due

ing different areas, for example white men in to dominant genes, such as juvenile cataract,

Europe, black in Africa).

could be totally eliminated by preventing

A heading " Human Diversity Desirable" the reproduction of affected persons; for

148 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

similar harmful genes constantly reappear by mutation. Here negative eugenics would not extirpate an infirmity, though if continu-
ally applied it could reduce its incidence.
Sex-linked abnormalities could also be somewhat reduced. Indeed, " we could cut down the incidence of a great many maladies to a
large extent." But recessive genes would be
more refractory. The author opposes
sterilization, whether compulsory or voluntary, for carriers. Laws permitting
voluntary sterilization are, he says, subject
to gross abuse. After a further declaration of nescience, Haldane says: " We shall only
do what is right if people realize that we have a duty to beget and bear the best-endowed
children. . . . A prerequisite . . . is the moralization of our sexua behaviour-that is to say, making it subordinate to ideal ends, not to impulse on the one hand or
superstition on the other " (my italics). The author's final section, " Difficulties of
Positive Eugenics," deals with values. " In many human societies those types which are most admired are bred out. The Middle
Ages admired holiness and courage. The holy men and women were celibate, the
courageous men killed one another. Our age admires money-making. The men who
make most money have least children." Haldane does not know of a single rare and desirable gene whose frequency we could increase, though there is little doubt that such exist. Knowledge being as yet rudimentary, our best course is to encourage the mapping of the human chromosomes and the analysis of the psychological constitution of exceptionally gifted people. Haldane does not know what we are now selecting for;
to mention but three possibilities, we may be favouring genes which make for high sexual activity, low intelligence or lack of
susceptibility to propaganda. But despite his ignorance of current trends and his affirmed nescience as to values, Haldane gives us a picture of the " man of the future."
" He would probably be regarded as a physical, mental and moral defective. As an adult, he would probably have great muscular skill but little muscular strength, a large head, fewer teeth than we have, and

so on. He would develop very slowly, perhaps not learning to speak till five years
of age, but continuing to learn up to maturity at the age of forty, and then living for several
centuries. He would be more rational and
less instinctive than we are, less subject to
sexual and parental emotions, to rage on the
one hand and so-called herd instincts on
the other. His motivation would depend far
more than ours on education. In his own
society he would be a good citizen, in ours
perhaps a criminal or a lunatic. He would
be of high general intelligence by our
standards, and most individuals would have some special aptitude developed to the degree which we call genius." Finally, our
immediate task is the remodelling of human
society rather than the refashioning of the human race, " though the two duties must
and will go together."
An impression is received that the author's declarations of nescience, irreproachable in the dim vistas of palaeontology, have been
belied by the exercise of his imaginative
powers. The unengaging picture of the weakly, large-headed, neotenic, cerebralized, apathic and largely edentulous man-of-the
future is doubtless a salutary corrective of Nietzsche's vision of the superman as a pitiless, blond and warlike viking. Haldane's man-of-the-future is the product of his system of values (" I think that these are desirable evolutionary trends ") and presumably of his analysis of what human characteristics are in fact being selected for. The chilling mists of nescience are dissolved by the warmth of human likes, dislikes and
hopes. More important, there emerges from
Haldane's text, though punctuated throughout by declarations of nescience, a fairly clear picture of the type of human being that he would like to see inhabiting the planet not half a million years hence but today. The quotations italicized above are finger-pointers to his preferences. The desirable, the eugenically valuable, human would be tolerant of his fellow beings in their unhindered diversities; he would be co-operative rather than combative; he would be educable, plastic and moralizable

HALDANE ON EUGENICS

'49

in his sexual behaviour, and conscious of implications and guiding principles of the

" a duty to beget and bear the best-endowed Nazi philosophy, and, before I939, himself

children possible "; he would be moralizable fought in the Spanish civil war. Haldane's

also in his social and international behaviour, attitude to the past history of the Eugenics

showing himself capable of living happily in Society is expressed in the following passage

a worlI where universal peace reigned. This taken from his Possible Worlds (I927):

would be a world consisting of an association

" The Eugenics Education Society " [as the

of friendly democracies (rather than a Jewish, Hitlerian or other world empire) which recognized, encouraged and educated

Eugenics Society was then called] " have doubtless done good work in persuading a certain number of intelligent people to have more
children. They have also rghtly urged lessened

to the full each man's special gifts-; and he taxation of parents and children. But many of

would be free from genetically caused their members have coupled with this a clamour

disabilities. Haldane, moreover, recognizes
that " we are polymorphic not only in our esthetic but in our intellectual abilities";

against measures designed to ameliorate the lot of the children of the poor at the expense of the rich. It is a curious policy to combat evils due to
economic inequality by perpetuating that

and he is " fairly sure that some desirable inequality."

genotypes are commoner in one people than Haldane can be readily forgiven for not

in others, and that this difference is to some having closely followed developments within

extent reflected in its achievement." But the Society in recent years. But had he done

these differences are not such as to produce so, he would have known that the clamour

an overall superiority of one race over to which he objects ceased long ago. It has

another. What, we may ask, are the geno- not, indeed, been heard since I became the

types responsible- for cultural achievement ? Society's General Secretary in I93I; nor

Haldane does not, in the context of the has it been sounded in the editorial columns

passage above quoted, specify. But other of the EUGENICS REVIEW since 1934, when

passages in the essay leave the reader in no Maurice Newfield became Editor.

doubt. Haldane refers to esthetic and At the risk of appearing presumptuous, I

intellectual endowments. He is himself the now offer a suggestion which bears upon an

possessor of an abnormally high congenital evolutionary event which puzzles Haldanxe

ability for mathematics. But he is also tone- and which affects our interpretation of

deaf. He regards it as possible that his present-day eugenic values.

tone-deafness may be an advantage to Haldane has drawn our attention to how,

society as well as to himself, for his time in the Permian, our ancestors seem to have

might otherwise have been devoted to music been large and progressive reptiles, whereas

at the expense of science. It is thus clear that 70 million years ago they were mammals

Haldane regards proficiency in the arts and something like shrews. How can we account

in science as culturally valuable activities for this transformation? I suggest that it

which are, in part at least, the outcome of may be connected with periods of cold.

inborn endowments, and that he would Mammals and birds are descended from

encourage the spread of their determining reptiles which as a class flourished in the

genes if he knew how to recognize them. Mesozoic. During this epoch there were high

There is quite enough in this disjointedly mountains which were doubtless populated

avowed programme to justify the author in by a fauna differing from that inhabiting the

forthwith joining the Eugenics Society. Why hot, luxuriant and marshy lowland. In the

then this fa9ade of nescience, this parade of cold uplands, where food was scarce,

hostility? There are perhaps two reasons, survival value would come to attach to

which I suggest with diffidence-disgust at anatomical structures, physiological

Nazi practices and the past history of the processes and psychological characteristics

Eugenics Society. Little need be said about different from those which benefited the

the first, except perhaps that Haldane reptilian inhabitants, many of them large

discerned earlier than some of us the inner and formidable, of the lowlands. Changes in

X50 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
anatomical structures would mainly affect exterminating the oviparous reptile, unthe skin, protecting it against cold. The fur interested in eggs and young. The five subof mammals and the feathers of birds do classes of reptiles survivng today are best this in a manner which has no equivalent represented in hot regions. In cold and among known reptiles, lving or extinct. temperate zones these fall into a winter sleep, Physiological processes which protect against and in hot climates there is often a summer cold are those concerned in the maintenance sleep which comes to an end with the of a constant body temperature. Mammals beginning of the rainy season. are more warm-blooded than reptiles, and Gradually our small and inoffensive birds than mammals. Psychological protomammalian ancestors may have been characteristics having a similar purpose are forced down from the uplands to find the those which conduce to the protection of the territories below cleared of the redoubtable young against cold and which favour their enemies which, in earlier epochs, had made maintenance in harsh and inclement them untenable. surroundings where food is scarce. If there is any truth in these suppositions, Viviparousness and the development of we would, if adopting a paleontological facilities for feeding the young, after birth, conspectus, confer upon the instincts cenfrom the body of the parent serve this tring round the family-filial and parental purpose. So do the accompanying parental instincts, each evoking, supplementing and instincts, strongest in the female but capable satisfying the other-a greater importance of extending to the male. In birds oviparous than Haldane has allowed. They would, habits are retained, but are effectively indeed, become central features of the -theme supplemented by nest-building and brooding of his chapter which deals with human habits powered by compelling instincts. evolution, past and future. If, by parental These upland and highland progenitors of instincts and structures and by filial impulses mammals and birds were probably small in and reflexes, our supposedly shrew-like size, food being scarce; they were probably ancestors were differentiated from reptiles vegetarian, insectivorous or omnivorous in 7o and more million years ago, we are diet. Descent to the lowlands spelt death entitled to assign to these characteristics an in the jaws of formidable enemies. An important r6le in the -equipment of our inborn terror, survivnng till today in many descendants half a million years hence. humans and some monkeys, of sinuous, scaly, Haldane sees his " man of the future" as coiling, elongated or serpentine shapes may (in his words) " less subject to sexual and then have acquired survival value. Such a parental emotions" than we. Many would fear would resemble a Jungian archetype. agree about the sexual emotions but not
The causes of the geologically sudden about the parental. Our sexual instincts and extinction of the many sub-classes of overt sexual activities (I am not here reptiles which flourished in fullest diversity referring to their sublimated forms) are during the Jurassic, Triassic and Chalk excessive to the requirements of civilized
periods are unknown. Geological upheavals, man today. Hence the need for contracep-
germs of new disease, atmospheric and tion. The parental instincts are rarely climatic changes have been suggested. The excessive. Periods of decadence have, in the disappearance of marine animals, among past, been characterized by neglect of them ammonites and aquatic reptiles, some reproductive activities in response to what of the last probably viviparous, is difficult to have been called " waves of hedonism." In ,explain. The slow replacement of equable, the mammalian world excluding man, neglect torrid and humid conditions by a colder of the parental activities causes prompt age, beginning with an alternation of longer extinction. But with civilized man other and severer winters with still hot but sequences are possible. Lactation can be shortening summers, and proceeding gradu- shortened or avoided altogether by artifices; ally to ice ages, may have played a part in and an elaborate system of foster-parentage

HALDANE ON EUGENICS

can be organized. Women differ as do animals in the strength of their matemal instincts and in the willingness with which they will forgo pleasures and make sacrifices on their children's behalf. The local authority can now provide means by which a sequence of misconceived children, whom the mother persistently neglects or abandons, can be reared to maturity. If a delight in children, conveniently called genophilia, is in part inborn, we are now providing (albeit in a small way) the means by which lack of this quality can be disseminated.
Social measures encouraging fosterparentage, if widely extended and continued over, a long period, would permit of the survival of children in the absence of parental emotions in their parents, and might therefore weaken the race's equipment of these instincts. On the other hand, contraception is rapidly disconnecting sexual from parental emotions, thus confenring upon the desire for children a new importance in evolution. The future may see a simultaneous development of these two opposed
processes, the first weakening, the second
strengthening the values of the family. But there is one obvious way in which Haldane's men and women of the future,
who seem to bear a resemblance to the Selenites of Well's First Men in the Moon, could quickly come to possess a lesser endowment of genophilia than ourselves. Indeed, Haldane may have had such a possibility in mind when he was delivering his discourse to the Americans. I refer to ectogenesis, a vivid description of which was contained in the fantasia * which established Haldane as a literary figure thirty years ago.
Haldane has suggested that our immediate task is to remodel human society rather than try to refashion the human race, " though
the two duties must and will go together." Such a fusion of tasks is best accomplished by our taking as our standard of eugenic merit a performance test which is partly of a social and partly of a biological character. The following is a quotation from the Eugenics Society's Statement of Objects:
" The eugenically meritorious couple is the
Daedalus. 1924. Kegan Paul.

one which produces by design (i.e., by planned parenthood) a healthy and happy family. To plan the births of a well-spaced family demands intelligence, foresight and restraint; to produce families large enough for replacement implies
a love of children and a sense of duty to a community which needs children; to provide
them with a good home requires the power to make a success of marriage and of life outxide
the home. All these are valuable qualities and
their perpetuation should be encouraged. Eugenists aim at replacing the present
generation by children who are deliberately conceived in the full light of all known medical, social and genetic factors. They favour the planned against the unplanned family; and they wish to see the community so organized that its best citizens will feel eager to give full expression to the instincts of parenthood....
The effects of heredity and environment, of nature and nurture, are not easy to separate; nearly always they are closely interwoven.
The healthy and happy family perpetuates valuable inborn qualities; it also reproduces the conditions in which these qualities can develop to the best advantage."
If these values are preserved and reinforced in man's evolutionary future, our
distant descendants would be less macabre than Haldane depicts. They would be less likely than he suggests to strike us as criminals. The metamorphosis eventually realized in a new geological epoch would bear a closer resemblance than he has conveyed to the transformation we would
like to see brought about tomorrow. I have said nothing about the other sixty-
two essays in this book. They range over a wide assortment of topics which have been classified under twelve general headings. These include geological, meteorological and astronomical subjects, a popular outline of zoology (most readable), examples of animal behaviour, evolution, and accounts of six great men. My enjoyment of these essays has been enhanced by an impression (which may be misleading) that they exhibit less political bias than their forerunners. They encourage the hope that later collections may altogether avoid this bias. Political innuendo and propaganda, which mix badly with science, have for many readers spoiled much of Haldane's popular writings, and they have undoubtedly impeded the general recognition of his true status as a thinker
and teacher.
Eugenls Review, Vol. XLIV,lNo. 8

