STERILIZATION IN SWITZERLAND

Professor Hans Maier's Address at the Royal Colle,e of Surgeons

AT the Royal College of Surgeons, abortion was authorized. The opinion of each

London, on September 28th, Professor specialist was furnished in writing to the

Hans Maier, director of the Psychiatric surgeon before the operation, and the docu-

Clinic of the University of Zurich, read a ments were preserved by him for a given

paper on the practical experience of steriliza- period. It was noteworthy, especially in

tion in Switzerland over the past fifty years. view of the fact that the laws respecting

Sir Humphry Rolleston, President of the damage to the integrity of the person and the

Eugenics Society, was in the chair.

guardianship of minors conformed broadly

August Forel, who became director of the to those obtaining in Western Europe,

Zurich Mental Hospital (Burgh6lzli) fifty years that no special legislative enactments had

ago, instituted out-patient clinics for early been sought; nevertheless this procedure had

treatment; and he included, said Professor proved a sufficient safeguard to both sides,

Maier, prevention of procreation among the the courts having held the term " thera-

prophylactic measures applied to patients peutic grounds " to cover the protection (by

with hereditary disorders. Interruption of prophylaxis) of unborn children, and indeed

pregnancy and sterilization formed part of racial hygiene in the widest sense of the

the normal armoury in Swiss psychiatry, words.

both among private practitioners and in Dr. Maier brought out two further points

public hospitals; but in the Zurich area the of great importance. First, that marriage

machinery for collaboration between those without procreation, thus without parental

concerned (namely-the patient, his family, and added economic responsibilities, was

the general practitioner, the communal frequently held to have such therapeutic

authority with its social workers, the hos- value as to warrant sterilization of mental

pital, and the recognized specialists) was patients, quite apart from the eugenic

most completely developed, and here, too, motive. Secondly, that though eugenic con-

were performed the largest number of opera- siderations were accepted as valid in a

tions in proportion to the size of the popula- common-sense way, in practice they rarely

tion. During the past four years, in this area stood alone, and additional grounds for

of 400,000 inhabitants, there had been 500 sterilization or other operative interference

requests for interruption of pregnancy alone. were found to be present in almost all cases.

The procedure which had been gradually Sterilization of the feeble-minded was

evolved and now obtained was as follows: rendered relatively easy in Switzerland

when the surgeon or the surgical clinic owing to the high civil and legal ideals

received a request for operation, the patient obtaining in that country. Those unable by

was sent forward for examination to the reason of their mental condition or anti-

appropriate special clinic (e.g. the ear hos- social tendencies to assume the full personal

pital, the tuberculosis centre, or the mental and parental responsibilities of the married

hospital); and, when the case was not state could not get a licence in the civil

primarily mental, it was sent also to the courts; furthermore, the Communes were

psychiatric clinic to discover whether sterili- unwilling to contemplate the financial burden

zation was likely to be contra-indicated on of caring for illegitimate children. It fol-

psychiatric grounds. With few exceptions lowed that insane and feeble-minded persons

interruption of pregnancy and sterilization who were likely to procreate had to be

were carried out simultaneously, though retained in institutions, except when they had

frequently in " constitutional " cases the undergone sterilization. In many cases life in

husband was examined and sterilized before the community was regarded as " healthier,"

I73 C

I74

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and the recommendation for sterilization disorders with which they were concerned.

then went forward on therapeutic grounds. It was true that " carriers" could present

It was interesting to learn that the Burg- themselves for operation, but at present such

h6lzli institution had almost as many patients cases came mostly from highly intelligent

at a time boarded out on licence as in families, so that some loss had to be set

hospital.

against the gain. It would be by the spread

In replying to questions and discussion, of such demands among those who were

Professor Maier stated that differences in relatively irl-endowed by nature that dis-

practice existed between the various Cantons. cernible eugenic results could be anticipated.

Nevertheless, the line of demarcation of This brief summary can give only the most

feeble-mindedness was much the same inadequate indication of the importance of

throughout the country, and comparable Professor Hans Maier's paper for students of

with that which was adopted in South Ger- the problems that formed its subject. For

many. Great care was taken in Zurich not an accurate picture of the Swiss experience

to operate on patients under twenty, in order of sterilization, and surveys of the social

to ensure correct differentiation between effects of this measure as well as its-effects

cases of late development and those of true on the patients themselves, the complete

defect. As to the eugenic results, Professor paper must be consulted.*

Maier pointed out that such conservative

work as had up to the present been carried

out could not be expected to do more than prevent an increase in the prevalence of the

* Professor Maier's paper will be published in full in our next issue.

THE BIOLOGY OF SEX-THE SEXUAL IMPULSE IN YOUTH-SEXUAL DEVIATION -THE EROTIC SYMBOLISMS-HOMOSEXUALITY-MARRIAGE-THE ART OF LOVE
A MANUAL FOR STUDENTS
HAVELOCK ELLIS
Demy 8vo. Price I2S. 6d. net The Times Literary Supplement: " It is to be hoped that the general reader will take this opportunity under Dr. Ellis's masterly guidance to acquaint himself with the workings of that impulse described by Rank as' the last emotional resource which the exaggerated rationalization of our education has left us.' " BERTRAND RUSSELL, in the New Statesman: " Few books on the subject of sex can be so confidently recommended to all and sundry as this truly admirable volume. . . . Its views on marriage are sane,
and even somewhat conservative. But what above all recommends the book is its universal charity,
resulting from the attempt at an understanding at once sympathetic and scientific." H. J. MASSINGHAM, in the Sunday Times: " A study of fundamentals by the wisest English thinker of the twentieth century. . A light-bringer for the average man and woman whose ignorance of their own psycho-physical processes is scarcely less dense to-day than it was in the days when the primary constituents of being fell under an implacable taboo." The Practitioner: " An authoritative work, moderate in tone, extremely well written, and fully up to date from a scientific point of view."
Prospectus on application.
WILLIAM HEINEMANN (MEDICAL BOOKS) LTD
99 GREAT RUSSELL STREET, LONDON, W.C.i
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 8.

