.EXTERNAL MIGRATION*
U By R. S. WALSHAW

GE in the population of any that in a few years' time the population will

-during a specified period is begin to decline. When the number of

t about by three factors. The births begins to fall short of the number of

of births obviously produces an deaths, our natural increase will become a

the population. On the other natural decrease. A net loss by migration

causes a decrease. The third in such circumstances will not simply mean

tion, takes account of all parting with a fraction of our natural

wo cross the boundary of the increase, as in the past; it will mean adding

. Those who enter add to the to our natural decrease. Who can doubt,

and are called immigrants. Those therefore, that very soon the subject of

to leave cause a loss and may external migration will begin to occupy a

ngts. Both emigration and far more important place in the public mind

are included in the one term than it does now?

The conditions during the years immedi-

13ritish Isles the number of births ately preceding the war led to an enormous

the number of deaths and there flow of emigration to the Dominions.

e a natural increase. During the During the decade I902 to I9II, emigration

92I-30, for example, the popula- took away 34 * 6 per cent. of our natural

Bitish Isles gained a little over increase-which was much bigger then than

by births, and lost about 6 million it is now, and meant I67,000 persons a

The natural increase was there- year.

3 million. But the population did During the war, and the difficult years of

by 3 million; it only increased repatriation, however, there was practically

million. This was owing to a loss no migration. At the end of the war, owing

m on by migration. During the to the conditions prevailing in the mother

million more people left the country and the Dominions, in addition to

es than entered. Thus about the greatly increased cost of passages,

of the 3 million natural increase spontaneous emigration did not begin again.

t. to be exact) was offset by In I920, the short period of artificial

prosperity came to an end and widespread

generally realized that migration depression followed. It became apparent

such an important part in keeping that emigration would not be resumed on a

rate of increase of population voluntary basis. At the same time, attention

try-even though this has been was drawn to the sparsity of population in

of- affairs for more than half a those overseas portions of the Empire

Evi er since I870 up to I93I (apart inhabited by English-speaking people. It

unieties and the war years) migra- was generally agreed that a better distribu-

continually removed as much as tion of the white population of the Empire

of our natural increase.

was urgently desirable, and it seemed that

well known that the repro- both the home country and the Dominions

in this country is now well would benefit if migration could be stimu-

ent level, and it is predicted lated.

The problem resolved itself into two

before the Eugenics Society on Decem. Some figures which have more recently
have been incorporated in the Tables.

parts. The first was to ensure that British
emigrants would get work on arriving in one

39

40 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of the Dominions. The second was to arrange Secondly, with regard to emigra

that they and their families should be able the introduction of restrictions by*

to reach that employment. It was with these United States in I92I helped to keep e

aims in view that the Empire Settlement tion from the United Kingdom in I922 d

Act was passed in I922. It enabled the to I74,000. In I923, which was the

Government of this country to contnbute year to benefit by the Empire Settle

yearly up to £3,000,000 upon approved Act, there was also a temporary

schemes for the assistance of emigrants. revival; emigration increased by n

With slight modifications this Act is still in 8o,ooo. In I924 there was an acute fall

force. I55,000 mainly owing to further restrict

Before considering the operation of the by the United States. During the five y

Act, we shall first refer to some of the figures I925-9, emigration from the United

regarding migration to and from overseas dom always exceeded 140,000, but qui

since the war (see Table I). First with regard fell when the effects of the world depr

to immigration: the flow of British nationals were experienced. In I93I emigration

into the United Kingdom consists mainly of to be smaller than immigration-with

officials of the Colonial and Indian services result that, for the first time in our

returning on retirement; also of settlers (since figures have become available),-

returning in order to retire. The age group United Kingdom gained population

of immigrants is therefore substantially result of migration. Since the depr

higher than that of emigrants. Before the emigration has not yet begun to ex

world depression, this inward stream immigration again; and the resultant

remained very nearly constant, at about of people towards this country continues

55,000 persons a year. During the depression, mask the approach of the day when

however, the stream increased-in I932 it population will cease to increase.

reached as many as 76,ooo-being augmented With regard to the destination of e

mainly by the return of recent emigrants grants from the United Kingdom;

who had failed to establish themselves. I922 the proportion of emigration dir

Since I932 the inward stream has gradually to countries within the Empire has rem

gone back to normal again.

very nearly constant, at about 8o per

This is a little odd considering that e

TABLE I

tion to countries outside the Empire v

UNITED KINGDOM
MIGRATION OF BRITISH NATIONALS TO AND FROM OVERSEAS

with general depression or prosperity as case may be. It almost suggests, at

(in thousands)

outset, that the Empire Settlement

Year. Immigrants.

Emigrants.

Emiants Assisted under
the Empire Settlement Act.

has been operated in accordance with dep

1922 68 23 58* 24 64

174 256*
155

6 36 41

sion. The Act was put into operation v

25 56
26 51
27 56 28 59

141 I67
154 137

39
65 6I 48

promptly. But by I927 the figure assisted emigration stood only at abo 6o,ooo instead of the 8o,ooo anticipat

29 56 30 66
31 7' 32 76

1I44
92
34 27

72t
29$
A
o06

Quantitatively, therefore, the Act by means reached expectations. But the fa that by the end of that year, the repayme

33 59 34 50 35 46

26
29 30

02
03 02

of advances made to emigrants exceed the budgeted figure by as much as £8,

36 47

30

02 suggests that those who were assisted w

37 43 1938 41

32
34

0-4 I *6

* InDudes Irish Free State up to April ist, 1923.

Includes Includes Includes

3317,70,,00o00o0offufluulfl-llf--affraaerr.ep-eappyaaiyynimgnggpppaaaSsgSnegeegrserssuuunnndddeerrttthhheeeL£bXorrraaattteee

to to to

Canada. Canada. Canada.

able to establish themselves. The administrative machinery set up
operate the Act did not fail to arran sufficient schemes, nor did it fail to produ

EXTERNAL MIGRATION

4I

recruits. But at no time was transferred with them. Further, even assume to spend the money voted ing that the necessary capital is available, tin 1922 for the purpose of if the settlers are unable to find a market for ent. The number of people their produce, they cannot be successful. overseas, if assisted, was very Thus, unless the Dominions are receiving an bly in excess of the number inflow of capital, in addition to being assured were willing to accept. Before of markets for their produce, they are not in receive assistance, it was a position to accept immigrants on any be accepted by one of the considerable scale. being a suitable settler; and What has happened to the two factors, lmited their selection mainly money and markets, since the war is well ts., known. Bad trade and high taxation have to Canada reached a maximum made it difficult for the capitalist to set 1929, the most prosperous of the aside money for investment abroad; con-
between I924 and I936 sequently the flow of capital from the
tion to Canada amounted to United Kingdom to the Dominions has been these about one-third were very limited. But probably the most impor* the same period, 3Io,000 tant check which has dominated oversea t to Australia and New settlement since the war has been the unthese, nearly 6o per cent. were satisfactory condition of trade which has to 1926, assisted emigration to prevailed generally. All the Dominions have
but in 1927, owing to had great difficulty in finding markets for ent in her closely settled their produce. For this reason, New Zealand * changed their policy and was compelled in I926 virtually to suspend -cut down immigration. The immigration. Much has been done to improve fond in most cases that the trade between the United Kingdom and the of carrying out a scheme Dominions; but in spite of the slow imwas greater than they had provement which occurred in our trade with There was no shortage of the Dominions up to I927, the Dominions end; the difficulty was, never became sufficiently assured of markets of placing settlers in em- to be capable of receiving immigration on a
large scale. of assisted emigration since the Even so, between I924 and I936 as many
aclusively that the problem of as I,164,000 emigrants left the United
ent cannot be considered in Kingdom. What has been the effect of this only as a part of the general movement on our population ? Emigrants peration within the Empire. from this country have never consisted of t of view of the Dominions, a random sample of the population. Our
, money and markets-are population is by no means homogeneous; are very intimately inter- there are differentiating characteristics such
other. Even though State as age, sex, health, intelligence, enterprise le, it is quite impossible to and so on. During last century these factors estion of men either from the were of little importance from the point of
ey or from the question of view of emigration, because we then had a ly, unless fresh capital is growing (and perhaps surplus) population; the Dominions in order that also the cause of emigration then was almost
p their natural resources, invariably some form of failure or discontent. never be able to find work. But the trend of our population has futile for men to emigrate changed since those days; so also has the
Kingdom to the Dominions character of emigration. By the turn of the
oding amount of capital is century, emigration had been raised to a

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

better plane, and it has since become a the non-French parts of Canada no

selective process. Factors such as the age, have a replacement rate. If these Do

sex and health of emigrants have begun to are to become adequately peopi

assume special significance. But as emigration importance of immigration cannot be

in recent years has never reached as much emphasized. It is evident that it will

as i per cent. of our working population, be impossible for the United Kingdol

we must not exaggerate the practical im- continue the traditional role by parting

portance of the effect of emigration upon a fraction of the natural increase;

our national stock.

very long there will be no natur

It is well known that all countries refuse crease.

to admit persons sub-normal in health and When our population begins to deci

intelligence. The right of the Dominions to although it seems unlikely that barn

choose their immigrants is seldom disputed; be placed upon emigrating from this c

but we must not overlook the fact that the it seems very improbable that public

Dominions have imposed standards requiring will then continue to support the expe

an intellectual and physical capacity which of public money for the purpose of

is probably above the average. Also, with people to leave this country for

regard to enterprise: as all emigrants are Judging by experience since the war,

self-selected, emigration takes away the assistance, emigration to Australia

ambitious rather than the lethargic.

Zealand is likely to be very smalli

As to the sex of emigrants: emigration Australia and New Zealand must th

since the war has taken away more males begin to look to countries other than

than females. In I926, for example (a Britain for immigrants. Up to the

typical year), the percentage of males among they have shown no signs of being

emigrants from the United Kingdom was do this.

53-7. Emigration therefore accentuates the

excess of females which already exists in our While there is no doubt that the

population.

in fertility is cutting off the sup

With regard to the age of emigrants: migrants from the United Kingdom,

emigration takes away the young rather is a part of the British Isles which con

than the old. In a typical year, I928 for to be a source of migrants; namely So

example, 85 per cent. of the males who Ireland. During the pre-war years, no

emigrated were under 30 years of age. did it become customary for the I

Emigration therefore has a damaging effect emigrate; it became a tradition that

on the age composition of our population. went to America. Only about ii per-

Of our total male population in I928, males used to go to the Dominions. Since t

between the ages of i8 and 30 constituted the proportion of Irish emigrants d

2I per cent.; but they composed as much for the Dominions has been even less

as 55 per cent. of the total male emigrants. before the war. As Irish Free State ci

Thus, emigrants are drawn excessively from are not eligible for assistance unde

persons approaching and reaching the age Empire Settlement Acts, emigration

when marriage is most usual, and who may Southern Ireland to Australia and

be considered as potential parents. Emigra- Zealand has been negligible, because

tion therefore affects the trend and the cost. Although the passage to Cana

average quality of our population far more about the same as to America, and

seriously than by mere subtraction. From Free State citizens are free to enter

the point of view of health, intelligence, very few have done so. Nearly a

enterprise, sex and age, emigrants tend to Southern Irish emigrants going ov

be drawn from those elements in our popula- since the war have selected their tradi

tion which we need most.

destination, the United States.

Australia and New Zealand and probably But the restriction introduced b

EXTERNAL MIGRATION

43

the war has affected When the population of Great Britain

in that a very much begins to decline and the supply of native

of Southern Irish emi- labour decreases, there is the possibility that

Great Britain. During the demand for labour may increase. In

I924-35, 14I,000 people these circumstances it appears most unlikely

Irish Free State to the that the United Kingdom Government will

this represents as much begin to restrict Irish immigration. But, in

fthe total emigrants leaving view of the unimpeded influx of Southern

compared with 9 per cent. Irish citizens into Great Britain, expenditure

by the United Kingdom Government in order

TABLE II

to transfer its own citizens to the Dominions

RMOM THE IRISH FREE STATE

would already appear somewhat anom-

(in housatids)
aited England plhio and Wales (Liverpool)
t8o 7-2 3.2
8.8 5o0 50
*884 -8 -0o5

Scotland (Glasgow)
io*8
3-8
30

alous. The chief difficulty with regard to Empire
Settlement since the war has been to supply the Dominions with agriculturalists from the

17.7
'5
K8-*96

I3-0 47'-84
49

4.8
4.8 6-o
4-3

-5.2 population of the United Kingdom, which is

4.2
-0-2

mainly urban. It is therefore ironical that

3 0 many of the Southern Irish citizens who have

948 6-5 4.7 X3.0 8-7 5.7
113 7-6 6-3

42.-32
30

recently entered Great Britain should have come from the Irish countryside. Are not

12X26-64 II73..70
32 3 28-I

4-8
64 8-2

34 4.6 4.2

some of these the very people the Dominions are looking for ?

28.3 306 10-3 -2 9 Up to the present, public interest in Irish

28-3 9.5

immigration into this country has centred

to 1931 migration from the mainly on the economic consequences of the

to Great Britain averaged movement; particularly in the Liverpool

gyear. Since I93I immigration and Glasgow areas. There are, however,

ias been virtually prohibited; other aspects of importance. With regard to

Fnigrants have been returning the health of Irish immigrants: judging by

ree State from America. It is the heavy and arduous nature of the work

iurprising that after that year many of them take up, there is little doubt

vement from the Irish Free that their physical capacity is above the

t Britain became more pro- average. With regard to their age: from

bl II shows that during the last what we know of Irish life, we infer that the

influx has increased rapidly, majority are young; their average age is

es 30,000 persons a year. said to be about twenty. As to their sex:

into America again becomes in recent years, the influx has brought many

ioubt some of the emigrants more women than men; between I926 and

-ent attracted to settlement I936 Southern Irish immigrants entered

* might go to America. But Great Britain in the ratio of three females

certain that they would to two males. Also, with regard to their

permissible quota. They fell fertility: Irish newcomers are likely to have

quota in I928 and I929; a somewhat larger family than our native-

* by emigration from the born population.

I929 was considered a In view of both the trend and the general

for emigration to America: quality of our population, these facts con-

t during those two years, at cerning Southern Irish immigrants are not

Irish who came to Great without significance. But the arrival of these

y did so because they people is only the beginning of their story.

Britain to America.

Between I924 and 1935 nearly 40 per cent.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of the Irish influx was received by the consume without working. But it is not

Liverpool region, and in that area the for an alien to obtain permission to resi

Merseyside Survey showed that the per- this country for a long period. Each

centage of Irish immigrants living in over- judged on its merits, and the i

crowded conditions and the percentage officers are responsible for deciding w

below the poverty line are both higher than or not the country would benefit b

for the population as a whole: I2 to IO-8 particular alien living here. Is there

for overcrowding, and i6 7 to i6 for remotest possibility that he (or she) w

poverty. Also, although the mean number of ever become a public charge.? Would he

children born to Irish families is 4-3 com- day be obliged to find work and so re

pared with 3 * 9 for the population as a whole a national in employment? What is

more of them die; when the number living is source of his income and will it alwa!

considered, the advantage sinks to 3 - 2 to 3. sufficient to maintain him comfo

Such questions, together with many o

So far we have been concerned with the must all be answered favourably, and

movement of British citizens. Now we turn case of a young man, with a wide m

to the movement of aliens to and from the certainty, before he would be allo

United Kingdom. The term " alien " means reside here.

a person who is not a British subject. In Between I922 and I926 the aliens 1

this connection it should be remembered, this country were as numerous as th

however, that British nationals include entered; consequently the number of

persons from all parts of the Empire; Irish eigners living here remained practically

from Eire, negroes from Nigeria, Chinese changed. Since I927, however, the m

from Hong Kong, Indians and so on.

stream has exceeded the outward s

The landing of aliens is limited to certain From 1927 to I932 the inward baln

specified ports, and the immigration officers aliens into the United Kingdom ave

stationed there have the power to prohibit 4,000 persons a year. Between I933

the landing of any undesirable alien. Most I937 the average figure rose to 8,ooo

of the aliens entering this country (such as a year.

business men and tourists, and those who Refugees have added to the move

come here on their way overseas) have no intention of remaining for long; they
simply come and go.

TABLE III IMMIGRATION OF ALIENS Net gain by the United Kingdom

Those aliens who arrive with a view to taking up employment are only allowed to

Yea
I927 28

Total 2,303 4,333

land if they can produce permits which have
previously been issued to their employers by the Ministry of Labour. The number of permits granted has increased gradually
(apart from the depression years), up to 2I,OOO in I937. As these permits only

29 7,890 30 4,488
31 2,275
32 3,228 33 8,091 34 5,821 Austrians 35 6,042 1,39I 1.87
36 Io,i66 3,35I 3,13

enable foreigners to work here for six or nine months, most of these aliens can hardly

37
1938

II,459 15,214

S,II6 3,531

1,98
7,29

be considered as true immigrants. But those

ALIENS RESIDING IN THE UNITED KINGDOM

alien women who marry British become

TOTAL (May 1937) ... 193,653 (52% mal

British subjects.

Registered in Metropolitan

It is paradoxical to find that, while we Police Area (Nov. I938) iIg,688(49% mal

strictly limit the number of incoming alien workers and producers, we welcome those

Nadonality Germans Austrians

Total (May 30th, 1938) Refugees (ov. X
21,871 (45% males) 8,605 (56%/m
i6,ooo (8i% females) 2,369 (52%

foreigners who happen to be in a position such that they and their dependants can

Italians 20,289 (60% males)

Czecho-Slovakians

(DIec,aI29o3o8)

EXTERNAL MIGRATION

45

have not been entirely not refugees; if they wished, they could

increase. The number of return to their respective countries without

to enter and remain in this fear of discrimination on political, religious
X33 is officially stated to be or so-called racial grounds. But they

On the average, therefore, evidently prefer to live in this country

T.Iual influx of about 6,ooo rather than in any other. Residence of at

refugees, during the last least five years is always required before an

alien can be naturalized; but any children

lien immigration has almost born to aliens in this country are, ipso facto,

Table III shows that the British subjects.

n 1935 to io,ooo in I936 was With regard to the sex of alien immigrants:

mainly by the inward balance the figures quoted show that while alien

ing from I,300 to 3,300, and men and women reside here in about equal

increasing from i,8oo to numbers, the sex proportion of different

37 the total alien influx nationalities varies considerably. As to their

of whom 45 per cent. were age distribution: (and neglecting the refugee

e available information for children arriving in the last few months),

suggests that a high fig- as the presence of young children always

mmigration is being main- tends to retard the movement of families, we

infer that the bulk of alien immigrants have

last ten years the total alien been adults, and that the age group in which

the United Kingdom has most of them occur is very probably an older

to more than 6o,ooo. This one than for our population as a whole.

ber of aliens residing in this It is evident that the alien section of our

about 200,000, about 52 per population is being allowed to grow very

males. More than half are rapidly, and that alien immigration is now

the London area. The Italians bigger than it has ever been since the war.

ber about 20,000, 6o per cent. But considered as a group it is surprising how

There are about 2I,800 Ger- little we know about these people. The

cent. being males, and about official publication each year of many details

,of whom as many as 8i per concerning alien immigrants as a group

(particularly the newcomers) seems to be

of aliens living in this country called for.

ees is not known exactly, The recent influx of prolonged alien

is often difficult to determine visitors, together with the continued increase

a person is a refugee. Figures (apart from the depression years) in the

cannot be exhaustive, because number of alien workers coming with

aliens obtaining permission to permits, and the slight upward tendency in

for business, study and so on naturalization since the war, all suggest a

ees. But the number of distinct readiness on the part of aliens to

entering and remaining in take advantage of the position. In view of

sice I933 is about 8,6oo, 56 the decline which is to occur in our popula-

males. Austrian refugees tion, and the serious effect which any future

t 2,300, of whom 52 per cent. emigration to the Dominions will have on

e number of Czecho-Slovakian our population, it would appear that the

rized to enter this country time is not far distant when we may have

1938) is I,200.

to consider seriously either a more liberal

rtion of our prolonged alien system of labour permits for aliens, or a freer

been resident in this country system of naturalization or both.

and are perhaps, in effect, There are differentiating characteristics

society. Many of them are among aliens just as there are in our own

46 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

population: age, sex, intelligence, enterprise, health and so on. Who can doubt that among the numerous aliens who wish to live (and work) in this country, there may be many with characteristics such that they would form desirable additions to our
population? If anthropologists and other

scientific men could decide even on soX
the biological aspects of immigration give some sort of guidance as to which 4
are desirable as permanent members o society, what has in some quarters called an alien menace could very qu be turned into an immense opportum

Current and Standard ENGLISH, PRENCH and GERMAN Literature in MEDICAL, CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL and PHYSICAL SCIENCE
supplied from stock, or obtained promptly to order.

A visit to this Department is respectfully suzAested. Please write for CATALOGUES, mentioninA interests.

H. K. LEWzIS &Co. Ltd. PPhhoonnee:: EEUUSSttoonn 44228822 ((55 lliinne-s))

136 GOWER STREET

LONDON

W.C.1

