THE POPULATION PROBLEMS OF INDIA
AND PAKISTAN
By Dr. S. CHANDRASEKHAR
Professor of Economics, Annamalai University, India
I NDIA'S population problem arises Hence the importance, if not the danger, in primarily out of an extremely high fer- the number of India's teeming millions to her tility, accompanied by a high mortality economic and social development and her
which is only slowly declining. The resulting place in the modem world. increase in numbers, which amounted to more than four million a year in an un- Growth of Population divided India, apart from the very low sur- The population of the combined Dominions vival value, need not constitute a problem of India and Pakistan to-day is nearly 450 if the additional population could be absorbed million, or about a fifth of the total world without reduction in the standard of living. population. The estimated population of the But this standard is so low that any further two Dominions for I947 was 336 million for addition to the number of poor families could India and 7I million for Pakistan, but these well be disastrous; and such families are are only estimates, probably under-estimates, indeed so numerous that any further increase as there are many unknown factors in Indian in the total population must intensify what demography. is already a great problem. India's density in In the sixteenth century, according to agricultural as well as in the poorer strata of some rough estimates, the population of the urban society, though not as great as in subcontinent was about ioo million. In the certain overcrowded parts of the world, is too middle of the nineteenth century the figure great to permit an attitude of laissez-faire; reached about I50 million. In i88i, when the it is difficult to see how more people could be first regular, although incomplete, census was taken care of. Nor is there any migration taken, the population stood at 254 million. outlet for the Indian people. Even if some In I93I, fifty years later, the census revealed countries could welcome Indians as immi- 353 million, representing an increase of grants, they cannot possibly receive four io-6 per cent over the I92I figure. The last million people a year; nor is it reasonable to census of I94I showed a total of 389 million expect such a large number of " stay-at- -i.e. an increase of 50 million (I5 per cent) home" people to move out of India every over the I93I figure. The I95I census may year. The net addition of four or more show a similar increase, if the present trends million a year, or fifty million in a decade, or of mortality and fertility continue. a grand total of 350-400 or even more million The rate of increase of the Indian populain India, need not constitute a problem if an tion, though high, has not been abnormal. overwhelming majority of the population, For instance, between I872 and i941 the not to speak of everyone, enjoyed the irre- population of undivided India grew by 54 per ducible minimal requirements of decent cent. The United Kingdom during the same
human existence in terms of food, health, period increased by 56 per cent., and Japan
clothing, shelter, employment and leisure for by I36 per cent. So the rate of increase has recreation. But this is not so in India and, not been very rapid. But the growth over what is worse, is the well-known and de- the years has not been uniform, for the conpressing qualitative aspect of the Indian trolling factor has not been increasing ferpopulation problem. And as the quality of tility but fluctuating mortality. The populathe people is related to its numbers it cannot tion has responded to the presence or absence be improved unless these are controlled. of wars, famines and epidemics. As these
70

THE POPULATION PROBLEMS OF INDIA AND PAKISTAN

71

checks appeared or disappeared, the popula- fertility is the most important, for inter-

tion grew and declined accordingly. Volun- national lack of balance in fertility consti-

tary limitation of births has not played any tutes the crux of the world population

significant role in determining the size of the problem. Within a nation fertility differen-

Indian population. Till i9oi the population tials between different ethnic, cultural,

was almost stationary. The years between economic and religious groups constitute a

I9OI and I92I witnessed an irregular and serious problem in the formulation of any

spasmodic growth of population. But be- democratic population policy.

tween I92I-3I and I93I-4I the country If Indian vital statistics are accepted as

registered a growth of io 6 and I5 per cent fairly reliable, despite their well-known

respectively. And if the present public health inadequacy due to under-registration, we

conditions continue unaccompanied by any find that the birth rate is between 45 and 50.

famine, the I95I census may show a large The figure for I94I is 43, and this is compar-

addition.

able to high birth rates in Egypt (47 in I940),

But the problem in the Indian subcon- Palestine (40 in I935), Puerto Rico (40 in

tinent is not the rate of increase but the net I942), and Mexico (42 in I940). A discussion

addition to the existing population every of the corrections to be made in the estimated

decade. Because of the large existing and recorded rates of fertility cannot be

population even a modest rate of increase of entered into for lack of space, but Table i

IO or I5 per cent yields a net gain of some gives India's birth and death rates per

50 million (as during I93I to I94I), in itself thousand from I885 to I935. The significant

larger than the population of any European fact about the birth rate is not that it is one

country except Germany or Russia, or any of the highest in the world, but that it has

Latin-American country. And it is this large shown no signs of decline during the last

net addition that constitutes the problem, fifty years. It is obvious from the table that

for it nullifies all efforts to improve the there is no definite downward trend and the

admittedly very low standard of living of the little variation that is seen must be taken to

Indian people. All efforts to increase the be a natural and normal fluctuation for such

production of food, other commodities and a high figure.

services to give a better share per head to the As for rural-urban fertility differentials,

existing population are largely frustrated by the experience of India conforms to that of

I885-90 I890-OI
I90I-II
1911-21
1921-3I
1931-35

TABLE i BIRTH AND DEATH RATES OF INDIAN SUBCONTINENT PER THOUSAND SINCE 1885

Birth Rate

Death Rate

Natural Increase

Recorded Estimated Recorded Estimated Recorded Estimated

... ... ...

36

26

-

... ... ...

34

-

31

-

... ... ...

38

50.7

34

44 2

4

6.5

... ... ...

37

49 3

34

44 2

3

5.1

... ... ...

35

46.7

26

33 8

9 12*9

**

35 46 7 24 31I*2 II

15'5

an increasing addition to the population. Thus, in the present circumstances, improvements in the Indian standard of living and the increasing growth of population are incompatible.
Fertility Among all demographic factors the rate of

other countries. In Western and industrialized countries, the decline in fertility began in urban areas, and the rural areas tended to follow the downward trend after a time lag. This has been so because industrialization has been accompanied by the widespread
adoption of the planned-family habit. Though India may conform to this

72 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

experience eventually it has not done so yet. Mortality

The lower fertility in Indian urban areas must The population growth of the subcontinent

be explained in terms of the adverse sex ratio during the last century has been conditioned

in the cities where the relative paucity of mainly by the high but fluctuating death

females and the absence of wives are note- rate. Famines, epidemics, the general in-

worthy. Indian industrial workers have a sanitary environment and wars have con-

rural background, and they come to the tributed to the death rate, though the last

cities in seach of employment only when they factor has almost disappeared in the last half-

are faced with agrarian distress. As such century. During " normal " years the death

they come to the cities single, unaccompanied rate has been consistently high because of the

by their wives and children. When agricul- striking lack of public sanitation and

tural conditions improve, many of these hygiene, and widespread mal- and under-

industrial workers return to their villages nutrition of the population. The death rate

and to agriculture. Another reason for this rose distressingly during bad years, when

rural-urban fertility differential may be the epidemics and famine broke out owing to

high infant mortality rate in the cities. Thus scarcity of food. It can be said with some

the differential cannot as yet be explained in truth that famine and epidemics alone have

terms of either the availability or the adop- controlled the growth of population in the

tion of contraceptive techniques.

Indian subcontinent during the last hundred

An examination of the fertility rates by years.

occupational and income groups reveals, The death rate is high-3o per thousand.

however, a slight decline in the high income The recorded death rate was 24 per thousand

groups. These groups generally embrace the for I93I, and 22 for I940, but these are

so-called higher castes, who have better under-estimates because of incomplete re-

educational qualifications, better jobs and turns. This means that more than I0 million

consequently a higher standard of living. people die every year in India and Pakistan!

Here again the lower fertility cannot be While the all-round death rate is appalling

explained in terms of birth control. Though enough, the death rate by various age groups

adequate data on the question are lacking, is equally unusual. The most disquieting

it seems probable that the cause lies in the factor of the death rate is the high incidence

social ban on widow remarriage, which of mortality among first-year infants, women

withdraws many women from potential in childbirth and women of the reproductive

motherhood. As this ban is not generally age groups. The infant mortality rate is very

observed among the lower income groups high-nearly one-fourth of the babies born'

(which roughly correspond to the so-called die during their first year! According to

low castes), their fertility is high. Thus, the official estimates, about half the deaths

small decline in fertility that is registered for among infants occur in the first month and,

certain groups of the Indian population has of these, nearly 6o per cent in the first week.

not become a marked trend and the differen- Mortality remains high throughout early

tial is not large enough to have an adverse childhood. About 49 per cent of the total

effect on the future growth of population. mortality in any given year is among those

The population in I95I for both the Do- below I0 years of age, while the correspond-

minions will be about 450 million, if the ing figure for England is only I2 per cent.

present fertility and mortality rates con- To sum up the mortality figures: out of

tinue. So if there is no change the only factor every hundred babies born, one-quarter die

that will contribute to the reduction of the by the time they can reach their first birth-

future growth of the Indian population will day. When the fifth birthday arrives, 40 per

be not the deliberate control of the birth cent have disappeared through death, and

rate but high mortality. And this is some- when the twentieth birthday is at hand only

thing that cannot be looked upon with 50 per cent are left! Only I5 per cent

equanimity.

survive to the sixtieth birthday.

THE POPULATION PROBLEMS OF INDIA AND PAKISTAN

73

As for maternal mortality the figures are available for urban areas, and such figures

equally shocking. Sir John Megaw, when he must be multiplied five- or six-fold to get a

was Director-General of Medical Services in complete picture for all India.

India, made a random sample survey, and For instance, according to official sources,

arrived at the maternal mortality rate of in normal years, malaria is responsible

23*5 per thousand births. That is, at least directly for at least one million deaths every

200,000 women die every year during child- year. This really means that at least three

birth; and of every thousand girl-wives million people die of malaria every year. If

I00 are doomed to die in childbirth!

three million people die of malaria, it also

But despite the present mortality rates, means that at least ten million people suffer

the average annual addition to the popula- from it. The cost of treating the affected

tion of both the Dominions was five million. people-granting that they get some kind of

During the last two decades there has been, treatment, expert or quack-and maintain-

however, a steady fall in the general mor- ing them in low health, and the indirect cost

tality rate. A further fall is bound to occur of man-hours lost in the fields, factories and

if the large-scale programmes for improving offices, must be enormous. W7hen patients

the health of the country by various planning have recovered from an attack of malaria

committees are effectively put into operation. their efficiency, already low as a result of

It has been calculated that even a slight poor nutrition, is impaired still further,

improvement in the present health condi- making them less resistant to the many

tions can save three million infant lives. diseases prevalent in the Indian countryside.

When this is done the population will in- Diseases ending in death are said to be selec-

crease not by five but by eight million a year. tive in the sense that they wipe out the

And it is possible that the 83 million increase weaker elements, but they cannot be said to

that took place between I92I and I94I could improve the quality of those who narrowly

take place between I94I and I95I. To re- escape death. If Indian morbidity statistics

peat: a planned and purposeful control of are interpreted in this manner, the resulting

mortality without a corresponding control picture is too grim to need any comment.

of the birth rate can only have disastrous Not only malaria, but cholera, kala-azar,

consequences for the Indian people.

smallpox, beri-beri, dysentery, tuberculosis,

To-day, however, the death rate is the hookworm disease, filariasis, guineaworm

decisive factor in Indian demography. No and venereal diseases are ever-present and

comment is necessary on this inordinate and take their toll. Then there are leprosy,

tragic loss of human lives. Nor is this all. blindness and partial-sightedness, mental

There are many who do not die but who, disorders and mental deficiency, and a score

because of the high and severe morbidity, of other infirmities. All these are curable or,

cannot be counted among the truly living, what is more important, in some measure

i.e. among those who are healthy, active and preventable, but the lack of comprehensive

gainfully employed.

and organized medical services manned by

an adequate number of competent personnel

Morbidity

makes the problem very formidable. Cura-

If the available information on birth and tive medicine will only half solve it. As long

death rates is somewhat incomplete and un- as vitality and resistance to disease are low,

reliable, that on the incidence of diseases is as they must be in the presence of so much

even more so. Rural India and Pakistan, poverty, malnutrition and ignorance, and as

which together shelter nearly 8o per cent of long as the insanitary and unhygienic

the total population, have no adequate hos- environment of the towns and villages per-

pitals, clinics or other general or specialized sists, any medical approach to this problem

medical services. Thus there is no way of can be only fragmentary.

estimating the total morbidity of the Despite the inadequacy of the returns on

population. Some information, however, is the specific causes of mortality, a rough idea

74 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

can be obtained for a representative pre-war cent of the girls married in India are below

year from Table 2, which summarizes the the age of fifteen. Though child marriage

death rates for I939. The general death rate as such has largely disappeared, most girls

of 22 -2 for I939 was distributed as shown in between I5 and 20 are already married. The

the table. It is highly probable that where girls in rural areas marry as soon as they

deaths have been unattended by doctors, as reach puberty, begin bearing children early

considerable numbers are, the returns usually and reduce the period of lactation, thereby

list " fever " as the cause of death. This lack possibly shortening the intervals between

of precise information nullifies the efforts of childbirths and increasing the number of

the public health department because the premature deaths.

authorities, who are anxious to control the The second factor is the universality of

death rate, do not know what exact causes marriage. Everyone sooner or later gets

contribute to the high death rate.

married. It is a quasi-religious duty. As

TABLE 2

DEATH RATES IN INDIAN SUBCONTINENT IN 1939

Dysentery Respira-

Cholera Smallpox Fevers and

tory

Diarrhoea Diseases

Deathsperi,oooofpopulation 0.4 0| 2 1 oZr 1|300

09

Percentage of total deaths ...

8

O9 58*I

0.5 4.I

Injuries
I8 8*I

All Other Causes
5.8
26*5

Social Factors

economic security is not a prerequisite to

The demographic situation of any region marriage and as there is generally no indi-

is largely the product of its peculiar social vidual choice in obtaining a partner, there is

characteristics, which in their turn affect no economic deterrent to marriage. For a

births, deaths and migration. The popula- representative census year like I93I we find tion problem in India might conceivably that 467 males and 492 females out of every

have been very different if the social institu- thousand were married. That is, taking into tions of early marriage, universality of consideration all widows, some widowers, and

marriage, the ban on widow remarriage and ascetics and mendicants, almost everyone

the joint Hindu family and other institu- of marriageable age was actually married.

tions and attitudes resulting in an adverse When factors favourable to the postpone-

sex ratio, among others, did not exist. But ment of marriage-e.g. prolonged education, as they do, with a socio-religious tradition lucrative employment, eagerness for per-

and sanction behind them, and as they condi- sonal and social advancement, free choice in

tion the lives of an overwhelming majority securing life's partners, and other considera-

of the people, the demographic problem has tions that operate in a normal Western

become what it is to-day.

society-will come to operate in India and

Early marriage and universality of mar- Pakistan, it is difficult to say. But the sooner

riage are dominant features of the social such considerations come to operate, the

scene. Indian girls attain puberty between nearer the Indian peoples will be to the

the ages of twelve and fifteen, and though solution of some of their social problems.

often physically immature they are physio- A third striking characteristic of the

logically ready to bear children. And cases Indian social scene is the scarcity of females.

are not wanting where reproduction has There has been a deficiency of women in the

begun at the age of fourteen or fifteen. The population throughout the Indian census

Report of the Age of Consent Committee history. In I94I there were only 934 females

and the reports of the All-India Womern's for every I,OOO males. In I93I and I92I the

Conference have estimated that nearly 50 per ratio was 940: I,OOO. The sex ratio in

THE POPULATION PROBLEMS OF INDIA AND PAKISTAN 75

England and Wales in I940 was I,000: 940, inbreeding is generally harmful, it does not

revealing a contrasting deficiency of males. explain the sex ratio at birth.

The steady fall in the proportion of females The available statistics tell a different

to males has been going on in India since story. Actually, between the ages of one and

I9OI, and the 195I census is not expected to five, India has an excess of girls, and only at

reveal any significant change.

the next age group the sex ratio is reversed

Several explanations have been offered for in favour of males. A more rational ex-

this phenomenon. Some explain it as the planation for the paucity of females is that

result of relative under-enumeration of though the female infant is definitely better

women. This is possible, but during the last equipped by nature for survival than the

fifty years the efficiency of the Indian census male the advantages she has at birth are

organization has consistently improved, yet probably neutralized in infancy by compara-

the adverse sex ratio has increased rather tive neglect, and in adolescence by the strain

than decreased. Some argue that excessive of bearing children too early and too often.

masculinity is an index of " racial " decad- As Hindu parents put a greater premium on

ence. But the sex ratio is more unfavourable male children, they are apt to treat female

in the north and north-west-parts of children with relative neglect, especially

present Pakistan region-where the so-called when they are assailed by infantile ailments.

" martial races " live. We have little know- This, coupled with early marriage and a high

ledge of what constitutes " racial decad- birth rate, results in more and earlier deaths

ence," and still less scientific evidence of its among women.

causes and symptoms. If there is any truth We have some comparable evidence in

in this explanation the virile people of the China that supports this view. Dr. Ta Chen,

north-west must be most decadent. As we discussing the sex ratio in the Kumming Lake

cannot have it both ways there seems to be region, observes: " It seems clear that in

little truth in this explanation.

China relatively more female infants are

Some others have offered a biological born, but as they grow up the male babies

explanation. According to the Census Com- gradually catch up with them in numbers,

missioner for Bombay (I92I) " the Indian evidently indicating a proportionately higher

caste system with its exogamous gotra mortality among female children. This may

(sept) and endogamous caste is a perfect be due to the fact that in the Far East gener-

method of preserving what is called in ally and in China particularly parents usually

genetics 'pure line.' The endogamy pre- put higher value on male children for the

vents external hybridization, while the perpetuation of the family line and for the

exogamy prevents the possibility of a fresh observance of filial piety. Thus female

pure line arising within the old one by the children are unconsciously neglected, thereby

isolation of any character not common to the leading to the higher death rate among

whole line." The Census Commissioner for them."

India (I93I), accepting this view, comments The social ban on widow remarriage is yet

" whether this proposition be entirely accept- another reactionary feature of Indian demog-

able or not, it may be conceded that if once raphy. The demographic situation is closely

a caste, whether as a result of inbreeding or interwoven with social problems, for one

some totally different factor, has acquired undesirable social institution leads to another,

the natural condition of having an excess of and so on, in an endless chain. This practice

males, this condition is likely to be per- of " socially sterilizing " the widows results

petuated as long as inbreeding is maintained." in considerable disparity in age between

This explanation is at best plausible, but we husbands and wives. Since most widowers

have very little knowledge about the pres- remarry and since they cannot marry widows,

ence of a genetic factor, if any, in the Hindu they have to seek wives among girls much

caste system. While there may be some truth their juniors. This leads to a still further

in this explanation in the sense that excessive increase in the number of widows, for the old

76 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

husband passes away, leaving his young wife yields. According to I939 official statistics

behind. And, of course, she cannot remarry. one-third of the cultivable land in both the

The disproportionate sex ratio and the Dominions lies idle-not fallow. The govern-

resulting deficiency of women keeps up the ment statistics for the undivided India (which

custom of early marriage for girls. As exclude the Indian States) are set out in

bachelors and widowers have to take brides Table 3, which shows that of a cultivable area

of any age they can get, the disparity between

TABLE 3

partners is increased. This difference in age UTILIZATION OF LAND IN INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

increases widowhood. Since widows cannot

IN I939

remarry, widowhood increases the already existing shortage of eligible brides-thus completing a vicious circle.

Agricultural Area of the Provinces
Net area of professional survey ...
Area under forest ... ... ...

Millions
of Acres
... 667 4 ... 89.5

The two significant facts that have emerged about the wasteful balance between

Area not available for cultivation ... Cultivable waste other than fallow
Fallow land ... ... ... ...

... 145 -0 ... I53 6
... 5I 0

births and deaths are the large decennial Net area sown with crops ... .. ... 229X9

increases in the population and the tre- of 432 million acres, only 53 per cent is sown

mendous human cost at which this increase with crops, ii -8 per cent is fallow, and not

is being maintained.

less than 35 *8 per cent is cultivable but left

waste. Then there is land " not available for

Improvement of Agriculture

cultivation." About this land the Royal

What is the way out? The problem of Agricultural Commission (India, I926) said:

population has to be considered in relation " It is difficult to believe that the whole of

to the means of sustenance, mainly food the vast area now classed as not available

supply. Nearly 70 per cent of the population for cultivation, amounting as it does to

is dependent on agriculture for a livelihood. I50 million acres, or 22X5 per cent of the

As the mouths to be fed every year increase, total area of British India (provinces), is

the area of productive land diminishes. That either not available for cultivation or not

there is pressure on the land of both Do- suitable for cultivation."

minions to-day cannot be denied. Agricul- The Dominions, therefore, have not ex-

ture is characterized by primitive methods of hausted their supply of cultivable land, and

farming, dependence on the vagaries of the what is cultivated appears to be eroded and

monsoon, subdivision and fragmentation of exhausted because of the primitive technique

land, consequent on the Hindu and Moslem of farming. With scientific agricultural

laws of inheritance which enjoin the suc- methods of erosion prevention and soil

cession of immovable property by all male reclamation the cultivated land can be made

heirs, usually in equal proportion, and lead to double its present yield and bring much of

to uneconomic holdings and to an excessive the so-called uncultivable waste under profit-

dependence by most people on the land for able cultivation. But such an improvement,

their livelihood. Moreover, a quasi-mediaval however welcome, would touch only a fringe

land-tax system has created a large number of the problem.

of parasitic middlemen who have come to While increased yield and greater acreage

possess undue rights on land, claiming a con- of cultivation are possible with the aid of

siderable share of the income arising from it science, they cannot by themselves afford a

which they do nothing to earn. The primi- better standard of living, or completely solve

tive technique of Indian farming is respon- the population problem, unless and until a

sible not only for the low yield per head, even substantial number of people now dependent

when compared to countries like Japan and on land are transferred to some other produc-

China, but also for the gradual deterioration tive employment, such as industry.

of land with soil erosion and deforestation.

This does not mean, however, that there Industrialization

is no scope for improving farms and their Industrialization is often offered as a

THE POPULATION PROBLEMS OF INDIA AND PAKISTAN

77

remedy for Indian population problems. A land in the world is either colonized or

discussion of the possibilities of rapid and under the control of some country or other.

large-scale industrialization of the sub- Whether or not some of these countries, like

continent is beyond the scope of this paper, Australia, Brazil and Canada, are thinly

but it must be pointed out that the basic populated with empty spaces, it is out of the

prerequisites for industrialization-namely, question, because these countries will not

raw materials, capital resources, skilled have millions of Indians as immigrants.

labour, a market and technological know- World conditions are not yet ripe for the

ledge-are already available in some measure. adoption of an international migration policy

The industrialization that has taken place based on the just needs and available re-

during the last thirty years, however, has not sources of various countries and peoples.

helped to ease population pressure, because it And once we grant, as we must, that every

has been piecemeal and unplanned, and the country must have the right to determine the

percentage of population gainfully employed composition of her population, we cannot

in modem industry has been less than i per object to the unwillingness of certain coun-

cent of the total. This haphazard industrial- tries, however thinly populated they may

ization has also led to the decay of cottage appear to be, to receive large numbers of

industries, causing further unemployment. immigrants from India and Pakistan. Nor

Only planned large-scale and rapid indus- do these Dominions wish to create unhappy

trialization and the development of cottage minority problems as in the Union of South

industries-for there need be no conflict Africa. The total number of Indians settled

between the two-can keep pace with the overseas as permanent immigrants to-day

growing population and siphon off the sur- amounts to about four and a half million,

plus population from the overcrowded land but the annual increase of population in the

to factories.

subcontinent is about five million. Even

Industrialization in both India and Pakis- were emigration outlets available it is un-

tan is important in the solution of their reasonable to expect a major portion of this

population problems for two reasons. It will annual increase to leave their homeland. For

increase the productivity of labour and India and Pakistan such relief may not even

create an abundance of badly needed com- be a temporary solution. All the available

modities and services and transform the evidence regarding the world's great migra-

present economy of scarcity into an economy tions shows that the immediate effect of

of abundance. Secondly, and this is probably large-scale emigration is to reduce the popula-

more important in these areas, industrializa- tion of the sending country, but that this

tion will encourage the development of new effect has always been short-lived because

urban patterns of living which lead to the the vacuum created is soon filled up.

control of the high birth rate. The " why " As for the possibility of internal migration

of this process need not be discussed here, as a method of relieving the population

but this has been the experience in the pressure, there is not much scope either,

United Kingdom, the United States and the because there are no empty spaces within the

West generally, and in Japan. There is no geographical confines of India and Pakistan.

reason why India and Pakistan should not There are, of course, certain provinces and

conform to this experience of other countries regions where the crude density per square

where industrialization has been accom- mile is relatively low, as in Assam in India

panied by declining fertility.

and in Baluchistan in Pakistan. During the

Migration

last fifteen years, half a million immigrants went to Assam from other provinces, par-

What about migration as a solution to these ticularly Bengal. The provision of some

population problems? As far as external or admittedly inferior land for half a million

internal emigration is concerned there seems people during a decade and a half, when the

to be no opening, because all the available country's population increased by more than

78 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

fifty million people, is only a drop of relief As severe famines or prosperity-promoting

in an ocean of increase.

irrigation projects are not annual occur-

Certain patterns of inter-provincial migra- rences, the impetus to migrate has not always

tion established in India during the last been present. Then there are other factors

thirty years show that such migration has that constantly nullify the urge to migrate.

been going on constantly. The Assam Conditions of climate, language, diet, man-

plantations, for instance, get their labour ners, customs and caste restrictions are not

supply chiefly from distant Chota Nagpur. uniform all over the subcontinent, and

The nearby Bengal peasants are not attracted people moving from one part of the country

by these plantations, nor are they absorbed to another may find themselves in a strange

by the Bengal jute mills, but they move in land, although they are among fellow

to occupy the land in the Assam valleys. Indians. Forsaking traditional homes and

The coal mines in Chota Nagpur do not farms in favour of distant places is fraught

attract the people nearby, and so labourers with psychological difficulties, even though

have to be recruited from the United Prov- the new homes promise relative affluence.

inces and Bihar. Then there is the continuous In these circumstances internal migration

rural exodus during times of agricultural dis- offers no substantial relief from population

tress. All these show that the-excess popula- pressure. And the partition of the country

tion is moving out into some neighbouring which has already forced communal migra-

province. We have no reliable figures, but tions upon both the Dominions renders the

these population movements are more of a prospects of further inter-provincial migra-

seasonal migration and do not have any tion dim.

permanent effects. And then, when one

group of people has moved out of a certain Birth Control

province, another group of people seems to The last and the most important solution

be moving in. So the net result of such is birth control. We need not discuss the

inter- and intra-provincial movements does question in general terms-science has long

not seem to constitute any relief to the since given its verdict in favour of contracep-

pressure on the land.

tion-but may consider the vital part it has

If migratory movements between different to play in Indian population policy, along

regions are to be explained as a response to with the modernization of agriculture and

the " pull " of prosperity from less crowded the industrialization of the national economy.

areas, rather than the " push " of poverty Apart from the general rural conservatism

from overcrowded areas, there are no regions of the masses that offers resistance to every

in the subcontinent where the standard of reform there is no organized resistance either

living of the masses is markedly higher than by the Government or the Church as in some

in the rest. The variations in the different countries. Nor are the Indian religions

levels of living in different provinces and opposed to planned parenthood. It will not

agricultural regions are not significant enough be a hard task, therefore, to enlighten the

to encourage inter-provincial or inter- public mind as to the benefits of birth con-

regional migration. After all, migration trol. Once the public health authorities begin

occurs from a region where the level of living to emphasise its importance it will spread

is low to one where it is high. There are no even to the traditionally forgotten villages.

conditions so absolutely unfavourable as to Once mothers are educated in the belief that

push people outside their regions if they have there is a scientific device to meet their

nowhere else to go. Thus, whatever internal desperate, albeit latent demands, birth con-

migration that has taken place in the last trol will make rapid headway. There are, of

thirty years has been in response to rigorous course, certain special difficulties which

famines or to the construction of new irriga- should be taken into account before planning

tion projects and canals which have ren- a network of birth-control clinics. It should

dered the cultivation of more land possible. be recognized that both in India and in

THE POPULATION PROBLEMS OF INDIA AND PAKISTAN

79

Pakistan a majority of the people live under these. It is desirable to lay stress as well as

backward conditions. Matters like bath- to spread knowledge on cheap and safe

rooms, running water, privacy, the cheap- methods of birth control. Birth-control

ness, reliability and availability of contra- clinics should be established and other

ceptives, and the illiteracy of women need necessary measures taken in this behalf and

attention. No matter what the obstacles, to prevent the use or advertisement of harm-

this reform must be carried through.

ful methods." The resolution is significant

Fortunately the question has not been enough, but it goes on to add: " An eugenic

completely ignored. The authoritative programme should include the sterilization

Health Survey and Development Committee of persons suffering from transmissible

appointed by the Government of India diseases of a serious nature such as insanity

observe, in their report (1946): " All of us or epilepsy." This resolution was adopted

are agreed that when childbearing is likely by the National Planning Commission when

to result in injury to mother or infant there India was not free and when it had no

is every justification for the practice of con- governmental authority. Now that the

traception. In such cases it should be the chairman of the committee is the Prime

responsibility of Governments to provide Minister of India it is to be hoped that the

instruction regarding contraception in mater- resolution will not remain a pious sentiment

nity and child welfare centres, dispensaries, on paper, but will be translated into action.

hospitals and any other public institutions The population problems of India and

which administer medical aid to women. We Pakistan are distressing enough already, and

also consider that the supply of contraceptive any delay could only make them worse.

requisites should be made free of cost by the

State to necessitous women when the prac- Human Conservation

tice is advocated for reasons of health. In brief, despite the unprecedented scien-

There is also unanimity among us in respect tific advances in the world during the last

of State action in two other directions, thirty or forty years, there is an enormous

namely: (i) control over the manufacture human loss in India and in Pakistan from

and sale of contraceptives, as in the case of birth to old age. With all the available

food and drugs; and (2) assistance from resources of scientific knowledge, skill and

public funds towards research for the facilities for protecting people's health, and

production of a safe and effective contra- curing or alleviating the many ills and

ceptive."

disabilities to which they are exposed,

But the most important need is to provide thousands of lives continue to be wasted.

contraceptive advice on economic grounds. Living to-day has become complex and

Even this authoritative committee could not difficult compared to conditions a century

shake off a traditional obscurantism and ago. t The majority live in overcrowded vil-

include poverty and the low standard of lages which have changed their faces but are

living as pressing reasons for adopting con- still without any sanitary or medical facili-

traception and limiting the size of the ties, and those who live in towns and cities

family.

find themselves in crowded conditions where

The Indian National Congress, however, earning a living, rearing children and running

set up a National Planning Commission a home have become formidable problems.

during the war, under the chairmanship of Despite our belief in the intrinsic value of

the present Prime Minister, Pandit Jawahar- human life as a central value of our culture,

lal Nehru. One of the committee's resolu- we have offered resistance to certain reforms

tions recommends: " In the interest of that encourage healthy and purposeful

social economy, family happiness and living. Human wastage and loss, therefore,

national planning, family planning and a persist long after they have become un-

limitation of children are essential, and the necessary because of certain traditional ideas

State should adopt a policy to encourage and beliefs that still linger from the past

8o THE EUGENICS REVIEW

when we were largely helpless against the diseases and dangers of life, and more or less ignorant of human needs and possibilities. To-day, to some extent, much human waste is tolerated because of a fundamentally defeatist belief in man's helplessness against superhuman and mysterious social and natural forces that are supposed to control
our social life and make such loss inevitable. Perhaps not a little of the tragic waste of life is due to a conviction that human ills and misery are well-merited punishments for our misdeeds and guilt. Many a marvel of medical advance has been more or less opposed as interfering with divine purpose which had ordained human suffering. While belief in " fate " as a controlling factor is slowly tending to disappear, it has not disappeared completely. These fatalistic beliefs persist in every society, but much more in the Indian subcontinent than elsewhere, long after they have been rendered obsolete by scientific knowledge which is powerless to displace them. The way out is
to cease clinging to ideas and practices that
are archaic and incompatible with a democratic affirmation of human values. The sooner we do this the better and easier will

be our approach to human problems of life, longevity and death.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Chand, Gyan (I939), India's Teeming Millions, London,
Allen & Unwin. Chandrasekhar, S. (I946), India's Population: Fact and
Policy, New York, John Day. Chandrasekhar, S. (I948), Census and Statistics in
India, Annamalai University, India.
Gangulee, B. (I938), Trends of Agriculture and Population in the Ganges Valley, London, Methuen.
Ghate, B. G. (I940), Changes in the Occupational Distribution of the Population, Office of the Economic Adviser; New Delhi.
Ghosh, D. (I946), Pressure of Population and Economic Efficiency in India, Bombay, Oxford University Press.
Karve, D. G. (I936), Poverty and Population in India. Bombay, Oxford University Press.
Mukerjee, Radhakamal (1938), Food Planning for 400 Millions, London, Macmillan.
Narain, Brij (1929), The Population of India, Lahore.
Population National Planning Cofamittee (I947),
Bombay, Vora Co. Ranadive, B. T. (1936), The Population Problem in
India, Bombay, Longmans. Report of the Health Survey and Development Com-
mittee (1946), New Delhi, Government of India, 4 volumes. Singh, Baljit (1947), Population and Food Planning in India, Bombay, Hind Kitabs. Sovani, N. (I942), The Population Problem in IndiaA Regional Approach, Poona. Wattal, P. K. (I934), The Population Problem in India, Bombay, Benett Coleman.

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION
" For the promotion of knowledge of the cours of legislation In different countrlie, more particularly in the eeveral parts of Hb Majest's Dominions, and in the United States." Presidai: The Rt. Hon. Lord MACMILLAN, G.C.V.O. Chairman of the Exueiwe Committe: The Rt Hon. Lord DU PARCQ
Editors: Sir ARNOLD McNAIR, K.C. Sir CECIL CARR, K.C.B., K.C., assisted by
Profesor H. C. GUTTERIDGE, KC., and F. H. LAWSON, Esq., D.CL. Honorary Serstary: C. E. A. BEDWELL, Esq.
Annual Subscription - - - ONE GUINEA
Address: THE ROYAL EMPIRE SOCIETY, NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, LONDON, W.C.2
Eugencs Review, VOL XLI, No. 2

