HAVELOCK ELLIS
1859-1939

H OW shall we estimate the debt we perhaps have been gulled into the belief that

owe to Havelock Ellis ? If in seeking somebody might say that this was a scientific

an answer to that question we recall work. But it is impossible for anybody with

inevitably his monumental Studies in the a head on his shoulders to open the book

Psychology of Sex, it is not from any wish to without seeing that it is a pretence and a

underrate the extent or the diversity of the sham, and that it is merely entered into for

other subjects over which his intellect ranged the purpose of selling this obscene publica-

to the enduring benefit of this and succeeding tion." That to-day we can recognize this

generations. But this work, one of the judgment for the barbarism that it was is

greatest contributions to knowledge ever part of the debt that we owe to Havelock

made by a single man, epitomizes as none Ellis. He made no counter-attack, he simply

other of his writings the special qualities of went on with his self-prescribed task. " The

his genius. It is possible to say, turning the decision I have been forced to reach," he

pages now, that here is a complete and wrote at the time, " seems inevitable. To

balanced account of the state of knowledge wrestle in the public arena for freedom of

and opinion at the time when they were speech is a noble task which may be worthily

written. These are works that can never be undertaken by any man who can devote to it

superseded or become out of date. They the best energies of his life. It is not, how-

mark, precisely and in detail, a stage in our ever, a task which I ever contemplated. I

cultural progress. We know that knowledge am a student and my path has long been

will advance, facts will be added, theories marked out. I may be forced to pursue it

will be discarded; but both as an indis- under unfavourable conditions, but I do not

pensable preliminary to more recent writings intend that any consideration should induce

and as an exact record of the facts as they me to swerve from it, nor do I intend to

were known up to and including the begin- injure my work or distort my vision of life

ning of this century the Studies are as by entering upon any struggle. . . I

indispensable to the serious student as when insist upon doing my own work in my own

they first disturbed the complacency of a way." And so he did, and in the process he

hostile world.

initiated a social revolution which -will not

But it is to belittle the fundamental be complete until it has resulted in a trans-

achievement of Havelock Ellis to regard him formation of the moral attitudes of a whole

merely as an artist, scholar and interpreter. society.

Havelock Ellis was a revolutionist. He

challenged, not aggressively but by the Dr. C. P. Blacker writes: In Havelock

character and consistent trend of his literary Ellis's death, the cause of eugenics has lost

output, the prevalent assumptions in his one of its most balanced, forceful and influen-

society that ignorance was a virtue to be tial supporters. But of this Society's policy

cultivated for its own sake, that prudery was he has sometimes been critical.

equivalent to a becoming modesty, and that With our qualified support of birth control

sexual physiology, psychology and pathology he has always been in sympathy and to our

were obscenities tricked out to look like pre-marital health schedules he accorded, on

science. The Recorder spoke for most of his several occasions, welcome public praise.

contemporaries when, in summing up the But of one aspect of our policy he strongly

case against Havelock Ellis's publisher, he disapproved, namely our approach to the

said: " I am willing to believe that in acting problem of eugenic sterilization. He opposed

as you did you might at the first outset our efforts to get the measure formally

III

II2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

legalized for persons broadly described as was his uncompromising refusal to allow

" compos mentis." In several letters to me, himself to be lionized. On one occasion I

he expressed strong dissent from the view tried hard to persuade him to give a Galton

that the voluntary sterilization on good Lecture. I went as far as to offer to have him

eugenic grounds of a mentally normal person conveyed to and from his home by car! But

was illegal. It was the business, he said, of with the utmost courtesy and firmness he

the lawyers to find ambiguities and un- refused.

certainties in the law. He urged the Society To myself and to everyone else who

to try by all the means at its disposal to approached him, he was invariably helpful

encourage the judicious employment of and encouraging; and from my talks with

voluntary sterilization and thereby to get it him I derived, even more strongly than from

accepted as part of normal medical practice, the reading of his books, a sense of the

rather than to challenge the organized forces wisdom of his judgment and of the balance

of the opposition by seeking to legalize it by and gentleness of his character.

Act of Parliament. A good precedent for the
course he advocated is the practice of blood-
transfusion. This has been widely adopted
without afterthoughts as to the legality, under Section 2o of the Offences Against the Person Act, of puncturing the vein of the
donor. Dr. Ellis gave his view of the legal position in a memorandum, wherein he con-
tended that, instead of forming a committee to legalize voluntary sterilization, the Society
would be less harmfully employed in establishing one to legalize voluntary decapilla-
tion-i.e. the process of having one's hair cut! The resort to Parliament was, in his view,
open to the serious danger that a carefully planned Bill might well emerge from the " mangle " of Parliamentary debate so
modified as to bear but a small resemblance
to the Bill which had gone in. Many unnecessary and unwieldy safeguards might be introduced and the practice might be so bound up with red tape that the result would, in his words, be " to sterilize sterilization."

Dr. Russell Brain writes: It would need a history of English morals to explain the nuances of the word " purity," but it is significant that a word which in the first
instance implies freedom from alien elements should have come to mean freedom from sexual feelings produced by repression and extolled as a virtue. If to-day the word " purity" in this sense is hardly heard outside certain religious circles and even there induces a slightly uncomfortable self-
consciousness we owe it to Havelock Ellis more than to anyone else. And yet if the word could be rehabilitated there is no one to whom it could be applied more aptly. He was a new type of man, one of the first in our
era to view sex without the emotion of guilt. He was free from alien elements because to
him there were none. We who come after
him are fortunate that his gifts as an artist
and a writer enabled him to emancipate
others as well as himself.

His view has been borne out to the extent Mr. Alec Craig writes: After his severe

that, despite much effort on our part and on illness last year Havelock Ellis, I believe,

that of others, the unanimous recommenda- realized that the end was not far off. At any

tion of an influential and representative rate he employed the small measure of his

inter-departmental committee has for five recovered health and strength in setting his

years been ignored.

affairs in order.

Mature consideration of Dr. Havelock One task was the disposal of his extensive

Ellis's contentions in this matter has con- collection of books. I say " collection of

vinced me of their fundamental soundness. books " rather than " library " because

An approach to the problem is now being Havelock Ellis had little of the bibliophile

made along lines of which he would have about him. Although he possessed hundreds

approved.

of volumes from all over the world he

A feature of his character which I much appeared to care little for books as books.

respected, as well as on occasions regretted, He kept them in no formal order but relied

HAVELOCK ELLIS

on his remarkable memory to guide him to
any reference he required. It was in connection with this disposal that I was privileged to see something of him at a time when his health made him more of a recluse
than ever. He asked me to help in disposing
of his rarer sexological books, and in carrying out his wishes with regard to some hundred
volumes I had to visit him both at his house
at Herne Hill and at his country cottage near
Hayward's Heath. Soon after he gave up
both places and retired to Suffolk, a county in which many of his family had lived. The hope that he would there spend a long and tranquil evening to his life has unhappily been disappointed.
I had met him previously in connection
with my own work and received most generous assistance including loans of books and little gifts of pamphlets.
His bodily weakness did not impair the interest of his conversation. Over lunch one sunny day at Hayward's Heath he recalled his childhood and how he once stole pennies
to buy pears, his favourite fruit. On another occasion he talked about his voyages, ending up by saying: " I liked the sailing ships best." He spoke very sadly of Edward Carpenter's last days of infirmity and mentioned that Mrs. Ellis used to go and stay
with him, adding (characteristically): " But I would never stay away anywhere."
But there was no trace of " anecdotage" in his talk. He showed a keen appreciation of present trends and controversies. Only about the Surrealists he once shook his head
in a puzzled way and said: "They are beyond me." He displayed not the least bitterness with regard to the indignities to which his work had been subjected, though he quite realized that the law which had in effect condemned him as a common pornographer was unchanged and unrepentant and ready to treat in a similar fashion younger
writers who are sincerely striving to carry on his work. He seemed to have a simple and complete faith in the ultimate triumph of reason and intellectual freedom.

Major Leonard Darwin writes: When studying the " Contents " of the first volume of the EUGENICS REVIEW, namely that for I909-IO, the fourth name on the list of authors is seen to be that of Havelock Ellis, the subject dealt with being the sterilization of the unfit. Is there any other man in England who can now point to a like continuous and consistent advocacy for thirty years of this measure of eugenic reform ? I was not then even a member of our Society, and possibly on that account I am sorry to have to own that I never became personally acquainted with this pioneer of our cause. I can only recall that on one occasion I accidentally misrepresented his views, with the result that I received a kindly and courteous letter pointing out my error. I well knew the value of his published works, and cannot but regret that I did not come under his personal influence. Some of those whose names appear on the above-mentioned page are still with us, I am glad to say-Inge, Tredgold, and Poulton-but the losses we have sustained, however inevitable, are grievous. The works of Havelock Ellis will remain with us permanently to help us in
our long and arduous campaign.
Lord Horder writes: The eugenics cause has lost a valiant and sturdy supporter in the death of the veteran Havelock Ellis. For half a century his work, both in its contributions to sexology and in the more general advocacy which his exceptional literary gifts gave to sociological progress, has greatly strengthened the activities of our Society.
It has been given to few men or women to see their efforts on behalf of their fellows so rounded off before they joined the great majority. Ellis knew this and enjoyed a quiet satisfaction from reflecting upon it. Over and above his public work there stands to his credit an enormous number of private and personal efforts made in connection with co-workers in the same field. To these he was a constant source of encouragement, and by them especially he will be greatly missed.

c Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI No.2.

