REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

139

germ-cells, but if the statement means anything it must assert the exist-

ence of "germ-tracks," that is, of lineages of cells descending from the

ovum and remaining quite undifferentiated till they produce the new germ-

cells. In some few cases' of animals of rapid life-cycle, such as insects

and small crustacea, there is evidence that the parents of the new germ-

cells are set aside in the embryro from the beginning, but in many other

cases they cannot be detected till a much later period of development, and

they arise from epithelia, which are certainly differentiated tissues, as, for

instance, in Annelida. When Professor Conklin has settled the case in

favour of Weismann and Mfendel to his own satisfaction, and proceeds to

apply his results to man, he rather shrinks from the cul-de-sac of hyper-

calvinism towards which his conclusions lead him. He tries to emphasise

the all-importance of environment, since after all the members of human

population are such a mixed lot that their hereditary potentialities are

likely to be on the whole similar, and the difference in the outcome will

be mainly due to environment.

Professor Conklin exhibits the common failing of accepting at face-

value all the work which his countrymen turn out, and so he swallows

Davenport's assertion that " feeble-mindedness " is a Mendelian recessive,

oblivious of the destructive criticism that has been levelled at the treat-

ment of " feeble-mindedness " as a unit factor.

Professor Conklin's general conclusion that certain physical defects

are likely to reappear in offspring, and that marriages tending to per-

petuate them should be discouraged, is in accordance with sound eugenic

principles, as is his protest against " race-suicide," but his book as a

whole is rather special pleading for one particular point of view than a

scientific presentation of the evidence as a whole.

E. W. M.

Jewett, FRANCES GULICK. The Next Generation-A Stzudy in the Physiology of Inheritance. Ginn & Co.; 19I5; price 3s. 6d.; pp. 235-
WE welcome this little book, dedicated to " Boys and Girls, the Guardians of the Next Generation," as a valuable attempt to give in plain facts and simple language an account of the main bases of our modern knowledge concerning inheritance. The author, the writer of several books belonging to a well-known American series on hygiene, choosing some of the most striking examples of MIendelian phenomena, introduces the reader to the laws governing inheritance, and proceeds to show the useful application of these laws in raising new types of plants and animals. The route by which organic progress has been achieved is outlined in a series of chapters dealing with evolution and with the work of Charles Darwin. Dr. Tower's experiments on Leptinotarsa form the basis for a chapter on the effect of changed environment upon species, and is dealt with in such a way as to prepare the reader for consideration of and speculation upon the human problem. Skilfully the author passes from general consideration of the beginnings of the next generation-the germ-cells-to the special case of man, and proceeds to showr how germ-cells may be damaged by alcohol, and how the individual may suffer through the use of tobacco. One appreciates the skill with which the author has taken hold of difficult subject matter, and has given it in a simply-rendered and very readable form, but this has led her to be too definite in statement upon points which are yet held to be debatable; more particularly is this noticeable in that part of the book dealing with human inheritance and with racial deterioration. At the same time, the emphasis is on the right side, and should be well calculated to impress the adolescent mind with the necessity for careful personal conduct, and ought to stimulate it to further search for knowledge. There is a tendency towards sensationalism, again in the later chapters of the book, perhaps the effect of giving selected, too striking, examples in brief unadorned sentences. One deplores any attempt at sensationalism when seeking to enlighten

140 EUGENICS REVIEW.
adolescents or adults upon the subject of venereal diseases. Definite, protective instruction can be given without imperilling the adolescent's ideal. There are some chapters which are more suitable for instruction of adults than for placing directly in the hands of boys and girls, and, on the whole, one would be inclined to value the book more as a suggestion to instructors of youth on how to give simplified information on the physiology of inheritance, than for use as a text-book by the boy or girl unprepared for the subject: though, undoubtedly, to the late adolescent, nearly approaching adulthood, the book would have its very effective value.
The author is to be congratulated upon the ground covered in this little volume, and upon the skill with which the main facts of our information on the subject of inheritance are presented in a brief form.
N. MARCH.
OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS.
SEVENTY-SIXTH ANNUAL REPORT OF THE REGISTRAR-GENERAL OF BIRTHS, DEATHS AND MARRIAGES IN ENGLAND AND WALES (1913). [Cd.
7780.] Price 5s. 4d.
This Report was issued in May last: the Registrar-General apologises for the lateness of the issue, but this was an inevitable result of the war which simultaneously depleted his staff and increased the amount of work to be done. In normal circumstances it is hoped that Reports will be issued within twelve months of the period to which they refer.
An important alteration of method has been made in this Report bearing on the relative mortalities of the sexes. Ordinary standardised death-rates, it will be remembered, are calculated on the basis of the population of England and Wales at the Census of I9OI. Supposing that we wish to compare the relative incidence of some disease on males
and on females, and work out a standardised death-rate for males on the
population of males in I9OI, and a standardised death-rate for females on the population of females in IgoI, these two death-rates will be no more truly comparable than the original crude death-rates, because the
standard populations are not the same. But this is the process that has
been used in former Reports, though attention was directed to the fallacy in the last issue (footnote p. xxxvii.). To avoid the difficulty, whenever, in the present Report, a comparison is made of the mortality of the two sexes, the age-distribution of "persons" in igoi is used as the standard population for each sex, cf. the footnote on p. xx. Where the results of the two processes can be compared the alteration made is sometimes considerable. Thus the excess of the general mortality of males over that of females, where the correct process of standardisation is employed, is some 23 per cent. (19I3), not I4 per cent. as by the old process (1912). The
standardised mortalities from diphtheria and croup in I9o6-io were given as i69 per million for males and i68 for females in the last Report, these are now altered to I64 for males and 173 for females. For the same period the standardised rates for car,cer were 770 and 986, these are now altered to 814 and 944.
With the Report for I9II a scheme was initiated under wWch a certain number of causes of death have been taken each year for tabulation under combinations of causes, so as to indicate as fully as possible the complete statement of the cause of death. In the Report for I912 the causes so dealt with included Nos. 20-38 of the detailed international list, which covered tuberculosis and syphilis. This year the causes similarly treated are Nos. 39-46-cancer and other tumours. The resulting extensive tables (pp. 548-587) which are based on the deaths registered in 1912 could

