THE GROWTH OF EDUCATION IN ENGLAND AND ITS INFLUENCE ON THE SIZE OF THE
FAMILY*

By GRACE G. LEYBOURNE, M.A., B.Sc., Ph.D.
(Research Associate, Population Investigation Committee)

Introduction

excluded from them by law. Instead of being

T HE task of isolating the forces responsible for the collapse of the birth-rate
is not an easy one. The forces analys-
able into biological, religious, psychological, social and economic are to-day merged in a broad river of almost universal influence, and the observer finds it hard to assess the strength of each without tracing the river to that source where its streams have not yet combined or lost their identity. Even then he must proceed with caution, for the headwaters of this river are found in the 'seventies
of the last century, years which formed a watershed for every field of England's social and economic life and, moreover, a watershed of the most complex geography. Nevertheless, a study of developments during last
century yields much evidence which is conclusive, and more that is suggestive, in determining why our birth-rate began to fall so noticeably in the eighteen-seventies and continued to fall with ever increasing momentum. Evidently costs of education, whose influence forms the present study, are only part of the wider category of economic causes, and it will often be essential to comprehend the latter in their entirety in order
to gauge the particular contribution of the smaller element.

the national centres of learning and instruc-
tion, they were little more than comfortable
monastic establishments for clerical sine-
curists with a tinge of letters."*
A similar slumber sat upon the schools,
once the nurseries of Newton, Milton and
Gibbon. " It has been estimated that the condition of our ' public ' or higher schools
was worse between I750 and I840 than at any time since King Alfred. The grammar schools were largely derelict, often scandalous. Sometimes for half a century or more only half a dozen boys might have attended the school at some large centre of population. In I734 there were no boys at all in the
Birmingham school. From I832 to I836 one boy at Chesterfield made up the school. A do-nothing clerical master, sometimes absentee, absorbed what endowment there was. The master of Berkhamsted School in I835 lived in Derbyshire and took the en-
dowment, while the school was entirely
empty."t Boarding houses in the public
schools were so ill-regulated that members of the upper class bold enough to entrust their
sons to them were decidedly in the minority. Most of these families preferred their boys taught either in their homes or else as day pupils in grammar schools or private academies.

Education in Early Nineteenth Century

As the century advanced, however, great

At the beginning of the nineteenth century, changes in the educational institutions

education in England was decadent as never accompanied those in the whole national life.

before. As for the Universities of Oxford and A new class of men was emerging to express

Cambridge, " although they were the only an interest in education for their children.

universities in England and Wales, Protes- With the disappearance of home industries

tant Dissenters and Roman Catholics were and the spread of steam-driven mechanized

* A paper by Dr. Leybourne, entitled " A Declining * George Macaulay Trevelyan, British History in the

Birth-rate and Cost of Education," was published in Nineteenth Century, 1782-190I, 1922, p. 27.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April I938, P. 33.

t F. S. Marvin, The Century of Hope, I9I9, p. 204.

175

I76 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

factories, wealth had increased as if by magic in some hands. From a negligible capital able artisans rose from the ranks to be millowners and captains of industry. New trades appeared-builders to erect the modem factories and towns, contractors to dig canals, coal merchants to furnish the new centres, and shop-keepers to supply the new race of town-dwellers.* England became " the workshop of the world, the forge of the world, the banker of the world, and the world's greatest carrier."t Society now acquired a new and powerful group of leaders. As these entrepreneurs acceded to political power in I832, and in I846 wrested economic power from the landed, they became impatient to inherit every sort of privilege. Education did not escape their attention. Relying on the power of wealth, they were prepared to penetrate institutions hitherto closed to them. When, therefore, the development of railways in the third decade brought rural shires to the doors of the towns, they began sending their sons to public schools as well as to the local endowed grammar schools. Numbers in the public schools increased and the education they provided steadily improved under able headmasters led by Thomas Arnold of Rugby. The work of regeneration in the grammar schools was begun by Brougham's Commission of i8i8, but the recovery here had to wait for several decades, since the railway network which assisted in the resuscitation of the public schools ruined some and jeopardized others of the grammar schools.+
New Business Needs
It was railway development also which in a more roundabout but altogether profounder fashion reached to the heart of education. The inauguration of the age of speed flung an ever wider and closer mesh of communications over Great Britain, over Europe, over the world. The Industrial
* See L. C. A. Knowles-The Industrial a,nd Commercial Revolution in Great Britain during the Nineteenth
Century, 192I, p. 99. t Knowles, op. cit., p. I02. + See G. A. N. Lowndes, The Silent Social Revolution.
An Account of the Expansion of Public Education in England and Wales, I895-I935, 1937, p. 46.

Revolution was converted from a movement into a landslide. Producers launched unparalleled expansions in response to an unparalleled clamour from new sources of demand. Great Britain's labour and technical force put her in a position to secure for her entrepreneurs the lion's share of new enterprise. " It is scarcely an exaggeration to say that in the middle of the century the five continents consisted of a number of countries, all chiefly and some entirely agricultural, grouped for commercial purposes round the manufacturing centre of England."* The great sweep towards largescale production began. Conditions were ripe for the unleashing of tremendous technological forces which have left a profound mark upon the laws and life of this country.
As business outgrew the scope of the old family concerns, two trends came to fulfilment. The first was to grant-companies in the I862 Act general privileges of joint-stock with limited liability. The effect of this legislation was to sanction and facilitate a
new specialization of function in business,
that of management in separation from ownership of capital. It was now open for almost any type of company to grow without limit upon capital gathered from shareholders in all corners of the globe. In the second place, business managers ceased typically to be mechanics or investors and became financial experts intent to work out scientific principles of management and accounting in order to squeeze the last penny of profit out of the difference between costs and revenue. The figure of the new type of business leader naturally bulked increasingly large with the growth of business units and the consequent intensification of competition and the bureaucratization of enterprise. The day of the selfmade capitalists, ignorant of formal education and despising it for their sons, was past. The scope, competitiveness and specialization of economic life, demanded new capacities, not acknowledged in this country as soon as they should have been. " At the Great Exhibition of I85I, out of a hundred different departments in which goods were
* Trevelyan, op. cit., p. 276.

GROWTH OF EDUCATION IN ENGLAND AND SIZE OF FAMILY I77

displayed, Great Britain had won the palm of excellence in nearly all. But at the Paris Exhibition of I867 she excelled her competitors in only io per cent. Lyon Playfair, who had been a juror at Paris, wrote a letter ascribing England's loss of ground to the fact that her competitors possessed ' good systems of industrial education for the masters and managers of factories and workshops,' whereas England possessed none."*
The Examination System
There were other events at home working a conversion about education in the minds of these new industrialists. The most important of these was undoubtedly reform in the Civil Service. The Civil Service Commission, instituted in I855, suggested the Order in Council of I870 abolishing patronage and making public competitive examinations for the first time compulsory for entrance to most branches of the Service. Careers in the Service were now open to sons of the new men, but these had to face the rigours of a competitive examination, often to test all-round scholarship. Consequently, an adequate schooling or university training for the upper branches of the Service became
essential. Before long it- was equally neces-
sary for most professions, as these, following the example set by the Civil Service, instituted entrance examinations requiring extensive and thorough knowledge, theoretical as well as practical. Now, indeed, education must have finally cast off the cloak of privilege and appeared nothing short of a rigid necessity. "To select men for practical careers on the report of examiners showed also a belief in higher education, which was something new in England.... The universities and the cause of higher teaching bene-
fited greatly by the change."t
New Life in the Universities
As late as I870 Oxford and Cambridge still remained closed to half the nation by the religious tests. In addition, restrictions on fellowships, the dominance of the universi-
* R. C. K. Ensor, Oxford History of England, z870-
1914, 1936, p. 319.
t Trevelyan, Op. cit., p. 358.
B

ties by its component colleges, and a still persistent prevalence of absenteeism and sinecurism, rendered them useless to meet the demands of the new age. Reform was urgent. It was finally achieved by legislation spread over the years I87I to I882. Men of all religions were now eligible for these universities. In addition, there existed two modern universities-London and Durham-founded in the thirties. London, however, apart from the teaching organization of two colleges, was little more than an examining and degree-giving board; Durham remained small. But as demands for higher education became urgent, Univerity Extension, spreading from Cambridge in I873, finally led to the formation of new universities in great industrial centres.* There the doors were always open to all classes and all religions. Science and modern studies were always iucluded among the subjects taught.
Emergence of New Stimuli
At first, education undoubtedly stood for greater competing efficiency in the minds of the industrialists. As a group they had a tradition of their own, one of rugged independence, modelling itself on nothing but their individualism. Of this they were proud. They " stood four-square to the world with a certain self-respect. They may have wanted money, to enjoy or to hoard, but they did not dream of using it to buy themselves out of their class. Being respectable why should
they aspire to be genteel?"t But about
I870 a change began to be apparent. These new producers began to lose their sturdy pride and the self-importance at which Matthew Arnold and other of their critics have pointed. The acute observation of Dickens was quick to sense this change." In more than thirty years, Dickens had poured out a wealth of stories and articles portraying the middle class of the day, when in I865 he published Our Mutual Friend, his last completed novel. But here the middle
* Victoria University (Manchester, Liverpool, Leeds), I884; University of Wales, I893; Birmingham University, I900.
t Esmd Wingfield-Stratford, The Victorian Sunset,
1932, p. 48.
+ Wingfield-Stratford, op. cit., p. 47.

178 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

class represented by the Veneerings, contrasts with his earlier characterisation of it. " Mr. and Mrs. Veneering were bran-new people in a bran-new house in a bran-new quarter of London. Everything about the Veneerings was spick-and-span new. All their furniture was new, all their friends were new, all their servants were new, their plate was new, their carriage was new, their harness was new, their horses were new, their pictures were new, they themselves were new."* Dickens's shrewd pen had discerned, and hit off, a new generation among the middle classes, ashamed of their rugged origins, and anxious above all else to lose that mark and to secure recognition in the ranks of the traditional landowners. The forces contributing to this changed attitude are no doubt manifold, but among them the evolution towards " Big Business " must occupy a prominent place. " There was not the same pride to be derived from such service as from the pettiest autocracy.... The very success of British business had its effect on the business man."t Intent now on securing recognition as gentlemen, they desired for their children the education of gentlemen and gentlewomen, in contrast to their own. Education now took on a new desirabilitynot only for rising in the economic world, but in the social world, too. For his sons, a public school, followed perhaps by a university, and even for his daughters something more than a governess at home, had to be contemplated. From the middle of the century, Miss Buss at the North London Collegiate School and Miss Beale at the Cheltenham Ladies' College, had done pioneer work in schools for girls, while Bedford College, London, was also providing university education for a select few. The current really began to flow strongly, however, when the Girls' Public Day School Trust was launched in I870 and Girton College was founded in Cambridge in I869. New schools and universities followed one another in rapid succession, and from this time education for women never faltered in its forward stride. Masculine monopoly of the professions was soon challenged; and
* Charles Dickens, Our Mutual Frietnd, I865, ch. 2.
t Esm6 Wingfield-Stratford, op. cit., p. 49.

it is highly significant that in I872 a woman was for the first time appointed to a post of importance in the Civil Service. Mrs. Nassau Senior (daughter-in-law of the economist) became a poor-law inspector. An early marriage was no longer the only successful career for girls.
Education and Business Leaders
By the early 'seventies, then, everything conspired to leave no shadow of doubt in the minds of business leaders and those who accepted their ethics, that for each child brought into the world an extensive education must be provided. This was the first generation of parents to be so generally convinced of this need. If education was essential, however, it was no less certain to be expensive. To the previous generations of business men, children, after infancy was passed, were economically an asset-they could work and swell the family income; but for the generation of the 'seventies, asset had undoubtedly turned into a liability of no mean proportions. Here were men of wealth and responsibility, accustomed in
their business dealings to applying the touchstone of utility to every undertaking, used to considering the likely profit from invest-
ments, weighing cost and depreciation against possible dividends. Virtually Benthamite principles had been applied, however unselfconsciously, by rising men in England for centuries. The leaders of the 'seventies came as heirs to a long tradition rooted in that pervasive form of realism which tended to conceive of all things in terms of matterof-fact profit and loss. They were nurtured in that way of thought. Evangelicalism was the religion of men who made it their basic assumption for conduct; the creed of J. S. Mill converted political sovereignty from the glamorous plaything of princes and lords it had seemed, into a prosy branch of blue-book utilitarianism; art, a thing of adornment and little practical use, achieved its nadir in England and sank to the level of railway stations. The attitude of " enlightened selfinterest," to which the Victorians owed their unparalleled advance in material civilisation, had proved to their satisfaction its validity

GROWTH OF EDUCATION IN ENGLAND AND SIZE OF FAMILY I79

for every department of thought and action. of value received for money expended "*

How could their mentality, triumphant in played a substantial part in the inauguration

business, fail to extend its victories to other of a scheme bearing all the stamps of com-

spheres ? Education became one of them. In mercialism.

i862 the Newcastle Commission which had

sat from I858 " to inquire into the present Cost of New Education and Size of Family

state of popular education in England, and How then would these same gentlemen

to consider and report what measures, if any, regard domestic expenditure, with children

are required for the extension of sound and as an important part of it ? Children could

cheap elementary instruction to all classes hardly be regarded as profitable investments

of the people," reported, to a House of from any point of view. Their cost, particu-

Commons dominated by the new philosophy, larly with the new educational demands in

that in spite of the money that Parliament view, was excessive, the return which might

was paying to these schools-£30,ooo a year be expected on this outlay, most uncertain.

since i839-children were being badly taught What investment could be more unsatis-

and results were correspondingly poor. The factory than one not transferable, likely to

pupils never mastered reading, writing and depreciate in value, and of a maturity much

arithmetic. In Parliament this caused an delayed ? This is precisely the risk a prudent

uproar, and from the ensuing battle there investor must guard against. Is it possible

emerged a system of " payment by results." that the same reasoning was applied in some

" The new arrangements allowed one grant measure to investment in the shape of a large

only, paid to the managers, and not exceed- family? But then, if it had been, would

ing twelve shillings a year for each child. parents have found themselves in a position

Four shillings were to be paid on the average to follow out the logic of their argument,

attendance, and the other eight shillings on i.e. to curtail the size of their families?

the results of an annual examination in Methods of contraception had been avail-

reading, writing and arithmetic; one-third able for some time, and no doubt, some

of it being withheld for each subject in which use had been made of them. They had still,

a child failed."*

however, to be popularized. In I876, the

The educationists who supported the Bradlaugh-Besant trial gave them just such

scheme saw in it a means of facilitating the popular advertisement. Sensational litiga-

task of administration grown cumbersome tion always found space in the newspapers of

through excessive centralization in White- the day, and this celebrated trial was fully

hall.t For before I862 grants were made not paraded in all its shocking detail. No doubt,

to schools but to individuals; the army of many influences were playing upon men's

schoolmasters and pupil-teachers making minds inducing them to explore some way to

direct personal claims upon the State was escape from the trammels of a large family.

growing. An accumulation of evidence re- But the trial had a decisive effect in pointing

mains, however, to show that the scheme a definite path of action to unfulfilled and

appealed to Parliament for quite other often vaguely formulated urges. It pointed

reasons than to educationists. Members "I saw to a way of 'escape by contraception. Subse-

in his [Lord Lingen's] proposals the means to quently, sales of tracts and books on contra-

satisfy their demands for some such annual ceptive methods leapt into hundreds of

stocktaking as their business experience and thousands. To the industrialist, no longer

habits of thought could appreciate." Thus, able to shirk the responsibility of providing a

" the blind demand of mid-Victorian parlia- reputable education for every child, boy or

mentary thought for a visible demonstration girl, and of paying highly for the privilege,

the relevance of the trial must have appeared

immediate. To many, the expense of properly
* Helen Wodehouse, A Survey ofthe History of Educa-

tiOn, I930, p. I84.

t See Lowndes, oP. cit., p. 9.

* Lowndes, op. cit., pp. 8 and io.

i80-

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

educating twelve or thirteen children would of the relative importance of industrial and

no doubt have been more than their finances landed wealth were numerous. The tide of

could bear, and they would be glad enough events which by the 'seventies had revolu-

to avail themselves of the opportunity of tionized the attitude to education in the

limiting their liability to five or six children. middle ranks of society, were not without

For others, the attitude to children as the their significance in the upper ranks. Educa-

unprofitable investments they were, no doubt tion above a standard of mere literacy had

supplied a potent enough argument for long remained a prerogative of the gentry.

limiting their families. A new fashion was Great as it was, however, it had not always

coming in.

been given to all the sons of the family and

Education of Landowners

certainly not to its daughters. Sinecurism had often rendered superfluous more than a

Meanwhile, the 'seventies were years of superficial education for the younger sons

challenge and crisis for the landed pro- and a home governess usually provided all

prietors. Between I875 and I879, agriculture the accomplishments a girl would need. But

suffered a succession of bad harvests, while gradually, patronage and sinecurism had

prices instead of being stimulated by scarcity been swept away from the parliamentary and

fell ruinously under the flood of American municipal systems, from schools and universi-

exports. In addition, the world monetary ties, and at last, from the Civil Service.

crisis dragged the prices of meat and dairy " Since the privileged families were especially

produce on the same downward course. anxious to provide maintenance at the public

There settled upon British agriculture a expense for those of their members who were

depression from which it never recovered. least likely to make their own way in life, the

" Farmers themselves sank into ever in- reputation of Whitehall for laziness and in-

creasing embarrassments; bankruptcies and competence was proverbial."* " Politicians

auctions followed each other; the country- dealt in ' reversions ' (i.e. ' futures ') to office,

side lost its most respected figures.... Ad- buying and selling them for young children,

justments, as time went on, were made; but who when old enough to be inducted into

always upon the basis of withdrawing both office, often drew the salary but employed

capital and men from the land.... So was some agent at a pittance to do the job."t

consummated the urbanizing of a nation, But under Gladstone's reforms, unless the

which till the century before had possessed new men were to be allowed to move in and

only one great city.... England, being now occupy all the seats of power, the old families

' the workshop of the world,' staked her no less than their new rivals had to consider

future upon continuing to be."* Collapse of educating all their children in schools and

rural rents and land values in the 'seventies universities now transformed by the new

involved an economic dethronement of the spirit of urgency. Within their ranks as well

landowners of which another ten years saw as outside, education now became no less

the final consummation. Income depending than a bare necessity. At first, while wealth

on ownership of broad acres gradually con- still flowed on the land and old traditions

tracted and estates passed into the hands of were still enthroned, these new demands of

commercial wealth, which thereby achieved education can have had little effect on the

a coveted social distinction. In the face of number of children born in these families.

much opposition, the old values of an aris- But when agriculture collapsed, landowners

tocracy went into general retreat before the found themselves confronted by new alterna-

commercial, especially when, later, the fate tives. Education had by now established

of agriculture was finally sealed by a second itself and the only acceptable economy was

collapse of prices in I893.

the limitation of the number of children for

Evidently the repercussions of this reversal whom education must be provided.

* Ensor, op. cit., p. xI8.

* Trevelyan, op. cit., p. 357.
t Herman Finer, The British Civil Service, 1937, p. 33

GROWTH OF EDUCATION IN ENGLAND AND SIZE OF FAMILY I8I

The second half of the century therefore, the first time shouldered the burden of

particularly from the 'seventies onwards, education. " England had obtained, better

found the lists growing shorter in the bibles late than never, a system of education, with-

of upper and middle class families. To every out which she must soon have fallen to -the

hundred of such couples married between rear among modem nations."* Improve-

I85I and i86i, 625 children were born on the ment in school standards was naturally not

average. The quota dropped to 593 for those the product of a moment, and compulsory

married ten years later, as low as 497 for education was not enforced until six years

marriages in the decade I87I to i88i, and later, but by the end of the century illiteracy

422 for marriages between i88i and i886.* had been practically banished from the cot-

Family limitation had evidently been widely tage.

adopted, and whatever other influences

played a part in this revolution in social habit State Secondary Education

among these classes, the new onus of paying for a substantial education for all children must have been assigned a heavy role.

In the meantime, however, a new urgency had arisen. It has been shown how individual ownership of industry was giving place,

Universal Elementary Education

especially after the Companies Act of I862,

England had thus ensured the education to company ownership, and by the end of the

of all " her masters." By I870, however, it century this movement was becoming rapid.

was further realized that the nation could In addition, from the late 'eighties onwards,

ill-afford to delay any longer the beginnings the formation of monopolistic trusts and

of at least an elementary education for all. combines made much headway, in spite of

It had not been important in the past for the the obstacles offered by England's free-trade

working class to be literate, but the require- policy. Encouraged by the protection of

ments of industry by this time demanded tariffs, the movement was much more that even the mass of the workers should prominent in the United States and

acquire at least the rudiments of reading, Germany; but even in this country from

writing and arithmetic. " It is seen that an i888 onwards combinations of as many as

uneducated people is handicapped in the fifty small firms promoted a growing ten-

industrial competition with educated dency towards large-scale undertakings.t

nations," wrote an economist of that age.t
By this time, moreover, England was no

Following these developments, Civil Service methods were invading every precinct of busi-

doubt beginning to know the reality of in- ness, banking, trading and manufacturing. dustrial competition, in particular from " The profession of accountancy acquired a

Germany and the United States where totally new importance ; and the invention of

general education was already much superior the typewriter (adopted by English business in

to anything England could boast. Volun- the 'nineties although patented in America in tary societies, particularly the National I867) was one of many mechanical devices

Schools of Bell and Lancaster, directed the helping in the same general direction."

only education provided for the lower classes At an early date it had been acknowledged

and, as we have seen, that was often all too that such a radical transformation of busi-

inadequate. The State had done no more ness methods required a new and educated

than make an annual grant to these volun- man at the head of affairs. The realization

tary societies. As late as I870 therefore, only dawned only much later that it demanded no about half the children of the country were less a system of education adapted to train

educated at all and most of these very in- up a new army of clerical workers. The Board

differently. By an Act of I870 the State for Schools were providing the elements of

* Census for Englansd and Wales, I9I1, Vol. 13.
Fertility of Marriage. t James E. Thorold Rogers, An Economic Introduc-
tion to History, I89I, p. 495.

* Trevelyan, op. cit., p. 354.
t See Ensor, op. cit., p. 283.
1 Ensor, op. cit., p. 114.

182 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

literacy; but something more was required reason why, from about I870, these countries

for even humble members of the new bureau- began to steal our markets was their superior

cracy. Some of these gaps were filled by training among men as well as masters.

recruits from the grammar schools, rescued Germany was considered educationally to be

and revolutionized by the successful inter- sixty years ahead of us.

vention of the Endowed Schools Com- At a late hour, England had learned from

mission between i868 and I874, and later by foreigners that an industrial nation could ill-

the diversion to them of a substantial amount afford to be content with general illiteracy.

of "whisky money" which the county Once again, as the century drew to a close,

boroughs and new county councils received foreigners had to teach her that a mature

for disposal in I890. But the numbers so commercialism needed a more advanced

schooled were pitifully inadequate. Thus the education to equip her clerks. English higher

Bryce Commission on Secondary Education education for the upper strata of society

had to report in I895 that, in the Manchester might have borne comparison with that in

area, "out of a population of five or six Germany or the United States, but for the

millions, some twelve hundred boys are en- majority of her people it was virtually non-

joying an efficient secondary education. If existent. There was little conception yet of

that were a district in Germany there would a secondary, to follow an elementary, educa-

be at least one good school for every hundred tion. Grammar schools were regarded as

thousand inhabitants."* Similarly, although catering for a social class quite distinct from

the fifteen new secondary schools under the that in the' Board Schools. At last, legisla-

Welsh Intermediate Act of I889 and the tion to provide national secondary schools

seventeen secondary schools set up in was passed in the Education Act of I902,

England by the county and county borough which among its various clauses included

councils were a success, they were unable to one permitting secondary education to be a

supply more than the merest fraction of the charge of twopence on local rates. Its in-

clerks everywhere in demand. Consequently, clusion did much to ensure the successful

" the government and local government passage of a controversial Act. During the

services of those days (I895) must have found debates on the Bill, voices from all parties

it a difficult matter to recruit an adequate were raised to emphasize the national

supply of efficient clerks [and] this difficulty urgency attaching to increased secondary

was clearly in Lord Lingen's mind when he education-notably from Haldane, a leader

gave evidence to the Cross Commission some of the Parliamentary Opposition, from

years previously (i886-9)."t

Asquith, the Liberal, and from the Radical,

Thus by I902 " everywhere business men Charles Trevelyan. In I902, then, the

were regretting that city offices were forced foundations of State secondary education

to employ so many thousands of well- were laid in England; its growth, though

grounded and industrious German clerks for not spectacular, was notable. (Table I.)

want of a home-grown substitute ; and the Board of Education mentioned this difficulty in its report for I904 (p. 45). Here indeed
was the rub. Not only was this country failing to supply her own clerks, but that deficit was being made good largely by Germany,

TABLE I

PUPILS IN SECONDARY SCHOOLS ON THE GRANT LIST*

19I3-14 ... I87,207 1920 ... 308,266
1921 ... 336,836

I929 ... 386,993 1930 ... 394,105 I93I ... 4I1,309

the very country which, with the United I922 ... 354,956

1932 ... 432,06I

States, was now recognized as our most dangerous competitor. In fact, the major

I923 ... 354,I65
1924 ... 349,141 1925 ... 352,605

1933 ... 44I,883 1934 ... 448,42I I935 ... 456,783

I926 ... 360,503

1936 ... 463,906

* Lowndes, op. cit., p. 51.

1927 ... 37I,493
I928 ... 377,540

1937 . 466,245

t Lowndes, op. cit., p. 49. Lowndes, op. cit., p. 89.

* From the Annual Reports of the Board of Education.

GROWTH OF EDUCATION IN ENGLAND AND SIZE OF FAMILY 183

Families of Clerical Workers

of advance. He wants a little more than he

The objective of building up a clerical force, can afford, and is almost always living be-

so prominent in the minds of the Act's pro- yond his income."* Nevertheless, however

moters, has undoubtedly been achieved. A full the balance sheet of family expenditure,

new and distinct stratum has been added to the cost of educating their children in the new

society, neither lower nor upper, nor belong- secondary schools could never be crowded

ing to the middle class of new industrialists, out. Without it, their very existence as a

although they have tended to join forces suburban class was jeopardized. But at the

with these latter more recently.

beginning of the century, there was little or

The comparatively few clerical workers no chance of a parent's being given any

who had already appeared before the nine- financial assistance towards his child's

teenth century closed had begun to create secondary education. Only a few scholar-

the phenomenon of a " suburban " residential ships were ever given and these of short

class, but soon these districts were to sprawl duration and doubtful value. The general

over vast areas and their populations to leap provision of assistance had to wait for the

into thousands as clerical occupations grew. Free Place System in I907.t In that year,

From the outset, these occupations conferred more liberal regulations came into force,:

a social status dignified above that of arti- but it remained true that the great majority

sans, even though the latter, equipped with of children were a direct financial burden to

valuable skill, not infrequently earned more their parents during secondary education.

money. " The secondary schools seemed The latter could help themselves in one way more respectable than attendance at the only-by reducing the size of their families.

elementary school till fourteen, followed by And would not such a policy receive addi-

day or evening classes (to acquire a technical tional sanction because their masters and

skill)."* Education of a non-practical nature patterns were pursuing a precisely similar

beyond the primary stage had always been one ? Contraception was soon in general use,

the sole privilege of the wealthier classes and its cost being small sacrifice to be rid of the

it was therefore inevitable that education of incomparably heavier expenses of education.

this type should be irrevocably linked to This class, then, grown at last to represent

gentility, even where wealth was lacking. one of the most important of our social The nature of clerical work in itself helped to groups, is characterized by its determination

classify the white-collared with leaders rather to attain a high standard of living on rela-

than masses. Not unnaturally, therefore, the tively small income, and by its appreciation

ambition of a business bureaucracy was to of secondary education. This education has

live up to the standard hitherto associated made many appeals-including those unwith their education-the standard of life tinged by the ethics of materalism-but

entertained by the well-to-do.

educationists are not unaware that " a wide-

But this was a standard of life to which spread popular desire for those better oppor-

with their moderate incomes they could tunities in life to which higher education is

never fully attain. They willingly subjected

themselves to a tyranny of gentile standards, * C. F. G. Masterman, The Condition of England,

and with it to a gratuitous and lifelong need for

1909, p- 74.
t Cf. Lowndes, op. cit., pp. II0-II.

" pecuniary prudence."t " He (the suburban $ Up to 1907, the State was far from defraying the

dweller) is proud when he is identifying his interests with those of Kensington, and indig-

whole cost of secondary education, the grants payable
for each scholar taking an approved course amounting to not more than two pounds or three pounds according

nant when his interests are identified with to the scholar's age. In 1907, the grant was raised to

those of Poplar. He possesses in full the pro-
gressive desires which are said to be the secret

five pounds on each pupil between the ages of twelve and eighteen in secondary schools satisfying certain conditions. Only those secondary schools could qualify

for a grant where a proportion of school places (at least

* Lowndes, op. cit., p. I94.

25 per cent. of the total admissions of the previous year)

t See Bernard Shaw, Preface to Three Plays by were held as " free places" for scholars from public

Brieux, I909.

elementary schools.

184 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

. . . supposed to be the gateway has definitely professional occupations and those with inplayed a substantial part in the growth of comes well under a thousand pounds a year-

secondary schools."* Parents dissatisfied a class which has been much swollen in

with their own position in society have in- recent years as numbers required in pro-

creasingly seen in this education a medium fessions have grown so rapidly. Even on such

for their children's progress to something limited resources they aim at educating their

better, and new strata of society have children in the public and other self-govern-

claimed places in the schools. Other parents ing schools outside the State system with the

have known that without a secondary educa- full knowledge that these schools " confer a

tion their children must lose ground that they prestige and open the doors to many desirable

themselves have won. And in this respect occupations."* But on a son resident in one

Alfred Marshall's words, in his Principles of of these schools, they must expend at least

Economics, have proved abundantly true. two hundred pounds each year, often three.

" Most parents are willing enough to do for A daughter can be rather less expensive,

their children what their own parents did although in well-known schools the total

for them; and perhaps even to go a little annual cost is rarely less than a hundred and

beyond it if they find themselves among seventy-five pounds. Many of these parents

neighbours who happen to have a rather will not be content for education to end with higher standard."t The numbers have in- school days, their standards more often

deed increased of parents desiring a second- embracing university and professional trainary education and, although voices may be ing. In each of three or four years at Oxford

raised to lament the smaller families neces- or Cambridge, university expenses alone may

sitated by such ambitions we can hardly fail, amount to two hundred pounds in addition

with a prominent educationist, to " recognize to which six months of vacation must be this new appetite for secondary education for financed. As many years of study must also

what it usually is, a perfectly legitimate and be undertaken at the new universities, al-

praiseworthy attempt on the part of the though the annual budget there can be cut as

sensible citizen to endow his child with a low as one hundred pounds. Subsequent pro-

good education as the best, perhaps the only, fessional training may add another three or

capital asset which he can hope to pass on to four years and cost several hundred pounds, him."+ From the national point of view, also, especially in the most eminent professions

the new striving after education has not been where pupilage costs are high and partner-

found undeserving of praise. In the words of ships must be bought. Evidently, on incomes Leonard Darwin, " we should also recognize under a thousand pounds a year, such costs

that we can best serve our country by bring- cannot be met for more than one or two

ing healthy and intelligent children into the children. Yet the ambition to train their world, provided that we can give them a children for a professional status can hardly

sound education and a fair chance of win- be questioned.

ning a good livelihood."§

Education and Working Classes

Families of Professional Workers

Meanwhile, what of the lower rungs of the

Such words of commendation must also be social ladder? How did the claims of educa-

held to apply to another group similarly tion rest on them? For half a century and

striving after an education rather more ex- more their children had been growing in-

pensive than they find it easy to finance. Here are found many of the lower ranks of the
* Lowndes, op. cit., p. I27.
t Alfred Marshall, Principles of Economics, bk. 4, ch. 6, para. 7.
+ Lowndes, op. cit., p. 128. § Spoken at a Conference of Eugenists, New York,

creasingly unprofitable to labourers. Under the system of home industries, each additional pair of hands and feet could be used to increase the total family output and to swell the family income. Later, however, as we
* A. M. Caff-Saunders, World Population, 1936,

1921.

p. 251.

GROWTH OF EDUCATION IN ENGLAND AND SIZE OF FAMILY 185

have seen, Parliament accepted the principle steadily fainter. Other types of incentive,

of universal education-i.e. in I870-but also, were weakened by influences bound up

this achievement only gained its full signifi- with the spread of urbanization. It is not

cance when compulsory education to the age surprising, then, that the working man con-

of I0 years was enforced in I876. Small sums templated with equanimity, a family circle

could still be earned out of school hours, but smaller than his father's. Statistics show

parents could no longer expect their children how such families grew smaller from the

to contribute substantially to the family 'sixties onwards. (Table LI.)

income until their tenth birthdays were

passed. With the spread of the factories,

TABLE II

moreover, family earning disappeared as such, " When the family broke up into independent units, and the boys kept their money to themselves and married when they
chose and when the girls were mistresses,

NUMBER OF CHILDREN BORN PER IOO COUPLES WHERE THE WIFE WAS 45 OR OVER AT THE TIME OF THE CENSUS, ENGLAND AND WALES, 1911
(151, PART 2, P. XCVIII, TABLE 44)

Date of Duration

Social Class

Marriage of I 2 3 4 5 6

too, of their own earnings the loss of the

Marriage

family wage tended to lessen the stability of i88i-86 25-30 556 562 609 513 684 632

life."* The return which parents might expect from a child could no longer be relied

I87I-8I I86I-71 I85I-61

30-40 6I5 6I6 652 567 717 667
40-50 679 673 698 633 760 702 50-60 707 700 718 654 759 738

upon. Later, when factory acts removed I85I or Over 6o 68I 740t 698t * * 746

young children from the sphere of industry earlier

and placed restrictions upon the employ- I. Skilled artisans

4. Textile workers

ment of young persons and of women, the 2. Intermediate between 2 5. Miners

economic value of children was steadily curtailed. Last came the Education Acts, as

and 3 3. Unskilled workers

6. Agricultural workers

culmination to these well-established forces. Other forces were not lacking in the same

Not only did they advance by an extra year direction. In the first place, the inconveni-

the lowest age at which children could secure ence both of bearing and rearing children had

full-time employment, but also, through greatly increased when women had to leave

School Boards and School Attendance Com- the home to work in factories if they were to

mittees, they made evasion of the law a much assist in earning the family income. Secondly,

more difficult task.

as industry developed, men skilled in its

The sacrifices of earnings necessitated was processes became increasingly valuable since

not, however, the only hardship imposed on they were always scarce. Workers were thus

working-class parents by the new education. furnished with a substantial motive for

Money for school fees had also to be provided. ambition to rise to join the ranks of this

Such fees often amounted to no more than aristocracy of labour. But the requisite

ten shillings a year for each child; none the training could by no means be secured by all;

less, their burden fell heavily on many to many, its costs were prohibitive. " The

families and only the very poor could hope industrial revolution upset this old tradi-

for exemption or assistance. Some years tional system (of training under craftsmen);

later, in I89I, fees below ten shillings were ... the increasing discoveries of science far

at last abolished, but such relief was offset out-stripped the teaching powers of any

only two years later by a raising of the school- individual craftsman. The work of training

leaving age to ii years, and by further ad- for industry on scientific lines became in-

vances to I2 years in I899 and in some areas finitely complex andjcostly.". Nevertheless,

to I4 years in I900.

the prizes offered and the additional support

For the working man, financial incentives given by working-class societies, such as the

to invest in a large family had thus grown

t Rates based on less than ioo couples.

* Knowles, op. cit., p. go.

* Rates based on less than io couples.
Marvin, op. Cit., p. 209.

I86 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

co-operative movement, to desire for self- prior claim. In addition, the majority of em-

improvement and education, were together ployers remained apathetic in their attitude

sufficient to encourage many men to acquire to technical education so that, until quite

the new training at whatever cost. They recently, it has usually proved the distinc-

attended the Mechanics' Institutes estab- tion of those among manual workers who

lished throughout the country, securing certi- relied on their own or their parents' initiative

ficates of the Department of Science and Art to acquire the extra accomplishments. But

in South Kensington, and later, attended the among these no less than among the white-

technical schools and colleges when these collar workers, such ambitions for their

began to appear. There is, in fact, ample children would often be unrealizable where

evidence that up to a date as late as 1930 the size of the family was large. There can be

" the impulse towards technical education little question, then, that the desire for ad-

came principally from the ambition of the vancement through technical training has

individual student . . . from those who taken its toll of large families among the

[were] ambitious to rise to better paid, more working classes.

secure, or more congenial positions; from

parents who [were] sufficiently ambitious for Conclusion

their children's future [to make serious efforts] There seems to be, then, no group in the

to launch them into a skilled career."* social hierarchy for which the cost of educa-

Already at the beginning of the century, tion has not been and does not still remain

many contended that technical education a factor of some importance in causing the

should be a vital concern of the State itself. collapse of the birth-rate. Here is an eco-

Our deficiency of skilled workmen, compared nomic influence, pressing powerfully upon the

with Germany and the United States, was size of families. It is difficult to assess its

already evident, especially in the chemical relative weight among the many and varied

and then in the electrical trades. Conse- influences which must be operating, but the

quently, there was " a reiterated demand by very fact that it is susceptible to such

members of all parties, during the debate straightforward classification suggests a

upon the Act of i902, for technical education simple means, should that be desired, of

to bring this country to the level of her in- counteracting its effects. The burden of

dustrial competitors."t Funds were limited, educational costs could be offset by a policy

however, and secondary education was given of grants or scholarships, a wide extension,

that is, of what has already been undertaken

* Lowndes, op. cit., pp. I96-7. * Lowndes, op. cit., p. 192.

on a scale which is ineffectual, because too restricted.

SCIENTIFIC BOOKSAl

Current and Standard ENGLISH, FRENCH and GERMAN Literature in MEDICAL, CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL and PHYSICAL SCIENCE
supplied from stock, or obtained promptly to order.

A visit to this Department is respectfully su*Aested. Please write for CATALOGUES, mentioninA interests.

LEW td.LH K.

VIS Co. L A

*

.*er.1L36ONGDOOWNER

STREET
W.C.1

Eugnics Review, Vol. , No. 8.

