A. JAMES GREGOR
Washington College, Maryland

On the Nature of Prejudice

NY DISCUSSION OF "race prejudice" is
afflicted, at the outset, with a number of difficulties not the least of which is the that there is no generally accepted anthropogcal definition of "race." This particular perxity need not long detain us. Our concern, re, is with sociological responses and so our uiry will not commence with a consideration those entities physical anthropologists take to races, but rather, with those groups which any en society is ready to accept as racial.' Such definition, which seems, at first glance, inLerably inexact, actually provides considerable ;ght into the problem of race relations which uld most certainly be lost without it. What passes as "race prejudice" is actually but ingle variety of a whole class of related renses2 rooted in normal human behaviour. To trict our inquiry to a study of relations beeen strictly defined anthropological races uld unnecessarily obscure that fact.
Man is a gregarious creature and as such es in many of the behavioural characterof social animals.3 The one characteristic ich, to our study, is of most significance is the cal animal's disposition to identify with only
ect members of its own species. The most singular feature of this identification the exclusiveness which is its natural corol-
4. Social insects, for example, will defend e hive from trespass by different groups; they
behave differently toward creatures which of their own species but which originate in es or hills other than their own.6 A similar lusiveness characterizes all social creatures oughout the animal kingdom.6 Such behaviour is particularly characteristic of hropoids, man's nearest relatives among the ates. Intruding strangers are forcibly driven m established communities.7

Man as a Social Animal
Among men such behaviour manifests itself as tribal, class, caste, national or racial exclusiveness, the explicit form of preference being deter-
mined largely by the historic, social and political circumstances in which the particular human
group finds itself.
Among primitives, whose range of activity is generally limited to contacts with members of their own physical type, exclusiveness is tribal, distinctions are drawn along cultural lines. Each tribe in distinguishing itself from its neighbours arrogates to itself the appellation "men," designating others "non-men."8 Each community conceives of itself, with an a priori conviction of the most categorical sort, as somehow uniquej superior and favoured of the gods. The members of the community are attracted to each other and abstract from the observed similarity among themselves an ideal beauty-and find in their common customs and usages the self-evident laws of proper behaviour. Honour, value, aesthetic and moral worth become attached in varying degrees to now one and now another of the collective cultural and physical attributes of the
community.
Among the natives of Mexico, for example, there existed a tendency to congenital albinism. Since these albinos departed from the accepted physical norm they were sacrificed to the gods.9 Among the Papuans a child born of lighter hue than the average of the tribe was held assiduously over a fire of green branches until it was tinted the proper colour.10
The aesthetic and moral justification whichi sustains this behaviour is a rationalization of attitudes which man shares with all social animals. For the attitudes characterize man's primary social disposition: each association of men is animated by a consciousness of kind, an identification of like members, a preferred

2I7
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1961, 52. 4

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

association11 whose common attributes are con- fact that they had few occasions to express this

ceived of, somehow, as superior.

latent consciousness since their contacts were,

Human communities can distinguish them- by and large, limited to peoples of their own

selves by physical disparity, different territorial general physical type. Correspondingly, cultural

origins, varying speech, diverse political, moral differences occupied the focal point of their

and religious allegiances as well as different awareness.

economic functions, modes of dress and adorn- None theless, when the first contacts were made

ment.12

between intruding Indo-Europeans and the indi-

Generally, social distance is measured by a genous population ofwhat was to become Greece,

constellation of differences varying in their physical differences (in pigmentation primarily)

degree of permanence. These differences are did not pass unnoticed. Rather, these specifically

never looked upon philosophically, they are one physical differences appear to have been made

or the other or all together, made the ground for the basis (along with cultural differences) for

discrimination or preference. At best, in highly social and political preferences.17 Furthermore,

sophisticated communities, they are tolerated- by the time of Aristotle, after the two stocks had

but even then, under the least pressure, they amalgamated to form the Greek People, the

become the focal point of group antagonism. Hellenes had stabilized, as evidenced by their

One does not have to be particularly astute to literature and art, a composite physical ideal, the

recognize here, the source of what passes, in our elements of which were strictly European.

own time as "race prejudice."

Deviations from this established norm were con-

What is important to note is the fact that sidered, at best, strange or curious, at worse, they

exclusiveness and preference centre around dif- were despised.

ferences. These differences can reside, as we have Thus whenever the Greeks represented people

seen, in attitudes, religious opinions, speech, of little consequence, barbarians, demons or

aesthetic judgments, technical achievements or comic figures, they were almost invariably small, observable physical differences.'3 In varying very dark and possessed of prominent fleshy or

context, in different areas of competition, one or broad noses characteristic of non-European

the other or several in combination will be of races.18 Thus the pseudo-Aristotle's ideal man

primary importance.

was a man of medium pigmentation, of medium

stature, of thick, slightly curly hair, straight

The Ancient Greeks

forehead-that is, the composite European.19

For the ancient Greeks of the Classical period, Non-European, non-Greek physical types were

whose principal contacts were with people of deplored: a very dark complexion, black eyes,

essentially similar physical type, the primary woolly hair, excessive or diminutive stature,20

distinction upon which group identification fixed low or sloping forehead, everted lips and prog-

itself was cultural. The Greeks identified them- nathous jaws21 were all held to be hallmarks of

selves as "Hellenes" (by nature superior) and inferiority. In this connection the pseudo-

deprecated the rest of mankind as "barbarian" Aristotle deprecated the Ethiopians and Egyp-

(by nature slaves).'4 The original distinction was tians, the only negroid peoples with whom the

applicable to persons of non-hellenic speech'5 Greeks had contact.

and dress.'6

This time has been spent with the specifically

Why the Greeks should have selected these racial consciousness of the Greeks because con-

criteria for distinction is understood once we temporary sociologists often contend (using the

appreciate the fact that their principal line of Greeks as illustration) that race awareness per se

contact was political and territorial and the most is a by-product of modern capitalism.22 Our con-

obvious differences between themselves and other tention is, rather, that it is a function of group

identifiable groups were cultural.

consciousness, a corollary of the native con-

This is not to say that the Greeks were not sciousness of kind characteristic of all gregarious

"conscious" of racial distinctiveness, in the animals.23 The nature of the specific criteria for

anthropological sense-it is simply a matter of preference (cultural, national or racial) will be

2I 8

ON THE NATURE OF PREJUDICE

influenced or determined, in some cases, by around these hard and fast physical dissimi--

objective social forces as well as by the degree of larities.3' So persistent are such identifications

permanence to which each distinguishable dif- that they move men to act in a way they would

ference is subject. But the instinctive seeking out not were they motivated solely by utilitarian

of kind is the primary, generic social fact.

considerations. Thus they are of primary social

concern. On the other hand, economic, social or

The Early Egyptians

political circumstance can influence the strength

This same consciousness of kind led the or weakness of the specific reaction.

ancient Egyptians (of predominantly Mediter- In contact areas where groups of widely

ranean race24 before their admixture with the differing stocks encounter each other, the contact

Negroes) to select brunette curly hair25 and is not truly social, for by virtue of the disposition

brown skin as the epitome of the highest type of of the members of each group the physical

humanity which they designated Rot, the human singularities of the other mark them as beings of

race par excellence.26 Departure from this select an entirely different moral order.32 The classic

physical type was a manifest sign of inferiority. consequence of such contact is the enslavement

Thus theblond, fair skinned Tamhu (Mashausha) of the one group by the other. Any subsequent

were always represented as barbarians,27 and the attempt to organize association on a more organic

black, woolly haired Nahsu (Kesh) were ap- basis leads to the elimination of slavery and the

praised a "perverse race."28 The Negro visage introduction of more or less formal caste relation-

was carefully painted under the soles of sandals ships.

to be trod upon by the lowliest Egyptian.29 In One can say that the degree of association and

the reign of Sesostris III the entire Negro race the ease with which the groups are integrated

was proscribed from ever entering the confines of varies in inverse proportion to the degree of

Egypt.30 While at the other extreme an Egyptian physical dissimilarity.33

unfortunate enough to be graced with fair hair We can illustrate such a generalization (which

carefully concealed it under a dark wig.

would have been qualified by more careful

analysis had space permitted) by a number of II historic examples.

The Basis of Prejudice

This disposition, on the part of human groups,

III

to identify with an ideal physical type is the There is considerable evidence to indicate that

psycho-social basis for race prejudice. As we have both the Hellenic and Roman civilizations ori-

indicated, group identification can be made on the ginated in the contact of peoples sufficiently

basis of language, dress, mannerisms, religious diverse to promote class and caste lines marked

or political affiliation (such identifications are the by physical distinctions.34 The original ruling

substance of the daily lives of all peoples). We classes of Homeric Greece and Post-Tarquinian

have here dwelt upon racial distinctions because Rome seem to have been more fair, in general,

they are of permament duration and of high than the indigenous population of Italy and

social visibility. We can generalize (bearing in Greece.35 These distinctions originally charac-

mind exceptions which can conceivably result terized the social castes and classes (Patricians

from singular socio-political circumstances) that and Plebians, Helots, Perioikoi, Aristocracy and

where two peoples, marked by gross physical so forth).

dissimilarities, make contact, the attempt at as- Since the differences between the orders were, similation is invariably met with tensions and on the whole, negligible, these distinctions were

disharmonies which it is almost beyond the modified (Sparta was the principal exception) in

power of men to resolve. Gross physical dis- a relatively short time to produce the physical

similarity provides a broad and sure base for and cultural synthesis of Northern and Southern

group identification. The racial livery of an Europeans which we know of as Classical individual indelibly marks him a member of a Antiquity.

specific community. Group identity crystallizes Opposed to this more common pattern we,

21I 9

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

have the historic examples of aggregations of ing it with a religious rationale. The Laws of

people of markedly different physical type which Manuil8 ascribe the origin of caste to the creative

never seem to synthesize completely; the most acts of God. Essentially the same process fol-

tragic illustration of which is Ancient India. lowed the bringing together of two races of

manifest dissimilarity in North America. The

India and the Caste System

original contacts between white and black

Several millennia before the birth of Christ,
Indo-European peoples invaded the Asiatic subcontinent of India, coming into contact with an indigenous population composed of protonegroid, veddoid and archaic caucasoid stocks.36
Tlhe conquerors, who designated themselves
"Aryans," that is, "nobles," "equals," characterized the aborigines "Dasas" or "Dasyas," i.e., slaves or robbers.37 The invaders identified themselves as "fair"38 compared to the indigenous population which they distinguished as "black-skinned" and "noseless."39
Slavery was the first consequence of this contact4'-later the slave-master relationship was modified to become a strict caste system with the original dark-skinned population occupying the lowest Sudra caste or remaining Pariahs, Outcastes.4'
India never succeeded in synthesizing these
disparate elements and to-day over 50,000,000 Indians remain outside the organic body of Hindu society in what has been called "the largest subordinate racial group in the world."42 How persistently this form of group identification, consequent upon the contact of two widely divergent physical types has plagued India from that day to this (about four millennia) is exemplified by the fact that a contemporary high caste Hindu will continue to refer to a man of low caste as a "very black fellow."43 Honour and value still attach to fair skin."
*Through thousands of years of contact the original racial distinctiveness has persisted, and
even to-day the nasal index provides a rough guide to social status. Noses grow broader as one proceeds down the social scale45 with negroids composing the vast majority of casteless Untouchables."

resulted in a slave-master relationship later modified into what can legitimately be spoken of
as a caste relationship.'9 Similarly, in the Southern States of the United States caste was formalized by appealing to a religious rationale.
The Negroes were conceived of as the descendants of Ham, who cursed with negritude, and proscribed to multiply only after their own kind,
were to serve their fairer skinned brethren in perpetuity.50
In the United States, where immigrant populations composed of all the European sub-races basically akin to the native stock have been, by and large, absorbed, the Negro and the Asiatic remain in caste isolation.
This is true in spite of the fact that the Negro is one with the majority of Americans with respect to language, religion, customs and general allegiance. None the less, their subordinate status, with its attendant disabilities, shows but little susceptibility to change.51 The retention of social distance seems a function of high social visibility.
It is not necessary, here, to review the disabilities suffered by the Negro in the United
States and the Negroid in India-the point to be made is that gross physical differences provide a convenient and permanent core about
which group distinctions collect themselves. This felt difference provides the latent source of prejudice and preference wherever two divergent races come into contact. In areas where distinctions are not formalized by religious or legislative precept they are none the less real.
In Brazil, where amalgamation of races markedly dissimilar has gone on since the first
European colonization,52 a six-way caste system (Negro, Indian and White and their hybrids) was the first accommodation subsequent to the original slave-master relationship. The formal

American Immigrants

caste distinctions disappeared with the increased demographic strength of the mixed bloods.

The caste relationship, which arose originally To-day, where legally no race distinctions can be

out of the contact of peoples vastly different in made, preferences and prejudices are still mani-

physical type,'7 was early formalized by provid- fest along race lines. Lighter pigmentation and

220

ON THE NATURE OF PREJUDICE

European features are still considered natural marks of superiority. Economic, social and political dominance is still exercised by the European, the broad base of Brazilian society supporting a small social aristocracy which is of unmixed European descent. The metis, or mixed bloods, form an intermediate group, holding correspondingly high social and economic status when compared to the unmixed Negro and Indian mass which forms the lowest stratum of the population.53 The same is true of all Latin American countries where races (in appreciable numbers) or singular physical dissimilarities have tried to merge into a single organic society. It is equally true in North Africa where the Europeanoid Tuareg upper class rules slave castes predominantly Negroid.54 Again social status diminishes as the nasal index increases. In Northern Nigeria the Fula (Fulani) form a caste of non-Negroid Hamites ruling over a NegroHamitic Hausa caste.55 In Ethiopia caste lines are colour lines with the full-blooded Negroes held in virtual (and sometimes real) slavery.56 The term "Negro" is one of opprobrium and pronounced Negro features are a mark of inferiority.57
Racial Dominance
We could trace similar relationships throughout the world wherever peoples of disparate physical appearance have come into contact (Chinese and Malays, Asiatics and Europeans) but the point to be established here is that wherever Europeans have come into protracted contact with organized groups of markedly distinct racial livery the result invariably has been either:
(1) extermination, as was the case with the Tasmanians and almost the case with the Australian Blackfellows and the American Indian (in New Zealand, South Africa and Ancient India58 the natives were hunted like animals by organized hunting parties59), or as has been more commonly the case:
(2) slavery or formal or informal caste subordination as in India, the ancient world,60 Latin America, North America, South Africa, North Africa and, as appears to be the case, in Britain.
While under special circumstances it appears possible for a people to absorb biologically a

markedly alien group (Portugal and its Negro slaves) nowhere have two diverse races been able to unite into one organic society while maintaining their identity. In every instance of EuropeanNegro racial contact the Negroes or Negroid people have been forced into a subordinate slave or caste relationship. The universality of this fact leaves one the choice of but two alternative explanations: (1) the Negro is biologically inferior and succumbs in direct competition with
Europeans, or-as seems to be more likely-42)
the non-White is discriminated against systematically (covertly or overtly) by a dominant group consciously or unconsciously motivated by a preference for its own kind.
That these traits are not restricted to Europeans nor to the era of imperialism is sufficiently obvious. In the first instance, the same or similar relations exist between the Chinese and the Malays, the Japanese and the Ainu, the Bantu and the Bushman, the Forest Negro and the Pygmy and the Mulattoes and the Negroes of Haiti. Secondly, the race attitudes of antiquity, similar in all respects to those of our own time should establish them as extra-capitalistic.
Anything more than a casual or temporary contact between widely diverse races, in precapitalistic as well as capitalistic times, provokes prejudice and discrimination and a subsequent rationalization for felt preferences.
In epochs of strong religious conviction alien races have been proscribed as "accursed of God" -this is as true of the ancient as it is of the modern world. The ancient rabbis had formalized their preference by advancing the thesis that Negroes were *the "accursed descendants of Ham."'61 The external stigmas of this curse being "black skin, misshapen lips and twisted hair."
So impressed were the earliest Europeans by the
physical differences between the primary races
that by the first century a doctrine of separate
creation of blacks and whites was advanced and
supported by both the Babylonian Talmudists
and the Emperor Julian. By the beginning of the
fifth century A.D. this notion had become so
prevalent that St. Augustine inveighed against it
at considerable length as heretical.62 Heretical or
not, similar notions continued to find support
and were entertained by Paracelsus (1520) and

2 21

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Bruno (1591)-certainly no apologists for
capitalism.
Even the Mohammedans, long known for their liberality in racial matters, concocted a similar rationalization for discrimination. A woman, so the account goes, concealing a child from the Prophet, brought down a curse upon it and its descendants: they wete to be for ever black as "darkness," to be sold as cattle to those of fair
skin.63 We have seen similar arguments formulated in
areas so widely separated as India and the United States.
Even the argument of the Emperor Julian, favouring the polygenetic origin of the primary races, was revived in relatively recent times (where a more "scientific" disposition obtained)." Still more recently, in the West, all the paraphernalia of science has been employed, at one time or another, to establish the biological inferiority of the Negro on scientific grounds-to provide support for exclusion or for white preference.
It cannot be our concern here to discuss the merits or demerits of this last endeavour, to consider the adequacy of the evidence for or against Negro biological inferiority. The point here is that discriminatory practices and preferential treatment are almost universal concomitants of the contact of two widely different races whether such practices are supported by a religious or a "scientific" rationale, or no rationale at all. The preference for one's kind is an elementary social fact, the forms it will assume will be conditioned and modified by circumstances-but where the differences between peoples are so great as to be immediately perceptible, and where organized groups of appreciable numbers maintain sustained contact, characteristic forms of race prejudice manifest themselves.
IV
History records no greater tragedy than the attempt by a number of societies to accommodate peoples of visibly divergent race. Rabindranath Tagore, the Indian Nobel Prize winner, wrote :"
[India's] history began with [race-prejudice] and
though India desperately tried some kind of mechanical race adjustment she has failed in giving

birth to a living political organism owing to abnormal caste consciousness that obstructs strain of human sympathy and spirit of m co-operation. Ihis is the reason why, in spi the fact that India had produced a series of minds, she had not produced a great o history; and it has yet to be seen if such a is in the making in which people of ciff colours can have a perfect bond of life....
American and South African circums are too well known to warrant comment The prospects for those of colour are con* discrimination, poverty, a painful awar not belonging-an inability to identify with race, culture and historic tradition of the munity in which they find themselves unw members and in which they will serve as pirates in times of affluence and as revolutio fodder in times of stress.
Prejudice is the obverse image of prefe association. Preferential association is c teristic of all social animals, and while h beings can base their preference on a num factors: nationality, class, religion, intell interest or race, race has been one of the persistent of the criteria considered, conscio or unconsciously in preferential association, the visible trappings of race are perman stable and transmissible in accountable fas
Sanguine hopes that the disposition to ferential association will be eliminated education,66 by legislation or by time itself belied by historic experience. Only a sensi awareness of the complexity of the probi which face our world in the increasingly freq contact of races and cultures can assist us avoiding the tragedy that has attended s contacts in the past. That men are capable meeting those problems and resolving equitably is admittedly something of an of faith-an article of faith, however, suppo by some compelling instances of contempo racial accommodation. But is it an article faith we must entertain if we are not dis supinely to submit ourselves to tragedy.
REFRENCES
1. Cox, 0. Caste, Class and Race. 1948. Garden 319.
2. Park, R. Race and Culture. 1950. Glencoe. 232. 3. Gini, C. Corso di Sociologia. 1957. Rome. 554 f. 4. Park, op. cit. 321 f.

222

ON THE NATURE OF PREJUDICE

5. Keith A. A New Theory of Human Evolution. 1949. New York. 61.
6. "Thus we find that every species of social animal is divided into independent groups; that each group is dominated by a separatist, self-regarding group spirit; that competition, selection, and survival involve a struggle, not between species, but between groups of the same species." Ibid. 39.
7. Forbes, H. Handbook to the Primates. 1897. London. II, 157.
8. Fairchild, H. Race and Nationality. 1947. New York. 4 f.; Park, op. cit., 87; Gini, C. Le rilevazioni statistiche tra le popolazioni primitive. 1942. Rome. 270f.
9. Brinton. The Nation as an Element in Anthropology. July, 1893. Smithsonian Institute. 592.
10. Ibid. 11. Giddings, F. Principles ofSociology. 1903. New York.
v; Bonner, H. Social Psychology. 1953. New York. 358 f. 12. Gini, C. Le rilevazioni .. ., 276.
'13. Gini, C. El problema de la asimilacion culturl.
Revista de la Facultad de Ciencias Economicas de la Universidad Nacional de Cuyo, May-August,
September-December, 1955. r4. istotle. Politica. I, 2, 1252b, 1-8.
S. Hettich, E. A Study in Ancient Nationalism: The
Testimony of Euripides. 1933. Williamsport. 48. 6. Euripides. Rhesus. 294. Orestes. 1396 f.
7. Guenther, H. Lebensgeschichte der Hellenischen Volkes. 1956. Paehl. 85 f.; Rassengeschichte des Hellenischen und des Roemischen Volkes. 1929. Munich. 18 f.
8. Guenther. Rassengeschichte ... , 27 f.; Myres, J. Who were the Greeks? 1938. Berkeley. 73 f.; Beardsley,
G. The Negro in Greek and Roman Civilization. 1929. Baltimore. 113 f 9. Aristotle. Physiognomonica. 3, 807a 32, 807b 19, 36, 812b 1-6; Myres, op. cit. 75 ff. Aristotle. Physiognomonica. 812a 13-15, 812b 31. . Ibid. 811-12. Ashley Montagu, M. Man's Most Dangerous Myth. 1952. New York. chap. 1; Cox, op. cit., passim. Giddings, F. Elements of Society. 1915. New York. 66 f.; Studies in the Theory of Society. 1922. New
York. 163 ff.; Principles . . ., v f. Dixon, R. The Racial History of Man. 1923. New
York. 186 f.; Smith, G. 7he Ancient Egyptians and the Origin of Civilization. 1923. New York. 25; Sergi, G. Le prime e le pi4 antiche civitd. 1926. Turin; 135. Mosso, A. Origini della civiltd mediterranea. 1910. Milan. 321 f. Smith, op. cit., 58. Nott, J. Types of Mankind. 1865. Philadelphia. 85. Coon, C. Races of Europe. 1954. New York. 464. Nott, J. Types..., 255, 269; Rogers, J. Nature Knows No Colour Line. 1952. New York. 8. Nott, J. and Gliddon G. Indigenous Races of the Earth. 1857. Philadelphia. 188.
Seligman, C. Races of Africa. 1957. London. 97 f.
1. Hooton, E. Up From the Ape. 1931. New York. 584; Reuter, E. Race Mixture. 1931. New York.
"The first phase of race and culture contacts is characterized by contacts that are not truly social, in the sense that persons with different racial and cultural backgrounds who are brought together are not members of the same moral order ... they hardly regard each other as completely human."

Frazier, E. Race and Culture Contacts in the Modern World. 1957. New York. 32; Gini. Le rilevazioni . . . , 270 ff. 33. Warner, W. The Social Systems of American Ethnic Groups. 1945. New Haven. 285 f. 34. Oberziner, G. Origine della Plebe Romana. 1901. Genoa; Patriziato e Plebe. 1912. Milan. 35. cf. Park, op. cit., 93; Guenther. Racial Elements of European History. 1927. London; Adel und Rasse.
1927. Munich; Lebensgeschichte des Roemischen
Volkes. 76 ff. 36. Sen. The Pageant ofIndia's History. 1948. New York.
14, 35; Horrwitz, E. Veda and Vedanta. 1937. Mayavati. 8 f.; 11. 37. Majumdar, R. The Vedic Age. 1951. London. 156. 38. cf. Rig Veda 10, 96; Guenther. Die nordische Rasse bei den indogermanischen Asiens. 1934. Munich. 23. 39. Wallbank, T. A Short History OfIndia and Pakistan. 1958. New York. 36; Horrwitz, op. cit., 11. 40. Dange, S. Indiafrom Primitive Communism to Slavery. 1955. New Delhi. 41. Ouwerkerk, L. The Untouchables of India. 1945. London. 3. 42. Ibid. 43. Spectator. May 28, 1931. 501. 44. In 1949 Prattis wrote: "I talked with the editor of the Hindustani Times about matrimonial advertisements in which girls mention their fair and white complexions as desirable attributes in seeking a husband. It was my impression that this disposition was a carry over from the long British occupation. The editor said this was not true, that it has long been the tradition of Indians to place a premium on a fair skin and that fairness has been a sort of ideal . . ." "Seventeen Days in Independent India." Pittsburg Courier. August and September, 1949, as cited Rogers, op. cit., 9. 45. Dixon, op. cit., 258 f. 46. ". . . it is scarcely a paradox to lay down as a law from the caste organization in Eastern India, that a man's social status varies in inverse ratio to the width of his nose." Risley, as cited Haddon, A. The Study of Man. 1898. New York. 81. 47. "The existence of a permanent caste system in India seems to have had its origin in the obvious diversity of racial types in the Indian population. It is a well-recognized fact that visibility is an important factor in maintaining social distances and incidentally making class distinction hereditary." Park, op. cit., 92. 48. Chap. 1, 87-93. 49. Dollard, J. Caste and Class in a Southern Town. 1957. New York. 50. Murray, W. The Negro's Place in Call of Race. 1948. Tishomingo. 51. Kinzer, R., Sagarin, E. The Negro in American Business. 1950. New York. 52. The fact that biological amalgamation began seems to have been a consequence of the fact that the original Europeans failed to bring with them women of their own fraternity-as the English, in North America, had done. A similar process resulted in New France when the French came as trappers and fishermen without their women. The Dutch in South Africa evinced the same behaviour until women of their own joined them to re-establish group life. cf. Keith, A New Theory
,360f.

223

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

53. cf. Frazier, op. cit., 15; Reuter, op. cit., 34. 54. Coon, op. cit., 471 ff.; Dixon, op. cit., 203. 55. Haddon, A. Races of Man. 1925. New York. 56. Yilma, A. Haile Selassie, as cited Rogers, op. cit. 57. Rogers, op. cit., 19; Coon, op. cit., 453. 58. Dange, op. cit., 115.
59. Frazier, op. cit., 51. 60. Beardsley, op. cit., 111, n. 1. 61. cf. Topinard, "De la notion de Race en anthropo-
logie." Revue de Anthropologie (2nd Series), II, 589.

62. Augustine. City of God. Bk. xvi, 8. 63. Speke. What Led to the Discovery of the Blue Nile,
cited Rogers, op. cit., 13.
64. cf. Nott, op. cit. 65. Spectator. May 9, 1931. 739, as cited Rogers, op.
9.
66. cf. Bonner, op. cit., 373 f.; Samelson, B.DoesEd tion Diminish Prejudice? Journal of Social (1).1945.11-13.

224

