GENETICS, MEDICINE AND PRACTICAL EUGENICS*
By J. A. FRASER ROBERTS, M.D., D.Sc., M.R.C.P., and ELIOT SLATER, M.D., F.R.C.P., D.P.M.

Two Types of Inheritance
I NHERITED differences between human
beings tend to fall sharply into two
groups. First we have definite abnormalities and defects. Sometimes these are wholly determined by heredity. Sometimes there is a genetic basis, though the co-operation of other factors, often environmental, is needed

be adequately investigated until after the appearance of reliable quantitative tests. Up till that time it had to be judged on the
basis of educational assessment or of social behaviour; thus some authorities of the
early days thought in terms of qualitative distinctions between the mental defective and the normal, and of single-factor inheri-

if that genetic basis is to express itself as tance. It is only fairly recently that we have

recognizable abnormality. These definite been able to estimate the relative parts

inherited departures from normality are
practically always due to single genes. In the
second place, however, when we turn to the
hereditary differences which distinguish normal people it is rarely indeed that we find
these to be due to the action of single genes.
Multifactorial inheritance is the rule; that is, the effect we see is due to the combined action of many genes, each making a small contribution which is not individually distinguishable. So we get the familiar picture of continuous variation, the normal curve and certain average measures of resemblance between relatives.
The distinction between these two modes of inheritance is a radical one, but it has not
always been clearly drawn. In physical
characters there was from the beginning no real confusion, but this was largely the result of accidental circumstances. Physical abnormalities were investigated by medical men by the pedigree method, and were found reconcilable with a single-gene heredity. Quantitative variables, such as stature, were investigated by statistical methods by Karl Pearson and his school, and the apparently non-Mendelian type of inheritance for which they were looking was found to apply.
The inheritance of intelligence could not

played by single genes and by total genetic
equipment, and to separate clinically those forms of mental deficiency or backwardness attributable to the one and to the other. We
now know that the hereditary component
in the determination of the majority of in-
stances of mental deficiency is multifactorial. When we come to the inheritance of
temperamental qualities we are on less
certain ground. We have no precise and reliable tests of temperament as we have of intelligence. Nevertheless, here too it seems
probable that we have to look for single genes as the explanation of pathological events, and for a multiplicity of genes as the explanation of individual differences in the
physiological range. Let us look first
at the mental disorders of what is com-
monly called a " psychotic " kind, that is to say manic-depressive illnesses, schizophrenia and paranoia, involutional melancholia, and the endogenous presenile dementias. In some of them a single-factor inheritance has been demonstrated. This is
so in Huntington's chorea and Pick's disease. Inheritance of the manic-depressive psychoses is compatible with a theory of a single dominant factor, with the environment too playing a considerable role, although objections can be raised to this view. The findings

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on December i6th, 1947.

with schizophrenia are even more difficult to interpret. But no serious worker has wished

62

GENETICS, MEDICINE AND PRACTICAL EUGENICS

63

to depart from a single-factor theory, constitutional and hereditary make-up. In

although that single factor may be either his balanced study of a large series of

dominant or recessive, or, most probably, criminal twins, Kranz (I936) concluded that

schizophrenia may be not one but many the fundamental structure of the personality

diseases with different single genes respon- was largely determined by heredity, but that

sible from case to case. Generally speaking, environment often exercised a decisive

the evidence suggests that specific single influence on behaviour. As pragmatists we

genes are essential for the appearance of the are really more concerned with behaviour

endogenous psychoses; but that multifac- than with abstracted notions of the under-

torial inheritance also plays a part in lying personality; so we must make a larger

determining constitutional resistance or sus- allowance for environment in the problems

ceptibility, just as it does in environmentally raised by temperament, neurosis and psycho-

caused diseases such as tuberculosis.

pathy than we need do with those raised by

Neurosis and psychopathy have probably intelligence and mental defect.

to be looked at in quite a different way.

Almost certainly they depend on qualities of Their Eugenic Significance

temperament and personality, which are From the point of view of practical

determined by multifactorial inheritance. eugenics, the kind of hereditary difference

In clinical practice we are unable to find any which is determined by multifactorial in-

sharp dividing line between abnormal and heritance is far more important than that

normal personalities; the differences which caused by single genes. Here are some of the

exist must be of a graded and quantitative reasons. First, those things determined, or

nature, whatever the particular tempera- partly determined, by multifactorial inheri-

mental trait we consider. Although our tance are more important socially. Intelli-

tests of temperament are nothing like as good gence, good physique, resistance to disease

as tests of intelligence, where they can be are more important to the community than

applied they show that the population is rare hereditary diseases, even including some

distributed in the normal curve. The work of the low-grade mental deficiencies, or those

of Eysenck (i947) and his collaborators is diseases which though rather commoner

particularly convincing on this point. From appear to have a definite and maybe simple

investigations on twins, we know that genetic basis. In the same way, tempera-

qualities of temperament and personality mental differences are more important than

have a hereditary basis, and the sort of the insanities. All the hereditary mental

inheritance of those traits that are found illnesses together give a risk of only about

running in families is readily compatible with 2 per cent in the general population, whereas

a multifactorial theory, but very difficult to the disabilities caused by neurosis and

reconcile with any single-factor hypothesis. psychopathy are of fateful significance to us

In temperament and character, therefore, all.

multifactorial inheritance holds, as it does in Secondly, and this is even more important,

intelligence; but we must rate the impor- simply inherited abnormalities are individu-

tance of the environment considerably ally rare or very rare. Seldom indeed does a

higher. Newman, Freeman and HoLzinger hereditary defect attain a frequency of one

(I937), in their classic study of uniovular in 5,000 in the population; it is usually much

twins who had been brought up apart from less than this. The sole exception is colour-

one another from the earliest years, showed blindness, but this condition should perhaps

that there were larger differences between be regarded as a more or less physiological

the twins in their response to tests of tem- variation rather than as an abnormality.

perament than to tests of intelligence. Selection then, either natural selection based

Different environments had also imposed on natural differing rates of reproduction, or

different patterns of development, and differ- any conscious selection that it might be de-

ent life stories, on personalities of the same cided to apply, operates on a few human

64 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

beings only. With recessive genes it is only hopeful in qualities caused by multifactorial

very occasionally that we can identify geneti- inheritance than they are with single genes.

cally the outwardly normal carriers, so our Even the strictest eugenic laws, such as the

general conclusion is little affected. Contrast Draconian laws of Nazi Germany, would

with this multifactorial inheritance, deter- have remarkably little effect in reducing the

mining in part some human quality such as incidence of recessive abnormalities below a

general intelligence. Every human being certain level. But even a slight selective

exhibits the result of the action of many advantage will cause a growth in frequency

genes, some good, some bad. With the birth of multifactorial genes. If we were conquered

of every single human child the balance tips by an alien race from Mars, it would be quite

a little, up or down. Selection is operating, a feasible project for our overlords to breed

not on one person in five thousand, or fifty up humanity to the intellectual level of a

thousand, or five hundred thousand, but on world of first-class honours men, or down to

every child born to every couple; for upon a world of morons, and in quite a few genera-

the sum total of their good and bad genes and tions. For the ease with which it lends itself

the relative rates at which these are increas- to modification by almost invisible trends,

ing or diminishing depends the future of the multifactorial inheritance is of paramount

species, whether it is advancing, whether it is significance in eugenics.

holding its own or whether it is retrogressing.

Here is something about which the individual Eugenic Measures with Single Genes

can have his say. Here is something not In stressing the greater importance of

merely about which the State can legislate multifactorial inheritance and the things

effectively if it wishes, but something which with which it is concerned we are not trying

is automatically affected, for better or for to say that a consideration of inherited

worse, by social and economic measures of abnormalities is of no value, or, necessarily,

many kinds. We cannot confine our debate that nothing can be done about them. But

to the merits of action or inaction, for the the field is limited and the useful application

actions of individuals, of groups and of of our knowledge will often lie outside the

governments are already exercising a con- field of eugenics. We must dismiss simple

tinuous influence.

dominant and sex-linked harmful genes as of

There is a third reason why multifactorial minor practical importance. In the former

inheritance is the more important practically. every possessor is marked by the abnormality

If the mute inglorious Milton and the village and so is fully exposed to the blast of natural

Hampden may be denied their opportunity selection. If the effect is at all serious the

by external circumstance, it is no less true rate of elimination is so high that such genes

that the potential genius, rich in good genes cannot be other than very rare. Recessive

of many kinds, may be stultified by having sex-linked genes are exposed to one-third of

the misfortune to possess just one single this exceedingly severe selective force.

grossly deleterious gene. Too rigorous an Simple recessive genes present a much

attempt to eliminate such genes may prove more intricate problem. We know that for

harmful on occasion. To some extent this is every person we see with retinitis pigmentosa

so today, for it is the highly intelligent and there are more than a hundred unsuspected

conscientious who tend to limit the number heterozygous carriers; for every albino,

of their children because of some harmful two hundred and fifty; for every sufferer

gene known to be present in the family from alkaptonuria, two thousand outwardly

group. Contrast with this the person whose normal people who carry the gene. Looking

unfortunate heredity is multifactorial and at it the other way round, while only one

due to an accumulation of many bad genes. person in every five hundred carries the

Selection in this instance is on balance gene for such a rare condition as alkaptonuria

practically devoid of risk.

one person in every 70 carries the gene for

Finally, eugenic measures are much more albinism, and no less than one in every thirty

GENETICS, MEDICINE AND PRACTICAL EUGENICS

65

or forty amongst us is a carrier of retinitis elimination has been reduced, the harmful-

pigmentosa. Thus our population contains recessive genes are slowly multiplying.

great numbers of these recessive genes; Ultimately after many generations the old

in all probability there are few of us who high incidence will once more be reached, but

do not carry at least one. In this man- the proportion of carriers will be much

kind corresponds to the rest of the animal higher. A sudden reversion to smaller, closed

and plant world, for wild populations too communities once again and relatively close

carry large numbers of harmful recessive inbreeding would result in a marked outbreak

genes, with little ill effect apparently on the of recessive defects of all kinds.

race. In the absence of a family history of a

The first lesson is a negative one. There is recessive abnormality the increased absolute

no eugenic reason why a sufferer from a risk of a consanguineous marriage is small.

recessive abnormality, or a known carrier, But the relative risk, which is what matters

should not marry and have children, though, to the whole community, is greatly increased.

of course, he will be wise to avoid marrying Would the community be wise to discourage

a blood relative or anyone with a family cousin marriage? If it were prohibited the

history of the same defect. It is true that immediate effect would be to lessen appreci-

harmful genes are being handed on to future ably the amount of recessively determined

generations, but we are all of us doing the abnormality, but in the long run this would

same thing, the only difference being that be at the price of a greater accumulation of

sufferers and their relatives know it and we the genes in the population. The case for

do not. Here we must state our disagreement interference does not seem a strong one.

with the views of Professor Ruggles Gates as Conscious control of recessive defects

expressed in his Human Genetics (I946) and would be enormously easier if the hetero-

again in THE EUGENICS REVIEW (I947). The zygous carriers could be identified. There is

eugenic effect of abstinence is negligible and the promise of this in some current work.

if everyone adopted so conscientious an Provided that the heterozygotes could be

attitude towards posterity no one would feel identified with certainty the defect itself

justified in raising a family.

need never appear provided that marriage

Perhaps it is natural that in the past between the carriers were avoided. This is

eugenic thought has concentrated on one not merely a theoretical impossibility. It

particular line, namely influencing the next could be realized at the present time in

generation positively or negatively by in- erythroblastosis foetalis, a condition which

creasing or decreasing the number of children is common compared with ordinary inherited

of certain individuals. But the consideration defects, occurring say once in every 200

of recessive defects leads us to another births. Confining ourselves to what is

possibility, based on the fact that sometimes practically important, the abnormality need

an individual can safely marry certain not arise if Rh negative women do not marry

individuals but not others. Recessive defects Rh positive men. But is it likely that 15

crop up particularly when blood relatives per cent of women will accept the proposition

marry because they tend to share the same that they can only marry their like and that

genes in common, having received them from 85 per cent of the male population is barred

the same source. The incidence is greatly to them ? If such an attitude were, however,

affected by changes even in the limited to become general we should see an interest-

degrees of inbreeding allowed and practised ing social development, for our population

in our community. The decline in the amount would split into two diverging strains,

of inbreeding during, say, the past century between which marriage rarely took place.

must, as Haldane (I939) has shown, have Some reference has been made to an

greatly lowered the frequency of recessive apparently simple genetic basis, or something

defects. But of course mutation has been that looks like it, for certain not very un-

going on at its usual rate, and, as the rate of common conditions such as thyrotoxicosis,

66 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

essential hypertension, or schizophrenia. of the human population. Either the good

But in all such instances the hereditary basis genes are multiplying at the expense of the

is only part of the story; the co-operation bad, or vice versa; or, it may be, the

of other factors, probably environmental, is population in regard to some of these things

necessary if genetic potentiality is to become is in a state more or less of equilibrium. Now

transformed into the disease itself. If these we have great sympathy with those who

single genes exist they must be relatively would claim that as environmental factors

common and widely spread. Their elimina- are also concerned we should concentrate on

tion, or even substantial reduction, is prob- these first. Let us, it might be contended,

ably impossible and in schizophrenia, for exhaust the possibilities of reducing in-

example, the tendency to self-limitation is efficiency and disease by improvements in

very strong. It would seem much more environment before thinking too much of the

hopeful to concentrate on the environmental less tractable hereditary differences. And

component and discover how to prevent the even when heredity is clearly important,

disease appearing in those whose genetic the most useful practical applications may

constitution renders them susceptible.

well lie not in attempting to influence

We are not going to claim that in all the relative birth-rates but in taking special

foregoing instances there is no scope for precautions to safeguard those who are

eugenic action. The importance of such known to be genetically susceptible. Let us

deformities and defects to the sufferers and take pulmonary tuberculosis as an example.

their families may be very great. Much The fine twin study of Kallmann and

relief can be given by wise advice and by Reisner (I943) has shown most clearly that

suitable legislation. The recent informative in the present state of our community

paper read to this Society by Professor Tage heredity is of great moment in determining

Kemp (I947) on fifteen years' experience in whether or not a person will develop the

Denmark of eugenic legislation shows the adult form of the disease. But is the lesson

importance of these humanitarian measures. of this that those with a bad family history

But that experience also illustrates the should not marry? In our opinion, no.

limited scope and effect of such measures There are so many unfavourable things that

when we think of the community as a whole. can be inherited and this is only one. It

In our country a few thousands of individual might well be that other good qualities would

cases a year would be the utmost number more than outweigh this particular weakness.

affected, and even of those many would have, The lesson is rather to protect those likely

as we have seen, little eugenic significance. for genetic reasons to be highly susceptible:

In those things determined by multifactorial by periodical mass-fluorography for example,

inheritance lies the true and overwhelming by supplements to the diet, by seeing that

importance of the application of genetics to such pecGple do not enter the tuberculosis

practical eugenics.

service, by discouraging the nursing of a

tuberculosis patient by a sister.

Eugenic Aspects of Physique and Tempera- When we turn to tempelament we come

ment up against objections of another kind. Few

There is a large genetic component in would deny the advantage of good build,

human differences in certain physical traits, fast and accurate neuromuscular co-ordina-

for example stature. This is also true of tion, strength, physical health and a high

certain mental qualities, in particular intelli- natural resistance to disease. We can surely

gence. And there is doubtless a genetic encourage those endowed with such qualities

component, also multifactorial, in much that to regard themselves as proper parents for

goes to determine a sound physique and also the next generation. But in the field of

degrees of resistance to certain diseases. As temperament, our aims are much less clear.

we saw earlier, variation is continuous, and There is no such thing as a good and desirable

selection is operating over the whole range type of temperament, and a bad and un-

GENETICS, MEDICINE AND PRACTICAL EUGENICS

67

desirable one. It takes all sorts to make a poorer genetic endowment are reproducing

world. There is room for the quiet, the docile appreciably faster than those who are

and the stable; but there is room also for the superior. Thus we can be philosophical about

man of strong passions, for the natural born heredity and pulmonary tuberculosis.

rebel, for the man whose moods take him Hygienic measures are proving efficacious in

from phases of elation and enhanced activity lessening its incidence and there is no clear

into troughs of depression. It is true, indeed, evidence that those who happen to carry an

that a man like Hitler can cause much excess of genes making for poor resistance

greater harm to humanity than even a are reproducing any faster than the rest of

million mental defectives; but we cannot the population. In all probability we should

say, if Hitler had had children, that they be justified in assuming that owing to some

would have been any more likely to have elimination at a relatively early age the

been bad citizens than anyone else's. It is reverse is true. But suppose that we were

particular combinations of temperamental told that those with the strongest hereditary

qualities which are productive of large effects, predisposition to pulmonary tuberculosis

good or bad. Recombined in another way, were reproducing twice as fast as those who

the effect of the genes responsible would have were most resistant, could we afford to take

been different. In fact we are too uncertain of so detached an attitude? Surely not. And

where we want to go, and too ignorant of the yet this is what is happening in regard to one

foundations on which we stand, for there to quality-general intelligence-a quality of

be at present a practical eugenic approach the highest social importance and one

to the betterment of human personality. determined in large measure by heredity.

We do not propose to discuss the nature of

Eugenics and Intellgence

what is measured by intelligence tests or to

We come at last to intelligence. Even review the evidence which points to a large

here, perhaps, the nature of our aims is not hereditary component. This has been done

beyond all controversy. There are many very recently by Burt (i947) with whose

jobs in society which do not demand a high views we are in entire agreement. Whether

level of intelligence; and we know that when we accept the estimate that three-quarters of

people are set to jobs which provide no the variance in intelligence as measured is

adequate outlet for their intelligence they due to heredity or whether we are ultra-

are often unhappy and difficulties are likely cautious and simply say at least one-half, it

to arise. But there would be general agree- is evident that the problem is urgent. For

ment that we are short of men and women of here is no question of speculating on the

high intelligence, that the number of skilled composition of a more or less stable popula-

jobs is increasing and that with the advent tion and debating at leisure whether some

of mechanization unskilled jobs are becoming change is desirable, whether it could be made,

more and more skilled. The world in which and if so how. We are confronted with what

we live is becoming more and more complex. appears to us a ruinous rate of loss of good

If the average citizen is to understand it, and genes and so a corresponding rate of increase

play his part in a democratic society, better of bad ones. This is the eugenic problem that

education and better intelligence are both far outweighs all others. We are confronted

required. And a rise in the average level of with a relatively enormous dysgenic trend,

intelligence would permit a fuller and richer one moreover which is readily amenable to

mental life in the community.

selection, should selection be attempted

The attitude of concentrating on environ- either directly or, better and more practi-

mental improvement and of doubting the cable, indirectly through those things that

great urgency of positive eugenic measures affect our lives and are to greater or lesser

seems to us to be justified only if one degree within our control.

important condition is satisfied. This is that There is no reason to suppose that the

we have no reason to suppose that those of unfavourable differential birth-rate in regard

68 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to intelligence exists in anything like the Galton himself pointed out the significance

same measure in regard to anything else. Not of changes in the average for changes at the

only is it known solely with respect to extremes, just as he pointed out that among

intelligence, but is only likely to exist with the relatives of men of outstanding ability

respect to intelligence. Nevertheless we must there are a remarkable number of the out-

not forget that good qualities tend in general standingly able. These are two complemen-

to be positively correlated and similarly for tary aspects of the same phenomena, but we

bad qualities. This means that improvement have tended to neglect the more important

in regard to the differential birth-rate as it one. Galton's views about distinguished

affects intelligence should automatically families were right enough; but we need to

secure improvement in other directions also. supplement them with the observation that, But this in all probability would be small, all the same, the great majority of intellec-

important though it is to recognize that it tual giants come from families of moderate

would be in the right direction.

ability as the result of an exceptionally

If the average level of intelligence of the favourable chance. Taking them by and

community continues to decline, we can large, the children of university professors

expect to see the effect not only on the are no doubt more intelligent than the

average but much more markedly at the two children of clerks. But there are so many

extremes. The average citizen will become more clerks in the world than university less fitted by natural aptitudes to understand professors that any collection of brilliant

and exercise an effective voice in the society men will include more clerks' sons than

in which he lives. But the proportion of professors' sons.

mental defectives will rise sharply. Most We need to look for a moment, not at the

critically of all, the loss of good genes will be distribution of men of ability in the comshown in a decrease in the number of the munity, but at the distribution of the genes.

really talented. Civilization owes dispropor- No doubt the genes of hereditary ability are

tionally much to men of the very highest spread more thinly among those of average

intellectual powers, to such figures as Shaw and slightly better than average intelligence

and Einstein in the present age, Pasteur and
Descartes in a past one. Even a relatively small fall in average intelligence implies a catastrophic fall in the number of such men. These are the men whose intellects place

than in the very able. But there are many
more such genes in the former group than in the latter. Regarded as treasuries of potential ability, there is no comparison between the two. The principles of genetics

them in the one-in-a-million class. With an inform us that our concern must be with the average drop of half a dozen points on the community as a whole, and not with a small

Binet scale we can expect them to appear, and special section. The facts as we see them not with a frequency of one in a million, but give rise to grave disquiet. Our task is to of less than one in ten million; for every ten reverse the present trends, to change the sign

such men today, tomorrow we should have of differential fertility, to encourage the more

but one.

intelligent half of the community to have

Eugenics in the past has had too much of more, not fewer, children than the less

an aristocratic air. Perhaps the brilliant intelligent.

pedigree of its founder has had too much
fascination. Perhaps there has been a Summary

failure to distinguish between fruitful Inherited human differences tend to fall

methods of investigation and the use that can into two groups. First, there are definite

be made of them. Studies of the extremes, departures from the normal, these being

on men of genius on the one hand, on mental commonly due to the action of single genes.

defectives on the other, are both fascinating Secondly, there are the inherited differences

and illuminating, but the lessons that they that distinguish normal people, which tend

teach apply to the whole community. strongly to show continuous variation.

GENETICS, MEDICINE AND PRACTICAL EUGENICS

69

These are due to multifactorial inheritance. While there is somae scope for eugenic action in differences of the first kind, this is small compared with the effect of even moderate degrees of selection, operating on all human beings, on differences of the second type. The outstanding eugenic problem, far outweighing all others in importance, is the present differential birth-rate with respect to intelligence, for of this human quality only do we know that the less desirable genes are multiplying rapidly at the expense of the good.
REFERENCES
Burt, C. (I947), Intelligence and Fertility, London,
Hamish Hamilton.

Eysenck, H. J. (I947), Dimensions of Personality
London, Kegan Paul.
Gates, R. R. (1946), Human Genetics, New York, Macmillan.
(1947), EUGENICS REVIEW, 39, 124.
Haldane, J. B. S. (1939), " The Spread of Harmful
Autosomal Recessive Genes in Human Populations,"
Ann. Eugen., Lond., 9, 232.
Kallmann, F. J., and Reisner, D. (I943), " Twin
Studies on the Significance of Genetic Factors in Tuberculosis," Amer. Rev. Tuber., 47, 549.
Kemp, T. (I947), " Danish Experiences in Negative
Eugenics," EUGENICS REVIEW, 38, x8I.
Kranz, H. (1936), Lebensschicksale Krimineller Zwillinge, Berlin, Springer.
Newman, H. H., Freeman, F. N., and Holzinger, K. J. (1937), Twins: A Study of Heredity and Environment, University of Chicago Press and Cambridge University Press.

The Life, Letters, and Labours of
FRANCIS GALTON
by
KARL PEARSON

VOLUtME I: Birth I822 to Marriage I853. With 5 pedigree plates, 72 Photographs,

frontispiece, and 2 text figures. VOLUME II: Letters and Labours of Middle Life.

With 5o plates and many text figures. VOLUME IIIA: Letters and Labours of Later

Life. With 44 plates (3 in colour) and many textfigures. VOLUME IIIB: Character-

isation of Galton, especially by his Family Letters. With i8 plates, many sketches,

and an Index.

Compkte, £3 3s. net

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS

Eugenics Review, Vol. o,Nh.2

