Fertility in Economically Emergent Countries

SOME FACTS

THERE ARE OVER 150 countries in the area, four in an Indian city and in Formosa, five

world as a whole, and of these only about in an Indian village. Not many couples say two

sixty can provide worth-while complete children; even the image of a small family is

data of birth registrations. In another sixty it is hardly present as yet. This will do much to

possible to make some assessment of fertility explain why current population projections show

from census or sample survey statistics, but in the an expected increase between the years 1975 and

remainder (including much of Asia and some of 2000 of over 2,000 million people in Asia, and

Africa) there is no satisfactory information at all over 3,000 million in the world as a whole.

on this subject. The particulars given below are Where fertility data are scanty, the reality must

subject to the limitation that the state of affairs be faced that evidence on the trend of the birth

in emergent countries, and a fortiori in countries rate will be rare and unreliable. But some recent

that it is hoped will soon start emerging, is only indications are available for ten countries in Asia

rather dimly known.

and four countries in Africa and they show little

It is estimated by the demographic staff of the change of level. Fertility has not yet responded

United Nations that in the more developed to political, social and economic developments;

regions of the world the average crude birth rate or perhaps conflicting forces have been at work,

is 22 per thousand (ranging from 18 in Western improved health conditions tending to raise the

Europe to 25 in U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R.) and birth rate and economic progress to lower it-

the gross reproduction rate 1-4. The corres- though this seems unlikely to have occurred on

ponding figures for the other regions are very any large scale. In the Caribbean area, at least,

nearly double in both cases, and show little the upward-pressing forces have prevailed and

variation from place to place: nearly 90 per cent fertility has risen. In general, however, fertility

of less-developed countries have a birth rate of levels in the developing countries are determined

35 per thousand or more and a gross reproduc- to a large extent by cultural traits that have not

tion rate of 2-4 or more.

so far been appreciably influenced by their

The following data quoted (subject to possible economic modernization. Japan, with the strik-

errors) by Professor Freedman at the recent ing reduction in its birth rate, is an isolated

Royal Society Symposium include some excep- exception. There is immense scope for research

tionally high gross reproduction rates:

and much-needed reform: research which has

British Guiana 2-9 Honduras 2-8

Cocos Islands 4-2 India

2-6

been conducted in only a handful of the underdeveloped areas, and reform that has been put

Ceylon

3*7 Trinidad 2 5

Costa Rica 3*4 United Arab

Republic 3-1

into practice almost nowhere. As Dr. Hauser said at the Conference on Research in Family Planning, held in New York in 1960, the exis-

The numbers of children that respondents to tence of large programmes of modernization in

sample surveys say they consider ideal vary a these areas provides a valuable opportunity for

good deal from region to region; for example, an studies of the effect a changing culture does and

average of three or less in parts of the Caribbean could have upon fertility.

S3

