REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

Clayton, I. M. The Shadow on the Universe, or the Physical Results

of the War. Simpkin, Marshall, Hamilton, Kent and Co., Ltd.;

price 2S. 6d. net; pp. 142.

WE can sympathise with Mr. Clayton in his anxiety concerning the

effects of the present War, but neither his methods nor his opinions are

likely to be of assistance in meeting a crisis. A writer who can give a

separate paragraph to such a remark as " The universe has gone through

some perils, but never one of the significance of this " (p. 4), is not likely

to make a serious contribution to any subject; and we are not surprised

to find (Chapter II.) that his only notion of the dysgenic effects of war,

upon which his whole book is built, is the supposed inherited effect of

wounds and impaired constitutions, which there is every reason to sup-

pose does not exist. The book is full of the wildest exaggerations, such

as (p. 14) the suggestion that the revolutionary wars reduced the stature

of the French nation "by nearly a head "; or (p. io), "A few more years

and the human race will be extinct." On a par with his illusions as to

the cause of the racial injury which modern war inflicts, is his suggestion

of the remedy, which consists, we gather (p. 38), in psychic efforts on the

part of women to mould the character of their children during pregnancy.

Probably the real purpose of this hysterical book is found (on page 20)

in the statement " Conscription is the death sentence of the race"; and

(p. 99), " Militarism fights for, and supports, the lowest instincts of life;

pacifism, the highest."

R. A. FISHER.

Rivers, W. H. R., M.D., F.R.S. Kinship and Social Organisation. Constable and Co.; I914; price 2S. 6d.; pp. 96.
THIS book comprises three lectures of exceptional interest and importance, in which Dr. Rivers seeks to show that the use of terms of kinship in different tribes is intimately related to tribal customs and social
organisation, and can be made to throw light upon a tribe's social history even when its distinctive customs have disappeared. Historically, the elucidation of the "classificatory" system of reckoning kinship was the work of Lewis Morgan, and he also saw its importance in revealing
forms of social organisation which have now ceased to exist. At the time at which Morgan wrote, however, he was not aware of specific rights and duties pertaining to the different classes of kinsmen, and this left the way open for McLennan to disparage the importance of primitive kin-
ship systems by regarding them merely as terms used in mutual saluta-
tion. Further, Professor Kroeber, of the University of California, absolutely rejects the view that the nature of the classificatory system has been determined by social causes.
Dr. Rivers presents a carefully selected body of facts to show, first, that the classes of relations denoted by kinship terms have especial duties and functions assigned to them, and, next, that the special classification used depends upon the marriage customs in vogue. For example, in Fiji, the Southern New Hebrides, and the Island of Guadalcanar in the Solomons, what is called the cross-cousin marriage is practised. That is to say, it is habitual for a man to marry the daughter of his mother's brother, or of his father's sister. In this case the relationships of fatherin-law, maternal uncle, and paternal aunt's husband will be held by one and the same individual, and there several relationships will be represented by one word. Thus in the Mhau district of Fiji the word vungo is applied to the above three relationships, the word nganei for the three corresponding female relatives. The term tavale is used by a man for
the son of a paternal uncle, or of a maternal aunt, as well ,Is for the
wife's brother and the sister's husband. Nudavolo is used not only for

REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

211

the child of the maternal uncle, or of the paternal aunt when differing

in sex from the speaker, but this word is also used by a man for his

wife's sister and his brother's wife, and by a woman for her husband's

brother and her sister's husband.

The connection between such a system of reckoning kinship and the

practice of cross-cousin marriage is unmistakeably clear, but Dr. Rivers

reinforces it by examples of the kinship systems among races having

peculiar marriage customs; such as for a man to marry the wife or widow

of his mother's brother, as occurs in the Banksi Islands, or the extra-

ordinary customs of the Island of Pentecost of marrying the eldest

daughter of one's own daughter, or perhaps more probably of one's

brother's daughter. By means of this connection between kinship terms

and marriage customs, Dr. Rivers is able to throw much light on the

primitive customs of South India. Here the three languages-Tamil,

Telagu a'nd Canarese--all suggest cross-cousin marriages, such as are

still practised among the Todas.

In its broad aspect Dr. Rivers' work is of importance in showing that

the classificatory system is naturally associated with an exogamous tribe

organised in two moieties, while the descriptive systems of Celtic and

Scandinavian, as well as Lithuanian and Esthonic are appropriate to a

large circle of kindred. From this latter is derived such a system as our

own, in which the four classes of uncles are undifferentiated, while all

distant collaterals are grouped under the one heading of cousins. This is

the natural effect of the narrowing of family life, which has progressed

continuously in Europe.

The whole book is of more than ordinary interest. The subject is

treated with studious caution and fairness. The exposition is beautifully

clear, and Dr. Rivers has been particularly happy in the selection of

relevant material to exemplify his arguments. It is a book which all

could read with ease, and is of exceptional interest to students of

marriage customs.

R. A. FISHER.

Lamarek, J. B. Zoological Philosophy. Translated, with an introduction, by Hugh Elliot. Macmillan and Co.; 1914; pp. 4IO.
BOTH the translation and the introduction will be very welcome to English readers. The latter aims at being a clear account in modern language of
Lamarck's opinions and achievements; while the former, true to the
historical value of the work, is exceedingly literal. The distinction is a very necessary one in view, on the one hand, of the difficulties which both
the style and the scientific ideas of the eighteenth century present to the
modern reader, and, on the other hand, of our need to pay a juster tribute to the greatness of Lamarck's contribution to Science, than is done by the associations of his name in modern controversy. The life-work of a great man is not to be summed up in a single error. We owe to Lamarck
the first modern statement of the doctrine of descent with modification; and though he guessed a cause of modification which has since proved to be illusory, we have no right to judge which side he would have taken in the controversy when the point became of importance more than half
a century later. Lamarck's limitations are clearly apparent in his Philosophie Zoo-
logique. Having entered upon a vast and unexplored domain of thought, he did not succeed in evolving a consistent theory by the careful examination of the consequences of a single set of fundamental postulates. Instead, his powerful imagination led him to numerous inconsistencies. His attempt to classify the whole animal kingdom in a linear series (a very convenient plan for writers of Natural Histories) is in itself discordant with his theory of the inheritance of characters acquired as adaptations to environment. Although he was much hindered, and often led astray, through lack of accurate scientific information, it is clear that as a philosopher he did not make the best use of the facts at his disposal.

