EUGENICALLY DESIRABLE TYPES

A SYMPOSIUM

T HE three papers that form this finest qualities of body, mind and spirit are

symposium were read at a members' widely distributed and perpetuated from

meeting of the Eugenics Society on
May 28th, I946, w'ith the president, Lord Horder, in the chair. Dr. Newfield's open-
ing paper, in his unavoidable absence, was read on his behalf by Dr. Blacker. A draft had previously been sent out to the other speakers in the hope of bringing out points of agreement and difference.

generation to generation; and from which the less desirable genes are as far and as fast as possible eliminated. As I dictate these words I am conscious that this is a cumbersome definition; yet it has, I submit, one small merit. It stresses our own responsibility for the direction and pace of our biological evolution and suggests one criterion-on the long view much the most

Dr. Maurice Newfield's Contribution

important-for assessing the value of legislative and other changes in our social

I should like to begin, if I may, with an structure.

apparent digression and consider for a few All this, as I said, is a digression ; but it

moments what are the characteristics of a society that we would agree to call eugenic.

will have been justified if, as I hope, it throws some light on the far more difficult

Obviously the definition of a eugenic society, problem of what constitute eugenic types. though difficult enough, is a far simpler And I ask you to note the plural--eugenic matter than the definition of a eugenic type types not the eugenic type. I do not think or individual. In the case of the individual there has ever been a time in history in

we start with an immutable genetic structure. which it has been more important to make There he is with all his inborn qualities and this distinction than to-day. Between those

defects, and the most profound problems in values may be involved in the, decision

whose professed aim has been to create " the eugenic type " and those who can think only

whether, on the balance, he should be regarded as a benefactor or enemy of posterity.

of types or, better still, of individuals, there are irreconcilable differences in social philo-

But a society is different. It is a dynamic sophy. In the one case the ideal is uniforstructure whose evolution is very largely mity-a uniform excellence admittedly, but

within the control of its members. The nevertheless uniformity; in the other it is

distribution of genes in society, unlike the aggregation of genes in the individual, is not something that is fixed once and for all; on
the contrary it changes from generation to generation, with trends which can be studied objectively by the methods of science and influenced by the action that we take as individuals or jointly as a community.

diversity, a respect for individual differences with a profound distaste for the trend to standardization so plainly discernible, in spite of a recent set-back, in our world to-
day. There are of course some qualities, so
desirable in themselves, that their widest dissemination must always be a major

Taking my chance on a definition, then, eugenic objective-obvious examples are

I would say that a eugenic society is one in good health and physique and high intelli-

which the evolutionary trend is in the right gence; just as there are others, such as

direction; in which (if for a moment I may grave mental and physical disorders, that

be allowed to imply the existence of absolute any society, however much it may foster

biological values without inquiring too diversity, would be best without. But when

closely into their nature)-in which the all this has been granted, it is still, I believe,

genes concerned with the transmission of the a eugenic ideal to tolerate and rejoice in

I33

134 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

those differences between people and races which add so much zest to the life of the
individual and contribute, by the crossfertilization of divergent cultures, so greatly

there not conflicting views among Germans, and not only among them, as to the social usefulness of Adolf Hitler ? Is it freedom from
familial disease and defects ? But some such genetic taints are not necessarily a serious

to the development of society.

I handicap, as, for example, diabetes mellitus

The realization of this ideal calls for more than ordinary tolerance; and for the exer-

since the introduction of treatment by insulin. Is it, in the sense defined in the Memorandum, genophilia ? It is worth remembering that

cise of infinite understanding and charity in among artists, scientists and saints, among

the assessment of human qualities. Most of
us can get by well enough when the qualities in question do not conflict with the prejudices of society or with those peculiarly our own. The real test comes when we are faced

men and women who have devoted their lives to the service of impersonal ends, this trait has seemed rather less conspicuous than among the generality of mankind.
More than a shade rhetorical, you will

with the uncongenial or unusual-not with agree, yet not I suggest without some

the person who combines such virtues as relevance to the theme of to-day's discussion.

those set out in the Eugenics Society's These and like instances may serve at least Memorandum to the Royal Commission- to remind us of the divergence that may be

good health, intelligence, social usefulness, found between contemporary opinion and freedom from genetic taints, and philo- the verdict of history; and I know few

progenitiveness-not with this paragon but better stimulants than this to the modesty

with the eccentric or rebel whose contri- in judgment and tolerance of differences that

bution, whether to his own age and genera- are among the highest eugenic virtues. tion or to posterity, may seem a doubtful But this I think should be added. Toler-

blessing. The test may be just as exacting ance must not be confounded with intelwhen the uncongenial or unusual qualities- lectual flabbiness. The one is a positive and

or when even admitted defects-are com- noble quality, the other a pusillanimous

bined with other qualities unquestionably evasion of the responsibility of judgment.

eugenic.

Because in some matters judgment is diffi-

This dilemma was discussed in THE
EUGENICS REVIEW in some editorial notes from which I may perhaps be allowed to quote.* Taking the various standards of eugenic worth set out in the Society's memorandum the author of the notes conceded that " No one who has attempted to define such standards will uniderrate the difficulties of the task" and then went on to ask:

cult, and must always be tentative, we are not therefore entitled to the easy solace of
agnosticism even when social values and
scientific knowledge both point in the same direction. The transmission of diseases and defects-to take a simple example-is always dysgenic; and the carriers of the corresponding genes cannot be classed among the unquestionably eugenic types, however high their endowment in other respects. And even though the advance of medicine has

Is health the standard ? If so, what place brought many such diseases under control,

is there for men and women of genius but and is bringing more, that is hardly a reason

afflicted in body or mind ? For John Keats
or Fyodor Dostoevsky ? Is it intelligence ? There are few who would question this standard, but are there no exceptions, for instance, robust

for regarding them lightly. Carr-Saunders put this point far better than I could in his Hobhouse Memorial Lecture on The Biolo-

persons with manual skills but relatively low gical Basis of Human Nature.*

I'Q's ? Is it social usefulness ? How useful

is the dreamer, the iconoclast or disturber of

The large preponderance of harmful over

accepted social values ? The Athenians of the beneficial mutations, he said, is well established; Fourth Century settled the question in the ease but preservation of harmful mutations must

of Socrates, but was it in a manner that would bring about genetic deterioration. No one can be unreservedly approved to-day ? And are really believe that if life could only be lived

* October 945, p. 89.

* Oxford University Press, 1942. Price 2S. net.

EUGENICALLY DESIRABLE TYPES

135

with an increasing multiplicity of aids, it woubd do and a brief life was long enough to learn

continue to be lived at all; the race would perish because of misapplied ingenuity-in-
genuity devoted to compensating for unsatis-
factory genes instead of to providing sound

and do them in. But in our complex civiliW
zation too many people die at the beginning
of their maturity; when having received

gened for each recruit to the race.

from society what it has to offer, they are

So far I have spoken only of diseases and

ready at last to offer a handsome return. You will recall that Shaw, in his morality

disorders which can-and I believe should -be balanced against any genetical advantages. But no such question arises in con-
nection with transmissible mental defect. I

play Bacb to Methuselah, solved tis problem in a characteristically Shavian manner, by
creating a long-lived mutation as a sport in a short-lived society. But in real life muta-

can imagine no associated advantage so great tions seldom arise quite so conveniently or

as to justify the deliberate conservation of so beneficently-and it seems safer to take

genes responsible for so much human misery. One of our most eminent biologists remarked

advantage of the established facts about the genetic transmission of longevity. The most

somewhere that his lab. boy, though technically a mental defective, was capable of
handling the most delicate scientific apparatus, and this fact was offered as an argu-
ment against the voluntary sterilization of defectives or other measures for reducing their fertility. We should all naturally
deplore any action that might dry up the source of lab. boys for this eminent biologist; but I am sanguine enough to believe that the supply could be maintained at a somewhat srmaller cost to mankind. Mental
defectives are objects of compassion to all right-minded men; and it is no service to
them or to society to suggest that their
perpetuation can have any biological value
whatever.
Among the standards of eugenic value set out in the Society's Memorandum, then, intelligence is absolute; and I am not impressed in the least by the old problemwhich to me is no problem at all-whether it is better to be a pig happy or Socrates
miserable. But I should like, if I may, to put forward three additional standards which, though implied in the rest, seem to merit separate mention and discussion.
The first is longevity. This character has always been desirable but has now become a necessity. Men and women growing up in a primitive society could expect to enter upon adult life in their teens-I mean adult life economically and culturally as well as sexually-and to live through the experiences normal to their period in the space of

dependable recipe for a long life is well
known; it is to choose parents belonging to
long4lived stocks. Nothing more difficult than that. And it follows that persons who come of such stocks fall, in this respect at least, among the eugenic types and have corresponding responsibilities to posterity.
The second standard is eugenic achievement. Any couple that has produced a richly endowed family has assured itself, by this most decisive test of all, an indisputable place among the eugenicaLly elect. Thiis point, so obvious when onre mentions it, had never in fact occurred to me until it was made by Dr. Blacker in the current EUGENICS REVIEW.* I shall say no more about it now; the idea and its implications are ingeniously developed in Dr. Blacker's paper, and I urge those who have not read
it to do so.
I can best describe the third added standard as the converse of the second. Like the second it is concerned with lineage, but this time not with offspring but with ancestry. To put it briefly, and omnitting saving clauses, eugenic worth may be surmised from a history of high endowment
through a number of generations of both, sides of the family.
There is a distinction that may con-
veniently be made here between socially desirable. types and those that are eugenically desirable. The one usually implies the other, but not invariably. Thus, the healthy

a few years. There was little to learn and

* April 1946, p. 25.

136 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

carrier of grave defect may faithfully serve
his own age and even, in a cultural sense, the future; but however great his talents,
it would be a misuse of language to class him among the eugenic types. It is not less
true that among-those who are a burden to
their own generation there are some who
eugenically are of the highest quality. The criterion here is to be sought not in the manifest characters but in those latent in the genetic constitution. Such a contrast between geneticxealities and outward appearances is seen-to take a striking examplein some neurotic subjects. For while it is
true that psycho-neuroses are often an
expression of constitutional inadequacy, their development can sometimes be traced to excessive strains and other noxious environmtenal influences upon a normal constitution. Such unfortunate persons might fail to provide their children with a desirable social setting; but if the stock is sound (as estimated by a study of family history) they may none the less endow them with a constitution capable of withstanding the defects of their environment.
I have chosen here an extreme case-in which the genetical endowment should be regarded as of -greater eugenic significance than certain undesirable characters manifest in the subject himself; and I suggest that, in like manner, the family history, in so far as it bears on genetical make-up, must be included with the standards set out in the Society's Memorandum.
The Memorandum does, of course, refer to freedom from genetical taints; but this
added criterion is concerned, more positively, with the distribution through the ancestry of special talents of body, mind or
character.
Anyone blessed with the qifalities discussed in the Memorandum owes to his forebears a debt which can only be completely repaid to posterity; and the richer the legacy from the past the more will there be, in all likelihood, to pass on to the future. As bearing on this point I may refer to some genealogical studies by Mr. Bramwell, from which it became apparent that the chances of rich biological endowment were

closely correlated with the number of talented ancestors in both lines.
It is said that Napoleon, when reminded that by ancestry he was hardly qualified to contract a royal marriage, replied, "I am an ancestor." The details are probably wrong, but the point of the story is there, and could serve as an inspiration to all highly endowed persons. They may be, as I believe all men are, ends in themselves; but they are also potentially ancestors, who long after their earthly course is run may be looked back to with pride by their -descendants. That is to- say, if they have any. For if the eugenic types restrict their fertility, then, no matter what their contribution to the life and culture of their own time, or of the future, they cannot be absolved of the guilt of depriving posterity of its rightful heritage.
Mr. Geoffirey Eley's Contribution
I was both interested and stimulated by Dr. Newfield's address and particularly perhaps by his thought-provoking reflections on longevity. I would only suggest in passing that it might perhaps be unwise to press on along that particular line of experiment in any society that is likely to. have a falling population. The excess of the old over the young would anyway be large enough, if not too large, in such a society without its being accentuated artificially.
My own approach to the subject under discussion will be on simpler and broader lines than Dr. Newfield's, both because I am much more the layman in this field than he and because I feel that in the opening stages of a discussion like this there is room for examination of basic aims.
When I came to think over this subject with a view to preparing my address I found myself quickly coming up against a number of simple issues. To begin with, " Should we wish to achieve any one particular type
of individual ? " The answer, of course, is "No." We are not aiming at breeding cattle or poultry but at producing a sufficiently wide and varied range of types to cope with the infinite complexities of modern
industrial society. EVen the very simplest thought along these lines leads one to the

EUGENICALLY DESIRABLE TYPES

conclusion that we need good leaders, good their present tasks would only begin to be

lieutenants, good privates; good heads, adequately performed, and I believe myself

good hearts, good physiques; artists, crafts- that Keynes's famous multiplier (or some-

men and strong manual labourers.

thing like it) would then come into force

I moved on to ask if one could not simplify and the activities of each new first-class

one's approach to the subject by shifting intellect would create the need for more.

from types of people to certain basic Yet the fact remains that we could at

characteristics. Good health for instance. least in theory breed too many intellectuals.

At first blush we should all vote for good Firstly, in a society made up exclusively of,

health, yet if we could arrange for a popu- say, Aldous Huxleys, Laskis, Einsteins, or

lation to be uniformly healthy and to remain Stracheys, who would mine coal, sweep

so throughout its life, we should risk de- streets, plough the land, or perform the

priving ourselves of some valuable, perhaps innumerable dull routine services necessary

outstanding, types. It is rightly said that if our life is not to relapse into confusion ?

genius is akin to madness; but apart from Secondly, even if you could get the necessary

that, imagination has been one of the chief manual and unpleasant work done by com-

forces in the advances made by man. Blake pelling intellectuals to tackle it, this could

said " What is now proved was once only only be achieved in an atmosphere of dis-

imagined." Yet imagination is most active content and internal stress that would make,

in highly strung neurotic people and is most in due course, for revolution and dictator-

active in each one of us when we are in our ships and oppression. Thirdly, pure in-

most highiy strung neurotic states. Galton tellect alone is perhaps not quite all that it

himself is an example of an outstanding is cracked up to be from the point of view

man who was highly neurotic; during his of making the most, successful sort of society

life on two or three occasions he had what in this world. To appreciate this point one

were virtually nervous breakdowns.

needs only to consider the extreme worldly

Still, by and large, I think we have no success that has been achieved by the

alternative but to vote for a population that British-a success which has, I think, broadly

would start out with sound healthy consti- been in the interest not only of the British

tutions. We cannot go far wrong along but of the world as a whole. This success

those lines, for people withreally active minds has certainly not arisen from the fact that

can in any case be relied on in due course the British are the most intelligent or in-

to damage their health sufficiently to enable tellectual people in the world. We can all

them and us to enjoy the benefits of the think of races appreciably better equipped

resultant neuroses.

than ourselves in those respects. Indeed,

So we aim for basic good health.

we might remind ourselves by a few quota-

What about intelligence ?

tions of the characteristics that eminent

This is a more difficult problem. As we foreigners have discerned in the English and

are actually situated to-day I do not think note how far removed their observations are

we can possibly have too great an increase from suggesting that we owe our success to

in the amount of intelligence available in intellectual pre-eminence. Voltaire, for in-

our society. Certainly the British people stance, said " The English people are people

could, I believe, use ten times the present who defend themselves." Carlyle, a Scot,

amount of ability available to it without said " Of all the nations in the world at

anything but advantage both to itself and present the English are the stupidest in

to the world. Actually in almost every speech, the wisest in action." Emerson, an

direction in which I look or inquire and find American, said " I find the Englishman to

men of high intellect at work, particularly be that man of all men who stands firmest

in the public service, I find them to be over- in his shoes." Washington Irving, another

pressed and overworked. If each of them American, said " He [the Englishman] is

could be split into two equally good parts like a stout ship which will weather the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

roughest storm but rolls its masts over- might describe as a sound reliable

board in the succeeding calm," (Inciden-

quoits player,

tally, how apt that last quotation is when we

consider the way in which the British people So far then we have opted for basic good

recently got rid of Mr. Churchill; or still health and various types of intelligence,

more the behaviour of the British between character and practical ability. Even then

the two world wars on the question of arma- the problem is hardly broached, for there is

ments and preparedness!)

a great range of psychological types which

This leads me to the point that even when we should need to consider and which we

we are aiming for intelligence in this country should require in different quantities and

we should attach great importance to the degrees. I do not intend to go far into that

form of test by which we attempt to detect most fascinating field. No doubt other

its presence. Tests for quick wits devised speakers will do so, but I would like before

by cosmopolitan intellectuals might produce passing on to throw out a suggestion that

a highly intelligent society but they would bears on two particular types, the indi-

not produce a British society with those vidualist and the co-operator. In the past

peculiar qualities which have made for its big forward jumps in man's knowledge and

success in the past. What we need would control over the world have been due mainly

be tests for some blend of high mental to the work of nonconformist individuals

powers with a sense of reality, tenacity and fighting against an unfriendly group atmos-

courage. These tests should be devised by phere. We have only to think of such men

an Englishman or a group of Englishmen. as Socrates, Galileo, Spinoza, Newton,

What I have in mind might really better be Malthus, Darwin, down to Einstein. I may

called an " efficiency test " rather than an be wrong but I think I have sensed that a

"intelligence test."

change has been going on in recent times,

Bearing these points in mind I would perhaps has indeed already taken place.

suggest that wvhat we would want for our The change from the period when it was the

ideal society in the way of intelligence would brilliant individual who6 was responsible for

be: the big forward move to a period in which

i. A good proportion of people of the major forward moves may come to be the

highest intelligence chosen by intelli- result of co-operative work, of group activity.

gence and efficiency tests.

The sort of discussion groups, for instance,

2. A very substantial body of people that John Stuart Mill describes in his

chosen by efficiency tests to fill the autobiography as having been part of his

" good lieutenant " class.

father's training of himself and his young

3. A still larger body of people who would friends have become increasingly more in

'be prepared and contented to perform evidence since those days and have cul-

the great mass of honourable tasks minated in such anonymous yet significant

that are indispensable to the com- activities as those that have centred in

munity if the wheels are to be kept politics, for instance, around the Round

turning. This means a mass of moder- Table or more recently around P.E.P. In

ately intelligent, sound, sensible fellows science also, it would appear to the layman

of the kind well known to us in all walks that the splitting of the atom and the pro-

of life and usually referred to as the duction of its first fruit, the atomic bomb,

salt of the earth. Some other criterion cannot be associated with the name of any

than the intelligence or efficiency tests one individual but arises from group work

used for the other jobs would be neces- on an international basis, If I am right in

sary in selecting this group. We thinking that we have reached a turning

should need a test for tenacity, shrewd- point in this respect then in future we shall

ness and not too much imagination. need fewer people of the nonconformist,

After all, what we are after is what one individualist, hero type and more personality-

EUGENICALLY DESIRABLE TYPES

139

sinking co-operators. My own belief is, and this discussion. Mr. Eley has so ably, said

I stress that it is no more than a belief, that most of what I wanted to say by way of in-

if we are to get through at all in the future, troduction that I will gladly skip it and

let alone make some of the major big forward plunge in, rush in rather, where neither he

jumps that lie ahead of us, we shall need the nor Dr. Newfield trod, and try to discuss the

maximum amount of readiness to sink our inheritance of some mental traits, and their

individual personalities and desires to co- value. I am assuming that the word

operate for purposes and objectives that are "types " means " combinations of traits."

not only much greater than ourselves but If the public ever thought that the eugenics

often greater than we could have conceived movement aimed at producing specific mental

of on our own.

or physical or temperamental "types," I

All this so far has been in the realm of hope it does not think so still. At any rate,

examining an ideal target, clearing the it is unnecessary to disclaim any such

ground as it were for practical suggestions. attempt here.

In ptactice, how can we begin to move to- There are three traits that I should like

wards such targets without becoming dic- to suggest are partly innate. First, this

tators and abandoning the essential respect matter of co-operation, of which Mr. Eley

for liberty and the humility of outlook with- has spoken as pre-eminently important. If

out which we cannot conceive of a livable the atomic bomb was made by a vast co-

world ? The Eugenics Society has advocated operative effort, probably the biggest in

various small negative targets and a very human enterprise, surely there is more need

loosely defined positive target. It has asked -desperately greater need-now, than before

that we should aim at encouraging that type its creation, for co-operation between human

of person which " produces by intention and beings. We are told that we have only ten

design a large family and provides for it a or twelve years in which to work out an

happy and healthy home." Dr. Blacker has amicable way of life between nations; and

recently suggested another practical ap- if that is so, it doesn't give evolution much

proach in his article in the current number chance. But assuming that the human race

of THE EUGENICS REVIEW. Dr. Newfield will continue to exist, I suggest that an

has added two more-the encouragement of essential eugenic trait is what I shall call the

longevity and of families whose ancestral social instinct. I know well what dan-

heritage of distinction is high. These are all gerous ground this is; 'I have studied my

modest practical suggestions. Disappoint- McDougall and John B. Watson. But I

ing as it may seem, I doubt if we can go still think (or maybe it is only a hunch) that

much beyond them, at any rate until such a " social instinct" exists. It cannot be

time as we have solved the problems of measured, and the genes that influence it

ectogenesis. Certainly if we are to think in can probably never be identified, but it does

terms of advocating bolder forward strides, appear to show itself in varying degrees in

we must do so with extreme caution and the animal world, and to reach its fullest

humility, for in no field, in my view, is it development in man. Dogs most certainly

more necessary when considering practical have something very like a conscience, and

action to remember Cromwell's famous re- so do cats; and Ernest Thompson Seton's

mark to the General Assembly of the Church true stories about wild horses and wolves

of Scotland, " Gentlemen, I beseech you, in reveal an instinct that amounts sometimes

the bowels of Christ, think it possible that to real leadership and responsibility.

you may be mistaken."

Criminologists can produce negative evi-

dence about the inheritance of criminal

Mrs. Barbara S. Bosanquet's

tendencies in identical twins, and I believe

Contribution

that anthropologists can tell of the growth

It was with feelings of great trepidation of a sense of co-operation in primitive tribes.

that I accepted the honour of taking part in The development of this social instinct can

I40 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

be watched in children. It could be defined to sexual and parental emotions. It governs

as a combination of the gregarious and self- all personal relationships; and people having

regarding instincts, and in full flower it this factor, who have been happily brought

becomes unselfish leadership. It cannot be up, can form the close personal attachments

disentangled from its surrounding culture, which we call sympathy and friendship.

because it helps to create a certain environ- Those without it tend to be " cold and

ment or " climate," and this climate in turn calculating," and I have noticed that their

fosters its growth. We all know families children have many difficulties. Often these

where the sense of responsibility runs strong cold individuals are also highly intelligent,

from one generation to another-the Frys, and we see the budding dictator or tycoon.

Darwins, Wedgwoods, Cecils and Adamses. Sometimes, also, what I have called the

Of course tradition plays a big part; but " warmth factor " is present, but high in-

unless there is a strong constitutional factor telligence is not, and then we have a feckless

at work, the tradition will not flourish. happy-go-lucky type. These are often

Couples having this " innate moral sense " charming and have large families, but on the

(the phrase is Galton's) are more apt to whole they do not contribute to the glory of

produce children who will build up the kind our culture. But where you have warmth

of international order we need for survival and intelligence, you have the truly valuable

than couples without it.

people. Churchill and Roosevelt are the out-

A group of psychiatrists in Washington standing figures of our day with this combi-

recently held a discussion on how to secure nation. Others that come to mind are Goethe

enduring peace. Their conclusion was that and Charles James Fox.

a cultural revolution was needed, centring The third trait which I believe is essential

on the education of children. Children is even harder to pin down as a genetic trait.

learn, they said, by assimilating ideas and It is what I should call " serenity "-a har-

example from significant elders, and only if mony of the different faculties, which may

they are helped to grow up into truly mature be possessed as well by. a reformer out on a

people can future catastrophe be averted. crusade as by a shepherd watching his flock.

General Chisolm of Canada led the dis- Another word for it might be contentment

cussion, and I should like to quote his -though here there is risk of its turning into

definition of maturity:

complacency. Perhaps it could be better

Basically it is an amalgamation of two defined by its result, which is a sense of fulthings: i, dissatisfaction with the status quo, filment. There are many jobs to be done

which calls forth aggressive, constructive effort, in the world, and our urban civilization tends

and 2, social concern and devotion.

to make able young people dissatisfied with

The whole discussion left no doubt in my the simple primary-producing jobs. This is

mind that these distinguished men were certainly due to social and economic factors,

dealing with inborn social instinct, though and until society changes its attitude and

they themselves would not admit it. Their respects the primary producers, we shall not

whole emphasis was on environment, but I have harmony in our culture and serenity in

think their noble quest would have been individuals. The innate factor, if it exists,

strengthened if there existed a clear con- does not have a chance, when you see

ception of the innate tendencies they were thousands of secondary school children

dealing with.

flocking to the cities for work at desks and

The second trait I want to discuss is behind counters or machines, when they

closely allied to the first, and in the same would function far more satisfyingly on the

highly debatable territory. Together with land, in the forests, at sea, or even under the

an inborn tendency towards co-operation, I ground-though admittedly, under present

think there is a temperamental factor having conditions, they do not.

to do with warmth of emotion. It is part of This obviously leads to a discussion of the

philoprogenitiveness, but it is not limited values of our industrialized culture, with its

EUGENICALLY DESIRABLE TYPES

constant threat of war, and for that there beautiful soul, clad in that perfect form, so

isn't time. But we are justified in asking palpably . . . made . . . to be loved."

what kind of society we aim at. What is Certainly a man's heart, once set, will not

the desirable environment that the desirable be changed by having information forced

eugenic ty pes are to produce, and be pro- upon it. But the direction in which the

duced by. In what direction should racial heart will set can be influenced beforehand

improvement be moving? The memory of by education. The social sciences can give

the past seven years, and the presentiment us a chance to raise ourselves by our boot-

of what our children may have to face, make straps, provided they acknowledge both the

these questions inevitable. And they also wisdom of the mind and the deeper wisdom

make inevitable the assumption that good of the heart. It is a question of acknow-

and evil do exist as realities, both outside ledging the primacy of spiritual values.

and within ourselves.

The social sciences investigate the innate

We have been listening for the past few characteristics of man, and the way they

Sundays to philosophers and scientists de- influence, and are influenced by, environ-

bating the Challenge of Our Time. They ment. Once certain fundamentals are

almost all agree that the social sciences must proved, it should be possible to formulate

concern themselves with moral as well as standards that we want to achieve, and to

biological values. Some of the speakers felt see that they are taught to all boys and

that science held the key to all questions, girls at home and in school. If it is true

and given time, would unravel man's moral that such profoundly important traits as co-

and spiritual problems as well as the physical operativeness, warmth of feeling and serenity

ones. The last two speakers (to my mind are, like intelligence and vigour, partly in-

incomparably the best) said that science is born, and if everyone knows it, then the

not enough, even social science dealing with deepest instincts of men and women will

ethical beliets and human values. Lord respond to this knowledge. Any girl worth

Lindsay concluded that we must learn to her salt is looking for the best type of man

harness the scientific mind in the service of to be the father of her children. It may be

the merciful heart. We cannot do with one a subconscious search, but it goes on every-

or the other alone; we need both. The where, all the time. And the same is true

individual who has a merciful heart, who of men-though-perhaps even more uncon-

truly loves goodness, will create a good sciously.

society in his personal relationships; and We need be under no illusions as to the

for the larger organizations of society speed with which a good society will result

scientific method is needed, to abolish want from better marriages-and by "good

and to organize peace; but it can work only society" I mean one where men will live

through individuals.

together in peace, because peace is a by-

Lord Lindsay ended by reminding us that product of true human relationships. If

hope is a virtue which is all too often missing wise and virtuous children only issued from

in our present, state. In concluding, I wise and virtuous parents, it would be much

should like to try and offset those messengers more simple. It is true, such is the com-

of despair who say " What does it matter, plexity of the gene structure, that many good

saying all this about good heredity; people children can and do come from not-so-good

are going to fall in love with the wrong parents; and many good parents have

people, and nothing will stop them marry- children who are poor sdecimens. But by

ing." As one critic of eugenics puts it: and large it is true to say that desirable

A man is called upon to consider principles eugenic types have desirable children. I

of reason precisely at that crisis in his life when think this is what Galton meant when he

his instincts and passions are most powerfully aroused. He is confronted on the one hand with carefully written monographs by Professor

said that he was concerned with the religious significance of the doctrine of evolution, and

Karl Pearson, and on the other with " that I think we have some grounds for hope.

