MEDICAL MARRIAGE CERTIFICATES:
A SUGGESTION FROM NEW ZEALAND
By A. N. FIELD
THE chief danger of eugenics, according to a recent English writer, is that when the biological theories upon which it rests have come home to the public, as they are very rapidly doing, there are certain to be a large number of energetic, over-sanguine people who, descrying with joy this promising opportunity of doing something big, and especially something that comes forward under the august patronage of science, will proceed to experiment vigorously before scientific knowledge is really ripe for application.
The main thing to be done at present is to bring people to think about eugenics, and to collect data in order that a more exact knowledge of the laws of heredity may be obtained. Human beings are not to be bred like farm stock, and it is not the object of this paper to advocate the placing of any legal restriction on the marriage of degenerates.
As matters stand to-day, it is not possible to obtain accurate data as to human heredity, except in a comparatively small number of cases, and it seems to the writer that if the trouble were taken to educate public opinion up to the point, it would be quite feasible for New Zealand to make a most valuable contribution to the study of eugenics at a cost which would be trifling compared with the benefits to be obtained.
Briefly, the idea is that every person before marrying, should be compelled by law to undergo a medical examination. The public has been accustomed for many years past to submit with-
out complaint to examination by doctors, when taking out life insurance policies, and the examinations now proposed would not be one whit mnore irksome than that. The doctors would give each person examined a certificate, setting out his or her general physical condition and the answers given to the usual

MEDICAL MARRIAGE CERTIFICATES

307

questions as to parentage, age of parents at death, and cause of parents' and brothers' and sisters' deaths, and so on. For the purpose of compiling statistics the persons examined might be grouped into three or four grades, according to their general soundness of physique and stock.
The examination would be perfectly private and confidential, and its result would not even be disclosed by the doctor to the other party to the marriage. The certificate would be issued, and the person receiving it could then do as he or she thought fit with it. One alteration in the law might, however, be made with advantage, and that would be to provide that where one party to a proposed marriage refused to show this official medical certificate to the other party, no action for breach of promise would lie.
The result of such an examination as that proposed would be that no person could contract a marriage without having attention directed to his or her physical fitness to do so.
Of course, when two people, presumably more or less in love, get to the stage of applying for a marriage license, no doctor's views as to their physique are likely to have much weight with them. Admitting this, it has still to be recognised that the mere fact that there is a medical examination to be undergone before a marriage can take place will cause the whole population to think much more seriously about this important question, than ever it has done in the past. A direct national premium, as it were, is placed on good health. People assess most factors in a marriage, and here would be a new one that not only the parties themselves, but their relatives also, would show a keen interest in. The "a" or top grade certificate given to a thoroughly sound and well-developed person would be something worth having; a " b " would be tolerable; a " c " would conjure up visions of doctors' bills and physic for a family of future weaklings; and a " d "-well, a " d " would be a pity.
So much for the proposai from the point of view of the individual. From the national point of view the result would be that a return could be issued every year along with the other vital statistics showing the number of " a's " marrying " a's," the
number of " a's " marrying " b's," the nunmber of " c's " marrying

3o8 A. N. Field:
" d's " and so on through the list. The country would be able to see at a glance how things were tending, and in case of the "d's," more specific information might be published in another table, showing the grounds on which they were so classified.
The marriage of " d's " with " d's " would give a clue as to what extent the production of degenerates was going on, and the course of the statistics would soon indicate whether further legislation was desirable.
While the whole examination would be private and confidential, a duplicate of the certificate concerning each person would be filed away in the Government archives, just as the private and confidential income-tax returns of the community are already filed in Government offices. From these records properly accredited officials would, in time, be able to secure definite information as to the ancestry of the great majority of the inmates of mental hospitals and defectives generally. In the course of a hundred years, which, after all, is a short time in the life of a community, an enormous mass of data would be available, and invaluable light would, doubtless, have been shed on many obscure problems of heredity.
After a few years public opinion would, probably, be ready for a further extension of the law, providing that when the birth of a child is registered particulars must be supplied as to the parents' health grading, and a simple table could then be compiled, showing from which sections the bulk of the next generation of citizens is coming.
The medical officers superintending the examining would also be in a position to follow the history of all marriages between degenerates taking place throughout New Zealand. Any future proposals for restrictive legislation would then be made not on theoretical assumptions, but in the light of cold facts and the experience of the whole community.
Though the State might well pause at any proposal to prohibit the marriages of degenerates, there would be much less objection to attempts to mitigate the evil effects of their tainted heredity on the offspring of such marriages. With Plunket nurses and a State Public Health Department it should not be difficult to visit the homes of such couples occasionally, and

MEDICAL MARRIAGE CERTIFICATES

309

advise the parents in the rearing of their children, or, if need be,
see that the children were placed where they could be properly
cared for. The doctor's examination would identify the bulk of these undesirable marriages, and once they were listed by the Department it would be merely a matter of having them reported on from time to time.
Again, if parents, on registering the birth of a child, were obliged to give information as to their medical grading at the time of marriage, it would be a simple matter for the registrar to notify the local health officer, when a couple, say, with two " d " certificates, had a baby registered. The State medical service could then get right on to the spot where its assistance was most needed, and it is quite possible that a proper supervision of the rearing of such infants would mean ultimately a saving to the public in solid pounds, shillings, and pence, by reducing the number of persons to be supported in mental hospitals, reformatories, and gaols.
The cost of the medical examinations proposed would not be a heavy burden on the taxpayer. There are about 8,ooo marriages a year registered in New Zealand, and this would mean i6,ooo persons per annum to be examined. If the examinations cost the State a guinea a head, the bill would
be under EI7,ooo a year. It is safe to say that the whole cost of
the scheme would not greatly exceed this figure. The most workable plan would probably be for the State to insist on an official examination, free of charge, at the time when a marriage license is taken out. At the same time provision might be made for anyone, on payment of a prescribed fee, to submit himself or herself for examination at any time for the purpose of obtaining an official certificate. No doubt numbers of those who received low-grade certificates would wish to dispute the doctor's findings, and it should not be impossible to meet their complaints by providing appeal boards in different districts. Persons appealing would deposit so much to defray the expenses of the appeal, the deposit to be returned where the appellant was successful, and to be forfeited where he failed.
The proposals which have been set out can hardly be described as revolutionary. No violent interference with social

3IO A. N. Field:
customs is contemplated, and once the public understood the scheme clearly there would probably be much less opposition to it than many might suppose.
Of course, when one talks in a general way of health certificates before marriage people immediately jump to the conclusion that the idea is to divide society into two classes, the fit and the unfit, and to permit only the fit to marry. No one is at present competent to say who is fit to marry and who is not. It is doubtful whether it will ever be humanly possible to draw a hard and fast line. The " fit " man and the " unfit " man, as two separate species, are just as much figments of the imagination as the " good " man and the " bad " man, or that extraordinary person whom no one has ever yet identified in the flesh, the " average" man. It is easy to pick out extreme cases-the thoroughly sound and clean-bred youth, and the lunatic descended of lunaticsbut between these lies a great mass of population, neither especially fit nor especially unfit. Who is there that would dare to say just where the line was to be drawn ?
A writer in the Edinburgh Review for January, I91I, touched on this point, and said the answer usually comes promptly as to who are to be eliminated. No one, it is declared, can object to the elimination of the feeble-minded, -of maniacs, of epileptics, and of monstrosities. To this the reviewer replied that Julius Casar and Mahomed were epileptics; so also very
probably were Alexander the Great, Napoleon and St. Paul. Rousseau was a nervous degenerate. Comte was insane, Schumann, Nietsche, and Guy de Maupassant were victims of a vile disease culminating in general paralysis and insanity. Tuberculosis wrought its effect on Chopin, Rachel, Heine, Robert Louis Stevenson, and John Stuart Mill. Even Shakespeare, we are told by some writers, may at times have suffered from such a form of insanity as melancholia, and was very probably a man with a tainted heredity. Citing these cases, the reviewer asks, " If the heredity of these famous men had been examined by an enlightened eugenist, and their birth been at his mercy, how many of them, we should like to know, would have been allowed to be born?" This question is not the poser it seems.

MEDICAL MARRIAGE CERTIFICATES

3II

The answer to it is that the heredity of these persons never was scientifically examined by anybody, and their cases merely emphasise the need for a systematic examination of the whole population as a preliminary to any further step in the practical application of eugenic principles.
Such an examination is worth striving for as an end in itself. It would make people think for themselves on this most important matter. It would offer a direct incentive to good health, particularly if the highest grade certificates were refused to persons who, though free from disease, were not physically well developed. It would enable the State medical service to watch over the children of degenerate parents, and see that they were given the best chance possible. And finally it should tend to discourage experimenting before scientific knowledge is ripe for application.
If the Society saw fit to take this matter up, it should not be difficult to direct considerable attention to it throughout New Zealand, and in time to make it a question of practical politics. New Zealand prides itself on having led the van in a number of social experiments, and here is a chance for it to do a piece of practical work in nation-building that might not only be of great advantage to its own people, but possibly of service to civilisation generally.

