THE STABILITY OF MARRIAGE*
By A. JOSEPH BRAYSHAW, B.A.

/\O NE of the elementary forms of guile need to care for children over quite long

Il by which organizers achieve their periods is a fundamental reason for stable
\./ ends is to ask their victims, many marriage. In recent years we have been very months in advance, to undertake something much reminded of it by our recognition that

that they would be far too cautious to much delinquency and anti-social behaviour promise to do next week. Thus it was that, springs from the want of a secure and happy

last October, I blithely promised Dr. Blacker home. When, further, we consider that one

that I would give a paper this evening. But illegitimate child may cost the community for all my foolhardiness some instinct of self- thousands of pounds before leaving school,
pre,servation counselled caution when I was and that a delirtquent child may cost far
asked for a title, and I sought for a form of more, we must acknowledge that even in the words that would be so wide and so general most mundane terms the effects of instability
that it would accommodate almost anything in marriage have an enormous impact on
that had occurred to me by the time that I society; while in terms of human suffering

was called upon to redeem my promise. the cost is incalculable. " The Stability of Marriage " seemed a safe enough formula with which to temporize. The Position of Marriage Today

It represents, I believe, the point at which Let us turn, then, to a consideration of the

all responsible opinion finds common ground position of marriage in this country. The

on the subject of marriage. It is a common- last year for which the Registrar-General has

place that on this subject, even more than most, we may start from different assump-

provided full figures is i949jt and a con-
sideration of them seems at first sight to show

tions and reach different conclusions. We a gloomy picture. In England and Wales the

may accept marriage as ordained by God; or number of dissolutions of marriage made

regard it as the product of social evolution. absolute in the peak year (I947) was some

We may view it as the private concern of a 6o,ooo, which was about ten times the pre-

husband and wife, or as a matter in which war annual average. By 1949 the total had

society has so vital an interest that in some fallen to about 34,000, and I believe that in

circumstances it must override the wishes I950 it will be found to be around 30,000.

of the couple. Whatever attitude we take, The latest figures show that one marriage

however, we normally accept as self-evident breakdown came before the courts concur-

the proposition that it is in the interests alike rently with every six new marriages that were

of individuals and of society that marriage contracted. This statement must be treated

should be stable and enduring. Whatever with some reserve. In the first place it does

else we may believe, it is surely plain that not, of course, mean that one marriage in six

every marriage breakdown represents a breaks down. This might be suggested from

private tragedy and a public ill.

the fact that the proportion has remained

If proof were needed we have, inde d, only to look to nature. It is in the higher forms of

similar over some years, but there are many factors to take into account, especially the

life alone that parents care for their young, fact that the same marriage breakdowns

and only in man that the young are helpless often come before the Magistrates' Court and

and dependent for so long a span of years. later before the Divorce Court. On the other

Moreover, a family is normally so spread over

the years that parents find that for most of * A paper read at a members' meeting of the Eugenics

their youth and middle-age their children are dependent upon them. The imperative

Society on Tuesday, March I8th, I952.
t Statistical Review of England and Wales for the year
x949. Tables. Part II. Civil. H.M.S.0. Price 4S.

85

86 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

hand there are, of course, many unsatisfactory marriages that never come before the courts.
The 1949 figures show that, I think for the first time, there were more divorced men and
women marrying than widowers and widows. Moreover, if we consider only those marriages where the wife is still of child-bearing age, we find that more are broken by divorce than by death. This arises, of course, in part from the success of medical science in staving off death longer. It is nevertheless of great significance from the point of view of population policies, and from the viewpoint of countless individual children.
For some years now the Registrar-General has published figures showing the interval between marriage and the birth of children. Thus if we take the number of illegitimate births and add to it the number of births occurring within about eight months after marriage, we find that about one child in eight was conceived outside marriage. It also becomes evident that nearly one in every six brides was pregnant on her wedding day, the proportion in the case of brides under the age of 2I being more than one in four. When one considers how widespread is the knowledge and use of contraception, it seems reasonable to assume that the real extent of pre-marital relations must be very much greater.
Compared with the records of our grandparents it certainly seems that marriage is much less stable today. But while the extent of marriage breakdown is alarming, it must be noted that quantitatively there is much more marriage today, so that some increase in the casualties might be expected. In the first place, people tend to marry younger, and
some 30 per cent of the married women in England and Wales are married before they
are 21. In the second place, more of them
get married. It is very remarkable that since I9II there has been an increase of about 20 per cent in the number of people married. In I93I 52 per cent of all women aged i6 to 50 were married, whereas by I945 the percentage was 62. Thirdly, we tend to live longer-especially if we are married.* But
* The Registrar-General's Statistical Review ofEngland and Wales, 1946 and X947. Volume I, Medical. H.M.S.O. Price 6s. 6d.

when all these allowances have been made it remains true that marriage breakdown has greatly increased in our modern society, especially since the war.
Reasons for Marriage Breakdown
Naturally many reasons have been advanced for the increasing breakdown of marriage. Some say that it follows a decline in religious observance in the country; others that the separation and loneliness of the war years wrecked marriages that would otherwise have prospered. Almost everyone agrees that the shortage of houses plays a tragic part. All these factors enter into the matter, and many more besides, including in-laws, selfishness, emotional immaturity, marriages forced upon young people because a child is on the way, the false values of the films and the tendency 'to regard sexual harmony as the sole 'criterion of marriage.
But the disruption of famnily ties has not been only in this country. It can be seen in almost every country of the world, although they have different religions; although some of them escaped the war; and although some of them have enough houses. Behind the obvious precipitating causes there seems to be some underlying reason for a world-wide change in attitudes towards marriage and the family.
Equality of the Sexes
I shall probably court misunderstanding if I state my thesis bluntly; but in truth it is the new equality of women with men that has led inevitably to the disruption, for the present, of stable marriage and family life. Lest this sound as if I were some old buffer in side-whiskers and drainpipe trousers lamenting that things are not what they were in Queen Victoria's day, let me say that I believe strongly in the essential equality of the sexes. It has, however, far wider social implications than have so far been generally recognized.
This has been called the Century of the Common Man. In all sorts of ways there has been a trend to equality-equality between Jack and his master, equality of rights for different religions, races and colours. Most of

THE STABILITY OF MARRIAGE

87

all the first half of this twentieth century has lead us to a happier and more peaceful world.

seen the equality of women with men. It has It does not really seem to have made much

come slowly enough not to excite much difference.

comment, yet in terms of history it has come

like a flash. People over fifty can remember Equal Pay for Equal Work

women chaining themselves to the railings The feminist plea of today is for equal pay

outside the House of Commons as Suffragettes for equal work. What is more, most fair-

in the movement for " votes for women "; minded people accept the justice of this;

but already in the world of I952 it seems very but at this stage the schoolmaster (for

odd that there should have been a time when instance) comes along. "Why should the

women were denied the vote-so quickly has schoolmistress have equal pay ? he asks.

the equality of women been accepted.

" She's only got herself to keep, or else she's

It was a brave, idealistic movement for the supplementing her husband's income;

equality of women in the early part of this whereas I have a wife and three children.

- century. It was largely directed by intefli- Surely that's not fair." Once again, everyone

gent women demanding that they should will agree with him.

have the same right as men to enter the There is only one way in which these

professions, vote and sit in Parliament. viewpoints can be reconciled. This is by

They pressed the intellectual claims of equal pay, supplemented by really sub-

women and their right to compete equally stantial family allowances, so that the person

with men. They tended to say-to adapt with dependants is not worse off. It is the

words that have since become famous- enormous cost of this that has so far held up

"Anything you can do, I can do better." " equal pay." It would mean that somehow

In the main, of course, they won their the State would have to collect much more

battle. Women have entered all the pro- money in taxes and pay out much more to

fessions except the Church. They have the families. It is open to question whether it

vote from the same age as men. They sit in would be a good thing to have such a degree

the House of Commons, though not yet in of intrusion by the State into the family;

the House of Lords. More and more women but it is the only just way of getting equal

are working in shops and offices and factories, pay for equal work.

doing almost every job that men do except

those involving heavy manual work. In the Grandfather's Day

first world war women drove ambulances. The equality of the sexes has had an even

In the second, they did many jobs that the greater effect in the home than in the work-

soldiers had done before, sometimes in active shop. My grandfather used to say what was

service alongside the men. All this made it what; and my grandmother (dear little

seem still more a matter of course that woman that she was) used to take it all from

women should be accepted as equals with him. As for the children, they were, I am

men. told, seen and not heard. Papa simply

Now in politics and the professions this decided everything that mattered. Religious

equality has had much less effect than observance, the upbringing of the children,

anyone thought it would have. The old the spending of money-in all these things

ladies who were Suffragettes must, in their he usually laid down the law. If grandmama

private hearts, be disappointed. There are wanted a new dress, he would magnanimously

women M.P.s, doctors, lawyers, journalists, let her have it, after telling her the material

and everyone accepts it as a very good thing; and colour that he thought appropriate, and

but it has not really altered the way in which very likely the price per yard. She had to

politics, medicine, law and so on are con- accept what he said. She could not go out

ducted. The ardent pioneers of " votes for and get a job herself. Her dependence upon

women" thought that, with a majority of grandpapa was enforced by economic neces-

women in the country, feminine voters would sity and social custom alike. Her only way

88 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of getting what she wanted was by subtle "-Women cause nothing but trouble! " No,

persuasion, about which she knew a good the equality of the sexes has come to stay.

deal. To our modem way of thought it seems

How different is the family today! intrinsically right, so that there can be no

Husband and wife, as equals, must somehow question of putting the clock back. The

agree upon scores of matters that were not issue before us, now that we have got

even open to discussion by their grand- substantial equality, is its effect upon

parents. For though of course there are many marriage, the home and the welfare of our

strange households here and there, in the children. The only other time in the whole of

main marriage has become a partnership of history when women enjoyed equality with

equals. It could not be otherwise. If men men was in the later days of Rome; 'and

and women are equal, then husband and wife there it may well have contributed to their

will regard themselves as equal. In the home disasters. The rich ceased to have children,

they have got to reach joint decisions. and standards of loyalty and morality

Obviously there is far more chance of dis- decayed. The equality of the sexes may be a

agreement when there are far more things to means to good or ill; it is not an end in

be settled jointly.

itself.

Modern Marriage Partnership

Of course when we say that the equality of women always causes more mamage

The truth is that this modern marriage breakdown, we really mean that the old idea

partnership is a much richer and more of the patriarchal marriage breaks down. In

worthy concept, with much more scope for this sense there is indeed a bright side to the

husband and wife each to give of the best. picture of breakdown and change that we

But it is much more difficult. In the home, were considering just now. The modem

as in the State, dictatorship is clear-cut and " democratic " marriage of equal partners is

definite, whereas a democratic sharing of a fuller and finer relationship but, as I have

responsibility is at once more worthwhile suggested, certainly more difficult. The early

and more difficult. It can only be achieved feminists took us on a false trail in demanding

by the attainment of a certain level, of equality mainly in terms of competition with

education and responsibility.

men along the same lines. We are instead

Now all this is not just the experience of coming to realize now that while men and

our own country. It is world-wide. Wherever women are of equal value they have essential

you get the equality of women emerging in differences of aptitude, outlook and function.

law or in custom, there you get increased Every modern marriage of thinking people

breakdown of marriage. Women have presents husband and wife with the problem

quickly achieved equality in some of the new of reconciling equality with respect for

states like India and Israel, Indonesia and differences.

Communist China. But the same result can Clearly this is a conundrum that can only

be seen wherever we look today-in the be solved by mature men and women.

U.S.A. or Japan or in Europe or Scandinavia. Marriage today involves a greater task of

Wherever you get the equality of the sexes tolerance and adjustment than ever before.

you get more divorce; and this tendency Moreover, people are necessarily affected by

applies among peoples who are white, black, the fact that almost everywhere divorce is

brown or yellow, and on both sides of the commoner and more accepted than it used

Iron Curtain.

to be. If they are disappointed in their

What is to be the result of this inexorable marrage the thought of escape will occur

drive for the equality of the sexes ? It cannot much more readily than it did to their grand-

be lightly dismissed with the comment of one parents. Increasingly people will not tolerate

of my small sons who (having been told by the mediocre marriage that our grandparents

his mother to go and wash his neck) came would have endured almost without com-

downstairs announcing his discovery that ment. At the same time that marriage has

THE STABILITY OF MARRIAGE

89

become more difficult, therefore, there tends Principles of Marriage Guidance Councils

to be ever more opportunity to abdicate Questions of principle were largely settled

from its responsibilities.

by, the adoption of "ten points." These

Formation of Marriage Guidance Council

included our beliefs "That the right basis for personal and social life is that sexual

It was in these circumstances of increased intercourse should not take place outside

strain upon marriage that the Marriage marriage "; " That parenthood normally

Guidance Council came to be formed in i938 by a group of enlightened people under the leadership of that great and good man, Dr. Herbert Gray. It was at first no more than
a small group of doctors, clergy and ministers, lawyers and social workers who were anxious

brings to marriage, not only the fulfilment of its racial end, but also the achievement of one of its deepest satisfactions; and that everything should therefore be done to promote fertile unions"; and another principle recognizing " That scientific con-

to do whatever might prove possible to traception, while serving a purpose in prevent marriage breakdown. I have deliber- assisting married couples to regulate the

ately put it in this rather negative way spacing of their children, becomes a danger

because it must be owned that, at first, the when misused. ..." From the first the emphasis was more upon preventing marital movement recognized spiritual values as disasters than upon the positive fostering of paramount, but never adopted any religious successful marriage that we now recognize test, demanding only adherence to the " ten

as a greater aim. It was assumed, too, that principles" that were in conformity with

ignorance-especially of sexual functions and Christian and Jewish ethics but did not

attitudes-was the great enemy that was to demand religious belief.

be worsted by the spread of accurate know- The difficult subject of divorce has never

ledge, so that truth would be victorious and caused us serious trouble. The movement

all would be well.

includes people of very different views on this

After a setback at the start of the war the subject, but we are united in the belief that

Council was re-formed in I942 with Dr. David R. Mace as its first general secretary.
Its work went ahead throughout the country in a way that was quite phenomenal. The
stress of war had made the public mind acutely aware both of the value of family life
and of its precariousness in those unnatural days. People turned with avidity to a movement that offered them help in the preservation of threatened marriages, with-
out being either shocked or censorious. At the end of the war, when people had more time for such activities, Marriage Guidance Councils tended to spring up in nearly all the

the most important thing is to prevent, so far
as possible, the desire for divorce. If we do
this, we can agree to differ on divorce, which is a confession of failure. As we tell the
Royal Commission on Marriage and Divorce
in a memorandum, to revise the law of
divorce without at the same time taking every possible step to foster successful
marriage is like providing varied and comprehensive funeral arrangements without an
adequate medical service.
Other points of principle arose. Help offered to couples in marriage difficulties must of course be offered in strict confidence, without which the public would not be

main towns of the country with such vigour justified in trusting our efforts. This raises

and rapidity that it was difficult to keep knotty points of legal privilege, and while in

track of them all. What was more, there was practice we have always been able to avoid

a considerable danger of them working on marriage counsellors being called to give

different principles and by different methods; evidence, in divorce cases, about what they

and while some variety might be desirable, it have learned during attempted reconcilia-

soon became clear that some standards must tion, the position cannot be regarded as

be set.

adequately safeguarded, and it is much to

go THE EUGENICS REVIEW

be hoped that the Royal Commission will the first partner to come to terms with the

recommend legislation to deal with this distressing circumstances. In the great

important point.

majority of instances, however, the second

Again, every effort is made to avoid being partner proves willing to discuss the diffi-

intrusive. People are not visited in their culty, although we neither have nor want

homes, save occasionally when both parties any powers of compulsion.

request it; for there must be no suggestion I have laboured this point a little because

that the errant husband or wife is being it casts a light on the ethos and outlook of

" cornered " by some guardian of public our movement. Those who deny that it is

morality come to bludgeon them into being always necessary to give the second partner

good. A service is provided for those who the opportunity of a hearing, are really

desire it, and who come asking for help. thinking of the first partner as a patient

This means that those who bring marriage needing help in readjustment to society,

difficulties to a marriage counsellor are a including husband or wife. The emphasis is

group that is weighted with people of some upon the individual. For our part, we regard

initiative and sense of responsibility, marriage not merely as one of the external

although of course many people come to relationships that is giving trouble to a

Marriage Guidance Councils on referral from patient, but as something of unique value.

other social workers. It is a matter of satis- While we are deeply concerned with the

faction to us that people of every class, individual, we are still more concerned with

income and education do seek our help in the couple and the family. To attempt to

marriage difficulties, from the most unlettered treat one partner without enlisting the aid of

to people whose names are known to every the other comes near to imposing a solution

newspaper reader.

instead of guiding husband and wife to

It is also a matter of principle that in all help each other to find a solution to their

marriage difficulties both sides should be difficulties themselves.

urged to come for a confidential talk with a

marriage counsellor. The ordinary man or Marriage Counsellors

woman is not going to regard it as just or I have drifted into a discussion of the

responsible for anyone to attempt to give remedial side of our work because this came

advice or treatment without first learning all first in our development, and is still the best-

the relevant facts, which can only be done known work of marriage guidance. We refer

from both husband and wife. It is, for to it as remedial work rather than reconcilia-

instance, highly material to know whether tion because our object is to\provide help in

acute jealousy is the result of some intoler- any kind of marriage difficulty. This of

able position that would make any of us course includes involuntary childlessness,

jealous, or whether it is quite irrational. which affects something like one in every

This information can seldom be learnt dozen married couples. Here there is nor-

merely from the jealous person. I therefore mally no question of reconciliation, but a

take issue with that school of thought which very real marriage problem that is, of course,

does not always invite the other partner to referred to niedical aid.

a similar confidential talk. Failure to do this The remedial side of our work is carried out

gives the impression of espousing the cause by " marriage counsellors," who are mature

of a complainant against the other party; men and women selected and trained for the

and it seems to me grossly unscientific to task. All of them are volunteers generously

attempt a diagnosis without first securing all giving one evening a week, or perhaps two

the available data. Of course, the second afternoons a week, to this work. Each of

partner may not choose to come, and in this some eighty-five Marriage Guidance Councils

case one cannot reconcile people who are not has a panel of these counsellors, and each

even willing to discuss the possibility, counsellor is thus dealing with only a limited

though often a good deal can be done to help number of cases at any one time. In our

THE STABILITY OF MARRIAGE

9I

view this has several advantages. In the trained voluntary social workers in the land.

first place it enables a Marriage Guidance That men and women who give their time

Council to provide a variety of service, so freely should be' prepared to go through such

that, according to the nature of the case, a selection and training-which is arranged by

couple can be referred to the counsellor who, the national body to maintain consistently

from age and experience, is most likely to be high standards throughout the country-

able to help them. Secondly, it means that the counsellor can remember the details of
the comparatively few cases being helped at any one time, and thus show a greater personal interest and friendship for each one. Thirdly, spreading the case-load in this way
reduces the undoubted strain imposed by this work, which touches a good deal of the
seamy side of life and sometimes involves very grave responsibilities, especially for the

gives eloquent testimony to their sincerity and selflessness, and their recognition of the delicacy and responsibility of their task.
One of the main objects of the training is to ensure that marriage counsellors recognize the limits of their competence, and the point at which difficulties should be passed on to professionally qualified help. Each Marriage Guidance Council, in addition to its rota of

welfare of the children.

voluntary counsellors, has panels of doctors,

We know that voluntary service is often psychologists, parsons and ministers, lawyers

accepted by organizations that dare not and social workers to whom the more diffi-

examine credentials too closely for fear of cult cases may be referred. Special care is

losing valued help. In such delicate and taken to ensure that marriage counsellors do

responsible work as marriage, counselling, not attempt to exceed the limits of lay

however, we have from the first imposed competence, which would be disastrous. On

rigorous selection and thorough training. the other hand, they can often deal with

Candidates must first be sponsored by a straightforward marriage problems and spare

local Marriage Guidance Council, and then attend a residential selection conference at
which they meet five selectors including a psychiatrist. The object of the selection is to choose for this work those who are really
suited by temperament. They must on the

the doctor, in particular, from being needlessly worried in his surgery by some simple matter that needs only a sympathetic
explanation. In practice, therefore, the marriage coun-

one hand be sympathetic, tolerant, patient sellor gives, let us say, each Thursday

and free from prejudices, while on the other evening to this work. He is available at the

hand they must be analytical and objective, consulting rooms, or it may be at his home,

avoiding taking sides and free from inhibi- to see those who may seek his help in con-

tions. This is a formidable combination of fidence. After seeing one party, he tries to

virtues, and the high proportion of about see the other. If the difficulty is a compara-

two-thirds of the candidates who pass the
Selection Board springs largely from the fact that they are all sponsored already by
local Councils that have considered them suitable. After this a training course relates
to the spiritual, psychological, medical, legal and social aspects of sex, marriage and the family. This is followed by written work and a probationary year's counselling, concluding

tively simple one, he will, over a period, see
each party several times, giving explanations and interpreting the outlook of each to the other, until it may be possible to see both parties together and get them jointly to face and overcome their difficulties. If, on the other hand, there are symptoms that clearly
call for psychological treatment, or a situa-

with a careful assessment of the work done. tion with difficult legal implications, the

The result is that these marriage counsellors, counsellor will, with the consent of the couple,

of which there are over 300 throughout the get them to see a psychiatrist or a lawyer

country, form-so far as I know-by far the who serves as a consultant of the Marriage

most carefully selected and thoroughly Guidance Council.

Q2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Conclusions from Remedial Work
The London Marriage Guidance Centre alone has helped over io,ooo couples in the past eight years, and throughout the country over 8,ooo cases a year are assisted by marriage counsellors. From the remedial side of the work two clear conclusions stand out.
First, that it is of the utmost importance to tackle marriage problems promptly when they arise. The natural reticence that people feel about their intimate worries makes them reluctant to seek help until a situation becomes quite intolerable, and drives them to drastic action. By this time there may be a legacy of frustration and bitterness and treachery-to say nothing of solid phalanxes of relatives-so great that their difficulties are beyond human help in our present state of knowledge. Secondly, the crucial factor is the will to succeed. Many warring couples, bemused by childish ideas or over-simplified psychology, come to Marriage Guidance Councils with a pathetic belief that we can, as it were, wave a magic wand over them and send them away arm-in-arm. Such faith in experts is touching, but it is not enough. In almost every case there is need for slow, patient effort in curbing tempers, admitting mistakes, refusing to take offence, learning afresh. While much skill and patience, sympathy and objectivity are needed of any reconciler, really determined effort is essential from those who would themselves overcome their difficulties.
Government Support
The Denning Committee on Procedure in Matrimonial Causes* made its final Report in February I947, and among other things recommended State grants towards marriage guidance work. As a result the Home Office set up a Departmental Committee on Grants for the Development of Marriage Guidance as a form of social service (the Harris Committee), which in November 1948 recommendedt some modest headquarters grants
-5,ooo a year to the National Marriage Guidance Council, and £1,500 each to the
* Cmd. 7024. H.M.S.O. Price gd.
f Cmd. 7566. H.M.S.O. Price 6d.

Catholic Marriage Advisory Council and the Family Welfare Association, for an expenmental period of five years. In addition the Home Secretary was recommended to set up a Marriage Guidance Training Board to plan, supervise and finance ' the selection and training of marriage counsellors, up to a maximum cost of £5,000 a year, which was later reduced to £4,000. These recommendations were adopted, but not some others that were needed to support the work of the local Councils. The amounts were small, but as an essentially voluntary body we have never wished to be dependent upon Government grants, and have chiefly valued them as a token of official recognition of the value of marriage guidance work, though the money has been welcome to an organization much hampered for lack of it.
According to the estimates published in the last few days it is proposed to halve all these grants in the coming financial year, as a measure of economy. It is difficult to believe that this will be carried out, seeing that the taxpayer pays perhaps fifty times as much in subsidizing the divorces that fonned 8o per cent of the cases receiving legal aid in the first year's operation of the Legal Aid and Advice Act, 1949.*
Education for Family Life
All this leads us to education for marriage and family life, which is so much more necessary now that marriage has become "democratized " into an equal partnership.
It is true that the Churches have usually felt some responsibility in preparing couples for marriage, and done much that has been of value. But-as I think, most unfortunately - fewer young people attend Churches today. The Churches themselves have not always seemed abreast of modern thought, as for example in this basic matter of the equality of women. Also the old taboo on discussion of sex matters has largely disappeared, leaving the Churches embarrassed and uneasy on the whole subject, and incidentally placing at a great disadvantage a celibate priesthood where this exists.
* Attorney-General: House of Commotns, Official
Report, December 3rd, 1951.

THE STABILITY OF MARRIAGE

93

The problem is, then, to break in upon the cycle of the generations; to set young people thinking about marriage and preparing themselves for it with as much enthusiasm
and determination as they prepare for a job or career; and to help them lay the foundations of such wise and happy marriages that serious difficulties never arise. This can hardly be better put than in a striking passage of the Final Report of the Denning Committee presented to Parliament in February
I947:
" We have been much impressed by the evidence of experienced workers in this field that the basic causes of marriage failure are to be found in false ideas and unsound emotional attitudes developed before marriage, in youth, and even in childhood. The right time to correct those ideas and attitudes is before marriage. There is a need for a carefully graded system of general education for marriage, parenthood, and family living to be available to all young people as they grow up, through the enlightened co-operation of their parents, teachers and pastors; and in addition specific marriage preparation of engaged couples to give them instruction and guidance to ensure the success of their marriage. Valuable work is already being done on these lines and its extension is much to be desired."*
Our experience suggests that there are three or four points of particular significance at which education is possible for family life. This education, like training for citizenship, is concerned much more with infusing ideals and imparting attitudes than with the mere giving of information. Undoubtedly the formation of attitudes and the moulding of outlook begin in the nursery where the young child gains his impressions of what is normal and right. The greatest influences in education for family life are still the informal ones of home and family itself. The example of parents in love, in tolerance and in shared
* Page 5, Final Report of the Committee on Procedure in Matrimonial Causes, presented by the Lord High Chancellor to Parliament by Command of His Majesty, February I947. Cmd. 7024. H.M.S.O. Price
gd.

ideals is a much more powerful and lasting influence than any direct instruction. Whether a person grows up selfish or unselfish-a vital matter to happiness in marriage-depends largely upon the early years, and upon the patience and understanding of the mother who encourages the child and gives him a sense of satisfaction and importance in participating in little family tasks and errands.
The first step, then, in education for family life rests with the parents, and one of the forms of educational work that my own organization hopes to develop still further is the assistance of parents in meeting responsibilities that they often feel more willing than able to fulfil. Many speakers have addressed Parent-Teacher Associations, and many Church groups are active in assisting young parents in the crowded years when the children are at once most noisy and troublesome and yet at their most impressionable.
Sex Education
The question of specific sex education is one that I need only touch upon. Whether we like it or not, knowledge cannot be restrained in a free society. Unless sound and sensible information is given to children about sex they will learn highly coloured, garbled and often dangerous half-truths, in undesirable ways. It is never wise to keep a child in complete ignorance of sex. Secrecy inevitably suggests that the grown-ups regard it as a furtive and disgraceful subject. If a child gains such an impression it is likely to militate against his or her later married happiness, and to do far more harm than mere ignorance which may be dispersed by knowledge. That sex teaching should be given is certain. The question is rather how children should be taught. There can be no doubt that the parents are the best source of information that should be given naturally in answer to the children's questions as they arise and merely to that extent. After all, if a child feels that he cannot ask his own parents a sensible question, the very basis of trust and confidence is undermined. But I repeat that attitudes are more important here than factual information, and many

a4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

parents are themselves too embarrassed or later, that they have married someone with

inhibited to talk about sex to their children whom they have little or nothing in common

or, more important, to present it as a natural, when dancing days, or tennis days, are over.

right and noble aspect of life. Thus it may It is true that when they fall in love later

often be necessary for teachers or others to they may be swept off their feet (and who

deal with sex education, though this can only would have it otherwise ?); but it is at least

be a second-best. What matters is that, in desirable that in their " teen-age " years they

dealing with all the kinks and convolutions of sJiould have developed some sort of frame-

the tubes in our bodies, we should not fail to work of values against which they can

impart to our children the emotional, moral measure those whom they meet of the

and spiritual significance of what is, after all, opposite sex.

one of God's greatest wonders. To give Boys and girls who have had a sensible sex

biological instruction without any hint of education ought, by this " teen-age stage,"

mQral standards may be a grave dis-service to have it developed to give them some

to children. There have been cases in which understanding of the different ways in which

it has simply stimulated their natural men and women tend to view sex and

curiosity to make sexual experiments. They marriage. It is well for young people to

can hardly be blamed for this if they have understand how lightly and quickly strong

never been taught that men and women, emotions may be aroused in a young man;

having souls and minds, are not just so many how much more mature and deliberate is a

guinea-pigs. And it is more important that young woman of the same age. Often dis-

they should really lay hold of this truth than harmony arises later because husband or wife

that they should know all about Fallopian is expecting the other to look at things in

tubes.

exactly the same way.

If a married couple, for example, postpone

Adolescence

parenthood year after year, the husband may

A second opportunity comes to influence well be happy enough, while the wife is

boys and girls around the ages of 15, i6 or deprived and frustrated because conception,

17. Intellectually they are almost adult but gestation, birth and the nurturing of the

emotionally they are adolescent. This is child is the completion and fulfilment of her

often the main chance to influence them in sex experience, as it can never be for the

their attitude towards the choice of a husband.

marriage partner. Once John and Mary have The practical problem arises as to how one

fallen in love and hope to get married, it is may reach and influence adolescent boys and

useless to talk to them of the qualities that girls. My own organization has experience of

go to make a loyal and loving wife or providing speakers to many youth groups

husband. They will only listen with one ear, and Church groups and this is certainly

and only take notice of anything that valuables especially if audiences can be

haippens to coincide with the attributes of addressed who have not only met for that

Mary or John. They are, in short, emotionally subject but who gather regularly to discuss

committed and often unable to consider many different things. The fact remains that

marriage in long-term fashion, taking account it is, on the whole, the more responsible boys

of courtship, companionship, children, mid- and girls who belong to Churches, clubs and

dle-age and the later years when the children societies. It is the feckless and unattached

have left home. It is before John and Mary who most of all need encouragement to think

have fallen in love that they should be set about marriage as a most important part of

thinking about marriage itself, and what it the life that lies ahead.

involves as a growing and evolving relatfon- We have not found the full answer to this

ship that develops and changes as children problem. Newspapers, cinema and the radio

come and go. If they can but grasp this are almost the only influences that reach

elementary idea they are less likely to find, the less responsible youngsters. In the

THE STABILITY OF MARRIAGE

95

newspapers of the type they read, the activ- course, entirely confidential. Alternatively,

ities of Aly Khan and Miss Rita Hayworth in the larger towns, two or three counsellors

tend to receive more prominence than any- may, in turn, talk to a group of half a dozen

thing that has to do with maturity and re- or a dozen couples. This method is more

sponsibility in marriage. Nevertheless, there satisfactory than it may sound, because it

are great opportunities for influencing people often serves to show each couple that their

through popular newspaper articles and the own anxieties and preoccupations are per-

answenng of readers' queries in regular fectly normal and shared by most other

newspaper features. One London evening couples; but it is important to provide

paper has printed such a feature (which is opportunities for private consultations after-

syndicated throughout the provincial Press) wards for couples who may wish to raise

each week for seven years. It may be dis- particular difficulties on their own.

tasteful to some professional people to see It is true that a large proportion of those

statistics or legal or medical knowledge coming for marriage preparation have come

simplified into popular, chatty, journalism; mainly to discuss family planning and

but it is almost the only way in which the spacing. It would be quite unreal to talk to

knowledge of the expert can be brought to young couples before marriage without being

the ordinary man or woman.

willing to discuss this issue. A thorough and

impartial investigation* conducted under

Engaged Couples

the Royal Commission on Population that

Perhaps the greatest opportunity for reported in June I949, showed that at least

education for family life is with the engaged two-thirds of the married couples in the

couple. The choice of partner has been made country practise some sort of family plan-

and now they know that when they marry ning, whether by appliance or non-appliance

they are setting out on an adventure into methods. My own organization believes that

uncharted seas so that they need both a there are right, as there are certainly wrong,

knowledge of navigation and an idea of the uses for contraception, though it is for each

reefs and shoals to be avoided. The Marriage couple conscientiously to decide such matters

Guidance Councils have almost all found for themselves. The function of the marriage

young people increasingly anxious to seek counsellor where contraception is concerned

help in preparation for marriage. In 1950 is merely to ensure that the couple have

some I,300 engaged couples asked and correct information (and there are still some

received this help.

who have the most bizarre misunderstand-

We are dealing here with those who have ings) and that they recognize the subject as

pledged themselves to marry and who want a moral one that needs their conscientious

help on specific points, rather than generali- and united decision, if possible before

ties about marriage. Is it a good thing for a marriage. The majority regard contracep-

wife to go out to work ? Ought they to wait tion as a necessity in the early years of

until they have a home of their own before marriage and they are referred to appropriate

they start a family ? Is it important that doctors or the clinics of the Family Planning

they should share religious beliefs ? How Association.

often should sexual intercourse take place ? But if couples come to Marriage Guidance

How best can they use the family income ? Councils largely to discuss family planning

This is the sort of problem they present and -in the belief that they already know every-

on which they seek help.

thing else about marriage !-our marriage

Where it is,possible, engaged couples are counsellors take the opportunity to broaden

seen by a mamnage counsellor. The interview

may be in the consulting room of a Marriage * Papers of the Royal Commission on Population,

Guidance Council or round the fireside in Volume i. An investigation carried out by the Council

the counsellor's home. Like the interviews
with those in marrage difficulties it is, of

of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists: Family Limitation and its Influence on Human
Fertility during the past Fifty Years. H.M.S.O. Price 4S.

96 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

discussions to a much wider basis. Most who are being married in a church are

eager young couples are thinking of the little encouraged to see the priest or minister who

home they plan and concentrating almost will conduct the service. Without doubt all

entirely on the immediate future. That the Churches have been taking this responsi-

marriage is a growing, dynamic relationship, bility more seriously, and dergymen usually

enriched with the arrival of the children and regard it as a definite obligation to see the

changing with their growth and departure couple beforehand. This is much to be

from the home, is a fundamental that they welcomed. Marriage Guidance Councils are

may not realize. They may think that they at pains not to compete with either the

will marry and, automatically and effort- clergyman or the doctor, but to co-operate

lessly, live happily ever after, whereas with both; for neither of them would claim

constant consideration and readjustments to be competent to deal with every aspect of

are needed. Not only can the need for the many-sided relationship of marriage.

tolerance and co-operation be underlined but Above all, in presuming to offer help to

some of the particular hurdles can be pointed young couples in preparation for marriage

out. When the first baby comes, for instance, we must be very sensitive to their ideals and

how often does the husband resent the fact anxieties at a most precious and beautiful

that he appears no longer in sole possession stage of their lives. I have been talking in

of his wife's affections ? These things are general terms and statistics this afternoon as

commonplace to those who have seen them I have imagined to be appropriate before a

many times. To each young husband it is learned society. But the subject of marriage

new and disturbing. The very fact that cannot be treated as an impersonal one.

marriage necessarily involves difficulties and In my office, which really has no other

challenges may not have been recognized by advantages to recommend it, my window

the idyllic couple, who may thus be plunged looks out over a roof garden of a neighbouring

into depression and resentment when the building. There in the summer time facetious

first cloud appears.

young men photograph hard-bitten young

Ideally we should certainly encourage all women modelling the latest fashions and

young men and women to have medical leaning against the balustrading. As if this

examinations before marrage. This is highly were not sufficiently disturbing to the

desirable and considerate couples feel that dictation of correspondence, lunch time

they owe it to each other. Since, however, brings young men and girls to hold hands

doctors are now so overworked we content while they eat their sandwiches. Sometimes

ourselves at present with the definite sugges- then the years seem to slip away and I am

tion that medical advice should always be reminded of the lines of W. B. Yeats-

sought by those who have any doubt about
general health, sex functions, or heredity. We always encourage reference to the family

" Had I the Heaven's embroidered cloths
Enwrought with gold and silver light

doctor and other procedure agreed with the

British Medical Association only comes into I would spread the cloths under your feet:

effect if the patient is unwilling to go to his But I, being poor, have only my dreams;

or her family doctor or if the family doctor I have spread my dreams under your feet:

is unwilling to help.

Tread softly because you tread on my

It goes without saying that every couple

dreams."

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLIV, No. 2

