THE GALTON LECTURE

T ERE was a large gathering of general on eugenic topics, but a good many

Fellows and Members of the Eugenics
Socitey and their guests at Manson House on February i6th, to hear the Galton

of those views were not necessarily the views of the Sociely with respect to its policy. The
editor generally headed his review with a

Lecture for I943, which, under the title
"Eugenic Aspects of Children's Allowances,"

comment to that effect. " In the statement of the aims and objects of the Society there

was delivered by Sir William Beveridge, occurs this passage:

with Lord Horder, President of the Eugenics Many other social measures have been

Society, in the chair. Introducing the lecturer Lord Horder
said: " Knowing how deeply Sir William Beveridge is immersed in affairs connected with his Report and how numerous his speaking commitments must be, it may seem an act of great courage on the part of the
Council of the Eugenics Society to invite Sir
William here to-day. But the Council did
not underestimate the status of the Galton
Lecture and therefore did not hesitate to

suggested to reduce or remove the expense and inconveniences of rearing children. Amongst them may be considered family allowances. These might be arranged by graded equalization of the pools or other methods which would provide relief for parents in the higher occupational groups
as well as in the lower. Taxation rebates for the children might be allowed on a
scale which would influence fertility.

approach him. Its courage has been re- It is obvious, therefore that the Society

warded."

endorses Sir William Beveridge's views on

He then called upon Sir William to deliver these points."

his lecture, which is published in full else- No doubt there would be questions as to

where in this issue.

Sir William's use of the word " inversion,"

At its conclusion, Lord Horder reminded suggesting, as a major premise, that there

the audience that the Galton Lecture was not was a top and a bottom in regard to bio-

usually followed by speeches, but on this logical human material. Perhaps there would

occasion the Council thought a compromise also be a question on the words " biological

might be feasible if they could impose it on failure" as a synonym for infertility. Lord

Sir William Beveridge, namely, that mem- Horder said finally that he thought they all

bers of the audience should be permitted to agreed with Sir William that eugenic

ask questions. As a chairman of some ex- measures constituted, by their very nature,

perience, he was fully aware that some happy a long-term policy. The Eugenics Society was

individuals could ask a question and sit not perhaps as popular as it would be if it

down again, while others could not. He held that the ideals of eugenists could be

begged questioners not to turn a question achieved in one generation.

into a speech, although a question sometimes MR. CECIL BINNEY asked whether Sir

required a statement of the grounds on William did not think that in the case of

which it was asked.

professional people who had never had to

He thought it was his privilege as Chair- contribute at all, the possible inducement of

man and as President of the Society to put children's allowances would be greatly offset

Sir William wise on the question of the by having to find 7s. 6d. a week, plus the

Society's policy on the matter of children's unspecified addition to the income tax.

allowances and taxation rebate. Whilst Would not this diminish rather than en-

admiring Professor Fisher's research work courage fertility? In the second place, had

they did not always take his views on he contemplated how these weekly contribu-

eugenic matters. The EUGENICS REVIEW tions of 7s. 6d. were to be collected from such

was a medium for the expression of views in people ? In view of his remarks about income-

I24

THE GALTON LECTURE

I25

tax rebates, had he altered his views con- allowances, he did not think that such

cerning paragraph 422 of his Report, in schemes were any substitute for the statutory

which he said:

children's allowances. They could not cover

"In so far as it appears that children's allowances to all families irrespective of their means would mean giving money to
prosperous people without, need, this can be corrected by an adjustment of the rebates in income tax now allowed for
children."

the whole population; the first step to neutralizing the premium on infertility was by a general scheme covering the whole population. The children's allowances set
out in his Report neutralized only up to
subsistence level. Whether vocational
schemes should be compulsory or not was again a matter on which he had no final

His other question was why, if there had to views. If he were in charge of the civil

be vocational provision, it should be left to service he would make them compulsory on

the professions to do it on their own ?

the whole service. If he were in charge of an

SIR WILLIAM BEVERIDGE replied that he educational system he would apply it

had not got his Report in his hands, but he throughout the whole system, but it might

thought it would be found that what it stated be that in some places it could be on

was that in Class II, where there was no voluntary lines.

employer, the contributions otherwise paid CAPTAIN OLLIVER asked whether Sir

by the employer and employee would take William realized his vast responsibility idf

the form of a single security contribution. stressing the need on the part of the people

Persons in that class would receive pension of the will to work, the need of compulsion

on retirement, medical treatment, funeral for the work-shy, and the need of inspection

expenses, but no disability benefit during the in homes in order to discover whether this

first thirteen weeks of disability, and no un- extra money was spent in the right way.

employment benefit. Their total contnbu- How would he ensure that family allowances

tion was 4s. 3d. He did not know that the were not spent on cinemas and " perms " ?

amount was very important. They would SIR WILLIAM BEVERIDGE replied that he

get something for that, namely the benefits knew nothing which would save any person

he had just enumerated. He agreed that 8s. from having married the wrong husband or

for each child was not going to be much of the wrong wife or from having chosen the

an encouragement to professional people. wrong father or mother. But he was a

That was why he wanted in addition occupa- sufficient believer in his kind not to agree

tional allowances. On the income tax ques- to the idea which had been presented to him,

tion, when he wrote his Report he was not that any assistance of this nature should not

concerned with eugenics at all. He had to be given in money but in goods because the

deal with the argument of some people who people could not be trusted to spend the

said that children's allowances should have money properly. He had no wish to say to

an income limit. For a number of reasons, them: " If I give you money for food you

partly administrative, and partly those of might use it for something else, and there-

justice, he saw great objections to any kind fore I am going to give you a benefaction in

of income limit in this scheme. If it was kind." He did not want that kind of inter-

thought that one ought not to give money ference. It appeared to him that the ques-

for the children of the rich, one should make tioner was expecting him to talk about social

the adjustment in an income-tax rebate. insurance, and his subject that evening had

But now he had a eugenic reason for giving been strictly children's allowances. But so

more money-as much more as he could- far as the will to work was concerned, he

for children of the more wealthy classes. He believed that the one thing which people

had not changed his opinion since writing were really anxious about was to have a

his Report; he had merely changed his certain chance of work after this war. Of

approach to the subject. As for vocational course, there were some people lazy by

I26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

nature, and most of us could be made lazy SIR WILLIAM BEVERIDGE: That is a

in suitable economic circumstances. But question of nurture, not of nature.

there was nothing whatever in his scheme to MRS. GRANT DUFF said that if a child were

increase the premium on idleness. In the starved in its youth it did not grow to full

first place, most of his scheme had nothing stature, and it was by such children that the

to do with unemployment at all. It was a race was harmed even in one generation.

scheme very largely for pensions, sickness, THE CHAIRMAN asked whether eugenic

medical treatment and other benefits. The differences could arise in one generation.

unemployment expenditure was only one- MRS. GRANT DUFF suggested that they

eighth of the total, or little more than the could, as, for example, by the relief of

expenditure incurred under this head before starvation and by measures to combat

the war. It amounted to £105 millions as syphilis.

compared with £90 millions just before this DR. COLLIER asked whether children's

war. He was not proposing any change in allowances would apply to adopted children,

the present rules regarding unemployment also whether Sir William supposed that the

benefit, and he had put in his Report the rate of allowances suggested would be

obligation of people not merely to accept the sufficient to induce any large number of

work they wanted but the kind of work whicb people to adopt orphans and so diminish the

wanted doing. He had done everything he tragedy of children without homes.

could to meet the point of view put forward SIR WILLIAM BEVERIDGE replied that the

by the last questioner, but he did want him children's allowances which he proposed, 8s.

to realize that there was very little in this a week, did apply to every child, whether

Report about unemployment. It dealt adopted or not. Some children had no

mainly with children, sickness, and old natural parents, and he hoped that with this

age. 8s. most of such children would find a home.

MR. TITMUSS asked whether it was not a But he was not sure that all would do so, and

fact that Professor Fisher's conclusions on in so far as they did not there would have to

the differential birth rate were based on the be some scheme for looking after orphans.

I9II census report and that since then, under The community must have a public body

the impact of two wars, the birth rate of the which saw that orphans were cared for.

skilled, semi-skilled, and unskilled had MR. BRANDER said that many people were

probably fallen by at least 50 per cent and agreed that the scheme would tend to produce

that the relative rates of these classes were a large crop not only of children of the better

altered ?

class, but of slum children. Had Sir William

SIR WILLIAM BEVERIDGE said that he was considered what happened under the Speen-

afraid he did not know what the latest hamland scheme of I50 years ago, which,

figures were. All birth rates had fallen, but instead of producing more children of the

he did not know that there had been a return better class, produced a number of children

to class equality as between the labourer and of the lower eugenic standard? He men-

the skilled man, or the skilled man and the tioned his own city of Glasgow, where one

professional man. He would be very much quarter of the population were Roman

surprised if that change had taken place. Catholics, and where the spiritual leaders of

THE HON. MRS. GRANT DUFF asked that community were urging their faithful

whether Sir William and the Eugenics Society followers to produce as many children as

would consider a plan of family allowances possible and were quite hostile to family

on such a scale as would make a very great planning. He had not seen any consideration

eugenic difference even in the present genera- of this difficulty in any of the official exposi-

tion. She was not content to wait 200 years tions of the Beveridge scheme.

before the effect was manifest. She wanted SIR WILLIAM BEVERIDGE said that he did

to see a great improvement throughout the not think that historically it was the case

population at once.

that the Speenhamland expenment had

THE GALTON LECTURE

caused a large number of children to be born existing economic disadvantage which mem-

who would not have been born otherwise. bership of a large family entailed.

It did not go on long enough for that purpose. MRS. WESTBROOK asked whether it was

Under a scheme of universal stepping up of only for financial reasons that Sir William

wages the result would be that the advantage did not subsidize the first child.

to everybody would be nil. What he was SIR. WILLIAM BEVERIDGE replied that in

proposing was that for every child born there his Report he was concerned with the aboli-

should be a subsistence allowance. In other tion of want. That was the whole basis of it.

words, that a child should not impoverish It was difficult to maintain that it was neces-

the parents. That did not make it profitable sary to give anything for the first child of

for parents to have children in any event. the family, so long as the responsible parent

They were no better off than before and they was earning, in order to ensure that that

had all the added trouble of the children. He family was not in want. Broadly speaking,

did not see how this was going to affect the there could be very few people who had not

number of people who made the slums. It got enough income, when earning, for them-

was only going to appeal to people who might selves, their wife, and one child. If the actual

be thinking: "We should like to have surveys on poverty in different towns made

another child, but we have not enough between the two wars were studied, it would

income to have another child and do justice be found that practically no cases of poverty

to the child we have already."

due to the wages being insufficient for man,

DR. CAMPS asked whether Sir William's wife, and one child were found. Wages

researches had quite convinced him that pretty well everywhere were up to that level.

equality of opportunity was going to be a Therefore, if money were given for the first

eugenic advantage. Was he quite convinced child of a parent in work, it was given when

that he had given an adequate allowance for it was not necessary for the abolition of

voluntary effort ? Was there not some incon- want. A great deal was saved by not giving

sistency between compulsion at the top and anything for the first child, and that money

freedom at the bottom ?

was available for medical and other services.

SIR WILLIAM BEVERIDGE said that he did Again, he was not thinking of eugenics but

not understand the second question. As to of the relief of want. He thought that the

the equality of opportunity, his argument cost of children ought not to be borne wholly

was substantially taken from Professor by the parents or by the State. Some people,

Fisher. If there was inequality of oppor- if the amount were gs. per week, would say:

tunity as between the large and the small " Let the State pay 5s. and the parents 4s."

family there was social promotion of the He did not like that way of sharing. He

child of the small family, and if infertility preferred to say that the parents should pay

was inheritable this meant that one would for the first child, and that the charge on the

get in the upper social classes a larger pro- State should rise with the size of the family.

portion of relatively infertile stock. If that That was a direct incentive to a larger family.

argument was sound-and he did not see DR. C. P. BLACKER asked whether a

any logical flaw in it-then by equalizing -certain amount of contention might perhaps

opportunity between members of large and be raised by compressing under one head

of small families one would stop the promo- two kinds of infertility which could be

tion of infertility. He was not saying any- remedied by family allowances. People

thing about equality of opportunity as be- could be fertile or unfertile for either of two

tween rich and poor, but as between large reasons. They could be involuntarily infertile

and small families. Moreover, he was speak- or deliberately infertile, and it was only

ing only of economic opportunity. He did infertility of the second character which

not deny there were certain social values in could be removed by economic measures.

belonging to a large family. That was an SIR WILLIAM BEVERIDGE replied that the

additional reason for trying to remove the whole of his argument was on the other line,

128 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

that certain people did vary in their degree characteristics were inherited, as no doubt

of natural physical fertility. If people were they were, he did not feel that there was any

promoted into the upper social class because real difference between them and the physical

they were infertile, they would be likely to characteristics. It would make no difference

marry into that same class, and thus there would be a breeding out of ability. This

to the eugenic argument.

could be corrected by checking the promotion On the motion of the Chairman, a very

of people merely because they were infertile. hearty vote of thanks was accorded to Sir

There were in this matter temperamental William Beveridge for his lecture and for

and moral factors, but in so far as these his replies to questions.

* C. B. C.
CONSTRUCTIVE BIRTH CONTROL
SOCIrTY AND CNIC FOUNDED BY DR. MARIE STOPES IN 192I The oldest Birth Control Clinic, the first to establish Birth Control Case Sheets and collect scientific data; C.B.C. Cliniics are still the only free clinics: the only birth control clinics dealing from the first with all aspects of birth control, i.e. prevention of detrimental births, spacing of healthy births and inducing potentially desirable pregnancy in sterile women, and general marital help.
THE PIONEERS OF THE CLINIC MOVEMENT
Libra?y, Museum and Clinics open daily, io-6 (except Sats.)
Books and Racial supplies may be obtained direct. TECHNICAL DEMONSTRATIONS for MEMBERS of the MEDICAL PROFESSION
First Thursday each month Applications to The Hon. Secretary, Headquarters Clinic,
I o6 Whitfield Street, W. I
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXIV, No. 4

