THE FUTURE OF OUR POPULATION*

By C. P. BLACKER, M.A., M.D., F.R.C.P.

W HAT is to be the future of our population ? Will it go on growing at the same rate as in the past, or
will it become stationary some time soon ? If the latter, when? And what will happen afterwards ? The answers to these questions are of great importance for this country's future, not only in its international bearings, but also in its internal social life. National policies, such as education, housing, emigration and pensions will be directly shaped by the numbers of people in the country and by their ages.
A good deal of confusion has been caused in people's minds about questions of population by various announcements and statements in the newspapers which seem to be contradictory and to point in opposite directions. On the one hand, we see continual references to our large unemployment figures and to more or less unsuccessful efforts made by different Governments to reduce them. We see announcements of quarterly returns of births and deaths, which mostly show an excess of births over deaths, and which therefore tell us that the population is increasing. We hear a great deal about town planning, about housing schemes and about efforts to relieve overcrowding in slum areas. We directly witness the increasing crush of traffic on our roads and of people who travel in buses, undergrounds and trains during the busy hours. And from the roads and windows of trains we see ribbon building along the main thoroughfares that lead into towns, so that it becomes increasingly difficult to get out into the open country. But on the other hand, we read that the birth-rate is falling to dangerously low levels, and experts tell us
* This article was originally written as a pamphlet Lxr the general public, but it includes much new material with which not all eugenists are familiar. It may be read as an introduction to such works as A. M. CarrSaunders's World Population, R. Kuczynski's Population Movements, and D. V. Glass's The Struggle for Population. Copies of the pamphlet may be obtained from the Eugenics Society, price 6d.

that unless people soon begin to have more children, the country will somehow be threatened with depopulation. English people are given to trusting the concrete evidence of their senses rather than the theories of experts. " It is all very well," they say, " for experts and statisticians to utter these gloomy forebodings; the plain facts are that the population of the country is increasing and that our unemployment problem is quite bad enough as it is. The fall of the birth-rate is a very good thing." The experts are either ignored or ridiculed.
But are the experts as wrong as all this ? The object of this article is to explain how it is that they are not wrong.
The factors in the problem of population as it concerns us to-day are not entirely plain to unaided common sense. They require a little unravelling and careful thinking out. This we will try to do by certain stages. First we will consider the recent history of our population during which it has greatly increased, and explain that the increase has been due, not to the birth-rate going up but to the death-rate going down. We shall then examine how the birth-rate has fallen and try to explain how it is that, though the population is still increasing to-day, it is almost inevitably destined to decline soon. Lastly, we shall try to form an idea of what is going to happen to our population in the next hundred years.
Recent Increase in Population
From the year i8oo until the year I9I4, the population of England and Wales increased in an astonishing manner; faster in fact than did that of any other European country. In i8oi, the population of England and Wales was about nine million; in I93I it was shown by the census to be nearly forty millions. This increase was accompanied by an enormous growth of towns and by a period of unprecedented industrial prosperity during which England forged ahead of other

205
C

206

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

countries and established a position of People now live much more healthily and

leadership in the civilized world.

cleanly than they used to do. Not long ago

But in the last few years, this increase has this country used to be ravaged by epidemic

been slowing down rather quickly. Between diseases which are now almost unknown, such

1838 and I9I3, births on average exceeded as cholera, typhus, enteric fever, smallpox

deaths by about 300,000 in each year, and and plague. In the early days of the indus-

the population of the country increased every trial revolution when factories were built,

year by about this figure, or by just a little people flocked into the towns, which grew up

less because, in those days, there was more round developing industries, and multiplied

emigration than immigration. In the nine there. In these towns the sanitary arrange-

years which elapsed between the beginning ments were very primitive compared to what

of the war and the end of I923, births ex- they are now. In those days, too, we under-

ceeded deaths by a smaller figure-by stood little about diet. Such diseases as

220,000. In I933, births exceeded deaths by rickets and scurvy were prevalent because

only 84,000. Thus the excess of births over little was known about the value of fresh or

deaths is growing smaller. There will almost green food, and nothing about the various

certainly still be an excess in I936, but it vitamins which have lately been discovered.

will probably stop about I940 or I94I.

But in the course of the last century great

We spoke above about birth- and death- improvements were made. Modem sanitation

rates, and these terms must be understood. was introduced. Food was imported from the

If we say that the birth-rate of a country for Dominions and from North and South

a given year is 25 and the death-rate 20, we America. Many changes for the better took

mean that for every thousand people in the place which have been well described in a

country there have been twenty-five births book by Mr. Talbot Griffith* which will repay

and twenty deaths. A thousand average per- study. The epidemic diseases above men-

sons in a country will consist of males and tioned, and others such as measles and scarlet

females in about equal numbers, and these fever, used to kill in ever year a large number

will be of all ages, from newly born children of young children, particularly if their consti-

to very old men and women. Eastern tution was weakened by rickets or other

countries, such as India and China, have very deficiency diseases which were the result of

high birth- and death-rates in the neighbour- inadequate or wrong diet. Cholera, typhus,

hood of forty per thousand, while Western smallpox, enteric fever and plague have prac-

European countries have lower rates. In tically disappeared in response to improved

I933 the birth-rate for England and Wales sanitary conditions, and the other epidemic

was I4.4 per thousand, and the death-rate diseases from which children still suffer to-

I2 3. It is obvious that if a country's birth- day have become much less serious because

and death-rates are the same, its population the children's resistance against them has

(apart from migration) is numerically stable; been strengthened by better feeding. What

if birth-rates are higher than death-rates, its was the result? Accurate figures about

population is increasing; if death-rates are birth- and death-rates are only available

higher than birth-rates, the population is since I874, but figures have been computed

decreasing.

for earlier years. Between the year i8oo and

I875 the birth-rate remained fairly stable at

Increase caused by lowered Death-rate

a high level between 3I and 38. But the

It is important to realize that the increase death-rate, which had begun to fall about

of our population which we have noted was I740, declined, by i8io, to about twenty--

caused, not by a rise in the birth-rate, but by four per thousand, and remained near this

a fall in the death-rate. During the last low level till I870, when it began to drop

century, people do not seem to have had

many more children than they had in previous centuries; but many fewer of them died.

* Population Problems of the Age of Malthus. Cam-
bridge University Press, I926.

THE FUTURE OF OUR POPULATION

207

further still. These movements can be seen Fall in Birth-rate

in Chart I. Each year the population in- But about the year I875, probably because

creased as a result of fewer people, particu- about that time people began to use birth-

larly young children, dying.

control methods more than before, the birth-

The death-rate cannot fall indefinitely till rate which, as we have seen, had previously

it reaches zero for the very good reason that remained more or less stationary, began to

everyone born must sometime die. It would fall. People began to have fewer children.

fall to zero and stay there only if everyone The families were getting smaller. This

became immortal and none died of accidents. movement is shown in Chart I. We are not

But the birth-rate could much more easily here concerned with why people began to have

fall to zero. It would, in fact, do this if every- fewer children, but merely with the fact that

one stopped having children. The present they did begin to have fewer. The chart

death-rate in this country may well be shows that this fall in the birth-rate has con-

lowered by further reducing the deaths of tinued till to-day. The birth-rate which, in

newly born children. But. progress in this I875, stood at about thirty-five per thousand,

direction, however desirable, is small com- has now fallen to about fifteen per thousand,

pared to what was possible sixty years ago. less than half the figure at which it stood

CHART I

COMPARISON OF BIRTH AND DEATH RATES IN ENGLAND ANDWALES BETWEEN 1700 & 1930

oj~~~~~~t

ini0O~O~~~C~~~

i

°-Q~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~%

105 NITO0~~~~~~~ T 22~~~~~

The higher the black line over the dotted, the greater the survival rate and, discounting emigration, the more
Obevhtthe population began to increase between 1740 and I750; that this increase was caused by a fall in the death-rate rather than by a rise in the birth-rate; that the birth-rate began to fall drastically about I88o and has halved in the last sixty years; that the death-rate in this period has fallen, but less quickly than the birth-rate, and that therefore the rate of increase of the population is falling. WVhereas, discounting emigration, the population was, between 1870 and I88o, increasing at the rate of 14 per I,ooo, between 1920 and 1930 it was increasing by 6 per I,ooo. If present trends in birth and death rates continue, the dotted and black lines will cross in I940 or I94I, as shown in Chart 2 which continues the story into the future.
The figures between I700 and I840 are taken from Brownlee (" History of the Birth and Death rates in England and Wales from 1570 to the Present Time," Public Health, June and July, 1916, Vol. XXIX, Nos. Io and II) and are estimates based on records of baptisms and burials. They are not accurate statements of the number of births and deaths, for during this time no trustworthy birth and death statistics existed. The figures from I840 are taken from the Registrar-General's Statistical Review of England and Wales for I932, and they express the average number of births and deaths per year for the ten-year periods ending at the date stated. Civil registration was introduced in 1837 and became compulsory in I874. Between these dates the figures probably under-estimate the actual births, though they do so less in the later periods than in the earlier. The figures after I876 are accurate.

208 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

sixty years ago. This roughly means that mothers to-day are having about half as many children as did their grandmothers and great-grandmothers. But it will be seen that the death-rate (the dotted line on the chart), which began to fall long before the birth-rate, has continued to fall to even lower levels than the birth-rate. This means that, despite the smaller families of to-day, more people are being born in each year than die in it. How much longer can this go on ?
Falling Birth- and Death-rates
We are now in a position to examine the question we asked ourselves at the beginning of this leaflet. The birth-rate in England to-day, despite its fall, is still higher than the death-rate and the population is still increasing. Yet the experts tell us that the birth-rate has fallen so low that the population cannot be maintained. How can this be? Superficially it is not obvious, but on closer examination it will be seen that it can easily occur in rather exceptional and unusual circumstances. These exist in England to-day. The population of this country is at present in a state of transition. It is emerging from a phase when many people were born, many died in infancy, and the survivors lived a short time, and it is entering another phase when fewer babies are born, fewer die and the survivors live much longer. A peculiar thing happens in the transitional period between these two phases, which can be clearly illustrated by an example. The schoolleaving age for most children in this country is fourteen and each year children leave school in a number which largely depends on how many babies were born fourteen years before, and entered school a few years after their birth. Now, suppose that the schoolleaving age were suddenly raised to sixteen. What would be the effect ? It would be that during the two years after this change, all boys and girls, who would be leaving school at fourteen, would get an extra two years school life, so that nobody would leave school. Now suppose that, during these two years, the number of children entering school dropped to half what it had been before; clearly the school population would then not

be maintaining itself. But nevertheless the
number of children entering school would be larger than that of boys and girls leaving it because of the way the latter had been arti-
ficially and temporarily lowered by the raising
of the school-leaving age. This is exactly what is happening with our
population at the present moment. The increasing age to which people are living is giving to a large number of middle-aged and
ageing people an extra lease of life in exactly the same way that the raising of the school-
leaving age in our imaginary example gave
to the boys and girls of fourteen an extra span of school life. The death-rate is being arti-
ficially lowered by this increased span of life. The birth-rate is falling, and indeed has
fallen well below replacement rate; yet the birth-rate remains higher than the temporarily lowered death-rate. (We may note
that, though our example is imaginary, it happens to contain an element of truth. The number of children entering school is getting
smaller, as is to be expected from the recent fall of the birth-rate. In a Government circular to local authorities, issued in I933, it was stated that in the next fifteen years the total number of children aged five and over in public elementary schools is likely tofallbyamillion.)
But there is one other factor which enters
into this interplay between births and
deaths which cannot be introduced into our example of children leaving school. It is that fewer children are dying in infancy. Every death in infancy or childhood sends the death-rate up and at the same time makes it impossible for the child or young person who has died to contribute to the next generation.
From the point of view of the growth of the
population, such deaths are dead losses to the nation, differing in this respect from the deaths of people who have passed reproductive age. A large proportion of deaths a hundred years ago were deaths in infancy and the death-rate was maintained at a high level by them. Nowadays many fewer children die in infancy. The birth-rate is not affected by
this, but the death-rate is lowered, so that, on average, the fewer people who are born live longer than they used to do, and more grow up to reproduce themselves.

THE FUTURE OF OUR POPULATION

-

209

Net Reproduction Rate
We have seen that, because more babies are born than people die in England to-day, it does not follow that the population is maintaining itself. How then are we to find
out when the population is maintaining itself ? Is there some other simple way by which, for any country, this important question can be answered? Clearly it would be convenient if this fact could be expressed in a
simple index number which would enable us
to compare the present capacity for growth of different countries. Such an index has been described by Dr. Kuczynski, and is called the net reproduction rate. Briefly this expresses the number of women who, in the next generation, will replace the women of
reproductive age in this generation. If the women of reproductive age in this generation who are mothers of children are having sufficient girl children to replace themselves
as well as those women of their age who are childless, the net reproduction rate is i or

unity, and the population is maintaining itself. If, allowing for deaths, they are not
having enough girl children to do this, the net reproduction rate falls below unity and
the population is not replacing itself; if they are having more girl babies than is necessary for this purpose, the net reproduction rate is above unity and the population will increase. Why, you may ask, should we concentrate in this way on girl children? Are not boy children equally important ? They are, of course, but remember that the sexes are fairly closely balanced at birth and it is the
women and not the men who bear the children. It is not claimed that the net reproduction rate is an infallible index of the power of growth of a population. The girl babies born to-day may refuse to marry when they grow up, or they may not want children if they are married. All that is claimed for the net reproduction rate is that it gives the best available index of what, if things go on more or less as they are doing at present, the

CHART II

30383

) _- __20 - __ _ ---cp-X'~~-~' -ItL~~iL2-I,~.~2'L-->l'lT 1-1
-I 2 - --- '2*3s- -I 13 -4 - -I I II1 1 1 1

-- ---- |lll-l2- .*90.4..ll2ll.l*38-

0-llT 11992255//2299 35-39

145-14911155-59

65-69

1
75-79

18.I5Is11-92 8911 1 -91 5-99

This shows average birth and death rates per i,ooo in successive five-year periods I925-9, 1935-9, etc., till the year 2000. The figures are calculated on the assumption that recent trends in birth and death rates will continue.
The death-rate rises like this because, as the birth-rate gets lower, fewer babies would be born and the average age of the community would rise; and the more old people there are, the more deaths. Note that the figures on which the chart is based represent forecasts made upon certain reasonable assumptions; they are not to be taken as accurate prophecies.
Based on figures published in Special Memorandum No. 40 of the London and Cambridge Economic Society,
by Enid Charles.

210 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

future size of a population will be. It gives

TABLE I

a much better index than does a mere com-
parison of births and deaths which, as we
have seen, is very misleading. The method by which the net reproduction
rate is calculated, though much simpler for
the expert than other methods which have been devised, is too complicated to describe here. Particulars will be found in Dr. Enid Charles' book The Twilight of Parenthood
(I934, Watts & Co., 7s. 6d.), which is recom-
mended to persons who wish to know more of this subject.
Let us now examine the net reproduction
rates of some of the civilized countries of the
world, bearing in mind that, if it stands at unity, a country's population is exactly reproducing itself, that if the rate is less than

Population of England and Wales between I935 and 2035 calculated on the assumption that recent trends in birth- and death-rates

will continue in the future.

Year. Thousands. Year.

Thousands.

I935 ... 40,563 I985 ... 26,o87

I940 ... 40,655

I990 ... 23,258

I945 ... 40,392

I995 ... 20,440

I950 ... 39,766 2000 ... 17,685

I955 ... 38,777 2005 ... I5,058

I960 ... 37,44I

20I0 ... I2,268

I965 ... 35,799
I970 ... 33,787
I975 ... 3I,452
I980 ... 28)857

20I5 ... I0,456 2020 ... 8,563
2025 ... 6,940
2030 ... 5,567 2035 ... 4,426

unity, it will, in all probability, diminish, and Future of our Population

that if it is above unity, the numbers will increase.

A calculation of the future number of people in England and Wales is shown in

Net Reproduction Rates, I933

Table I, for the years I935 to 2035, and future trends in birth- and death-rates during

Denmark ... ... ... o*9I

these years are shown in Chart II. The

France ... ... ... o * 8z figures have been worked out on the assump-

Germany ... ... ... 0o70

tion that recent trends offertility and mortality

Sweden ... ... ... 73

will be continued into the future. It is calcu-

Austria ... ... ... o067
Bulgaria ... ... ...I3

lated that our population will reach a maximum of nearly 4I millions in I940; it will

Finland ... ... ... o g
Hungary ... ... ... o*9I

then begin to diminish and the decline will gain momentum as the years go by. By the

Australia (I932-3) ... ... O*98 year I975 (40 years hence) it will have

New Zealand ... ... o098 decreased to 3I millions (to the nearest

million); by the year 2000 (sixty-five years

The net reproduction rate for England and hence) to i8 millions, and by 2035 (a hundred

Wales is not exactly known because, when years hence) to 41 millions. The change in

births are registered in this country, no birth- and death-rates which would be

question is asked about the age of the responsible for these figures are shown in

mother; it can, however, be estimated Chart II. By this time, moreover, the age

fairly accurately. Dr. Enid Charles has cal- distribution of the population would be very

culated that, in I933, the figure was 0-734. different from what it is now. To-day there

This means that, according to fertility and are, for every hundred persons in the com-

mortality rates prevailing in that year, one munity, twenty-three persons below the age

thousand women of reproductive age were of fifteen and twelve above the age of sixty.

producing only 734 girl children who would In I975, if present trends continue, there

grow up to replace them in the next genera- would be, for every hundred persons, seven

tion. below the age of fifteen, and thirty above the

age of sixty. The number of young people

* Kuczynski: " The Decrease of Fertility," Econo- * From London and Cambridge Economic Society's

mica, May 1935.

Memorandum No. 40, by Enid Charles.

THE FUTURE OF OUR POPULATION

2II

will be much less than it is at present, and
that of old people much greater. This change follows obviously and immediately from the fact that, as the birth-rate falls,
fewer babies are being born, and as the death-
rate falls, more people live to old age.
These, it should be remembered, are not
prophecies; they are estimates based upon the assumption that present trends in birthand death-rates will continue. They may not
continue. People may begin to have more children, in which case the population may
diminish less quickly or may not even diminish at all. On the other hand, people may have fewer children than is estimated
on the chart, in which case the population
would diminish more rapidly than is shown.
It is by no means impossible that, in the near future at any rate, people will have
fewer children than has been here estimated.
A perfect birth-control method may be discovered which may abolish the unwanted child; and another big war or slump may occur which may influence the majority of
people not to want children. But the assumption that recent trends will be continued into the future is a reasonable one,
though it is improbable that it will be fulfilled exactly. It is more likely to be fulfilled in the near than the distant future.
The further ahead we travel into the future, the more likely it becomes that new trends will set in which will falsify the predictions based on past trends. Few people to-day think that fertility will continue to decline at its present rate until I985; many would therefore think that the figures in Table I and Chart II are unduly alarmist for the remote future. But even if the fall in fertility were to be arrested before I985, the position would still give cause for disquiet. Dr. Charles has also shown in her estimates that if there were no further decline in fertility
after I933, our population would nevertheless begin to fall in the near future. It would reach a maximum of just under 4I millions in 1943 and fall to just under 20 mnlions (half its present size) in a hundred years. But you can verify how true these estimates prove for the next few years, and to enable you to do this, we give, in Table II, the birth-

and death-rates for the next ten years together with the total population of the
country, as calculated from the assumption that present trends will continue. The birth-
and death-rates for the country are published in every quarter of the year, and in I94I
there will be a census. Compare the figures in Table II with these figures as they are published. You will be able to form an
opinion for yourselves on how much the trends of the last few years are being continued.

TABLE II.

Future Birth-rates, Death-rates and Population of England and Wales in the next ten years, calculated on the assumption that recent trends in these rates will be continued into the future.

Per Thousand.

Birth-rate I935

Death-rate. Population in Thousands.
40,563

I936
I937 I2 4I

I2 e 07

40,598 40,625

I938 40,644

I939 40,654
I940 40,655

I94I
I942 I0 72

ii88

40,6I9
40,575

I943 40,523 I944 40,462

I945 .9-2I I2 33

40,392

While many people to-day think that England is somewhat over-populated and
would be glad to see fewer people in it, they would almost certainly become alarmed if, so to speak, the decline in the population were to get out of hand and to plunge below the lowest desirable level. It is difficult to
see how Western powers could maintain
their present state of civilization if present trends continue to the year 2000. Let us then not be too complacent. The birth-rate will probably exceed the death-rate by progressively smaller figures in the next four or five years, and the population will still increase a little; but this event must not be allowed to lure us into a false sense of

2I2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

security. Let us recognize clearly what lies In the preparation of this article I am

before us in the decade I940-I950 and in the indebted for valuable suggestions to Prof.

years after I950, if the birth-rate continues A. M. Carr-Saunders, Dr. Enid Charles and

to fall.

Mr. David Glass.

Publishers: DAVID NUTT, London - G. E. STECHERT & Co., New York - NICOLA ZANICHELLI, Bologna - FELIX ALCAN, Paris

AKADEMISCHE VERLAGSGESELLSCHAFT m. b. H., Leipzig - FRIEDRICH KILIAN'S NACHFOLGER, Budapest

GEORG & CO., Gfntve - RUIZ HERMANOS, Madrid - THE MARUZEN COMPANY, Tokyo.

1966

80th Year

InJTRNATIONAL REVIEW OF SINTIFI 8YNTi

X; PubGish~~~~~~~~evecorymoth (each tmmber cosdaining zoo to 120 p4gVS)

"SC IE N_*"_ . _^ s _, '^ ~~~~E~di~to~rsG:enP.eBr0 alASZeZcIr.t0a.ry PBaZo-lMoB-oPn.dEI > Q

18 TE ONLY REVIW the contributors to which are really international.

IS T1E ONLY REVIEW that has a really world-wide circulation.

IS THE ONLY REVIW of scientific synthesis and unification that deals with the fundamental questions of all sciences: mathematics, astronomy,
geology, physics, chemistry, biology, psychology, ethnology, linguistics; history of science; philosophy of science.

IS

THE ONLY REVIEsW ofte various sciences

that by means of enquiries among the most eminent scientists and authors of all ; On the most fundaneta astronmical and physi questions ofcurrent iterest ;

countries (On the philosophical principles On She contrsbution that the different coun-

tries have given to the development of varous branches of hnowledge; On the more important biological qustions, etc., etc.), studies all the main

problems discussed in intellectual circles all over the world, and represents at the same time the first attempt at an international organization

of philosophical and scientific progress.

1I THE ONLY REVIEW that among its contributors can boast of the most illustrious men of science in the whole world.

The articles are published in the lan of their authos, and every number has a lemt

the Fronh ranlatin of all tOhe

tat ar not French. The r i s om tel aooeuble to thm who know onlFr (Wrt for a free copy to the General Secretary of

Scientia, Milan, sending 16 cns in stamps ofyour country, nrely to cor kng and postage).

SUBSCRIPTION: 60 Shlibg

Sutantial reloa are panted to thos who take up more than one ye'as

o.

For information apply to "SCIENTIA" Via A. De Togni, 12 - iao 6 (Itly)

PARADISE FOUND
WHERE THE SEX PROBLEM HAS BEEN SOLVED By C. WICKSTEED ARMSTRONG, F.R.G.S.
(Fellow of the Eugenics Society)
This book, written in the form of a romance, is really a plea for practical schemes of Race Betterment, in a South American setting. The most important chapter is that entitled " The Seminal Gardens," where, without resorting to such unsavoury methods as eutelegenesis, the " Eugenians " are able to bring about very rapid racial improvement. These Gardens solve, too, the problem of unnatural continence for the young, that of dysgenic and immoral prostitution and that of the falling birth-rate. There are also " Euthanasian Gardens," and other social problems, besides those of Sex and of Race, are boldly tackled.
MR. HAVELOCK ELLIS says: "There are numerous chapters I read with much sympathy and agreement." The Eugenics Review says: . their ideas are certainly interesting and there can be little doubt that if they were universally adopted, human beings would be a good deal happier than they are. should be read with pleasure and pondered with profit by all eugenists." Public Opinion says: ... those concerned with modern eugenics will find much that is interesting and provocative. The Continental Daily Mail says: ... However unconventional the solutions proposed ... to eugenistic and other present-day problems-principally those of sex-set by the incompatibility of human nature with modern environment, social conventions and laws, they are nevertheless extremely interesting." The Glasgow Sunday Post says: " A remarkable fantasy, making wonderfully real a Utopia secreted in the Brazilian forest."
London: JOHN BALE SONS & DANIELSSON, 83/91 Great Titchfield St., W.1 Price 5s. net

l

