THE SOCIETY'S COMING OF AGE
The Growth of the Eugenic Movement By MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN, D.Sc.
Forming, with considerable omissions, the Galton Lecture for 1929.

SIR FRANCIS GALTON, whom we years, I should like to pay a warm tribute

honour to-night as the great pioneer in of thanks. My point for the moment is,

the eugenic campaign of the last cen- however, that a comparison between the

tury, had been in bad health for a few years attic of I9II and our present comparatively

before his death, which occurred in January, luxurious offices in Grosvenor Gardens,

91I. He was then our Hon. President, gives a fair measure of the growth of the

and in spite of his eighty-eight years and importance of the Sodiety in all other

his failing strength, he continued to take an respects; a growth which has been the result

interest in our proceedings until the end. of the continuous exertions of many of its

At about that time, Mr. Crackanthorpe, members, as well as of the receipt of large

then our President, expressed a wish to anonymous donations from two or three keen

resign that office. The result was that I, advocates of eugenic progress.

who was then not even a member of this The most remarkable change which has

Society, to my great surprise received an taken place in regard to eugenics during

invitation to succeed Mr. Crackanthorpe in these years has undoubtedly been a great

the presidency at the next succeeding an- alteration in public opinion, a change diffi-

nual meeting. This was almost exactly cult to demonstrate by reference to dry

eighteen years ago, and this invitation I facts. Soon after I accepted the invitation

accepted with much searching of heart and, to become your president, I met a friend,

I believe I may truthfully say, only out of a a distinguished fellow of the Royal Society,

compelling sense of duty.

and the look of mingled surprise and pity

Having but recently resigned the presi- which flashed across his face when I told

dency, it seems appropriate that I should him what I had undertaken to do has left an

begin this address by saying a few words indelible impression on my mind. I am

about what has taken place in the field of sure that Sir Bernard Mallet has had no

eugenics during my seventeen and a half such telling experience. Twenty years ago

years' tenure of office. As to the Society great ignorance in regard to eugenics was

itself, in igii our offices, as depicted in my almost universal. Our office attendant re-

memory, were situated in an attic in a not ported one day that someone had asked him

too respectable London street. There was whether eugenics was not merely another

to be found our indefatigable Hon. Secre- name for free love; whilst amongst the more

tary, Mrs. Neville-Rolfe, who had, I believe, instructed, our Society was often held to

played a leading part in the formation of be concerned with little more than sex-

the Society in I908. There she toiled all hygiene and the cure of certain diseases. At

day long, sometimes with one not too highly the International Eugenic Congress held in

paid assistant, and sometimes with none at London in I912, the subjects which elicited

all. Before long she had collected round marked signs of interest or approval were

her a group of energetic voluntary workers, generally such as lie outside our proper field

and thus set an example which has been fol- of study; temperance reform and the treat-

lowed ever since to our great advantage. ment of tuberculosis, for example. At that

To all these volunteers, in all these eighteen time the mention of eugenics in society was

9

I0

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

often greeted with nothing but a silent ence between brothers who are not twins, as

smile, in circumstances when now it would compared with the difference between

perhaps more often evoke direct opposition. ' identical ' twins, gives a fair measure of

That our path is not yet quite straight is the effects of heredity; whilst admitting at

hardly a subject for regret, because no re- the same time that the contrast between a

former can hope to be successful until he has man educated in a highly cultured home and

passed through the fire of keen opposition. his twin brother who had lived all his life

That we are winning, though winning amongst naked savages-if such a pair

slowly, is perhaps best proved by the num- could be found-would give an equally fair

ber of books now being published in all lan- measure of the possible effects of environ-

guages on this subject, some very wise and ment. We shall best win over our oppo-

some certainly very foolish.

nents to our side by a frank statement of our

As to the practical proposals put forward belief in the great effects, both good and

by eugenists, they have not changed to any bad, of human surroundings; for it is only

marked extent during the period under after such an acknowledgment that we can

review. This is not surprising, for our fairly advocate an unprejudiced study of the

policy is for the most part based on the effects of heredity.

broad principle that like tends to produce Natural inheritance, on the one hand, and

like, a principle which has been known from the transmission of human characteristics

time immemorial.' No doubt a vast amount from generation to generation by the agency

of scientific work has been done in recent of environment on the other, are, of course,

years in all branches of science; but on the radically different processes. This differ-

whole the result has been and will, I believe, ence may be illustrated by the fact that our

continue to be, to strengthen rather than to civilisation, in so far as it has come to us

change the eugenic superstructure,built on from previous generations as the result of

this scientific foundation. When I joined tradition and social contact, might conceiv-

our Society, eugenists were advocating most ably be almost wiped out in the course

of the practical proposals which find favour of a century, whereas any alteration in

with us now-a-days.

the inborn predispositions of a race can only

take place but far more slowly. Neverthe-

METHODS OF PROPAGANDA

less the results of these two modes of the

As to certain minor changes which have taken place in our methods of advocacy, I am inclined to rejoice that there is no longer
such a constant harping on the relative importance of our old friends, nature and nur-
ture, this being a comparison impossible to define with scientific accuracy. No doubt the emphasis on this contrast was very useful during the opening of our campaign, and no doubt in scientific researches the effects of heredity and environment should always be kept as distinct as possible. Indeed, we must continue to point out that the differ-

transmission of human qualities are often so much alike as to be indistinguishable, with the result that our social policy ought often to be the same whether we are looking to nature or to nurture. To take a single example, Dr. Goring, whose works now attract far too little attention, stated that the son of a criminal is ten times more likely to become a criminal than is the son of honest parents. To what extent this transmitted criminality is separately correlated either with natural inheritance or with bad home surroundings is a problem which cannot now be solved. Nevertheless this crude

1 By this principle is here meant that if a large number of specimens are selected on account of an excess in any quality from a species living under

general correlation between the qualities of fathers and sons is in itself a fact of great importance; because it certainly gives some

natural conditions, their offspring will show, in the same quality, on the average an excess in the same direction as their parents, though not to the same

indication of the probable results to be obtained by lessening the fertility of criminals

extent.

in any one generation on the criminality of

THE SOCIETY'S COMING OF AGE

II

the next succeeding generation, and this Moreover, systems of family allowances,

without reference to any theories concerning provided that they are organized like in-

natural inheritance. We know for certain surance systems, the payments out being

that many good and bad qualities observed in proportionate to the individual subscrip-

parents are apt to appear again amongst tions, might also have been declared to be the

their children, though we can give no com- best financial method of promoting fertility.

plete explanation of this re-appearance; and These two points were, however, rightly not

on this fact can be based a strong argument included in the Outline, for in these respects

in favour of endeavouring to reverse the I was in a minority.

existing differential birth rate. If we can

get social reformers to acknowledge the benefits which could be derived from

RESEARCH AND REFORM

changes in the fertility of the different types Turning from practice to theory, it has

of human beings, without necessarily con- been suggested that eugenics should be

vincing them that their views in regard to divided into two sections, under the head-

the effects of environment are mistaken, we ings of research and practical reform; and

shall have gone more than half way towards the question has been raised as to which is

winning them over to our side. Here is a the more important. To this we may reply,

line of advance which has been too much as we did in regard to heredity and en-

neglected in the past. The publication of an outline of a prac-

vironment, that both are absolutely necessary if progress is to be made, and that to

tical Eugenic Policy by our Society consti- contrast their importance is generally a

tuted, in my opinion, a very notable step in waste of time. On the one hand, the advo-

advance in regard to our eugenic propa- cacy of eugenic reform, if founded on-a false

ganda. Having said this much, I should, scientific basis, might have disastrous however, like to add that I most certainly results. On the other hand, except for the

do not look upon this Outline as constitut- highly important effect of stimulating the

ing the articles of a eugenic faith, nor do I hold that all our members should be ex-

imagination, scientific research will only benefit mankind if it is followed up by the

pected to toe this line. Individual differ- practical application of the discoveries thus

ences should always be admitted and even made. The demand that we should seek

welcomed. All that is desirable is that there should be a pronouncement concerning

truth for truth's sake is generally made by those who wish to save themselves the

our aims sufficiently definite to act as a flag around which we can rally as an efficient fighting force and then all advance together in the same general direction. I trust that this Outline will always be kept up to date, but only by the adoption of well-considered changes, and also that opportunities will

trouble of seeking to ascertain what should be the ultimate aim of scientific research. The fate of science is no doubt to keep digging away more or less blindly into the mountain of ignorance, and then quite unexpectedly to strike on some rich vein of knowledge. The wise man of science will,

constantly be taken for making it widely known. Having said so much, perhaps I

however, first learn to recognize the golden treasure when it is seen, and then dig by

may state that, whilst fully admitting that birth control is to be advocated in certain circumstances, as set forth in the present Outline, I should have liked also to have seen included an emphatic assertion as to the incalculable harm that has been done by the comparative decrease in the fertility of the best types since the middle of the nineteenth century, however brought about.

preference in those strata where it is most likely to be found. Nevertheless, looking to our own Society only, I suggest that we should devote our energies almost exclusively to the propaganda side of the question; because I believe that the ways of science will always prove to be so far more pleasant than any attempt to force unpalat-
able truths on an unwilling public that, if

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

both are admitted, the propaganda side of pure science, though it would be of doubtful

our work will not survive in the struggle for direct value to eugenics, the effect of X-rays

existence within the Society; just as, accord- on the range of distribution of qualities in

ing to Gresham's Law, light money, being the next succeeding generation of animals

generally preferred by purchasers in times or plants should be studied, the object being

gone by, always tended to drive heavier coin to ascertain if small mutations are promoted

out of circulation; if I may, for this pur- by this process in the same way as are large

pose only, compare science to an inferior ones. The heredity of stupidity and also as

currency.

far as possible of temperamental inferiority,

together with the relationship between the

SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH

I.Q. and the size of the family in the various social strata, are also subjects greatly need-

Nevertheless, I should like here both to ing further inquiry. Turning to reforms of

mention a few of the less obvious lines of greater magnitude, the whole system of

research which seem to me at the present registration in this country ought to be

time to be especially desirable in order to completely remodelled, for the sake both of

strengthen our eugenic foundations, and to efficiency and of economy. The merits of

express the hope that they will be under- our fellow citizens are never intentionally

taken at some university or other institu- hidden, and if the registration records in-

tion. First of all, may I make a strong cluded as far as possible all human defects,

plea for a psychological and physical exami- the tracing of pedigrees of scientific value

nation of a large number of children, all would thus be greatly facilitated. Most

of the same age, of women who have been important of all would be the establishment

actually certified as being mentally defec- of some system of human stocktaking, such

tive? This would give us one of those as that so ably advocated a year ago to-day

crude correlations which, I have suggested, by Dr. Bond.

might often be of great value in the advo- One of the many ways in which Sir Fran-

cacy of practical social reforms; for, any- cis Galton showed his genius was by his

how, we should thus learn what kind of chil- selection of the study of twins as a method

dren would be prevented from entering the of research in human heredity, a field of

world in the immediate future by the pre- inquiry by no means yet exhausted. I

vention of parenthood among the types of should especially like to see this line of

defectives now most often certified. We research pursued in the following manner.

could not, it is true, thus at once disentangle By means of all the best-known psycho-

the effects of heredity and environment, logical, temperamental, scholastic, and

which should no doubt be our aim, espe- medical tests, a considerable number of

cially in the scientific study of causation. twins should be examined, all of them being

The simplicity and intelligibility of these what are known as ' identical ' twins; that

crude correlations, as I have called them, is to say twins of the same sex and very

nevertheless make them facts of great prac- much alike in physical features. Now, it is

tical value. Another investigation much generally held that the similarity between

needed is a systematic inquiry into the such twins is due to a similarity between the

various methods of sterilization, including hereditary ingredients, call them what youl

the use of X-rays and also of injections, if like, of the germs from which the two indi-

this latter method can be made really viduals originated. May we not, therefore,

effective. The whole question of human assume that those tests in which the twins

sterility is indeed in great need of further showed the greatest degree of similarity

investigation; for we all know of cases when would also be those in which heredity

a child was desired but when for some unex- counted for most? A number of sibs not

plained reason none appeared. It may here twins should also be examined in the same

also be noted that, from the point of view of way for the purposes of control; that is, in

THE SOCIETY'S COMING OF AGE

'3

order to get a scale by means of which the ber the occasion when I say that, as the

similarity shown in the different tests could result of the exertions of our Hon. Secre-

be compared. The whole scheme would need tary, the Congress was, in fact, a brilliant

careful consideration in advance, but it success. And this was the first of a series

ought to be possible in this way to form of events which have made me inclined to

some estimate of the relative value of say that, having adopted a moderate policy,

various tests for eugenic purposes.

our cry should be boldness and ever bold-

ness.

RISKS MUST BE TAKEN

The advocacy of boldness implies the necessity for facing danger, and certainly in

Returning to questions of practical policy our eugenic campaign we shall never be

there are certain conclusions which, though free from doubts and difficulties. It has

perhaps not now widely held, have, during often been said that in science every state-

recent years, become more and more firmly ment should be actually proved before it is

impressed on my mind. Some of these are enunciated, whereas it would be wiser to re-

of minor importance; as, for instance, the gard no scientific statement whatever as

fact that the removal of children from bad being quite beyond the reach of criticism. A

homes must, for several reasons, inevitably short while ago Newton's Laws of Motion

result in an increase in the numbers issuing were held to be incontrovertible truths,

from such homes ;' this being a considera- whereas it has now been shown by Einstein

tion at present altogether neglected by that they are not the last words of science

philanthropists. I am to-night, however, on these subjects. Mathematicians were,

only concerned with certain broad under- however, fully justified in acting as if these

lying principles which should guide our laws represented the truth, because they

eugenic footsteps. Our aims should, of were the nearest approach to the truth then

course, always be moderate and reasonable, available. Every scientific theory should

but when once they have been definitely always be regarded as a provisional hypo-

selected with great care, they should be pur- thesis; and yet these theories must often be sued without any hesitation whatever. accepted as the only guides we have for pracThere may possibly be an element of contra- tical purposes. Even if we only rely upon

diction in this advice, or rather it mav point the best established scientific conclusions,

to the fact that, in all social questions, com- some risk is always accepted by so doing,

promise is always necessary to some extent. and the practical question is as to the degree

As to moderation, that I have always advo- of risk that we are justified in facing.

cated, whereas my belief in the merits of Looking at the matter definitely from the

boldness has only been slowly acquired. point of view of the scientific investigator,

When attending my very first committee he should, on nearly all occasions, try to

meeting as your prospective, but not your consider what theory will best fit the facts

actual, president, a proposal was suddenly before him, provided he is always ready to

sprung upon me that an International Con- abandon his suggestions in the face of new gress of Eugenics should be held in the fol- facts. The man who cannot school his mind

lowing year in London. My heart went thus to act had better keep clear of scientific right down into my boots, for I anticipated speculation altogether. If I may go near

a complete failure, with myself as the figure- home for an illustration of what I mean, my

head of the sinking ship. I had not the father thought out his theory to account for

courage, however, to show my cowardice at the growth of coral reefs before he had ever

the very beginning of my career, and I gave seen a coral island, though he did not pub-

an inwardly trembling consent. I am sure lish his views until he had collected a great I shall be in agreement with all who remem- mass of material. The framing of that

' For the reasons for this conclusion, see mv Eugenic Reform, p. 193 n.

theory not only made him observe these reefs with greater insight when he did see

I4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

them, but it has stimulated geological thought and research for nearly a century. Even if it will have to be abandoned altogether in time, which I may say seems to me highly improbable, its publication will have done more good than harm.' On the other hand my father certainly made an undeniable blunder concerning the Parallel Roads of Glen Roy; but when he " frankly admitted his own explanation to have been erroneous," his mistake was soon forgotten.' In fact the framing of an erroneous theory seems often to have been a necessary step in the path of progress, whilst no doubt the exposure of the error was equally necessary for a further advance.
NATURE AS A GUIDE
As to the necessity for taking risks, we may perhaps learn something by considering whether nature herself has not often been very rash in her procedure. Certainly in the evolutionary process innumerable species have advanced along paths which led only to entire extermination. But some of the fittest types always did survive, and with that result nature seems to have been quite satisfied. In considering the risks run during this forward march, I should like you to try to imagine, if it is not too fanciful, what would have happened, when the earth was only inhabited by certain primitive jelly-like organisms, if Dame Nature had applied for advice to some learned society situated in some other planet. If the inhabitants of that other planet had by that time risen to the same level of civilization as that to which we have now attained, might not the reply have been somewhat as follows? " We are still disputing," Dame Nature would have been told, "and often disputing very keenly as to the methods by which the evolution of living organisms has been brought about. The broad fact of the descent of man is no longer in doubt, but we have so far failed to reach
I See The Coral Reef Problem, W. M. Davis, American Geog. Soc., 1928.
'Darwin as Geologist, Geikie, Cambridge Press,
1909, p. 83.

unanimous conclusions as to the part which
has been played in the past by natural selection. The idea of making practical use of the theory of selection must, therefore, be abandoned until we have completed those exhaustive experiments by which alone absolute certainty can be reached." Now, if Dame Nature, greatly impressed by the cogency of this reasoning, had up till now persistently followed the advice she then received, what would have been the course of events on earth? I, myself, have no doubt that instead of sitting round this comfortable table, we should now all of us be, if I may so put it, merely jelly-like kind of creatures, living monotonous and unthinking lives on some otherwise unoccupied mud bank. It is true that those scientists who look askance at the deliberate application of selection to man do not hesitate to advocate selective breeding in the case of domestic animals; but how anyone can suppose that what is folly in the one case can be wisdom in the other has not been made clear to me. If Dame Nature seems often to have been playing a risky game, and at times to have lost heavily, yet she has always won in the long run; and we ought not to be afraid to follow her bold example in some measure.
If we are looking for guidance to nature,
we may also note that she certainly does not
neglect nurture; for she teaches the animals and plants under her care to strive to im-
prove their surroundings as much as they can; different kinds of ants, to take a not-
able example, both executing great feats in
architecture and also keeping slaves and
domestic animals. Each organism seems to
have been produced so as to fit into its own particular niche in the society of organic life; and our ideal should also be that everv
man should be found doing the work he is
best fitted to perform. All our citizens should only be employed in healthy, useful, and honourable employments, those doing
the best work being the best paid. Nature
also seems to make it a rule only to bring to
maturity, and arrange marriages for such a number of organisms as can make a living
in the same way as their parents, all the rest being ruthlessly exterminated. To those

THE SOCIETY'S COMING OF AGE

15

who dread over-population, nature seems to individual in review. No doubt many keen

reply:

eugenists have at times advocated schemes

"But war and pestilence, disease and dearth Sweep the superfluous myriads from the earth."'

for the promotion of the fertility of small selected groups of highly intellectual persons, and beneficial effects lasting for a few generations certainly might thus be pro-

Here we must, however, abandon nature as a guide, and we must seek to obtain the
advantages resulting from this struggle for existence in some less wasteful and cruel
way. According to a recent estimate, twenty million babies are now born annually inevitably destined only to live short and useless lives, and this number should be diminished as far as possible. Such a reduction in the infantile death rate would, no doubt, lessen the efficacy of natural selection, and here eugenics demands the replacement of nature's methods by some artificial method of selection. Our aim should be not only to lessen the fertility of all inefficient citizens as far as is practicable, but also that all those doing work which is really beneficial to mankind should have families fully large enough to fill their places when they die and somewhat larger than the families of those employed in such callings

duced. The formation of anything like a separate eugenic caste appears to me, however, to be quite impracticable; though, of course, the future may perhaps prove that here I am in error. As to the other end of the intellectual scale, one of the first aims of our Society was the reduction of the fertility of mental defectives, and that was certainly a wise choice. The attention of the public could have been directed to no other eugenic reform with equal ease, or with equal educative effects. In my opinion, however, recent investigations indicate that, whatever might be the beneficial effects of reform in this direction, it could not be relied on as a method of promoting steady and continuous progress in the innate intellectual qualities of the nation as a whole. If that be our object, we must place complete trust neither in the formation of eugenic castes nor in the elimination of mental defect.

as ought to be less practised or altogether

abolished. In these ways not only would SKILLED AND UNSKILLED LABOUR

the appearance in future generations of good qualities in infinite variety be promoted, but the evils of over-population might be avoided. In order thus to make eugenic principles widely applicable, many difficult problems will have to be solved. Though these difficulties will be largely of a social character, yet we shall often have to seek guidance from science, and the advice then received should always be treated with the greatest respect, except when we are told to take no risks.
These considerations lead us on to one other point of great practical importance which I wish to emphasize to-night, and that is that we ought to study the whole mass of the people when framing our eugenic policy; just as nature, by enforcing a continuous struggle for existence, passes every single

If we pass on to study our population from this large point of view, it will be found convenient to divide it, for statistical purposes, into classes according to the incomes received, a proceeding only to be condemned if an unfair use is made of this classification. When the nation is thus divided in tabular form, it can at once be seen that the millionaires are so few in numbers that they could not produce any racial effects on future generations worth considering. Indeed, nearly the same can be said of those possessing £io,ooo a year or over; for they amount to only about one in four thousand of our total population; and are comparable, as regards numerical frequency, to Galton's eminent persons. Paupers no doubt form an important group, because the numbers included are great; but if we want to study

Erasmus Darwin. Temple of Nature, Canto IV, 370.

what is taking place in the bulk of the nation, it is such a contrast as that between

i6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

unskilled labourers, on the one hand, and all groups than between them and the groups at

skilled workers on the other, that we must the two ends of his series. In fact, if a

mainly hold in view, because of the great differential rate of multiplication is a danger

numbers involved.

signal to the nation, whether we are looking

to inborn qualities or to culture, this danger

DIFFERENTIAL BIRTH RATE

signal seems to become most clearly visible when studying the great central masses of

It is in connection with the differential the population.

rate of multiplication of the different sec- If we seek for the causes of the lessening

tions of the population that the study of the of the differences in rate of multiplication at

central groups is of great importance. Both the two ends of the series, we find that

fact and theory point to the conclusion that several factors have been at work. A partial

the ill-paid are on the average somewhat explanation is to be found in the fact that

inferior in hereditary qualities to the well- certain classes of the grossly inferior, not

paid; and if it should be proved, as is very only have a high death rate, but may also

likely, that the difference is now small, this find the road to marriage beset with diffi-

would only indicate that the deterioration of culties, their rate of multiplication being

the nation consequent on the more rapid reduced in both ways. As to the highest

multiplication of these slightly inferior cultural groups, we might expect, not only

types is at the present time correspondingly that their social ambition would be to some

slow, though none the less sure. It is, more- extent held in check by their intellect, but over, important to note not only that the also that those who have reached the top of ill-paid must of necessity also be somewhat their profession would see little chance of inferior on the whole in general culture, climbing any higher. Social ambition being

because of their inferior opportunities; but a main cause of family limitation, it would

that this inferiority must to some extent be not be surprising, therefore, to find that

transmitted to future generations by tradi- families decline less rapidly in numbers, or

tion and social contact. In regard to this even begin to increase, when looking to tllose

transmission of culture, certain investiga- nearer and nearer to the top of the cultural

tions recently made by Dr. T. H. Steven- ladder. The recent investigations of Hun-

son are of interest. He divided the male tington and Whitney, which are set forth

population into five groups according to the in their interesting book, The Builders of

occupations given in the census of I9II ; and America, in the opinion of these authors,

in selecting the occupations to be included definitely confirm this conclusion. This is

in each group, he considered culture rather a work which I cannot refrain from here

than wealth. He then ascertained the quoting in a somewhat different connection.

natality and the mortality of each of these There we learn (p. 26) that it would require

groups, the differences between these an increase of 48,000 offspring of unskilled

figures giving some indication of the relative labourers in order to produce one single

rates of multiplication of these classes. additional entry in the American Who's

These estimates are certainly not very TWho; whilst the same result would be.

reliable, as Dr. Stevenson has pointed out; obtained by an increase of only i,6oo in the

but they are the best available. These offspring of skilled labourers. The contrast

results indicate that, taken all together, the would indeed be far more remarkable if we

higher cultural groups show a lower rate of were to look to the professional classes as

multiplication ihan do the lower groups; this compared with unskilled labour; but in that

being analogous to what has been so often case the difference in social status would do

found when comparing the richer with the far more to account for the difference in suc-

poorer strata. To say the least, this cess as thus measured. Here certainly we

differentiation is, however, far more clearly have a convincing proof that the child of the

noticeable between his three great central unskilled labourer is at a definite disadvan-

THE SOCIETY'S COMING OF AGE

tage for all his life as compared with the bers on the two sides of the central post.

child of the skilled artizan, whether that Now it is this annual crossing of the central

disadvantage be due to inferior inborn quali- line on balance by large numbers of the

ties or to inferior early opportunities.

worse paid to join the better paid ranks

In short when trying to ascertain the which I wish you to bear in mind for a few

effects on the future welfare of our country moments; for before proceeding to discuss

likely to result from the differences in the the actual numbers involved, it is necessary

rate of multiplication of the various classes to prevent any possible misconception on one

of the community, taking the difference in or two points.

their value to the nation into account, we When first visualizing the fact that large

see that it would be folly only to study the numbers of persons are constantly passing

two extreme ends of the series.

into the better paid half of the community,

we may be tempted to exclaim what a blessed

TRANSFERS BETWEEN CLASSES

state of things is this ! This would, however, indicate a total misconception of the

When dealing with eugenic problems in situation. We have imagined a central post

this broad way we soon find that the num- having been erected at the beginning of a

bers which we have to consider are huge. To year, a post which might now be marked

show how huge they are, may I ask you to ,52S. a week. At the end of the year this

visualize as well as you can an imaginary central post might, however, come to be

cinematograph picture which I am about to marked 53s. a week, and this would no

describe. You are to see in imagination at doubt indicate a desirable change for the

the beginning of any year the whole popula- better in the standard of living. On the

tion of the United Kingdom drawn up in a other hand, it might come to be marked

single line as on parade, the men being only 5Is. a week, which would indicate a

arranged in accordance with their earnings corresponding change for the worse. And,

or wages, best paid on the right, worse paid whatever changes were to take place in

on the left. You then see the central man median wages, the number of persons cross-

picked out, and a post erected where he ing the line in both directions might be

stood, with his wages marked on it. This exactly the same, and consequently no such

year the figure would be about 52s. a week, movements of persons on our imaginary

so I am told on good authority. Although parade would give us any indication what-

the parade is then seen to break up, yet the ever as to the changes in economic pros-

worse paid men continue to stand on the left perity which might be taking place. The

side of the post, and the better paid on its point on which our attention should be con-

right. As time goes on, the worse paid on centrated is as to both the magnitude of and

the left will be seen gradually to increase in the direction in which the stream is flowing;

numbers as compared with the better paid that is to say whether the increase is propor-

ranks, this being the result of their higher tionately greater in the families best en-

birth rate. At the beginning of the next dowed by nature or art, or in those worst

succeeding year, the parade being again re- endowed in these two respects.

formed in the same manner, many persons It should perhaps here be noted that we

will then be seen to pass in front of the must imagine all women and children being

central post in both directions, because of the paraded with the breadwinner of the family,

rise or the fall in their wages. Those mov- be he husband or father. Now if any

ing from amongst the worse paid, who have resentment should be felt in any quarter at

been increasing more rapidly in numbers, to the idea of women being always paraded

join the better paid half must, however, be with their menfolk, may I say in palliation

far greater in numbers than those moving in of my offence that I have elsewhere declared

the opposite direction, this being the neces- my belief that the duties necessarily per-

sary result of the equalization of the num- formed by women are amongst the most

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

noble of all human duties, and that eugenic society, efforts which may for some time to

progress will in the long run depend more come result in a continuation of the recent

on women than on men. My point here is, improvement in social conditions. But this

however, that the young son, not yet at increase in culture, due to improved sur-

work, of a man drawing less than the roundings, would have been much greater

median wage, will be seen standing with had it not been for the constant drag down-

his father on the left side of the post; but wards resulting from this increase in the

that if he gets to work during the year, and numbers of-the less cultured. In any case,

begins by drawing more than the median in the long run any steady deterioration in

wage, at its close he will be seen to pass in inborn qualities would prove to be the pre-

front of the central post. In fact the pro- vailing force, and our present increase of

motion of sons to a financial position above culture may be but a temporary and delusive

that of their fathers would account for a prelude to racial decay.

considerable proportion of those annually Before quoting any figures, it should be

crossing the line.

stated that any estimate that can now be

At this point the statistician may perhaps made is liable to a considerable amount of

point out that by selecting the centre of our error, and that the only available safeguard

imaginary line as the point where the post is to select methods of calculation which will

is to be erected, we have chosen the place not exaggerate the facts. And here one

where the numbers annually crossing in cannot but ask, who is to blame for the

front of it would be the greatest. This is fog which now surrounds us? Sometimes

true, but it is also true that wherever the I am inclined to attack the whole system of

post was erected, except perhaps quite near democracy, because it produces leaders who

either end of the line, more or less consider- study how to follow rather than how to lead;

able numbers would every year be seen to a state of things which they hide by claim-

pass in front of it from amongst the less ing the whole credit for such advances as are

well paid classes into the better paid ranks. made. Legislation certainly should not

Now if this crossing the line produces, as proceed far in advance of public opinion;

we have seen, a tendency for the nation to but the true leader of men will always

deteriorate both in culture and in hereditary fearlessly express his views as to what

qualities, it follows that this tendency must ought or ought not to be done. He will not

be operative amongst all the central classes allow his mind to become warped by the

of the community. As to hereditary dete- desire to catch votes, and he will not be one

rioration, natural selection is no doubt of those who only move when shoved on'

always at work weeding out certain innate from behind, if I may so express it.

human defects; but in the ill-paid ranks this Though Lord Balfour and M. Doumer are

evolutionary process seems only certainly now the only two prominent statesmen in

to be producing beneficial results in regard the whole world who, to my knowledge,

to physical qualities; and natural selection have ever publicly discussed these racial

certainly cannot now be relied on as a safe- problems, yet I have some hope that better

guard against forces tending to produce a times are coming. A small but important

deterioration in mental qualities. In fact, reform in our system of registration of

those crossing the line in an upward direc- births may soon be introduced by the

tion will not only always be somewhat in- Ministry of Health, which would make it

ferior on the average to the better paid possible to estimate with considerable accu-

ranks which they are joining, but they racy the rates of multiplication of the

themselves will continually show a decline different social classes. We hope, also, that

in inborn mental qualities as the genera- certain questions included in the Census of

tions succeed each other. Then as to cul- I9II will be reintroduced in I93I, and that'

ture, we all rejoice at the efforts now being in this way a study of past events will be

made to improve the lot of all classes of facilitated. In any case all that we euge-

THE SOCIETY'S COMING OF AGE

'9

nists can do is to keep on constantly bring- reached by the lower half of our own popu-

ing these questions before the public, so lation. In this way we get a fairly correct

that in time the pressure necessary to force picture of what has actually taken place.

politicians to take racial questions into If it is remembered that this huge body of

serious practical consideration will be forth- persons, whom I have likened to immi-

coming.

grants, has actually been absorbed into the

more cultured half of our nation, it surely

NATIONAL DETERIORATION

becomes evident that our country must have been greatly damaged by its efforts thus to

Now for the actual numbers that might in digest and assimilate this mass of inferior

imagination be seen in the United Kingdom material. For social contact is always a

at the present time annually crossing in two-edged weapon, those who are being

front of the post marking off the worse paid pulled upwards always dragging some way

from the better paid half of the community. down the hill some of those above them.

Feeling quite incapable of solving this prob- Worst of all, these annual invasions into

lem myself, I applied to Dr. R. A. Fisher our upper ranks as the generations -succeed

for help, as I have often done before in each other are becoming very slowly worse

regard to statistical questions. His esti- and worse in regard to their hereditary men-

mate is that on balance every three years tal qualities. Bring this picture before

there now pass from the worse paid to the your minds, and ask yourselves in all

better paid half of the nation more than two seriousness whether the nation will be able

million persons. Is not this astonishing! much longer to stand the heavy strain thus

I was prepared for large numbers but I did imposed upon it. My own firm conviction

not expect to be called upon to visualize is that, though the physical surroundings

the march of a large army every single year, of the mass of the people may continue

year after year. And let it be remembered either to improve or to remain stationary for

that there are good reasons for believing some time to come, possibly even for some

that these huge numbers have not for long centuries, yet, as things are, eventually the

been crossing the central line, generation tide must turn and a visible decay of our

after generation in the past, and that we are civilization must begin to make its appear-

consequently dealing with a " new and for- ance. I am equally certain, however, that

midable fact," to quote Dr. Stevenson's by the adoption of proper reforms, this com-

words. Let it be remembered also that, ing retreat could be converted into an ad-

according to that same authority, the re- vance, and I cannot but hope that if we

sults would be much the same whether the could make our political leaders visualize

nation were paraded according to wages or this picture of an entry of a host of some-

according to culture.

what inferior immigrants into the front rank

In order better to realize the gravity of of our nation, they would see to it that these

the situation, we may with advantage bring questions are at once fully investigated and

a somewhat different picture before our ultimately that the appropriate reforms are

minds. Let us imagine that the worse paid adopted.

or the less cultured half of society, which-

ever we may be considering, instead of in-

creasing in numbers had remained station- PROGRESS AND POLICY ary during the present century, whilst the

numbers of the upper half had continued to As already remarked, our Society was

diminish as at present; and that this defi- founded in i9o8, and this year, therefore,

ciency had been made up by some 20,000,000 we celebrate its coming of age. On this

immigrants coming to us during that same occasion we are, I hold, fully entitled to

period from a country which had only risen rejoice at the steady progress which has

to the same level of social conditions as that been made in eugenics during our minority,

20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
a progress much greater than I should have If any government were, however, to select ventured to predict eighteen years ago. some of its wisest citizens, men and women Besides indicating the changes which have learned in biology and sociology and above occurred, I have also in this somewhat all noted for sound common sense, and if it rambling address endeavoured to emphasize were to commission them to frame a scheme three conclusions which appear to me to be for the improvement of the race, that of the greatest importance. The first is scheme would contain, I cannot but believe, that if no risks are taken, no progress will the substance of the reforms mentioned in be made, or rather that we shall continue our Outline of a Practical Eugenic Policy, to go very slowly down the hill as regards probably together with other reforms; and hereditary qualities. The second point is if that government were to persist in the that, just as in the struggle for existence course thus laid down for, say, a couple of slight differences do not escape the net of centuries, the improvement in the moral, natural selection, so must we, in our efforts mental and physical conditions of the people to promote the progress of our race, con- would be so marked that all other civilized sider every class of the community and all countries would feel bound to follow the lead the innumerable improvements in human thus given to them. The nation which first qualities demanded by an advancing civi- sets out on this path of eugenic reform will lization. My last point is that the nation not only have added a page to its history of will not for an indefinite period be able to which its nationals ought for ever to be resist the downward drag due to the high proud, but will have conferred an incalculrate of multiplication of its inferior types. able benefit on all mankind.

CORRESPONDENCE
To the Editor, EuAenics Review.
SIR,-The following extract from a review of the " Speeches and Addresses of His Highness Sayaji Rao III, Maharajah of Baroda " (Times Literary Supplement, Thursday, March 7th, I929), may be of some interest in connection with Dr. Schiller's proposals for the reform of the House of Lords:
" Maharajah Sayaji Rao Gaikwar is one of the foremost and most interesting personalities of India. Having been brought up in comparative poverty, he was, as a connection of the ruling house of Baroda, adopted as successor to a Prince deposed by the British Government and was recognized by the latter.

" This form of succession, combining selection
with hereditary right, has often proved its value,
and is greatly prized by the Indian nobility. The present Maharajah has done credit to his selection; he is known and honoured as a fine representative of a fine race . . . etc."
(The italics are mine.) It appears that a system whose value is unrecognized in contemporarv Europe still finds recognition to-day in Asia. One presumes that the success and esteem enjoyed by this practice in India is due to the untrammelled power of selection of an enlightened aristocracy.
Yours faithfully, EILREN BZLFIZLD.
Barn Hill, Brampford Speke, Exeter.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 1.

