SEGREGATION OF THE FIT

A Plea for Positive- Eugenics

By R. AUSTIN FREEMAN

T HE appearance in the April number to raise the level of the whole people . . ." t

of this REVIEW of M. Dachert's pro- The statement is elsewhere repeated and

foundly interesting article, coincid- emphasized, and it underlies the whole ex-

ing with a second and cheaper edition of position of eugenic policy. That policy

Mr. Armstrong's vigorous and spirited must aim at the improvement of the whole

little book, The Survival of the Unfittest, population, not at that of any one section of

and a re-issue of Professor McDougall's it. Then as to the means by which this

National Welfare and National Decay, improvement may be brought about; a

seems to create an opportunity to raise once great part of the profoundly interesting

more the question of the place of Positive chapter (X) on Individual and Mass Selec-

Eugenics in the larger eugenic scheme. tion is devoted to a clear and convincing

In recent years the attention of eugenists demonstration of the paramount importance

has been mainly concentrated on the prob- of the great mass of the more or less

lems created by the apparent increase of the mediocre and the relative insignificance, in

definitely unfit; and the solutions of those a eugenic sense, of the small minorities of

problems have been sought in the domain the extreme types; the eminently superior

of eliminative or negative eugenics. The and the abjectly inferior. Selected groups

ambitions of the earlier eugenists, including -eugenic castes-are dismissed as useless

Sir Francis Galton, to achieve a positive so far as any permanent effects on the whole

improvement in the race-to evolve by con- population are concerned and as being

scious control a higher type of man-have otherwise undesirable for reasons which we

given place to the more modest aim of shall presently examine.

arresting racial decay, or, at the most, of The above appears to represent the con-

securing a slow, secular change for the sidered views of one who may fairly be

better by eliminating the causes of described as the leader of the eugenic move-

deterioration.

ment in this country, and, since it is un-

It will be well to begin our inquiry by likely that any responsible eugenist will

ascertaining the present state of authorita- contest them, we may accept them as stat-

tive opinion on the aims and desirable ing in general terms the approved eugenic

modes of eugenic policy; and, since the policy of the present day.

whole subject of eugenic reform has recently been dealt with on a scale of monumental STATE ACTION HOPELESS

completeness by our Honorary President, Probably, few of us have any doubts that

we cannot do better than study the con- if these principles of eugenic reform could

clusions which emerge from his careful, be put into practice, a steady, if slow, im-

impartial, and exhaustive survey.

provement of our population would result.

First as to aims. " Our main effort," But it is just at this point that a most for-

Major Darwin insists, " should be to im- midable difficulty arises. Measures of

prove the inborn qualities of the whole eugenic reform applicable to the whole

nation "*; and again: " We should strive population could be enacted only by the

* The Need for Eugenic Reform, p. I65.
207

t Ibid., p. I67.

208 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

State. Legislation would be necessary; and Universal suffrage combined with immense

that legislation would have to be of a kind pecuniary gifts to a large part of the

that would encourage the multiplication of electorate create a situation from which

the definitely superior classes while dis- retreat is almost impossible. We must

couraging or restraining that of the assume that the present political system,

definitely inferior. But is any such State with its subsidies to the inferior at the ex-

action imaginable in the prevailing political pense of the superior, will continue until its

conditions, or in any political conditions economic and biological unsoundness mani-

that may prevail in the calculable future? fests itself in some national catastrophe.

The answer is given in Mr. Bertrand Meanwhile, eugenics, as defined above,

Russell's curt dismissal of eugenics as a must apparently remain a more or less

practicable policy: " Democracy stands in academic study of a social policy whose

the way."*

application appertains to some remote and

The obstacle seems to be insuperable. unvisualized future.

Democracy-or, at least, our present Is this a position that eugenists can

democracy-is based on the assumption that accept? Surely a moment's consideration

all men are born equal. Eugenics is based of the changes that are occurring before our

on the observed fact that men are born very eyes must suggest an emphatic negative.

unequal. Eugenics seeks to perpetuate the The condition of our population is already

superior stocks and to eliminate the in- critical, and year by year it changes for the

ferior. Democracy denies the existence of worse. From the high fertility of the least

either and seeks, through environmental capable classes and the low fertility of the

agencies, to give effect to a postulated most capable, it results that our population

inborn equality. The two principles are at is coming more and more to consist of the

opposite poles, and the respective schemes offspring of the former. Twenty years ago,

of social policy which logically issue from the Census return showed that whereas the

them are mutually irreconcilable.

crude birth rate, per hundred families, of

Nor is it a mere question of opposition in the upper and middle classes was I90, that

theory. The principles of democracy are of unskilled labourers was 337 and that of

being put very energetically into practice; miners 358t; and though these figures do

and since those principles are the opposite not show the actual rates of multiplication,

to eugenic principles, so the practice is the they imply a differential rate of increase

opposite to eugenic practice; that is to say, that must, in a few generations, evolve a

it is dysgenic. In its enthusiasm for population mainly composed of persons of

equality, democracy even tends to fly past the unskilled labourer type. Whereas

its theoretical objective and create a privi- miners, unskilled labourers, and paupers

leged class; which class includes the very increase and multiply, the more capable

group that eugenic reform would seek to classes, including skilled artisans, are

eliminate. The dysgenic tendency is thus either stationary or actually declining in

inherent in the present political system; numbers. " In short," Major Darwin con-

for, whereas the multiplication of the less cludes, " as far as we can judge from the

capable-and even the definitely unfit-is facts at our disposal, the nation as a whole

encouraged by subsidies, the more capable is slowly and steadily deteriorating as

minority are hindered from rearing even regards its average inborn qualities."'

moderate families by the drastic taxation Of this deterioration there are two com-

which is necessary to provide those sub- plementary factors which may be considered

sidies.

separately; the increase of the inferior

Moreover, this is no passing phase. stocks and the decrease of the superior.

* Marriage and Morals.

t Dr. Stevenson, quoted in Eugenie Reform, p. 322. T Eugenic Reform, p. 327.

SEGREGATION OF THE FIT

209

These factors are of very unequal impor- bined with wild extravagance, the general

tance. For, whereas the relative increase march towards insolvency, the combination

of the least intelligent part of the popula- of paid unemployment with scarcity of

tion is a grave evil, tending to produce im- labour, and the spectacle of nations but half

possible social and political conditions, it recovered from one great war, busily pre-

does not of necessity involve the utter paring for another; are surely indices of

destruction of the present civilization; the declining intelligence. The political phrase,

disappearance of the superior types would " world conditions " is scientifically mean-

bring civilization definitely to an end. A ingless. There are no cosmic or other con-

population composed mainly of persons of ditions beyond human control that are

the unskilled labourer type would be responsible for this muddle. The social

utterly unable to maintain anything environment of to-day is undeniably the

resembling national life.

product of human conduct. Whatever the

difficulties of modern man may be, they are

THE EXTINCTION OF INTELLIGENCE

of his own creating. The recurring

The really great danger, then, that threatens our society is the total extinction
of the more intelligent part of the population. The reality of this danger is impressed on us by Major Darwin's cautiously pessimistic conclusions. Commenting on the figures relating to Dr. Stevenson's Class ia, consisting of naval and military officers, clergymen, lawyers, doctors, teachers, architects, commercial travellers, clerks, Civil Servants, etc., he says: " My own impression is that this group is not holding its own; and that this is certainly the case if we take a still smaller group, consisting of naval and military officers, barristers, physicians, clergymen, etc. Our professional classes in fact, almost certainly

" crises " and the endless conferences associated with them seem to suggest that modern man is less capable of reasonably managing his affairs than were his recent ancestors; which yields the further suggestion that his general capacity-his intelligence and character-has already appreciably declined.
Since any measures of eugenic control applicable to the population as a whole are beyond the powers of voluntary associations, and will certainly not be undertaken by the State, the question arises whether some measures of more limited application are not possible; measures directed specifically to the preservation, at least in quality and perhaps in numbers, of the definitely

form a group which is dying out . . . " * And again: " The stock to which the pro-

superior stocks. The numerical decline of the professional classes is presumably due

fessional classes belong is, I am sure, a to their low fertility and may be impossible

splendid stock; but it seems destined, as to arrest. But in addition to a decline in

things are now, to play no part whatever numbers, we may reasonably suspect some

in maintaining the high natural qualities of decline in quality. In the past, when the

our nation in the distant future." t

social classes were more rigidly separated,

The concluding words exhibit the the quality of the superior stocks tended to

author's natural optimism. But the future be maintained by a rather strict class

does not seem to be so very distant. Com- endogamy. At the present time, owing to

parison of the present with even the recent the more free mixture of the social classes

past of Victorian times suggests a visible and the tendency for men of inferior stock

lowering of collective intelligence. The to improve their social status (especially in

political and economic confusion of the modern world, the financial distress com-

political life) a considerable amount of intermarriage must be taking place between

the professional classes and those of a lower

* Eugenic Reform, p. 323.
t Ibid., p. 324.

status, some of which must be disadvantageous to the former.

2IO THE EUGENICS REVIEW

THE ONLY ALTERNATIVE
Measures of eugenic control that are
within the powers of private individuals
seem to be limited to some form of selective
segregation; to the formation, in fact, of
some kind of eugenic caste. If it is im-
possible for private individuals or voluntary associations to influence the general popula-
tion, it is at least possible for them to agree
among themselves to take such joint action
as may tend to secure their own progeny
from deterioration. And since this is the
only alternative to no action at all, it seems to be worth while to consider the probable results of such segregation of the better
endowed groups and the establishment, so far as would be practicable, of endogamy
within such associations.
The question is dealt with in some detail
in The Need for Eugenic Reform, and the author's findings have the special value for the present inquiry that they form the basis for adverse criticism of selective schemes. Referring, first, to the effects within the selected community, Major Darwin admits that " It is no doubt true that if any group of selected individuals were to be kept quite apart from the rest of the nation as a eugenic community, a certain average superiority would be permanently maintained, at all events after the first generation after their selection. Moreover, the formation of such a community of the more fit would produce certain advantages which would be reaped to a iarge extent by the whole nation; for one result of the separation of the more intelligent individuals from the rest of the community would be that a large proportion of men of high intellect would make their appearance in future generations, with a consequent more rapid advancement in material welfare and possibly in morals also."*
These undeniable advantages are shown to be set off by certain disadvantages and difficulties. The objection that the local improvement in inborn qualities would fail to influence beneficially the average racial quality of the nation need not be considered,

since such average improvement is not the purpose in view. But it may be admissible to ask whether there is not a tendency to overvalue the average racial quality and understate the importance of the man of exceptional intellect. One of the most disturbing features of the present age is the scarcity-not merely relative, but absolute -of men of first-rate ability. At a time when high places are being filled by men of second or third-rate capacity, it may be that a small increase in the number of men of really high intellect might be of more value to the nation than a slight rise in the average intelligence of the population.
This, however, by the way. The difficulties of establishing and maintaining a eugenic caste are undeniably formidable. In Major Darwin's opinion they are insuperable. To the difficulties of selection without favouritism, of maintaining the necessary standard and of ejection of unsuitable members would be added the jealousy and hostility of those outside and ineligible for admission. But the most weighty objection, in my opinion, is the low fertility of the superior classes. If the birth rate in a eugenic community were insufficient to maintain its numbers, the utility of that community would largely disappear. And this is what Major Darwin
believes would happen. " Is there any
reason," he asks, " to suppose that the fit, if separated as a caste apart, could be induced to maintain a high birth rate? The average racial qualities of the nation are now probably deteriorating because of the low birth rate of the more fit, and what we want to know is whether their isolation would accelerate or retard this process."t
THE STRASBOURG EXPERIMENT
To this question M. Dachert's experiment seems to have given an answer as surprising as it is encouraging. In his eugenic settlement, Les Jardins Ungemach, the birth rate has been more than double that of the adjacent city of Strasbourg, while the excess of births over deaths has varied

* Eugenic Reform, p. I54.

t Eugenic Reform, p. I55.

SEGREGATION OF THE FIT

2II

from about six times to thirteen times that that the spectacle of a eugenic Noah climb-

of Strasbourg. It is true that, as M. ing into the ark of segregation (we will not

Dachert points out, the figures are not pursue the metaphor to the other passen-

strictly comparable. But they are highly gers) might bring home the reality of

significant, and, as he says, " all the more eugenics to people who were immune to

striking since our citizens belong to just ordinary propaganda.

that class which is deemed the most infertile, the small clerk and small official

THE NEED FOR BRAINS

class." * This rather unexpected result But the question that we have to decide is

does, in fact, encourage us to believe that in whether a selective eugenic community is

a eugenic community the conscious atten- worth while; whether it promises to bring tion to the inborn qualities of the children about any desirable result. My feeling is

would result in a greater willingness to rear families of a size at least sufficient to main-

that, in the existing circumstances, the answer is clearly in the affirmative. The

tain the population by natural increase. With regard to the other difficulties, for-

present alarming crisis in our national affairs is a convincing demonstration of our

midable as they undoubtedly appear, my feeling is that, with tact and judgment,

collective incapacity. The sheer stupidity with which our nation has, since the War,

they could be surmounted, especially if a modest minimum standard were set which would allow of the inclusion of the better type of skilled artisan. The rejection of all artificial and conventional distinctions of social class and the insistence on personal quality as the one condition of admission, would disarm the hostility of even the

marched open-eyed towards insolvency, suggests at once a low level of general intelligence and a disastrous scarcity of men capable of the competent direction of public affairs. The great and urgent need of the nation at the moment is more brains; and if a eugenic community would produce an increase in the number of men of marked

extreme democrat. But my impression is that, at least in the early stages, there would be very little hostility from outsiders.

ability, no matter how small, it would be of inestimable value. In any case, the capable minority should, if possible, be

More probably the attitude of the public would be one of indulgent amusement. The

preserved from extinction and undesirable admixture. The time is apparently

community would be exposed to ridicule approaching when it will be impossible for

rather than enmity; and by the time that it the more mentally gifted to transmit to

had grown large enough to arouse hostile their children the material products of their

opposition, it would have acquired enough capacity, their industry, and their thrift.

prestige and influence to be able to take But no political conditions can deprive them

care of itself.

of the power, if they elect to retain it, of

There is one item on the credit side of the transmitting an uncontaminated germ-

scheme which has not been noticed; its plasm.

moral effect on the public at large. Verbal It was to this end that, ten years ago, I

propaganda are apt to fall on ears already put forward my suggestion of the Voluntary

deafened by other propaganda. The voice Segregation of the Eugenically Fit.t Un-

of one crying in the wilderness tends to fortunately, I made the tactical mistake of

become ineffective if the wilderness is too thickly populated by competing vocalists.

presenting the scheme in what I considered its ideal developed state, leaving the initial

But a practical demonstration is more stages to the reader's imagination. I now

arresting, especially if the demonstrator venture to re-state the proposal in some-

appears to be attending to his own affairs what different terms and in especial refer-

and seeking his own well-being. It may be ence to those initial stages. The immediate

* Eugenics Review, April 1931, p. I8.

t Social Decay and Regeneration. London, I921. Constable.

2I2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

aim is to prevent that dispersal and dilu- might, by mutual holiday visits, become

tion of valuable inborn qualities which extended to the respective families.

occurs when a member of a family well When we come to the conditions of mem-

endowed with those qualities marries a bership we are at once involved in the

member of a family markedly inferior in dilemma that Major Darwin has pointed

those respects or tainted with actual defects. out. A highly exclusive caste might

Such marriages are unfortunately all too achieve almost spectacular results, but it

common; and the disappointing quality of would be insignificant in numbers; a com-

the children of a brilliant father or mother munity setting a more modest standard of

thus inappropriately mated is not only a fitness would gain in number but lose in

source of lifelong regret to the parents but the average superiority of its members. My

an irreparable loss to the nation.

feeling is that the latter disadvantage would

have to be accepted. If the minimum intel-

A LEAGUE OF EUGENISTS

lectual standard were not beyond that of the

The scheme proposed to effect this pur- best type of skilled artisan, many social

pose is, in principle, of the utmost sim- and political pitfalls would be avoided, and

plicity. It envisages the formation of an a community of really effective size would

association, or league, of practical eugenists, become possible. Moreover, in such a com-

somewhat on the plan of the Freemasons, munity, having a developed eugenic con-

united for mutual help in safeguarding sciousness, assortive mating would probably

their children's future. Since the danger tend to produce something like the

to be guarded against is an early dysgenic " ascending series of castes " of which

marriage, the obvious prophylactic measure Major Darwin speaks, without any formal

is to limit the social contacts of the young separation or invidious distinction. Eugenic

people, so far as possible, to those whose ambition would be felt by all; but the best

inborn qualities are of a desirable kind. The endowed would have the widest choice.

ideal condition would, clearly, be segregation in a eugenic settlement in which all QUALIFICATIONS AND CLASSES

the inhabitants would conform to the The actual qualifications for membership

standard required; but as such a settlement would be settled by the members them-

would be impracticable in the case of pro- selves, but we may consider briefly what

fessional persons with established environ- would seem to be desirable. My own feel-

ments, we need not consider it. Neverthe- ing is that the qualifications should be prin-

less we may bear in mind the possibility cipally mental. Physical qualities are of

of establishing " neighbourhoods " by relatively small racial and national impor-

sporadic settlement, as has been done by tance; they are usually not deficient among

artists, Jews, Roman Catholics, and other men of good mental quality; and the special

bodies bound by a common interest. But danger against which we are providing is

in the beginning, the idea of segregation the decline in general intelligence. Physical

would have to be replaced by that of asso- defects, I submit, could be almost ignored

ciation. Facilities would have to be created in otherwise eligible candidates. The

for personal contact between the members actual minimum standard of intelligence

and especially the young people. For the and the methods of ascertainment would

adults and adolescents, social clubs of a have to be discussed; but they present no

suitable kind would furnish the means of special difficulty.

meeting and making one another's acquain- The members of our League seem to fall

tance, while the establishment of one or two into three classes: (I) Those beyond the

really good schools would enable the chil- marriageable age, who would be elected only

dren of members to be brought together for counsel and service, would be judged by

under conditions that would inevitably pro- their personal qualities. Their family

duce lifelong friendships; friendships that history would not concern the League. Of

SEGREGATION OF THE FIT

2I3

those of a reproductive age there would be an extremely useful purpose. Established

(2) the unquestionably fit who would be on a sufficient scale, it would tend to pre-

encouraged to rear families as large as their serve the dwindling intellectual class; it

means would allow, and (3) those who, would convert eugenics (as M. Dachert's

though of satisfactory intellect, suffered experiment has done) from a somewhat aca-

from some serious inheritable defect or from demic study into a living human activity;

a gravely unfavourable family history and it would furnish an object lesson to all

in whom parenthood would be undesirable. thoughtful persons; and the very ridicule

The membership of these would be condi- with which it would be greeted would, in the

tional on either celibacy or a childless end, have the effect of propaganda.

marriage.

In the case of the second class, at least, a record would be essential, and the following

IMMEDIATE ACTION NEEDED

procedure is suggested. Each member But if it is worth while, it should be

would be required to ascertain as com- done; and it should be done now. And it

pletely as possible the details of his or her could be done to-morrow. Nothing hinders.

family history, and to communicate them No money need be collected; no statutory

to a registrar, duly appointed and bound to powers need be obtained. A dozen resolute

secrecy. By him the information (but not persons could make a beginning-and it is

the name or identity of the member) would the beginning that matters. A few informal

be laid before an expert committee, includ- meetings, at a private house if need be, or

ing, at least, one medical man, who would even the formation of a luncheon or dining

assess the racial quality disclosed by the club at which the project could be discussed,

record according to a scale previously its utility and practicability weighed and

agreed on. They would then issue a certi- ways and means considered, would set the

ficate expressing the assessment by an scheme in motion. All that is necessary is

agreed number or letter (mental and physi- a small body of convinced eugenists, ready

cal qualities being assessed and numbered to make an effort, at the eleventh hour, to

separately); the registrar would add the save at least a remnant of a people whose

name to the certificate and deliver it to the great qualities once commanded the respect

member, retaining in a secret file a copy of of the whole world.

the certificate and the record. Thus in the But I repeat that time presses. The

event, for instance, of a projected marriage, present national crisis and our obvious

it would be possible for each of the parties inability to deal with it offer a lurid demon-

to produce a certificate setting forth the stration of the collective incapacity of the

eugenic status of the family without prema- British people. The existing confusion and

ture disclosure of confidential matters. distress, compared with the order and pros-

There is no need further to elaborate the perity of the past, is a measure of the

proposal. The question to be decided is, decline in racial quality that has already

Would such a society or League be worth taken place. It shows how low we have

while? My own belief is that it would serve already fallen.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 3.

