SPEECHES AT THE GALTON DINNER

TF' HERE was an exceptionally large They were " To promote the increase of

r aAttendance of Fellows, Members and natural knowledge and to forward the appli-

guests at the Galton Dinner which cation of scientific methods of investigation

was held at the Waldorf Hotel on Monday, to all the problems of life to the best of my

February I7th, with Lord Horder, President ability; in the conviction which has grown

of the Eugenics Society, in the chair. Among with my growth and strengthened with my

the guests of the Society were Sir Laurence strength, that there is no alleviation for the

Brock, Col. Sir Charles and Lady Close, Sir sufferings of mankind except veracity of

Daniel and Lady Hall, Sir Richard and Lady thought and of action, and the resolute

Gregory, Mr. and Mrs. Aldous Huxley, Sir facing of the world as it is, when the garment

Walter Langdon-Brown, Dr. Maurice Shaw of make-believe by which pious hands have

and Miss Ellen Wilkinson.

hidden its uglier features is stripped off."

Introducing the Galton Lecturer, Dr. Dr. Huxley may be too modest to say so,

Julian S. Huxley (whose paper entitled but there are ample proofs that his aims and

" Eugenics and the Social Environment " is purpose in life are much the same as these.

published on page II), Lord Horder said: Our Society is fortunate in securing him as its

The Galton Lecture was founded to com- Galton Lecturer for I936.

mnemorate the father of Eugenics, the dis- Col. Sir Charles Close, President of the

tinguished Englishman whose vision and International Union for the Scientific In-

whose work led to the activities in which our vestigation of Population Problems, pro-

Society is engaged. Its existence is almost posed the vote of thanks to the lecturer.

contemporaneous with the Eugenics Society. It is my privilege, he said, to propose a

Men of varied outlook have been honoured vote of thanks to Dr. Huxley for having

by the invitation to deliver this lecture: given us such an important and stimulating

lawyers, priests, doctors, sociologists and address on a subject of the greatest interest

scientists. This evening we welcome one of to all of us. Dr. Huxley has given us much

the last-mentioned, a man who has added food for thought, and we shall find his re-

additional lustre to a namne that stands marks well worth studying quietly when they

amongst the very highest in British science, are published. We cannot digest all of them

and whose versatility lends an additional at the present time; to attempt to do so

glamour to the name of Huxley. Our Galton might bring us to the condition of that un-

Lecturer for this year possesses not only a fortunate fly of which he has spoken, the fly

genius for observation and for research-the that suffered from a swollen abdomen. But,

two desiderata of all true scientists-he also speaking seriously, he has put before us

possesses that other and even rarer quality many important facts connected with the

of being an interpreter of science.

social environment which deserve our most

Incidentally we have amongst our guests careful consideration.

this evening another grandson of the great Our lecturer mentioned briefly the present

biologist, Mr. Aldous Huxley, and the excep- state of affairs in Germany. Several of us

tional mental equipment of these two connected with the Eugenics Society attended

brothers is a demonstration of the way in the Population Congress, which was held in

which genetics behave at their happiest Berlin in August last, and among those who

and best.

attended this Congress were Mrs. Hodson,

In an illuminating autobiography which Mr. Glass and myself. Present-day Germany

Thomas Henry Huxley left behind him, and must be regarded as a vast laboratory which

which is such a model of brevity, we learn is the scene of a gigantic eugenics experiment.

what were the objects which this great man It would be quite wrong and quite un-

had in view during his long and useful life. scientific to decry everything which is now

33
C

34 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

going on in that country. There is, as a fact,
much being carried out in Germany which deserves our approbation. The authorities there are in the position of being able to carry out the advice of their scientific advisers. If Dr. Frick, the Minister of the Interior, with the approval of the Head of the State, desires to enforce certain social
legislation, he has only to issue the order and
the thing is done. How different from us!
Why, some of us are not even dictators in our own houses! In Germany the most advanced eugenic legislation is carried through without difficulty.
In his opening address to the Congress, Dr. Frick told us what were his main objectives. These are, first, the increase of the birth-rate; he is afraid that unless special measures are taken the population of Germany will shortly decline. His next point was that it is most desirable to. get as many people as possible on to the land. And his next, that it is desirable to eliminate the definitely unhealthy stocks, as far as this can be done by legislation. And his last point was that it is important to unify the Germana people. This latter objective is being attempted by industrial legislation, and also by the institution of the labour service in which the young men of the country must work for a period, all worling together on useful, interesting and necessary manual employment. Well, there is not much in all this to find fault with. Of course, as we all know, there are some aspects of govern-
ment action in that country which we cannot approve of; but it would be unfair and
unwise to shut our eyes to so mnuch that is being attempted that is quite in line with our own aims.
I feel that I owe Dr. Huxley a private vote
of thanks for that admirable and interesting book which he has recently written, with
Professors Haddon and Carr-Saunders, entitled " We Europeans." At home we tried
the experimnent of guessing the nationality of
the individuals whose photographs appear
as the frontispiece. Quite independently, my wife, my daughter and I spotted one correctly each, out of the total of sixteen, and, curiously enough, it was the same individual-

the Spaniard. It occurs to me, in this connection, that it might be fairer to use, as a
test, composite photographs, such as Galton invented so many years ago. Why should we not have a composite photograph of the Council of the Eugenics Society? We might use it as the type of British face, and, no doubt, it would be very beautiful.
Well, I will end as I began, and propose a hearty vote of thanks to Dr. Huxley for the very important Galton Lecture to which we
have just listened. Mr. Aldous Huxley: When I was asked to
second the vote of thanks to this year's
Galton Lecturer, my first impulse, I must confess, was to say no. For suppose, I said to myself, suppose the lecture is a good one-
and incidentally it probably will be pretty good. What then ? If I praise it, I shall seem, as the lecturer's brother, to be blowing a trumpet that is vicariously my trumpet. Whereas if the lecture turns out to-be bad, I shall feel inclined to follow a fine old fraternal tradition and say, Am I my
brother's keeper? My first impulse, then, was to refuse the
invitation. But on second and maturer thoughts I changed my mind. For after all, I went on to reflect, it is possible to be objective even about one's relations. One can think about them in a detached and scientific way-even at a dinner party of eugenists. The Galton Lecturer is my brother. But that is neither his fault, nor mine. And, brother
or no brother, the fact remains that he is worth talking about. For-let me try to be as completely detached as possible-he is an
interesting, significant and also encouraging phenomenon. He is interesting, because he is uncomnmon, significant because he is
timely, and encouraging because, let us hope, he is symptomatic, a portent of muchneeded change. Our lecturer is- that rare specimen, a man of science who tries to be
scientific all the time and not merely when he is busy with an experiment. In an age of excessive specialization, he has insisted on
taking an interest in many things. His range extends from the problems of growth to those of colonial administration, from the behaviour of birds to industrial planning,

SPEECHES AT THE GALTON DINNER

35

from crustacea to religion, from pure zoology but also a natural philosopher; that he

to that tabooed subject, which the orthodox should take an interest in and responsibility

regard as the scientific equivalent of porno- for the world outside his laboratory.

graphy-psychical research.

The ills from which we suffer at present

Science, for only too many of its practi- are of many kinds; but a large proportion

tioners, is merely the intensive analysis of a of them are traceable to the one-sided

tiny section of reality; and they feel that development of science and the fatal in-

their whole duty as men of science has been difference to human needs of scientists and

performed if they succeed in carrying that technologists. The Sabbath was made for

analysis a single step further. Our lecturer man, not man for the Sabbath. The same is

is of another opinion. He thinks that it is true of science. But men of science have

the duty of a scientist to be more than the ignored this truth. Most pure scientists have

minute investigator of a single small pro- simply failed to think about the problem at

vince of fact. The laboratory, in too many all and have left the technologists to exploit

cases, is merely the modem equivalent of the their discoveries, not for the benefit of human

cloister-a place to which people, for whom beings in general, but for that of share-

the problems of real life are too difficult, holders. Our lecturer is a scientist who insists

retire for peace and safety. Our lecturer that science and technology are made for

preserves the more humanistic attitude to man, not man for science and technology.

science, which characterized the workers of That is why he is a phenomenon, not only

an older day. He thinks that a scientist interesting and significant, but also pro-

should be, not only a specialized researcher, foundly encouraging.

SCIENTIFIC BOOKSJ|
Current and Standard ENGLISH, PRENCH and GERMAN Literature in MEDICAL, CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL and PHYSICAL SCIENCE supplied from stock, or obtained promptly to order.
A visit to this Department is respectfully suMested. Please write for CATALOGUES, mentioninA interests.
v.K. LEWIS &Co. LTtd., E V13c6LGLROOiWNEDRONSTWR.ECE.1T .
EueisReview, Vol. XXVM, llo. 1.

