THE GERMAN STERILIZATION LAW*

By " REGIERUNGSRAT "

W ITH the German Law that came biologically inferior descendants to the State.

into force on January ist, I934- Hence eugenics and psychiatry demanded

concerned with the prevention of the regeneration of the German hereditary

hereditary diseases in future generations-a characters by elimination and selection.

great struggle came to an end. For many This demand was reinforced by the urgent

decades the admissibility of sterilization, and advice of legal authorities to stamp out

the demarcation of the sphere within which hereditarily diseased criminals and thus to

it should be allowed, have been fiercely develop preventive measures in favour of

contested. Long before the Great War the the criminal law. Great alarm was also

interest and attention of the public had been caused by the fact that while some millions

roused on these questions. The increase in of biologically sound and skilled manual and

knowledge and the results of recent research brain-workers were condemned to live and to

in heredity, with particular reference to the maintain themselves for an indefinite time

biological quality of heredity and its im- without work or subsidy, and some hundreds

portance for the future of the individual and of thousands of healthy people of all ages

the nation, pushed eugenics into the fore- were living the lives of tramps, the inmates

ground of interest.

of the imbecile and lunatic asylums were

increasing to such an extent that an intoler-

THE PROBLEMS STATED

able burden of cost devolved on the ever-

In post-war Germany this question of
sterilization became urgent when people in
general became aware that biological inferiority-both as regards quality and quantity of hereditary characters-was on the increase. It was considered an intolerable
burden that the cost of supporting mentally affected, inferior, and anti-social persons had
reached a figure that was out of proportion
to the means available for the upbringing of the biologically valuable future generation. The birth-rate of mentally and psychically in-
ferior people, unlike that of those with sound heredity, remained such that their rate of
increase hardly fluctuated. The burden on the biologically valuable proportion of the
population thus grew overwhelmingly. The psychically and mentally fit realized that they must strictly limit the number of their
descendants. The army of inferior people, on the other hand, paid no heed to economic
depressions; it delegated the care of its

diminishing section of the working and tax-
paying population. The sterilization of habitual criminals, the
insane and the mentally deficient had already been demanded in I900 in the Archiv /ilr Kriminalanthropologie. Then, in I922, the
Deutsche Gesellschalt fir Rassenhygiene pub-
lished several theses advocating the legal
regulation of sterilization. In July I932,
after lengthy preparations and reports from Muckermann, Lange and Kohlrausch, a bill on sterilization was submitted to the
"Preussische Landesgesundheitsrat." During the discussions on the legalization
of sterilization it became clear how many intricate problems arose from this question.
It was obvious that legal, religious, medical,
and " weltanschauliche " ideas and convictions referring to the question of sterilization had to be taken in consideration. It was
generally admitted that the hereditary dispositions in danger were to be protected
against further degeneration and decay.

There was a great struggle as to which

* This article is by a German official who has been able to observe at first hand the operation of the new sterilization law.

maxims of life and law would prevail. On one hand it had to be considered how to

I37

I38 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

protect the State, on the other hand how to Professor Reiter, the president of the

guarantee the psychical integrity and the Reichsgesundheitsamt, pointed out in a

sexual self-determination of the individual, lecture delivered to the Aerztebund in

both having their roots in natural law. Nuemberg, the consequences of the national-

Furthermore, there had to be considered the socialist revolution for medical science and

obligation of conscience, by which the the politics of race hygiene. A new interpre-

Christian-particularly the Roman Catholic tation of the conception " health " was

-was bound. On New Year's Eve, I930, essential for the altered point of view and the

a papal encyclical on matrimony pointed to new national aims. Health should mean the

the irrevocable maxims of the divine moral best relation of the individual to Volk and

law which bound Roman Catholics, and Staat. Thus the health of the individual

stated that only the divine Creator should should be removed from the sphere of a per-

have the control of life and its origin. sonal condition and raised to a position of

According to Catholic dogma, the only being a part of the sum total of national

justification for depriving human beings of health. The introduction of the biological

their natural functions was when it was in- idea into the conception of State should

tended as punishment for crimes committed. foster the view that the nation must not be

considered as an inorganic mass of human

PURPOSES OF THE LAW

beings, but as individuals as well as groups

The Bill brought in in I932 endeavoured to having a biological and organic connection

unite these discordant demands as far as with the past and future. Thus the obliga-

possible. Sterilization was to be carried out tions resulting from this view do not find

on medical and strictly eugenic grounds with their limits in the present, but look to the

ample security for the prevention of abuses. future. No politics of hygiene according to

Moral compulsion was eliminated as the Bill the new conception of State should include

was based on the principle of free will. future generations. The biological view

Henceforth, the authorities, even those who should teach the extent to which the fate

considered the question from a religious of human beings is determined by hereditary

point of view, no longer objected.*

characters.*

It is not a coincidence that the Govern- These sayings of Reiter, based upon

ment of the new German Reich, a few months national-socialist ideas on biology and race,

after its coming into power, undertook the show the way which the Voelkische Staat

legal regulation of sterilizing hereditarily (national State) is bound to go. It seems to

diseased persons. The German national be a natural consequence that, if the State

revolution brought about the realization of is determined to stamp out the biologically

the " Organische Staatslehre " (political inferior hereditary dispositions in the suc-

economic science), the biological interpreta- ceeding generations, it is compelled to sanc-

tion of the conception of "Volk" and tion sterilization. Thus the State considers

" Staat " (Nation and State). According the sterilization of persons hereditarily

to the national-socialist point of view " the diseased as a far-sighted provision for future

nation is the highest biological unit to which generations. No economic reasons are in the

the human being is subject "-" the nation foreground. Moreover, it seems from this

is a unit bound together by blood and race new biologically directed standpoint essen-

with innate identical characteristics." This tial only that the Government of the

new movement of regeneration had neces- new State should carry through this law

sarily to create biological laws for the political under certain conditions, even against the

purposes of the Reich, and thus to achieve a will of those to be sterilized and even in con-

fundamental change in the conception of the tradiction to the scruples of a large popula-

State."

tion unfavourable to the idea.

* Muckermann: Volkstum, Staat und Nation.

Essen, 1933.

* Deutsches Aerzteblatt, 1933, Vol. II.

THE GERMAN STERILIZATION LAW

I39

THE LEGAL PROCEDURE

an asylum, the obligation of giving informa-

Of principle importance in any individual
case of sterilization are the two legal supposi-
tions: (i) Sterilization is only permitted if
the disease is diagnosed by a doctor as being hereditary, and (2) if the Erbgesundheitsgericht (Court of hereditary health) comes to the conclusion that the descendants of the
person to be sterilized will most probably be hereditarily diseased. The groups of persons hereditarily diseased are distinctly stated,* and the legislator is restricted to cases in
which the hereditary taint seems to him to be scientifically proved.
Sterilization takes place on application. Those entitled to apply for it are, in the first place, the persons who are to be sterilized.
The law proceeds from the standpoint that in
many cases the herditarily diseased person
will himself see the necessity of applying for the operation voluntarily. The provisions concerning the co-operation of the legal representative and of the Court for the protection of wards (Court of Chancery) are
in most respects similar to the existing provisions of the German civil law. As many people do not fully realize the importance and the effects of sterilization, the operation can be performed only after the person concerned has been given full medical instruction as to its consequences.
Proceeding from the point of view that the public is interested in preventing a hereditarily diseased future generation, the district
medical officer or the superintendent of a

tion is laid upon the chief medical officer.
The clauses relating to sterilization do not
apply if the hereditarily diseased person is
not capable of propagation because of ad-
vanced age or for other reasons; or if the district medical officer considers that the operation is likely to endanger the life of
the person concerned; or if the said person
-being dangerous-is kept in a " closed"
asylum. The Erbgesundheitsgerichte (Courts of
hereditary health), being a part of the
Amtsgerichte (lower courts) in the first instance, are competent to give decisions. They consist of a presiding judge, a medical officer, and a specialist, the latter being an authority on human genetics. The legal proceedings bear no resemblance to those of criminal courts, and, having regard to the fact that private affairs should be kept secret, cases are tried in camera. Appeals against decisions come up before the Erbgesundheitsobergericht (Court of appeal for hereditary health). This court is part of the Oberlandesgericht (Supreme court of a Province). The decision of this court is final.
The surgical operation may only be per-
formed in hospitals and by surgeons ap
pointed by the supreme public authorities of the Province; and its cost is to be borne by the sick fund, if the person concerned comes under health insurance, or, if the patient is a pauper, by the public welfare fund.

" closed " asylum is entitled to apply on be-

half of the inmates. Should the latter not be a doctor himself, his application needs the approval of the chief medical officer of the
asylum.
A provision of far-reaching importance is the doctor's obligation to pass on to the district medical officer information of any patient suffering from one of the hereditary diseases mentioned in the Act or from acute
alcoholism. The same obligation is laid upon persons concerned with examination and treatment of patients. Regarding inmates of

EUGENIC INDICATIONS ONLY
The law concerning the prevention of a hereditarily diseased future generation is also on the side of national eugenics. Sterilization means the elimination of persons tainted with certain hereditary diseases. Surgical skill is placed at the service of the biological regeneration of the future generation. On the other hand the law against the habitual criminal (which came into force at the same time) provides for castration-a defensive act against offences dangerous to

* The text of the German Act was published in full
n EUGENICS REVIEW, Vol. XXV, Oct. 1933, P. 157.

society by habitual sexual offenders. Originally it was intended to cover the sterilization

i

I40 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
of hereditarily diseased persons and the been those of habitual sexual offenders castration of certain habitual sexual offenders dangerous to society. in one law. But the objections of the Reich According to the German law sterilization Ministry of Justice against this plan brought for social reasons still remains punishable. about a specific law against the habitual In the records of the new reforms of criminal criminal. This law is concerned with the law the reasons for forbidding such sterilicastration ordered by the criminal courts, zation are clearly stated: " The national with keeping antisocial persons in " pro- socialist conception of the State demands tective" asylums, as well as with other that the protection of the lives and the regulations for the protection of society. At hereditary qualities of the German nation present there is no tradition, as this law only shall never yield to economic forces, especicame into force on January ist, I934. The ally since the removal of national distress cases in which castration has been ordered by has already been taken in hand by the whole the criminal courts up to the present have nation."

-SOCOLOGICAL REVIEWI

JOURNAL OF THE INSTITUTE OF SOCIOLOGY

Editorial Board: A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS, ALEXANDER FARQUHARSON and MORRIS GINSBERG

Vol. XXVI.

JULY, 1934

No. 3

CONTENTS
Economic Science and Contemporary Economic Policy. Migration and Cheap Land. The Psychological Analysis of War. The Sociological Interpretation of Political Ideas. Divorce in England and Wales Book Reviews.

G. C. Allen Herbert Heaton
H. Goldhamer Werner Falk
David V. Glass

Annual Subscription £1 Is. Od., post free. 5s. 3d. per copy, post free.
Zbe ic [lap tlouse Pres,
35 GORDON SQUARE, LONDON, W.C.1

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 2.

