NOTES ON THE PRESENT WORKING OF THE MENTAL
DEFICIENCY ACT, 1913.
Two years have passed since the united efforts of various Associations interested, brought the Mental Deficiency Act into being. The way had been carefully prepared, and in consequence the country was thoroughly awake to the supreme importance, both on the score of public health and of morals, of dealing firmly with this question. The amount of work which remained to be carried out was immense, and in addition to the numbers of cases to be dealt with, much ignorance and prejudice on this subject still prevailed. When the Board of Control took up its work in November, 1913, it was confronted by a task which can only be described as one of colossal magnitude, the difficulties of which have since been much increased by the grave conditions of European War which overshadow the country.
The Board of Control has skilfully grappled with a situation of extraordinary complexity, and its effective action is traced in the lengthy list of Institutions and Homes which have already been certified or approved under the Mental Deficiency Act. Such Institutional care may be said to form the best answer to problems connected with mental deficiency.
Altogether a total of 7! such Institutions and *Homes exist, and as some of them contain several hundreds of inmates, the total amount of Institutional accommodation already available for the mentally defective is considerable.
As in its final outcome, the provision of Institutions and Homes seems perhaps to form the most important part of the work for the mentally deficient, details of the present accommodation may be given; the list of the Board of Control comprises
Thirty-five Certified Institutions. Eight Workhouses, approved under Section 37. (Section 37 of the Act provides that, on the application of the local authority, the Board may, if satisfied of the special fitness for the detention of defectives, "of any buildings . . . provided by the Board of Guardians of that Union" approve the premises for the reception of defectives.) Ten Certified Houses. Eighteen Homes " approved " by the Board of Control. Several more Institutions and Homes are in process of being certified or approved. The County and County Boroughs have formed " Committees for the care of the mentally defective," under Section 28, Mental Deficiency Act, and a fair proportion of women have, in accordance with the provisions of the Act, been appointed to serve upon them. The methods by which the provisions of the Act are carried out varies however in different districts. While some authorities have contented themselves with undertaking their compulsory duties only under the Act, in providing for cases under Section 2 (I) (b), othefs have availed themselves of their permissive powers, given by Section 30 (e), to provide for the mentally defective which are not " subject to be dealt with," under Section 2 (i) (b) of the Act; an attitude which demonstrates the intelligence and foresight with which the work is being carried out by the authorities concerned. Certain local authorities are engaged in debating the boundaries of their division of labour in the work with local Boards of Guardians, whose powers to deal with defectives under the various Acts relating to relief under Poor Law Authorities are preserved to them by Section 30 (ii.); fortunately in

134 EUGENICS REVIEW.
the great majority of districts difficulties between the two authorities have not arisen, or where they have arisen, have satisfactorily ended.
Action has also been taken by the approval of medical practitioners by Local Authorities, for the purpose of signing certificates requisite for dealing with defectives under Sections 3 and 5 of the Act. It must be remarked in passing, however, that the number of medical men or women who have actually qualified themselves by practical experience for such work is lamentably small. This condition of affairs, to which attention
was called at the meeting of the British Medical Association in <9I3 (under the. eugenics section), should be promptly remedied.
The passing of the Elementary Education (Defective and Epileptic Children) Act, I914, places upon the local education authorities, under Part III. of the Education Act, 1902, the duty of making provision for the instruction of the educable mentally defective children, between the ages of 7 and I6 years, who fall thereupon under the jurisdiction of the Board of Education, but the Board of Control deals with children between these ages, when they fall within Section 2 (i) (b) (v.), having been notified by local education authorities in pursuance of Section 2 (2), that is, in whose case notice has been given by the local education authority that they have been ascertained to be incapable of receiving further benefit in special schools, or in whose case the local authority are of opinion that it would be to their benefit that they should be sent to an Institution, or placed under guardianship.
The most serious bar to the progress of the working of the Act has undoubtedly been the restriction of loans to local authorities, for the purpose of establishing Institutions under the Act, announced by Mr. Lloyd George in the House of Commons last March; as this appears to be due to the stress of war conditions, which are unfortunately likely to last for some time, and as the future threatens inevitably increasing burdens upon rate and taxpayer from the same cause, the outlook, as regards the founding of Institutions, is discouraging. To meet this difficulty however the Board of Control has recommended a practical, but temporary measure, in the utilisation of existing workhouses (under section 37, Mental Deficiency Act), for some of the mentally defective who need Institutional care. In spite of monetary deficiencies the Treasury has managed to grant a sum of money for cases which remain outside Institutional care, both to the Central Association in London and direct to the local associations formed to aid the Local Authorities in connection with such care, under Section 48 of the Mental Deficiency Act.
Under the circumstances much is left to be carried out by voluntary effort, and fortunately new Homes have been, and are being, founded by voluntary agencies to meet the needs of the mentally defective; their necessity is in fact greater than ever, as these cases are now much more quickly recognised than before, and promptly discharged from the various Institutions into which they drift. In Rescue Homes for instance, a great effort is being made to obtain speedier recognition and appropriate treatment of the mentally defective. In February, 1913, all the more important Associations for Rescue Homes were circularised by the National Association for the Feeble-Minded, drawing their attention 'to Section Si of the Act, and pointing out that it was not lawful "for a person without the consent of the Board to undertake the care and control of more than one person who is a defective, or who is placed under his care as being a defective, elsewhere than in an Institution, a Certified House, or an Approved Home." At the same time, enquiry was made if these Societies would set aside some of their Homes solely for the reception of the mentally defective. In this case they would apply for them to become Certified Institutions under the Act and such action would, we understand, have the approval of the Board of Control. In any
case managers of such a Home should notif.y all mentally defective

NOTES ON WORKING OF MENTAL DEFICIENCY ACT, I913. I35
inmates (where recognised) to the Board of Control and to the Local Authority of the area in which the Home is situated, when the Board of
Control will consider the desirability of sanctioning the retention of such
cases in the Home. The retention of the imbecile in such Homes is unlawful under the Lunacy Act.
One of the first necessities of the moment, however, is the creation of a more enlightened public opinion, and the furtherance of popular education in connection with this subject, as many problems connected with the question of mental defect lie too deep for Acts of Parliament to reach them, and however excellent may be the law, and able its administrators, the conscious co-operation of an intelligent public is also necessary before this evil can be minimised. This we have said before, but as we are so far from attaining this goal, we say it again, as it cannot be too often impressed upon the public mind and conscience.
ANNA H. P. KIRBY.

