RACE AND ATHLETICS

By Sir ADOLPHE ABRAHAMS, Kt., O.B.E., M.D., F.R.C.P.

N EARLY forty years ago, an

uneducated native, a mathematical

genius, was discovered in a remote

village in India; brought to Cambridge he

made many valuable scientific contributions.

He died, I believe, whilst still in his twenties.

All of this would appear superficially to have

little or- nothing to do with the subject I

propose to consider, but I venture to think

that, as I shall presently show, it does in its

way provide its text or leitmotiv.

**

*

For two reasons, athletic ability is not a good criterion by which to measure national characteristics. It is, in the first place, a special quality; it is not, of course, incompatible with a goodconstitutionandphysique, but it is by no means the same thing. I have
seen athletic prowess displayed by the most unlikely looking material, both anatomical and physiological, and even when disease
has been identified. The second reason is that on account of world-wide competition unreasonable attention has been paid to the super-athlete by whom, quite illogically, the race or nation to which he belongs has been judged. To draw any valid deductions, investigations on a large scale would be
essential so that the average and not the exceptional would provide the proper infor-
mation. In the marathon race at the Olympic
Games at Amsterdam in I928, the first fiye men in order of their arrival were an Algerian, a Chilean, a Japanese, a Finn, an American.
Are we to conclude that all these races are
distinguished for long-distance running ? By
no means.
Until some fifty years ago the cult of athletics was practically confined to the British Isles, and any exhibition of interest and participation by other nations was rather condescendingly accepted. The United States, it is true, demonstrated a superiority in specialized events regarded by our athletes with a mixture of contempt and tolerance.

It was making a whole-time business out of what should be considered a pastime, and such transatlantic success did not appear to challenge British athletic supremacy.
But with the turn of the century, surprises were in store. Exceptional middle-distance runners invaded us from Finland and Sweden. From all over the Continent appeared expert performers in what are called the field events, as distinct from those that take place on the track. And to a more limited extent, yet on occasion with conspicuous success, came runners at all distances from places hitherto unsuspected of any such association to challenge and surpass our
best.
Farther and farther into the world participation in athletics extended, revealing latent interest, ambition, and ability. In I932, the negro became prominent. Hitherto some isolated examples had participated with
moderate success, but now a special attribute became unmistakable. Farther and farther into the world the interest extends and one
can only speculate on the unknown and the possible discovery of some tribe or race possessing natural speed or endurance to an extent that transcends anything the athletic world has so far witnessed.
When we attempt to isolate and-recognize ethnic types of athletic capabilities we must pause to consider the complexity of the subject and avoid the danger of accepting what seems only too obvious. The athlete must possess moral as well as physical attributes. For some events a highly strung temperament is a sine qua non; for others, stoicism, stolidity, an ability to tolerate monotony. So nations that on the whole
correspond to one or the other type will be relatively successful or unsuccessful, remembering again the fallacy of exceptions and the necessity to think of the average.
Temperament again will be conspicuous in the willingness to pay attention to the minute details so necessary to acquire the

B 143

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

technique of the (artificial) field events, combination of races ? The American negro's

quite apart, of course, from any natural African ancestors represent tribes as diver-

ability. The British lack of success in these gent as several peoples of Europe. Among

is a reflection of a reluctance to be bothered them were. the Arabs and Moors from the

rather than the result of any anatomical North coast, Hottentots from the South,

inferiority.

Bantu tribes from the equatorial region,

Climate may be particularly favourable to representatives from Central Africa, the

a certain achievement. Diet may play a part Gold Coast and the Congo. Add also a

although it seems to me that this aspect of certain, though trivial, admixture of Indian

the matter has been emphasized more by and white blood.

cranks and obsessionists than by responsible Moreover, to what is their relative

investigators. The dietetic habits of a great superiority attributable? It is natural to

athlete are always scrutinized and imitated correlate speed with some anatomical advan-

on the idea that they are the secret of his tage-the length of the lower limb, the pro-

prowess. Thus an Oslo physician assured' portion of its two components, the shape of

me in all seriousness that the success of the the knee or heel-but I do not find any

Scandinavian runners was due to the quality convincing conclusions. I think there is some

of the fish inhabiting the waters round their special quality in his muscles-a more rapid

coasts. In my opinion, diet whether of an contractility or reduced viscosity. Alter-

individual or a race has little to do with the natively, there maybe asuperiorco-ordination

matter.

related to his nervous system.

But we are by no means at the end of the As a survival factor, swift running must

complexity.

clearly have been of vital importance to

Psychological factors have tobe considered. primitive man. And although the American

The example and influence of a great negro is a highly organized individual and as

performer lead to a crop of admirers and remote from his ancestor as the white man,

imitators. Then there are social factors. The it may be that this physical attribute persists

athlete who regards his indulgence as a in him in relatively greater degree. Con-

pastime cannot be expected to compete tinuing this hypothesis we can reasonably

successfully with one who by inclination and suppose that there may be remote races In

circumstances can make it the whole business whom it is still more evident and, with the

of life. Circumstances comprehend all sorts extension of athleticism, will be revealed.

of influences and inducements such as The factor of endurance may depend on

encouragement, the provision of skilled some trifle in biochemistry which makes

instruction, the rewards for success, even in a sort of physical genius comparable to a

some instances the imposition of penalties genius in the intellectual world. Whatever

for failure. Nations differ enormously in it is, its distribution is according to Nature's

their attitude: one may be well disciplined ideas as in the case of genius of any kind. I

and prepared to accept or even to prefer mentioned the mathematician in a remote

what in another would provoke resentment Indian village. So with athletics. Some

and obstruction.

anatomical or physiological prodigy may

Thus an ethnic factor or peculiarity can be bom in the Tottenham Court Road or

be rarely if ever identified or isolated with in Siberia. The chances of his discovery

confidence. Perhaps the nearest approach are naturally enormously increased by his

to a justifiable generalization is the negro's contact with athletic circles. The man in the

ability in short-distance races and as a depths of Siberia whilst enjoying a local

jumper. I confess that my acquaintance reputation for fleetness of foot might well

with ethnology is so superficial that I feel remain in ignorance of a claim to be the

compelled to avoid any but the most ele- fastest in the world. As athleticism extends

mentary conclusions. How can one define farther and farther into the world physical

racial characteristics in a race which is a capabilities almost unbelievable by present

RACE AND ATHLETICS

I45

standards may with reasonable confidence contributions to a prospective progeny.

be predicted.

So dismissing this impracticable considera-

In this Journal it is fitting that a few tion, what is to be learnt from actual

words should be added on the subject of observation ? We know that cricket, rowing

genetics. Of course we cannot apply to and lawn tennis " run in families." This

human beings the principles of selective suggests transmitted ability, but we must

breeding of domestic animals and we are pause in reflecting that we are dealing with

sensible enough to recognize that it is the an artificial acquisition; that encouragement,

sentimentalizecl affinities of young people in opportunity and skilled instruction are from

the spring that predominate and will always the earliest age available, the influence of

predominate, uninfluenced by any genetic which has to be accepted side by side with

pronouncements, exhortations or warnings. native ability.

Yet suppose some human beings cold- Yet it must be recorded that the greatest

blooded enough to attempt to experiment of all cricketers was bitterly disappointed by

deliberately and to persuade an athletic his son's achievements with bat and ball!

youth to mate with an athletic young But take a purely natural capability such

woman. It is only too likely than an athletic as swift or prolonged running. I cannot

young man is on the whole not attracted by think of a really great athletic father pro-

an athletic girl, but let us go on supposing. ducing an athletic son of his own quality.

The intention is that the man is a marathon And this, after all, is what one would expect.

runner and the girl a sprinter and the hope, We know Nature's dislike of exceptions and

that of blending the two qualities of speed and her desire to restore the equilibrium. Athletic

staying power in the offspring. Well, history is, as yet, too short to provide

breeders of racehorses-which, after all, are examples of " throw-backs."

required for one specific purpose only-know On the other hand there are a fair number

that it takes six or eight generations to fix a of examples of brothers displaying if not

given quality by heredity, and men are supreme, at any rate distinguished, athletic

hardly to be judged by a less exacting success, a form of inheritance in a generation

standard than horses or dogs. Moreover, that is represented in other ways-intellec-

we know how capriciously heredity acts, tual, physical and pathological-and justi-

and recall Bernard Shaw's classic retort to the fies the postulation of an athletic gene or, as

beautiful danseuse respecting their relative the physician might prefer to say, diathesis.

Society for Constructive Birth Control and RACIAL PROGRESS The First Birth Control Clinic in the World

THE MOTHERS' CLINIC

There is also a

Founded by DR. MARIE STQPES, March 17th, 1921.

SpecialIstLuecctiuoraes

~Library~~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~anLibraryrReference
which may be con-

FromRtehfeebreegnicnening deamlairnrgiwaigteh parllobalsepmesc.ts of birth control and

Demonstrations
Members of

thteo

suited and Lending Library for Mem-

OPEN

DAILY

(not

Sats.)

10 a.m. to 6 p.m.

FREE

Medical Profession
are regularly given.

bers of the Society. Address: xo6/1o8, WHITFIELD STREET, LONDON, W.I Application by ktter

necessary.

Rugenlee Review,, Vol. X1JV. NRo. 8

