THE BOMBAY CONFERENCE AND ITS AFTERMATH: REACTIONS OF THE PRESS

By VERA HOUGHTON

General Secretary, International Planned Parenthood Federation*

T HE reception accorded by the Press
of India to the Third International
Conference on Planned Parenthood,
held in Bombay from Monday, November
24th to Saturday, November 29th, I952,
was something quite unprecedented in the
experience of most of the delegates from other countries and indeed, I believe, in that
of India itself. Interest was first aroused some days before the opening of the Conference by a Press conference, held by Lady
Rama Rau and other prominent members of the Indian Family Planning Association, which was attended by between thirty and
forty representatives of journals and newspapers. Interest ended on or about December 6th with the departure of the main body
of delegates. During the six days of the Conference
much publicity was given to the communications presented by leading demographers, sociologists and doctors from some fourteen countries. And such colourful personalities as Mrs. Margaret Sanger and Dr. Abraham Stone of U.S.A., Mrs. Frida Laski of Great Britain, Mrs. Ottesen-Jensen of Sweden, Senator Mrs. Shidzue Kato of Japan and Dr. S. Chandrasekhar of Baroda University were often " in the news."
The inaugural address by India's VicePresident, Dr. S. Radhakrishnan, has already been adjudged the most remarkable feature of the Conference.t As was to be expected, his oration: made headlines in the English and vernacular Press of India the following morning. While some papers, like Amrita Bazar Patrika, in Calcutta and Allahabad,

echoed Dr. Radhakrishnan's plea " To Give Better Chance to Future Children," others went further by challengingly demanding population control and family planning. In Bihar, " Frequent Childbirth is a Cruelty to Women " was the banner headline of a twocolumn report in the Indian Nation; The Bombay Chronicle called for " Family Planning to Ensure Health, Happiness"; and the Times of India announced that "Birth Control is Not Ethically Banned for Social Welfare."
A note of caution in the Prime Minister's message to the Conference against a tendency to ascribe all ills of India to over-population was regarded by some as a warning to family planners; but on the whole comment was fair and balanced. Here are extracts from two influential papers; the first sounds a cautionary note:
If the third International Conference on Planned Parenthood now being held in Bombay underlines anything it demonstrates that an increasing number of scientists and statesmen seek in the popularisation of birth control an escapist solution. The case for family planning is not altogether irrational since the conditions of utter destitution in which millions of children are born and bred constitute an evil and a challenge to the conscience of mankind.... What is dangerous is an over-emphasis which might lead to a distortion of the entire perspective of social and economic problems, particularly in under-developed countries.... Family planning has its place in a comprehensive programme of agricultural and industrial development. But divorced from such a programme it can only be a stratagem to confuse the real issue and evade its solution. It is to run away from, not face the problem.-Editorial in Times of India, November 26th.

* Mrs. Houghton arrived in India some three weeks before the beginning of the Conference and was much concerned both with its organization and with the
final arrangements.
t See Notes of the Quayter, EUGENICS REVIEW,
Vol. 44, 4, January, I953. $ The full text, as revised and approved by Dr.
Radhakrishnan, is published elsewhere in this issue.

The problem of over-population is a delicate one. Scientists hold that fecundity is high in a backward country. Poor, hungry, undernourished, illiterate people produce more. Thus, the automatic restraints on the growth of population can be forged by raising the standards of living and by promoting social reform measures.

41

42 i THE- EUGENICS REVIEW

Mr. Nehru in a message to the conference urged against planned parenthood in --"the modern

for a scientific approach which should not be scientific sense of contraception, the Planning

'inhibited by preconceptions or convictions Commission had favoured the dissemination of

already held. In Mr. Nehru's view, the problem knowledge of birth control.-Times of Inidia,

is one of higher production per capita and proper November 26th.

distribution. He told the conference that " the Government of India have an open mind on this subject." The family planning is most urgent in Asia because of pressing economic problems. In Asian countries the rate of industrial and agricultural production is low, and the population increases faster than the food supply. Thus, people in Asia oscillate between scarcity and famine. The family planning is a step towards the economic recovery. Mrs. Shidzue

Dr. Chandrasekhar said, " A charitable view may be that the Government is not quite stire whether our people, particularly our wives and mothers, both in the urban and rural areas, are in favour of contraception." He said that a
survey was now being carried out in Baroda City in Bombay State to find the attitude of mothers on the question of planned parenthood.
-The Hindu, November 27th.

Kato told the conference that Japan today had It should perhaps be explained that the

an average family of two children. This is Indian Government has supported pilot

helping Japan for economic rehabilitation in a quicker way. Family planning is sure to lead to improvement in standards of living which

experiments in the Rhythm, or Safe Period, method which were set up by Dr. Abraham

India needs badly.-Indian Nation, Bihar, Stone in the course of his important visit

November 29th.

to India in October I95I as the World

The reporting, which was both accurate Health Organisation's Consultant on Family

and comprehensive, of the Plenary Sessions Planning.

was no doubt helped by the fact that most Dr. Stone's definition of an ideal contra-

of the communications to the Conference ceptive as one which is harmless, reliable

were available in print at the time of and acceptable appealed to the Press, which

presentation.

widely reported his suggestion that " the

Full use was made by the Press of figures people of the world today were on the

given by Dr. S. Chandrasekhar of Baroda threshold of the realization of long-sought-

University and by Dr. C. Chandrasekharan, for contraceptive techniques . . . acceptable

Director of United Nations Office for Popu- by peoples of all cultures."

lation Studies, New Delhi, of surveys being Resolutions were passed on the last day

carried out in different parts of India to of the Conference when the name of the

ascertain the attitude of mothers towards International Committee on Planned Parent-

family planning. The initial results of a hood was changed to the International

survey being carried out in Baroda-

Planned Parenthood Federation with a

showed that 63 per cent of Gujeratis, 77 per widened scope. These resolutions were

cent of Marathis and 70 per cent of mothers belonging to other communities favoured birth control. Eighteen per cent of Gujeratis, 5 per

printed in full in the Sunday papers (November 30th). Also widely reported was the

cent of Marathis favoured moral restraint while decision to invite India, Japan, Hong Kong,

the percentage of mothers who were against all Singapore and Western Germany to join

kinds of birth control was i9 (Gujeratis), i8

(Marathis) and 30 other communities.-Times

of India, November 26th.

In Bangalore,

/

6o per cent of the urban and 40 per cent of the

rural couples (of a total of 2,000 interviewed)

the Federation forthwith. The announcement
of the election of Mrs. Margaret Sanger and Lady Rama Rau as joint honorary presidents of the Federation.was accompanied in most editions by photographs of the two

favoured birth control.-Times of India, Novem- Presidents.

ber 29th.
A criticism by Dr. S. Chandrasekhar of the Dr. C. P. BLACKER adds:

lack of co-ordination amongst Government The word " historical " is doubtless over-

Departments in tackling the question of worked. But future developments may well

population planning did not escape notice. confer upon this Conference, which was but

He was reported as having said:

scantily noticed in the newspapers of coun-

While the Minister of Health appeared to be tries outside India, what will later be dis-

B YBA ONFERENEE

43

cemed as historical importance. Indeed the
Conference has been almost immediately
followed by a most noteworthy event,
though how far the Conference can be held
responsible for this event is as yet uncertain. Before Dr. Radhakrishnan delivered on
the evening of Monday, November 24th, his address to the Conference's inaugural meeting, a message from India's Prime Minister, Mr. Nehru, was read. In this message, Mr. Nehru wished the Conference well; but he carefully stated that, though the Planning Commission responsible for India's five-year plan had made definite recommendations on the topic of family planning, these recommendations had not yet been officially adopted by the Government, which, over this important issue, still maintained an attitude of neutrality. The fact that Dr. Radhakrishnan, in his ensuing address (which can be read elsewhere in this issue), paid much respectful attention to the views of Mr. Gandhi, suggests that the Indian Government's hesitancy in 'this matter may have been connected with what they held to be the unready state of public opinion, which they knew had been much influenced by the views of the Mahatma. (Gandhi, whose outlook has much in common with that of the Pope, had consistently

opposed the use of appliance methods and
had sanctioned no alternative to abstinence and continence.)
The event above mentioned as having occurred after the Conference is that the recommendation of India's Planning Commission's five-year plan, which provided for
a sum of 65 lakhs of rupees (£540,000) to be
allocated to the Ministry of Health for a family planning programme, has been passed by the Indian Parliament. The views expressed by the Commission should be noted. The Commission holds that, if acceptable and effective, the Rhythm method is best suited to India: it avoids enormous expenditure, and the self-imposed restraint which it exacts is held to be morally beneficial." Nevertheless, the Commission declares, "research and experiment need not . . be confined to a single method." It adds that "there are numerous voluntary agencies which are currently propagating the spread of information on family planning and the use of chemical and mechanical contraceptives "; and it suggests that these agencies. should be given support.
[The full report of the Proceedings of the Bombay Conference will be available in Aprilprice, ios. 6d. Copies can be ordered from the .International Planned Parenthood Federation, 69 Eccleston Square, London, S.W.i.]

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLV, No. 1

