Opinion Surveys

T HE EUGENICS SOCIETY'S first survey limitation of problem families and with provid-

of opinion was fully discussed in the July ing facilities for voluntary sterilization; 9 per

1962 (54, 57-9) issue of the REVIEW, the cent more scientists than classicists opted for

questionnaire itself having been reproduced in "encouraging the birth of more children to

the October 1961 number (53, 180-1). Briefly, families whose early born children show

this survey was addressed to 1,000 people whose particular promise".

names appear in Who's Who, 406 of whom returned completed questionnaires.
The Council of the Eugenics Society later decided to extend this inquiry and send the same questionnaire to educationalists: on a stratified plan, 3,992 names were taken from the membership list of the Association for Science Education and 1,349 from that of the Classical Association. Twenty-four questionnaires were not received by the scientists, leaving 3,968 effective names, of

CREATION OR NATURAL SELECTION: 86 per cent of the scientists and 95 per cent of the classicists gave natural selection as their preference; neither group approached the remarkable Who's Who figure for a belief in "creation". There was, however, a significant group, particularly among classicists (15 per cent) who stated spontaneously that "natural selection and creation are not mutually exclusive".

which 1,089 (27 per cent) replied. There were HEREDITY AND ENVIRONMENT:

forty-two non-recipients among the classicists- Among scientists, seven out of ten considered

this larger proportion is largely accounted for that heredity has more effect upon intelligence

by the Classical Association's membership list than environment does. The comparative pro-

being under revision at the time. An effective list portion among classicists is only slightly lower

of 1,307 names yielded 302 completed question- (65 per cent). About one in five of both groups

naires (24 per cent).

considered both heredity and environment were

These percentages represent a low level of equally important, though it is interesting to

response for surveys of this type, especially when note that as many as one in ten of classicists felt

compared with the Who's Who survey, where in that they did not know.

addition to the 41 per cent who returned com- As in the previous survey, both groups tended

pleted questionnaires a further 10 per cent were to name the other influence as having the

sufficiently interested to write and return un- principal effect on social behaviour-74 per

completed forms. There was no such response per cent of scientists and 65 per cent of classicists

in the Educationalist survey. It would appear, said that environxment was more important than

therefore, that interest in the subject needs heredity. The classicists here showed more

arousing, even among educated people, but that certainty. One in four of the remaining respond-

(not unexpectedly) the range of thought and ents considered that both environment and

sense of duty of those whose names appear in heredity were of equal importance.

Who's Who are greater than average.

In the Who's Who survey 80 per cent sup-

ported the idea that research on human heredity

Broadly correct definitions of EUGENICS should be carried out. Among classicists and

were given by 89 per cent of scientists and 92 per scientists support was even higher-84 and 88

cent of classicists. This is a very similar figure to per cent respectively. Only 1 per cent in each

that found in the Who's Who sample, although group was against it. Knowledge that the

the scientists and classicists tended to be more questionnaire was put out by the Eugenics

specific in their answers, quoting dictionary Society may have had some influence here. The

definitions or referring to the Greek derivation. main reason given for encouraging research is

Three out of four in each of the three groups the general one that all knowledge is useful and

indicated that eugenics is concerned with the that all research is justifiable on this ground, but

2 11

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

17 per cent of scientists and 10 per cent of lack of knowledge on technical points rather

classicists specifically mentioned the problems of than from definitely opposed views. Both groups

inherited disease and defects.

are more in sympathy with eugenic thought than

the Who's Who sample, but the differences are

WORLD POPULATION CONTROL: Nearly marginal.

everyone (93 per cent) agreed that the population Reverting to the varying degrees of response

of the world was increasing fast, but as com- elicited from these three groups of people, a

pared with the 44 per cent of the previous survey, comparison raises some interesting conjectures:

only 38 per cent of classicists and 33 per cent of the first, Who's Who, questionnaire was sent out

scientists thought it was too large in relation to under the name of Social Surveys (Gallup Poll)

the natural resources of the world. This perhaps Limited, the second inquiry under that of the

is because scientists are more aware of the Eugenics Society with a covering letter from the

present misuse and maldistribution of world General Secretary; the replies were addressed to

resources- 1I per cent of them volunteered this the Society and only the final analysis was made

statement. Of the classicists, 20 per cent were by Gallup Poll.

unable to give an opinion on this question. It Apparently there are people who willingly

seems extraordinary that about one person in reply to an anonymous inquiry but do not care

ten should think that the population of the to let their names become known to a committed

world is too small in relation to its resources. organization-perhaps they fear further involve-

Nine out of ten people, however, still considered ment in the form of eugenic propaganda or

that we should try and control the increase in invitations to membership. On the other hand,

population and not rely on increasing world in the Who's Who survey 43 per cent of the

resources. To this end, the encouragement of the replies came from people who were aged sixty-

use of birth control was advocated by 80 per five or over. No information on age was available

cent of the classicists and 85 per cent of the in the later survey, but it seems likely that a much

scientists (the same proportion as was shown in smaller proportion were beyond retiring age

the Who's Who survey).

and that the replies came on the whole from a

Reactions to specific suggestions about pos- younger section of the community; there is also

sible methods of controlling the population were the point that many older people have more

again very similar to those shown in the previous leisure to devote to the task of filling in a

survey. Only three methods showed differences questionnaire.

of more than 5 per cent. Of scientists and Another point to be remembered, one which

classicists, 56 per cent recommended seeking to also applied to the Who's Who survey, is that

deter certain people from having children as those who take the trouble to fill in and return

compared with 63 per cent from Who's Who: the forms are likely to be people who are already

fewer classicists than either other group were in interested in the subjects involved and enjoy an

favour of providing greater opportunities for opportunity of airing their views. Thus the

voluntary sterilization, but on the other hand samples which have been analysed may be

more were in favour of legalizing abortion. Only overweighted on this side.

one-third of the educationalists were specifically To sum up, the surveys have shown a general

against such a measure.

similarity of opinion among those of a random

Throughout both surveys the three groups selection of three groups of educated people who

completing the questionnaire showed remark- elected to respond to the Society's questionnaire.

able unanimity on many questions. The scientists These findings will be of valuable general

are slightly, but only slightly, more in favour of information to the Council in guiding the actions

eugenic policies and views than the classicists and policies of the Eugenics Society during the

who, when they lag behind appear to do so from coming months and years.

212

