REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

245

system is entirely sexual. As regards kinship, the view that the Central

Australians ignore the part played by the father in procreation is accepted

too readily by the author. Mr. Walter Heape's criticism of this view

seems to be final, viz., that for certain reasons (analogous to those which

produced the idea of the Immaculate Conception) the Australians have

intentionally ignored what they really knew very well. An excellent

feature of the author's study is that he takes into account the facts of

daily life, the emotional side of family relations, and the magico-religious

ideas about kinship and so forth. He quotes his documents at full length,

an excellent practice. The fascinating subject of Australian family organ-

isation, so difficult to follow in the multifarious literature, is here

presented in a most readable and well-digested form, and this one volume

gives the student the whole of the subject. It is indispensable to sociolo-

gists. Eugenists will find its data and inferences very valuable for a

study of the connexion between the morphology of the family and the

welfare of the race.

A. E. CRAWLEY.

Greenwood, ARTHUR. The Health and Physique of School Children. London. P. S. King and Son, 19I3 (for the Ratan Tata Foundation); price is. net; pp. xv. + 96.

THIS volume contains an account of an investigation commenced in the Economics Department of Huddersfield Technical College by Mr. George H. Woods, F.S.S., and completed by Mr. Greenwood, the head of the department. It is based on the records contained in the annual reports of school medical officers who give averages of the height and weight of the children under their supervision, arranged according to age. These records have been accumulating since the passage of the Education (Administrative Provisions) Act of 1907, and a statistical summary of a considerable proportion of them, such as is contained in the volume under review, should receive a hearty welcome, particularly from those who are in a position to realise the large amount of labour involved in its preparation. The number of children dealt with exceeds 8oo,ooo, so that it may be concluded that the general results obtained are based on sufficient data to be reliable. A system of index numbers is employed for the purpose of making comparisons between different districts with regard to the physical development of their children. These numbers are arranged in four series. Boys' height, boys' weight, girls' height,

and girls' weight are calculated measurement at that age for the

for each age by group dealt with

dividing the average by the corresponding

average for the whole of England and Wales and multiplying by zoo.

To make this process clearer we will take a particular case. Suppose

the average weight of seven-year-old girls in Berkshire is 47'9 lbs.; in

the whole of England and Wales it is 46-6 lbs. Therefore the index

number for the weight of seven-year-old girls in Berkshire is

100 X 47'9 lbs. + 46'6 lbs., or I02'8. Having calculated the index

number for each age the general index number for the group or district

can be obtained by taking the average of all ages. This process facili-

tates comparison between different districts.

Applying the method just described to the task of comparing the effects of town or country life we obtain the following table:

Index Numbers.

Boys' Boys' Girls' Girls'

Height. Weight. Height. Weight.
County council (rural areas) ... O1@4 ... 103'3 ... IoI-6 ... i03-I
County icouncil (urban areas),

i.e., small towns ... ... 100'2 ... I005 ... too6 ... roo'8

Manufacturing towns ... ... 98'7 . 97-9 ... 98'2 ... 97 0

This table shows that elementary school children are on the whole better developed physically in the country than in small towns, and in

246 EUGENICS REVIEW.

small towns than in large, and leads one to question whether the agri-

cultural labourer is so badly off as he is sometimes represented.

Another interesting application of the method is to the study of

the effects of child labour on the development of the child. In Bra'dford

children of the age of twelve are allowed to spend half the day in school

and the other half-day earning wages. This is known as the half-time

system. Mr. Greenwood shows that the average of the height and weight

indices (the combinied index number) is low in Bradford for children

of twelve years old. Its value is actually 9547, whereas for children of

eleven in Bradford it is 99'2, and for children of twelve in Leeds, Sheffield,

and Wakefield, where the half-time system is not in use to so great an

extent, it is 97'4, 97'8, and 96'8 respectively. He argues from these

figures that the half-day's labour has a deleterious effect on the physique

of the child, a result which seems natural enough and is supported by

evidence of another kind brought forward in another section of the work.

But he makes no mention of the fact that at thirteen years the combined

index number goes up again in Bradford to 98'7, which is considerably

higher than the corresponding index in Leeds, Sheffield, or Wakefield.

In presenting the figures without mentioning this Mr. Greenwood shows

a certain bias, at any rate a strong desire to arrive at his conclusion

rather than let the statistics lead him where they will. In Oldham the

material allowed a direct comparison between the half-time children

and those who spend the whole day at school. But the half-timers are

throughout larger and heavier than the full-timers. The explanation

of this unexpected result is given by the medical officer for Oldham as

follows: " (I) That those working half-time are on the average older than

those not working; (2) that the tendency would be for the stronger and

better developed children to go to work, while the weaker and delicate
children would be kept at school; (3) that the worker, as he is bringing

in a wage, is better fed than those who are not wage earners." Possibili-

ties which might have an opposite tendency, as for example, that the

children of the poorer parents were more likely to be sent to work, are

not considered. The question is thus seen to be a complicated one,

which will not be solved without the collection and reduction of better

data. This should present no particular difficulty, as the exact age of the

children in the two groups, their physique, and home oonditions might

without difficulty be removed from the realms of conjecture and properly

allowed for. But though the simple comparison made in the worK under

review cannot be said to have led to a definite conclusion, it is not for that

reason without value as it serves to point the way for future work.

We will conclude by tempering the wind of general commendation

which issues naturally from us, by the question, " Why are the diagrams

so very sketchy.? "

EDGAR SCHUSTER.

Pearl, R. A Contribution towards an Analysis of the Problem of Inbreeding. Amer. Nat. XLVII.; I913; pp. 577-614. Genetics and Breeding. Science XXXVII.; 1913; pp. 539-546; and Parshley, H. M. Data on Sex-Determination in Cattle. Biological Bulletin XXIV.; 1913; pp. 205-225.
IN the first of these papers Dr. Pearl presents a method for determining the intensity of inbreeding. He points out that it is important to start
from the individual and work backwards into the ancestry, rather than to start from the ancestry and work downwards. The method adopted consists in finding a coefficient which shall represent the ratio of actual ancestors in any generation to the total possible number of ancestors. For example, if brother is mated with sister for three successive generations, the offspring will have only two great-grandparents instead of the
eight which they would have if there were no inbreeding. Three-quarters of the ancestors in that generation have thus been eliminated, and the co-
efficient of inbreeding for the three generations is therefore 75 per cent.

