A. C. STEVENSON
B.Sc., M.D., F.R.C.P. Director, Population Genetics Research Unit, Medical Research Council, Oxford
Modern Trends in the Population Genetics of Man

T HERE HAVE BEEN many factors which are available to be put to the test by planned

have influenced our thinking on popula- observation in populations. It has to be re-

tion genetics over the past ten or fifteen membered that such complexly inherited traits

years. The term "Population Genetics" still are more numerous and, on the whole, more

connotes a largely theoretical subject. Chapters severe in total effects on individuals and popula-

with such a heading in textbooks tend to deal tions than those simply inherited. Therefore,

with the hypothetical distribution of genes and from a medical point of view, it is import-

traits in populations as determined primarily by ant that their aetiology should be understood.

Mendelian segregation and modified by factors The large range of ill-understood developmental

such as fresh mutations at varying rates, anomalies and of premature degenerative pro-

selection in various degrees against different cesses with genetical components in aetiology

genotypes and different intensities of inbreed- form an impressive proportion of all wastage of

ing in populations of finite size. The enormous human life at the present time.

complexities introduced by even these variables limit most of the theory developed to situations Advantages and Disadvantages of Man as a at single loci being considered in isolation from Subject for Genetical Study

the whole genome.

Before considering current preoccupations in

The brilliant theories developed by Fisher, human population genetics it seems well to

Haldane and Hogben in this country and Sewell recall some of the advantages and disadvantages

Wright in the United States have been of the of man as an organism for genetical study, for it

greatest value in advancing genetical thought is still sometimes assumed that the limitations of

and in stimulating further work. Over the years study of man are such that human genetics is a

they have been vindicated by work on the kind of poor cousin of experimental genetics,

population genetics of blood group gene and perhaps even a rather dilettante occupation.

systems. Indeed, they continue to mould the

form of all planned observation in human Some Advantages of Man

genetics.

It is interesting to remember that following the

However, these theories, although valid when pioneer papers of Haldane' and Penrose' there

the strict conditions for their application are was a period of over ten years before a spontane-

present, have severe limitations and can easily be ous mutation rate estimate was available for any

misused even when considering what are prob- vertebrate except man. At the present time

ably single gene determined harmful traits in estimates are available for some twenty auto-

man. When we come to consider traits which, somal dominant and a number of sex linked

although not inherited by a simple mechanism, recessive genes in man. Further, these estimates

have some genetical component in aetiology are based, not only on the findings in free living

and which are both more numerous and of populations in a manner quite impossible in

greater social importance in man; then often experimental genetics, but the sizes ofthe popula-

only vague, complex and ill-defined hypotheses tions in whom these mutations have occurred are

*A paper read at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics
Society on December 14th, 1960.

very much larger than those available in experimental work, even with fruit ffies. Men have

9 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1961, 53, 1.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

names and other identifiable characteristics morphology in man and above all in facility of

which enable them to be traced. They know their relating developmental anomalies to chromo-

close relatives-even if it is said to be only the somal aberrations. Far more is already known of

wise who know their own fathers! Men can these relationships in man than in any other

detect subtle differences in each other because mammal.

they are studying their own species. Everyone A criticism of human genetics has been its

can recognize hundreds of individuals only seen apparent preoccupation with the abnormal and

once before and subtle changes of expression perhaps particularly with the harmful traits

such as fatigue are recognized in a way impossible which are, in sum, socially unimportant. This is

if another species was being studied. There is a valid criticism but it is important to realize that

only one species of man and all races can inter- the rare is usually simply inherited and available

breed. Men live in a greater variety of environ- for study with our blunt tools, and that these are

ments than any other creatures. Perhaps as just the kinds of characters still used by experi-

important, practically and potentially, is the mental geneticists for most of their work. Most

very high degree of sophistication of techniques animals used in experimental genetics are killed

of investigation of disease which have been long before they have time to develop the

developed in modem medicine, permitting a premature degenerative processes with hereditary

unique range and precision of variation in man associations which we are urged to study in man.

to be displayed. When new discoveries of medical Few counterparts to these complex processes

importance are made, the intensity and high have been recognized or adequately studied in

standards of work which follows make for animals. Human medicine enables us to identify

accumulation of knowledge at remarkable speed. the abnormal with so much greater precision than

The first concept of specific enzymic products in animals. It is not surprising that a large

of genes arose in man some fifty years ago with amount of experimental genetics, now as in the

Garrod's concept of inborn errors of metabolism past, concerns itself with abnormal traits quite

and it was only after thirty years that work on parallel to those studied in man. The great

neurospora and subsequently in other fungi, majority of such clear-cut harmful traits are

moulds and bacteria gave practical demonstra- extremely rare in free-living populations. Only tion of the importance of this theory and again their introduction into laboratory and use for

revolutionized genetical thought. The discovery example as markers in experimental work makes

of blood group incompatibilities in man gave them familiar, but how often do they occur in

rise to the sophistications of modem blood free-living populations?

group serology. More recently, haemoglobin It so happens that two classes of genes useful

and serum protein differences, and the situations in animal studies appear to have few counter-

at loci uncovered by drug sensitivities are not parts in man. The first is the relatively mild

only opening up new vistas in human genetics effect "recessive gene". Human single recessive

but are stimulating an immense amount of genes are, with the exception of albinism and a

experimental work. Surgical problems of grafting number of eye traits, nearly lethal. Almost

uncovered bisto-incompatibility problems which certainly a majority of what the experimentalists

have also stimulated brilliant experimental regard as recessives would be recognized in the

research. In turn, these experimental researches heterozygote in man and so would be classed as

feed back to man and offer further opportuni- dominants. The second is that we have no

ties in medicine and human genetics.

common easily recognized differences in man

Now that advances in techniques have enabled us to study mammalian chromosomes,

determined by single genes such as those determining coat colour in animals.

practical needs, sophistications of clinical diagnosis far higher in man than in any other Some Disadvantages of Man

organisms and previous knowledge of histo- Enough has been said, I think, to show that

pathological changes, have made for very rapid human genetics has for many years repaid with

advances in understanding of chromosomal interest its original debt to experimental genetics

I0

MODERN TRENDS IN THE POPULATION GENETICS OF MAN

and it is interesting to see, in papers in experi- devastating than the latter, particularly in the

mental genetics journals, how much in the way context of quantitative radiation estimates.

of inspiration and technique has derived from It is extremely important in view of these

modem medicine and human genetics. It is difficulties that, unless the human geneticist is

foolish, however, to make such comparisons for dealing with characteristics assessed in the

any other purpose than to show that, as in the laboratory (and often even then), every possible

wider field, all biology and medicine are com- effort be made to keep to the highest clinical

plementary to each other and are the strongly standards. This does not involve relying entirely

cross-fertilizing component parts of a larger on the diagnosis of a clinician-for he will tend

discipline.

to equate heterogeneous traits for other reasons,

It is proper, therefore, to point, in turn, to the e.g. response to treatment. Rather, it implies the

limitations of human genetics. The greatest of need for the closest co-operation with clinicians

all is obviously the impossibility of planned and for them to be so genetically orientated as

breeding experiments affording the classical and to be on the look-out for both clinical and

basic tool of genetical analysis. This is not so genetical heterogeneity.

serious in respect of balanced polymorphic loci

where by definition the least common allele is Single Gene Trait Studies in Man

not likely to be maintained at its observed or calculated frequency by any substantial contribution from mutation. In those balanced systems the least frequently occurring allele would perhaps occur in about 1 per cent of individuals in a given population. At this frequency, however, with patience, sufficient matings of appropriate kinds turn up in time to produce most, if not quite all, of the information needed for adequate formal analysis.

Perhaps the simplest and most obvious opportunity in human population genetics is to study the pattern of distribution of traits which are the expression of single autosomal dominant or sex-linked genes in a defined population. This at its best involves "complete ascertainment" of all cases in a defined population, the word of
necessity being used in the rather specific sense as identification of all characterized individuals,
either in a series of births in a geographical area

The impossibility of test matings is serious, or in a population living in a defined area. The

however, in respect of the harmful effect mutant sophistications of "ascertainment" and their

gene traits where fresh mutation frequency, bearing on interpretation of findings are too

although very low, has theoretically a simple complex to be dealt with here and it must suffice

relationship to the gene and trait frequencies to say that we can never be sure that an ascer-

in populations. Matings between persons tainment is complete, and that nearness to

both affected by the same trait are uncommon complete ascertainment and the methods to be

events but where they occur rarely, by chance employed will be different for every trait. Any-

or by social selection as in the case of deaf thing short of complete ascertainment introduces

mutism, they tend to reveal what we know serious sampling doubts. Further, the work

from experimental animals and suspect to be involved takes time and persistance; it is expen-

very common in man on other grounds, namely, sive, and it is dependent on achieving a high

that mutations at different gene loci or of differ- degree of co-operation with many people. Much

ent alleles can determine indistinguishable traits. work of this kind has been done, particularly in

Further we cannot adequately separate the two Sweden, Denmark, the United States and the

mechanisms as would be possible by genetical United Kingdom, and as a result we have a

analysis in well studied experimental animals. series of estimates of different trait frequencies

So we must qualify our optimism about the and mutation rates. It is at least reassuring to

validity of mutation rates as estimated for man find that the order of magnitude of mutation

and realize that some-I am tempted to think rates for this class of gene estimated per gamete

practically all-are the expressions of fresh per generation in man is similar to that in other

mutations occurring at different loci or to species and that for the same genes of this class

different alleles at one locus. The former is more estimates made by different observers in all the

II

ER-C

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

countries mentioned are in substantial agree- any subsequent examples of the condition arising

ment. can be identified with reasonable confidence?

There remains doubt, however, as to whether

they really represent absolute rates for specific The Importance of Harmful Recessive Genes

gene mutations, the sum of similar mutations at Ascertainment of recessive traits is on the whole one locus or the sum of like-expression muta- even more difficult than for dominant autosomal tions at different loci. It must also be a matter of and sex linked recessive traits. This is mainly surmise whether mutation rates for this narrow because they are usually so lethal that few subclass of genes, namely well known grossly harm- jects are living at any one time. Even with comful autosomal dominant and sex-linked genes, are plete ascertainment, and all evidence pointing to representative of rates of mutation at other loci. a one-gene-one-trait relationship, mutation rate
Nevertheless, estimates of spontaneous muta- estimates are at best hazardous. Any calculations

tions so made are an essential part of the logic of the rather hazardous estimates which have
been made of the effects of radiation on human heredity. Work of this kind must continue and much of the methodology evolved in these studies has other applications. In any event, so far as total detriment to a population is con-

have to make so many assumptions not susceptible to check, and other known variables such as the effects of relaxation of inbreeding cannot be expressed in quantitative terms
because the relevant information just does not exist.
Always there has to be assumed that the

cerned from dominant or sex linked genes whose expression is marked enough and specific enough to detect, we can make reasonable estimates of the total harmful effects in terms of premature death and of disability.

heterozygote carrier is neither at an advantage nor a disadvantage in selection, that there is no gametal selection and that the gene is uniformly distributed in the population studied. Such assumptions can seldom be tested.

When we come to consider autosomal recessive There is a large group of lethal recessive genes

genes the position is very different. As I have in man which determine traits having a fre-

already mentioned those recognized in man are quency of between 1/100,000 and 1/20,000 births.

all grossly harmful in their effects and most are, As in the whole of these islands there are only

in the genetic sense, lethal. The summated fre- just over a million births a year, it is clear that a

quencies of the recessive genes are far greater high gene frequency in a geographical isolate, or

than the sum of the previous classes considered. in a group such as Irish emigrants to England

Individuals homozygous for such genes and who tend to intermarry, could account for many

therefore showing the trait are fortunately very cases. Unthinking estimates of gene frequency in

uncommon. Further, it is likely that there are the whole population from the total trait fre-

many hundreds of such genes which are not quency could be very misleading. Suppose in a

recognized at all but which are grossly deleter- population of 50 million people there were ten

ious and lethal, or near lethal, to homozygotes. cases, then, if we assume that the trait frequency

This is simply because the homozygotes arise so represents the chance coming together of two

infrequently and most commonly only in one genes in the offspring of carrier parents in a

member of a sibship, that the aetiology is not population where the gene is uniformly dis-

suspected. Even if two sibs are affected with a tributed, then we have to assume-that the carrier

new and strange syndrome it is impossible to be frequency in the population is just under

more than suspicious, as common environ- 1/1,000, i.e. there were 50,000 carriers. However,

mental factors or multifactorial genetical causes all these cases could have occurred in a sub-

can just as readily determine such a situation. It population of about 100,000 in whom the great

is highly probable if two sibs are affected and the majority of the genes in the population were

parents are related, that a recessive gene is concentrated. In that case the carrier frequency

involved but what proportion of such cases are in the isolate would be about 1 in 50 and the

reported in the literature? Further, of those total carriers about 2,000 representing in the

reported how many are so fully described that whole population a frequency not of 1/1,000 but

I2

MODERN TRENDS IN THE POPULATION- GENETICS OF MAN

ofabout 1/25,000. Recent work by our Chairman they must contribute appreciably to these intra-

this evening, Dr. Cedric Carter, and Dr. Louis uterine losses and to complete infertility. It is,

Woolf on the preponderance of phenylketonuric however, probably fair to say that at very most

children attending Great Ormond Street Hospital a few per cent of such losses are so caused,

who have Irish origins provide an excellent because not only studies of the offspring of

example of this type of phenomenon.

related parents but of consanguinity in the

However, there can be little question that in parents of abortions and stillbirths fail to supply

total harmful effects of single gene expressions, any supporting evidence for such a contention.7

recessive genes are of much greater importance Indeed, in much animal work death in utero

than dominant or sex-linked genes and may seems to be equated to "lethals" whether

approach those of more complex constellations "point" or gene mutations or gross chromosomal

of genes determining developmental and de- aberrations. No doubt both mechanisms occur in

generative conditions. Further, any increase of man but they cannot account for more than a

mutation rates from radiation or otherwise small fraction of losses. In regard to harmful

would in time raise the frequency of these visible effect genes there is sufficient evidence,

traits, in the same proportion as dominant or however, to show that on average in some

sex linked.

Swedish, American, British and Japanese popula-

tions every individual is the heterozygous carrier

Consanguinity Studies

of, on average, between two and four genes,

As so many individual recessive gene effects cannot be recognized, extensive use has been made in recent years of another approach, namely, the ascertainment of cousin marriages and the comparison with those of non-consanguineous marriages in respect of the number of pregnancies, the occurrence of single recessive gene traits, the losses in utero, the malformations in foetuses and those born alive and the subse-

each individually of low frequency in the
population, which would be grossly harmful in
the homozygous genotype. There is also evidence for an excess of early mortality from all causes in the offspring. The Japanese data has also raised other extremely interesting questions about recessive genes or at least about the effects of inbreeding not related so specifically to genotype at a single locus.

quent mortality experience in the offspring.

Some recent data which we have collected in

It is not, I feel, being merely a carping critic Oxford suggest rather strongly that recessive

to say that no investigation has been conducted genes play no part, or at least no important

in such a way as to give data worth serious role, in determining complete infertility in

quantitative consideration except that conducted otherwise normal persons: of some 700 spouses

by Schull and Neel5 in Japan and even this to infertile marriages only five are the offspring

inquiry could only consider such marriages of related parents.

when at least one pregnancy ensued and one A whole theory has evolved using terms such

mature child was born.

as a "load of mutations", and "lethal equival-

From all these inquiries there is no con- ents" meaning an effect determining in total the

vincing evidence of a role of recessive genes in same number of deaths as a specified number of

abortions or non-specific cause still births. Of completely lethal recessive genes. The derivation

course, there may be recessive gene determined of such hypotheses is, however, rather tenuous

very early embryonic deaths but there is no and may be regarded as part of the result of

evidence on this point in man and a proportion trying to find ways of expressing genetical situ-

of recessive gene determined abortions and still ations in numerical terms for the purpose of

births could be present but not in numbers trying, in turn, to get quantitative estimates of

statistically significant.

radiation damage in man. Such conceptions are

Experimental geneticists always assume that immensely stimulating but there is some danger,

some abortions, still births and some complete as always when numerical estimates are made,

infertility are determined by single lethal mutant that the very hazardous derivation may be lost

genes in man. Further, they tend to assume that sight of in the subsequent mathematics.

I3

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The Basic Conception of Population Structure to make them practical propositions for popula-

Regarding Single Harmful Recessive Genes tion studies.

The real crux of the matter revolves round There is, therefore, increasing interest in the

whether in most recessive genes the heterozygote mechanisms which determine balanced polycarrier is just a normal individual whose morphisms of traits such as the blood groups,

viability and fertility are in no way affected by haemoglobins and haptoglobins and the inreason of his carrying a harmful gene at one of a creasing number of single loci variations in-

pair of specified gene loci. If this is the situation, creased by study of drug sensitivities. An underthen, providing we are reasonably sure that standing of some of these mechanisms would be the gene is more or less uniformly dispersed in a of the greatest value; the stimulation afforded

population, we can estimate a gene frequency to population genetics by the sickle cell malaria and a mutation rate. If, however, the heterozygote story has been very great indeed. either has a greater or less total effective fertility In others, a remarkable complexity of related than that prevailing in the population, matters factors have been uncovered. The proven

are different. A very small variation-much too associations of the ABO blood groups with

small to be detectable-could have an immense disease, and others which may well be shown to

effect on gene frequency. We may say that be associated, are almost embarrassingly large, providing a gene lethal in the homozygote has sufficient in too facile a fashion to explain the

once become established in a population it can polymorphism.4 When to these is added the be maintained at a constant level by rather less rather suggestive undue proportion of ABO

than 2 per cent heterozygote advantage without heterozygotes born which may be accounted for

any further mutations ever occurring. Con- by preferential survival in utero, or may be versely any heterozygote disadvantage of that explained by gametal selection, then the posi-

order of size would determine very high muta- tion regarding the ABO blood groups is indeed

tion rates indeed for any of the well known lethal complex. The undue proportion of MN indivi-

recessive genes in man. It is virtually impossible, duals could similarly be explained by one of in practice, to detect any increase or decrease of these mechanisms.

fertility of heterozygotes greater than, perhaps, We must therefore expect to see a great increase 10 per cent, so that we are very much in the dark in family studies of such polymorphic traits-

concerning the mechanisms which determine an even more laborious practical proposition

recessive gene frequencies in man. Further than mere population distribution of genotype

heterozygote advantage may operate in utero. studies.

It must be remembered also that any prefer-

ential entry into zygotes of germ cells, with or Study of Disorders with Ill-understood Hereditary

without a particular gene-gametal selection, is Associations

known to occur in experimental animals and a Finally, bearing in mind the unique oppor-

possible example has been advanced in man.6 tunities for certain aspects of population genetic

Such mechanisms would have an effect as large research in man, particularly high diagnostic

as heterozygote selection value variation with standards of complex clinical syndromes and the

1 or 2 per cent departure from random, and large populations which can be studied, there is

therefore equal contribution to zygotes of alter- plenty of scope for rather empirical collection of

native alleles segregating from a heterozygote good data. Even if, in our present state of

parent.

ignorance, we can hardly see what information

Balanced Polymorphic Traits

we should collect because we have no adequate hypothesis to test, we can note variables of

Although considerable advances have been made known biological significance such as parental

towards recognition of heterozygote carriers of ages, consanguinity, pregnancy order, age of

grossly harmful recessive genes none of these, onset, cause of disorder, patterns of familial

except in sickle cell disease and thalassaemia, can incidence and so on and make full ascertainent8

be recognized with sufficient accuracy or facility in communities making proper family studies as

14.

MODERN TRENDS IN THE POPULATION GENETICS OF MAN

we progress. In this way data becomes available on which some kind of an hypothesis can be
advanced and then in turn a more narrowly orientated investigation started.
There is such an immense amount of work to be done by people with special skills at all levels of genetical knowledge. For the practising clinician perhaps the most important dictum is Bateman's "treasure your exceptions". To
recognize an exception or a curiosity, however, there must be some genetical knowledge and it should be remembered that clinicians are the first to see sick people. For the statistically minded there is so much we would like to know about the causes of death ofpeople characterized
in various ways, about the total reproductive performances of members of cohorts of both sexes and so on. Knowledge of medical genetics and techniques developed in epidemiology open plenty of avenues for interesting work. Some of the studies are entirely orientated by hypotheses

whose theory is far from the original observations on which they were based. Others are orientated by hypotheses evolved from recent work and finally, as I have mentioned, there are areas in human genetics where neither experimental or theoretical genetics point very clearly a way to investigate. However, the steady accumulation of information proceeds apace. Already population genetics theory has been enormously influenced by phenomena defined im human genetics and this is only the beginning.
REFERENCES
1. Gunther, M. and Penrose, L. S. 1935. J. Genet. 31,413. 2. Haldane, J. B. S. 1935. J. Genet. 31, 317. 3. Klinger, H. P., Ludwig, K. S., Schwarzacher, H. G.
and Hauser, G. A. 1958. Gynaecologica 146, 1. 4. Roberts, J. A. Fraser. 1957. Brit. J. Prev. Soc. Med.
11, 107. 5. Schull, W. J. 1959. Pediatrics 23, 195. 6. Stevenson, A. C. 1960. Ann. hum. Genet. 24, 89. 7. Stevenson, A. C. and Warnock, H. A. 1959. Ann.
hum. Genet. 23, 382.

IS

