PROBLEM OF EUGENICAL STERILISATION
IN SWEDEN.
(Published by the Council of the State Institute /or Race-biology).
In the Swedish Parliament of 1922 Dr. Alfred Petren, Chief Inspector of the Asylums for Lunacy and Mental Diseases, introduced a bill proposing an address to His Majesty with a petition for an
enquiry to be made as to the circumstances in which sterilisation of idiots, imbeciles and epileptics might take place.
When this bill, which after thorough testing was unanimously agreed to by the Law Committee, had passed both Chambers, the Government entrusted the carrying out of the inquiry to the Medical Board, who remitted the question to the CouInCil of the State Institute of Race-biology. Here a report has been worked out, assigning motives for the step considered, by a Committee consisting of the Council's Vice-President, Professor Lenninalm, and the Professors Quensel and Hultkrantz, together with the Director of the Institute, Professor Lundborg. At a meeting on September 27th, 1923, the members of the Council unanimously decided to publish their views, which agreed on the whole with the above-mentioned report. As well as the Professors Lennmalm, Hultkrantz and Lundborg, the President of the Council, H. Hammarskjild, Lord Lieutenant of UJppland, A. af Jochnick, Director-general in the Royal Committee for Pensions, and Professor von Hofsten took part in the resolution, and Professor Nilsson-Ehle, who was hindered from being present at the meeting, sent his concurrence in writing.
The report runs as follows: TO THE ROYAL MEDICAL BOARD.
On account of the reference from the Royal Medical Board, asking for our opinion as to an inquiry demanded by the Parliament of 1922, concerning sterilisation of idiots, imbeciles and epileptics, the Council of the State Institute of Race-biologv herewith begs to make the following statement.
The number of individuals of a mentally and morally low quality is in Sweden, as in most other countries, alarmingly great. Many of these defects are undoubtedly of a hereditary character. As this class of person seems to be more prolific than the average instead of less so, and as many of the conditions connected with modern culture work in the direction of contra-selection, coming generations seem to be in serious danger of being recruited to a greater extent from inferior elements of the people-in the race-biological sense-than from elements with a better equipment.
During recent years investigations into the laws of heredity have

50 EUGENICS REVIEW.
clearly shown that the idea of former days, that such a "degeneration" of the national stock could be preventea by improving the mental and material environment has no basis in reality. The evolution of the ir.herent disposition can certainly within certain limits be checked or promoted by the conditions of life under which the individual developnment takes place, but the biological inheritance, which passes from generation to generation, cannot be transformed by these means. The pheno-type can be altered by the influence of environment, but not tne geno-type, at least not directly.
Eugenics must thus be founded upon the principle that the progress of a nation in the first place depends on the new generations receiving their hereditary disposition to a proportionally great extent from perfectly sound parents and not from degenerates. The importance of a nation's birth rate, taken as a whole, has up till now been highly over-estimated, and has been considered satisfactory if it has kept higher that the mortality, regardless of how the increase has been constituted. This point of view is of course quite wrong, for it is the quality, and not the quantity, which is the determining
factor. Under such circumstances it must be considered as of vital
interest to the State, not only that the most valuable elements of our nation get increased possibilities through marriage to increase the race, but also that production of degenerate offspring by mentally afflicted persons is restricted as far as possible. There is certainly no doubt that steps taken in the first-mentioned direction-positive, beneficial eugenics-can be expected -to give far better results than can be gained by means of negative, restrictive measures. But a broadminded policy in regard to the population will not omit the use of any measure available, when such an important object is concerned, as the warding off of threatening degeneration and, if possible, the improving of the main body of the national material. It is, however, of great importance that no more interference is allowed than can be fully justified by scientific results gained up to the present.
In the interests of society we think we are justified in interfering with the personal liberty in certain cases, e.g., through prohibition of marriage for some categories of mentally afflicted persons, who are a danger to the general welfare. The easiest, and at the same time safest way to prevent propagation by such individuals, is to sterilise them by means of an operation, a measure which in the majority of cases must be considered as less antagonistic to the person's own interest than either prohibition of marriage or internment during
many years.
Concerning sterilization for eugenic purposes no small amount of experience has been brought forward, especially in the United States. Even in Sweden some of the most prominent gynecologists have in several cases performed such operations. It must be both the right and the duty of the State to try to protect coming generations as far as possible from the danger which an unlimited reproduction of degenerates implies, but, on the other hand, it cannot be considered advisable that the prohibitive measures should be left entirely to private initiative. The Council therefore considers that the time has

EUGENICAL STERILISATION IN SWEDEN.

51

come, even in our own country, for establishing laws, conceding the right to sterilize under certain circumstances such persons, as will probably produce offspring, incapable of filling any position in society.
When entering upon a new path in legislation one ought, however, to proceed with great caution. A sterilization law should be
framed so as to prevent abuse as far as possible, but on the other hand it should place no hindrance in the way of sterilizing persons whose increase must be considered as involving severe injury to society. But a future law ought, of course, not to be formulated in such a manner that it directly or indirectly prevents a doctor from performing sterilization for purely medical reasons, e.g., in order to save a person's life or to preserve his health.
The Council is in complete agreement with the opinion of the Law Committee and of the introducer of the bill that for the present a sterilization law ought not to be made coercive, but should only give the right to sterilize or to be sterilized, whenr circumstances require it. If the person for whom sterilization is proposed is mentally normal, his own consent or eventually his trustee's ought to be required. If, as will usually be the case, he is lacking in the use of his senses, his trustee should give his consent to this interference. Is the person in question married or engaged to be married, the Council considers it reasonable that also the other party should have to consent.
According to the Council's conception consideration should be given in the fist place to eugenic indications in the question of sterilization. The risk for coming generations ought to be the factor of decisive importance. A person who has passed the fertile age need, of course, not be sterilized, and to some extent this is also applicable to such persons who, through perfect supervision or through complete absence of the sexual instinct, are harmless as far as eugenics is concerned. In the bill and in the report of the Law Committee social indications for sterilization are also mentioned, such as want of capacity for supporfing and bringing up children. T'he Council does
not consider such reasons as sufficient or decisive causes for sterilization, still they might be taken into consideration when inquiring into special cases. Degenerate offspring must of course be expected to become still worse, if allowed to grow up in a bad environment. But to allow economic motives or reasons of convenience to be decisive on the question as to whether a person shall be deprived of
the power of reproduction or not is not in accordanice with ideas of
justice now prevailing. It scarcely needs to be mentioned that under no circumstances must sterilization take the character or even the appearance of a measure of punishment.
The most important problem to be solved is of course the question which species of degenerate individuals shall be subject to the law. The simplest way would be, as the Law Committee proposes, to make the law applicable to the same categories who come within the present law for prohibition of marriage, viz., idiot, imbeciles and those epileptics whose illness is derived from congenital causes. The
regulations concerning sterilization would then form a sort of conm-
plement to the marriage law, and have as their real object the pre-

52 EUGENICS REVIEW.
vention of illegitimate procreation by those persons who are prohibited from entering into marriage.
It must, however, be observed that both mental deficiency-idiocy and imbecility-as well as lunacy are conditions which cannot be sharply defined in relation to certain other physical conditions, and further, that the above-mentioned defects, from a race-biological point of view, can originate from very different causes. As well as epilepsy and deaf-muteism, they can be hereditary, i.e., geno-typical, and they may also arise through externial causes, such as illness during tender years or even in the foetus. In the former case the risk exists that the offspring will inherit the defect, in the latter case this risk is not present. It is often quite impossible for a doctor-even if he possesses special training in the medical branch of the study of heredity-to decide if the defect in a given case is of hereditary or non-hereditary character. This is also due to the fact that a complete investigation into the hereditary conditions of previous generations often meets with insurmountable difficulties. Added to this it seems as if the inheritance can follow different paths even among forms of mental diseases, the outward appearances of which we cannot distinguish from each other. Certain of these defects do evidently not follow the relatively simple mode of inheritance, which we know are applicable to cases of some malformations or anomalies. Thus gross degeneration, e.g., criminality, as well as its opposite, great social capability, can be looked upon from a hereditary point of view as the direct result. of an unusually unfavourable, or in the latter case, unusually favourable combination of qualities, inherited from the parents. At the fertilization many possibilities arise for different
gen-combinations, advantageous or disadvantageous. One ought
therefore not to be surprised to find that children of richly endowed parents, through an unlucky combination of qualities, may prove to be particularly lacking, and we should also not expect that all children of a criminal will become geno-typically degenerates. It must
be strongly emphasized that at the present stage of science it is in
many cases not possible to attain to any real certainty, but only to a more or less high degree of probability, when making a prognosis stS to the hereditary conditions of the posterity.
Beside the three categories, which according to the Law Committee's opinion ought to come within the sterilization law, there are other kinds of severe psychical degeneration which undoubtedly can be transmitted from generation to generation. In certain of those cases sterilization seems to be advisable not only in the interests of the general welfare, but also in the interests of the person himself. As to periodical-depressive maniacal-mental disease it has been stated that 25 per cent. among the children become mentally deranged if either of the parents suffer from such an hereditary disease, and that the percentage rises considerably if both the parents are affected. On the other hand experience teaches us that near relatives and offspring of persons suffering from this kind of mental disease often are gifted to a high degree and show great social capability. This last-mentioned circumstance necessitates great caution in regard to the sterilization of depressive maniacal persons. The advantage

EUGENICAL STERILISATION IN SWEDEN.

53

of preventing the birth of degenerates can be bought too dearly if

society through this eventually loses a number of highly endowed

personalities.

One meets however, fairly often, cases of periodical mental

disease, where not only eugenic but humanitarian reasons seem to

speak in favour of sterilization. A depressive maniacal lunatic, before

the disease breaks out or during a longer period of freedom from it,

may have entered into marriage without meeting any hindrance from

the present law. If botn the mates iin such a marriage have insight

enough to understand the risk any eventual children of theirs run of

being mentally diseased, and wish that the afflicted party shall be sterilized, permission for this ought to be granted. If it is the wife

who is bearer of the disease it often happens that she becomes preg-

nant during a period of health, but gives birth to her child during a

period of disease, which naturafly may involve serious consequences

not only to the child but even to the family and society at large. It

has already been mentioned that the risk is essentially greater if both

the parents suffer from periodical mental derangement. In regard to

-tbe circumstances mentioned above the Council's opinion is that a

future law ought not to be formulated in such a manner as to exclude

all possibilities of sterilization in such cases.

Because of the many various circumstances which would come

inito consideration before arriving at a decision, if a person shall be considered dangerous to society-from the race-biological point of -view-and therefore ought to be sterilized, the Council wishes to

suggest that in every special case a close inquiry should be made by

an expert authority. Permission for sterilization should be given only

when such an inquiry has proved that there is imminent danger, that the individual will produce degenerate offspring. The question of

sterilizing idiots and other demented persons may seem to be rela-tively simple, as such an interference, even if it takes place without

any stronger eugenic indications, scarcely can be considered to

violate any justifiable interests, and on the other side strong social

Teasons can be asserted. The Council, however, considers that even in these cases it is advisable for the present, and until greater experi-

ence has been gained, to make use of the same method of inquiry by an expert authority as in the more complex cases.

If the individual examination which the Council considers should

be a condition for permission for sterilization is nmade sufficiently
effective, so that there is a guarantee that the primary investigation

is made as complete as possible, especially concerning the hereditary conditions, and if besides psychiatric competence and experience are -taken into consideration in the question, the Council does not think it necessary that the law should be limited so as to embrace only those classes of mentally defected persons, which according to the

present law are forbidden to enter upon marriage, but that it might

be of

extended so as to include even other persons, mentioned above, whom it may be feared on scientific grounds that they will give

birth to mentally defective children.

~eugenicThe final decision in all questions regarding sterilization for purposes ought, according to the opinion of the Council, to

54 EUGENICS REVIEW.

be left to a central authority, where not only medico-biological, but

also judicial experts are represented, in proper proportions. By these

means the enforcement of the law may be expected to get more uni-

form, and it can be more easily adapted to meet the demands of the

prevailing sense, of justice.

The establishment of a special institution to attend to this

niatter does not seem to be necessary at present, as the Royal

Medical Board, with the assistance of its scientific council and even-

tually by calling in the help of representatives for hereditary investi-

gation, ought to have at its disposal all the expert opinion demanded.

Necessary forms for the examinations and the reports ought to be

issued by the Medical Board. In order that the Board may be able

to follow the development of the question of sterilization in our

country reports should be made to it in all cases when sterilization

for eugenic purposes has been performed.

it

Lastly, does not

concerning the seem advisable

method to be employed for sterilization,
to prescribe any particular mode of pro-

ceeding in the law itself. If at present only vasectomy and salpin-

gectomy can come into question, it is not at all impossible that with

the swift development of science, new methods may be devised which

nmay be equally effective but at the same time more gentle.

Referring to the exposition given above, the Council of the State

Institute of Race-biology thus recommends that special regulations

may be promulgated as to the right of sterilizing certain mentally

degenerate persons, and the principles upon which legislation should

be founded-according to the Council's opinion-can be summed up

in the following points

Sterilization for eugenic purposes shall only be allowed to take

place when from scientific reasons it must be feared that the person

in question otherwise will produce mentally inferior offspring, and

not before the Medical Board, after examining the special circumI-

stances, has given its consent. When inquiring into these matters

the medical board shall have access to:-

(1). An official report from a competent physician or surgeon

on an examination made by him of the physical and mental condition

of the person in question, together with, if possible, an inquiry into

his family history, beside a statement of circumstances in the person's

life, which may be significant to the necessity of sterilization. If tne

person is married, or engaged to be married, an official report of an

examination of the other mate may be required, where this seems

necessary.

(2). The written consent to the sterilization of the person him--

self or, if he is lacking in the use of his senses, of bis trustee or

guardian, and if he is married or engaged to be married, that of the other party. If the person in question is a minor his consent should

be completed or replaced by that of his guardian (according to

special regulations).

In all cases where sterilization has been performed a report should be made to the Royal Medical Board.

Forms for the above-mentioned reports and returns should be

issued by the Medical Board.

