DISCUSSION
THE EUGENICS OF MIGRANTS To the Editor of the EUGENICS REVIEW UNDER the above title Major Woodruff calls attention to the neglect of the " law of adaptability " by eugenists, and demonstrates in a well-reasoned and informing article the extreme importance of this factor in the well-being of nations. He refers rather vaguely to the medical profession as "just beginning to realise that man himself is governed by the same laws of adaptation " as other species. This leaves me in doubt as to whether he is, or is not, aware that I dealt with most of the points he raises in a paper read at the British Medical Association last July (a report of which was published in the British Medical Journal of October 8th, I9IO) and in other papers and letters to the press during the past year. He, however, deals mainly with the question of emigration across the seas, whereas I have concerned myself chiefly with migrations within the compass of the British Isles. Major Woodruff writes as if the question of adaptation to climate were the main issue. Of equal importance are diet and social customs. I was first led to a consideration of this question of adapta. tion to environment by endeavouring to find an explanation of the proclivity of Jews to catarrhs and certain other ailments, when it dawned upon me that their special pathology was due to their having evolved in a warmer and drier climate than N.W. Europe, and also to peculiarities of diet and custom. Thence I proceeded to study the evolution and pathologies of the other racial and local types comprising the British people. The postulates for health of the blonde race are, broadly speaking, an open-air life-with a dry soil and plenty of sunshine summer and winter. For this reason they succumb to the exigencies of urban life which denies them certain essentials. In my paper at the B.M.A. I accounted for this by tracing their evolution through the long period of rigorous but dry climatic conditions (resembling those of Manchuria or Canada at the present day) which prevailed throughout Northern Europe after

62 DISCUSSION
the close of the humid cold of the glacial era, which, according to de Mortillet, took place 40,000 years ago. These conditions, retreating in a N.E. direction, account for the purest blonde types being found round the Baltic at the present day. Tacitus and, 400 years later, Strabo, bear witness to the nomadic habits of the " Germans " and their aversion from communal life. These " Germans " were the fair-haired, blue-eyed tribes occupying the great northern plain of Europe forming a part of the " Nordic " race. Tacitus in his celebrated "Treatise " notes particularly that their houses were not placed close together but that each dwelling was surrounded by an open space-conditions as requisite now as then for this type.
Major Woodruff speaks of statistics showing the greater morbidity and mortality of the " intruded blonde type " in the South of England. But surely the statistics on which he relies are urban! There are widespread rural communities in the South of England in which the blonde element is still, after a thousand years, largely in the ascendant. It is absent in districts with a damp and cold subsoil, such as the great tract of wealden clay, which is peopled by a small dark type.
That the Nordic type can emigrate with advantage is manifest-witness the Boer, who comes mainly of blonde stock with a strain of darker races. The Australian "cornstalk," familiar to us in the various athletic teams that visit us from the Antipodes, also belongs to this race and is obviously a vigorous and dominant type. The dry climate and open-air life of the veldt or the Australian plains rep,roduce sufficiently the conditions under which this type evolved to permit of efficient adaptation.
In recent letters to the D)aily Mail (commenting on an article by Mr. H. G. Wells) and to the British Medical Journal I pointed out that in this country, after the successive tides of invasion ceased, the mingled racial elements settled down to form local communities devoted to pastoral and agricultural pursuits. In the course of several centuries highly specialised local types were evolved, ill-suited by reason of their close local adaptation to migration elsewhere. The advent of the industrial era and the railway resulted in a wholesale uprooting of these localised types and their settlement in new environments, chiefly urban. From the re-grouping of the national molecules the forces of' industrialism have endeavoured, with varying success and at lamentable expense, to select an industrial type. There is no doubt that this has had a disastrous effect in many directions in the incidence of disease and on the national physique, despite the vast improvements in sanitation. Major Woodruffasks for anthropometric investigations among the failures in every city throughout the world. Much of course has already been done in this direction in Europe, notably by Beddoes Shrubsall, Fnd others in Britain, P3ut the difficulty lies in obtaining

DISCUSSION

63

really accurate and reliable observation. How great this difficulty is was emphasised by Dr. C. S. Myers (Lecturer on Experimental Psychology, Cambridge University) in a paper communicated to the British Association Meeting at Sheffield, I9IO, and published in the British Medical Journal, January 28th,
I9II.
The process of disintegration of old-established communities increasingly manifest in all directions makes the immediate outlook gloomy. But may it not be hoped that from this reassortment of the national elements new types will ultimately emerge, combining in the individual various inherited immunities and adaptations ? Of course there is always the tendency to revert to pure ancestral types with their stricter disabilities, but the science of Eugenics is young, and in its maturity it may lead us far towards the day when man will once more enjoy a condition of stable equilibrium in Nature, and emerge into the Superman foreshadowed by latter-day philosophers.

J. STEWART MACKINTOSH, M.D., F.R.A.INST.

