INHERITANCE OF MENTAL ABILITY*
By SIR CYRIL BURT, F.B.A.
Professor Emeritus of PsycholoAy in the University of London

D URING the first and second world to the prepubertal period, it seemed reason-

.L..'lweaardsi,ngDrp.artWailntdeervisBiinnggahnadm

played a
in putting

able to place each elementary pupil in the same class for all his subjects; the mentally

into effect, the--ingenious scheme for classi- defective were certified and sent to special

fying personnel in the American Fighting schools on the ground that they suffered

Services by the aid of psychological pro- from a general deficiency in intelligence; and

cedures. The original" Army Mental Tests," similarly, scholarship children were presumed

compiled under his supervision, have provided to be clever all round. A few special

one of the most popular models for the disabilities, such as word blindness, were

intelligence tests used in Britain for selecting occasionally recognized; and Galton himself

pupils at the age of eleven for entrance to cited evidence for special aptitudes-for

secondary grammar schools. In the course of mathematics, music, literary or artistic

his work for the United States War Depart- achievement, and the like. But for the most

ment, Bingham became more and more part these were assumed not to mature until

convinced that, under ordinary peacetime the onset of adolescence.

conditions, there was a vast and unsuspected During the past twenty years, however,

waste of human ability as a result of the owing to the remarkable success of recent

imperfect methods of educational selection experimental research on the training of

and vocational guidance ;1 and, by the terms animals, the attention of psychologists has

of his will, he left funds from his own estate been directed more and more to the possi-

in order- to encourage, by the institution of bility of improved methods of teaching and

lectureships and other means, the study of learning. Influenced largely by the school of

this problem.

behaviourism, which under the lead of J. B.

In Britain, as a result of the new arrangements introduced by the Education Act of I944, the problem has come once again to the fore. Fifty years ago the traditional method of discovering bright and promising pupils

Watson3 dominated American psychology between the wars, many have even denied
the very possibility of mental inheritance; while others, influenced by the statistical work of Thurstone,4 have rejected the notion

was still based on scholarship examinations of general ability and have substituted a in the ordinary school subjects. Most miscellaneous set of relatively specialized

British psychologists had by then accepted " primary" or " unitary)" abilities. It was

the attractive theory originally formulated indeed this revival of the old faculty doctrine by Francis Galton :2 namely, that, during that was in part responsible for the belief

childhood at any rate, intellectual efficiency that children at eleven plus should be in all directions is determined mainly, classified, not so much according to the though not entirely, by a single general degree of general ability, but rather according factor called " general ability," and that to the kind of special aptitude that each

differences in this ability are largely the appeared to show: thus the " abstract type," effect of the individual's genetic constitution. whether of a literary or mathematical bent, This has several practical implications. Up was said to be suited for a grammar school;
the " technical'" type for. the technical

* Substance of the Walter Bingham Lecture, school; and the " concrete " or " practical"

delivered at University C6l1ege, London, on May 2ISt. Reprinted from Nature (June 29th, 1957) by kind
permission of the Editor and of Sir Cyril Burt.

type for the secondary modern school. But quite recently, psychological research,

137 TEE EUGENICS REVIEW, September 1957. 49, 3.

138 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

often on entirely novel lines, has been tending capacity are the result of differences in brain

to rehabilitate much of the old beliefs, structure, we should expect that, like other

with the added recognition that both the physical differences, they would largely

psychological and the genetic problems depend on hereditary transmission, and that

involved are far more complicated than the mode of transmission would be that

psychologists of I9IO were inclined to which obtains in the case of almost all

suppose. The doctrine of distinct and physical characteristics, namely, the method

independent abilities has hitherto drawn described by Mendel's laws. The most

much of its support from the early experi- conclusive evidence is that furnished by

ments on cerebral localization, which seemed investigations among children of school age,

to indicate that sensory, motor and linguistic for whom the requisite data are most readily

functions could be assigned to definite procured. Where two alternative factors

centres within the brain. These findings such as heredity and environment are likely

appeared to be further corroborated by to be involved, the obvious procedure is to

maps of cortical cell structure published keep first one and then the other as constant

later by histologists, such as Campbell, as possible, and observe the results. In

Brodmann and von Economo. Their con- orphanages and other institutions, it is

clusions, however, have since been severely possible to find children brought up under

criticized by such Continental workers as much the same environmental conditions

Bok and Lorente de No, and by Sholl in. almost from birth. Contrary to expectation,

Britain. The latest studies of the micro- it is found that the individual differences, so

scopic structure of the human brain have far from being diminished, vary over an even

directed attention to the wide differences in wider range. In the majority of cases they

cell-architecture betweey one individual seem to be associated with differences in the

brain and another, and have shown that intelligence of the parents. Many of the

many of the alleged local differences are brightest, for example, prove to be illegiti-

more or less accidental consequences of mate children whose father, often a casual

variations in growth, in blood supply, and in stranger, was himself of a high intellectual

the surface curvature of the cortex. It would ability. In such a case it is out of the

thus appear that, in the same individual, question to attribute the child's intelligence

nerve tissue, like every other tissue-hair, to special opportunities provided by his

bone, muscle and skin-tends to be of much home or family.

the same general quality throughout, with To secure cases in which children's genetic

only minor local variations. Even if we endowment is the same, the psychologist

cannot unreservedly accept Lashley's theory turns to assessments obtained from mono-

of the " mass action " of the brain, neverthe- zygotic or identical twins. In Britain nearly

less the facts that he reports are much more thirty pairs have been investigated where the

in keeping with Galton's hypothesis of twins have been brought up in separate

general ability and minor special abilities homes almost from birth. The correlations

than with Thurstone's doctrine of major are, for educational attainments, o-68; for

" special abilities " and no general factor. group tests of intelligence, o077; for adjusted

Dr. Sholl himself concludes that "intelli- assessments of intelligence, o-88-almost as

gence," like retentivity, is a "general high as the correlation between two succes-

attribute of all cortical tissue." Finally, this sive assessments for the same child.

interpretation is independently confirmed by Hitherto those psychologists who have

wide-scale statistical investigations, based admitted the possibility that mental abilities

on applications of the procedure known as may be inherited have almost invariably

" factor analysis " to actual assessments assumed that their transmission would

obtained for various types of intellectual follow the principles of blended inheritance.

proficiency.5

They repeat the old definition of heredity as

If, therefore, differences in this general " the tendency of like to beget like; " and

INHERITANCE OF MENTAL ABILITY

I39

consequently suppose that the arguments the predictions is greatly improved. In

for mental inheritance consist solely in practice, such intensive studies of individual

demonstrating resemblances between the cases would be far too costly for education

parent and his children by means of correla- authorities to carry out, except, perhaps, in

tions; when the two parents differ, then the borderline cases.6

child is still expected to consist of an Investigations made just before the war

intermediate blend of both.

showed that during the ten preceding years

The approach of the modern geneticist is about 40 per cent of those who had sufficient

the reverse of all this. As he views it, the ability to enter a university had apparently

real problem is rather to explain why in so failed to do so.7 It is too early to inquire

many instances " like begets unlike." Both what improvement has been effected by

for the environmentalist and for the believer improved economic conditions or by the

in blended inheritance, one of the most new arrangements made under the Education

puzzling phenomena is the appearance, not Act of I944. A series of studies recently

only of extremely dull children in the published by Dr. Floud8 and her colleagues

families of the well-to-do professional classes, shows that the grosser material handicaps

but also of extremely bright children in appear to have been lessened and in many

families where the personal, cultural and areas eliminated, but that the problem of

economic conditions of the parents would, social wastage is as yet by no means over-

one might imagine, condemn every child to come.

failure on either count. On the Mendelian hypothesis that is just what we should expect. After all, Mendel himself suggested the possibility that the inheritance of graded characteristics might be interpreted in terms of a multifactorial hypothesis; and during recent years a vast and valuable amount of
work among plants and animals has been done by the biometric school, in which that hypothesis has not only been fully confirmed but also has issued in results of the greatest practical value.

The whole issue is of such far-reaching
social importance that there is a most urgent need for more research. Since school investigations undertaken by outsiders are bound to be incomplete, it is to be hoped that once again the more progressive local education authorities will allow their official psychologists time and full facilities for such inquiries. But the underlying processes are so complex and obscure that the psychogenetics of man is not likely to make much headway without carefully controlled experiments on the

In point of fact several investigations nature and transmission of intelligence in

recently published yield fairly clear indica- lower animals.

tions that in the case of intelligence individual. variations are influenced by both unifactor

REFERENCES

and multi-factor inheritance; in other words, Bingham, W. Aptitudes and Aptitude Testing. I937 they result from Mendelian factors of two Houghton Miffin.

kinds: (i) major genes responsible for com- 2 Galton, F. Hereditary Genius. I869. Macmillan.

paratively large deviations, usually of an abnormal kind; and (2) multiple genes, the effects

3 Watson, J. B. Behaviouris'm. 1931. Kegan Paul.

of which are small, similar, and cumulative. 4 Thurstone, L. L. Primary Abilities. 1938. University The biometric techniques have been elabor- of Chicago Press.

ated by R. A. Fisher and others; and on 6 Sholl, D. A. The Organization of the Cerebral Cortex.

applying their procedures it is found that, 1956. Methuen.

with the ordinary tests of intelligence, about 6 Burt, C., and Howard, M. Brit. J. Statist. Psychol.

three-quarters of the total variance is due 1956. 9, 95.

to genetic factors, that is, to what is loosely 7 Burt, C. Brit. J. Educ. Psychol. I943. 13, 83.

called heredity. If the results -of the tests are corrected and adjusted in the light of all available information, then the accuracy of

8 Floud, J. E., Halsey, H. E., and Martin, F. M. Social Class and Educational Opportunity. I956.
IHeinemann.

