RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN INTELLIGENCE AND SIZE OF FAMILY 37

Correlations between the intelligence of the students and the number of siblings are positive and insignificant, i.e. they are effectively zero. At the London School of Economics,' low negative correlations were found.

REFERENCES
1Carr-Saunders, A. M., and Wilson, P. S. (I933),
The Professions. Oxford University Press. 2 Himmelweit, H. T. (1948), Intelligence and Size of
Family. EUGENICS REVIEW. 40, 2, Pp. 77-84.
8 Leybourne-White, G. (1947), Opportunity and
Capacity for University Education. Pilot Papers, H, i, March, 1947.

GALTON'S HEREDITARY GENIUS

REPRINT OF THE SECOND EDITION

Hereditary Genius stands to-day as one Marx's book has supplied a large part of

of the great books of the nineteenth century. mankind with a new religion; evil and

This is not due to its influence on popular ignorant, but still a religion. Galton's has

thought, but to its inherent qualities. It was had no such sensational effects, it has acted

first published in I869, ten years after the slowly as the leaven leavens the lump, but

Origin of Species, and only separated by two it has never ceased to act. From this point

years from the appearance of the first volume of view, perhaps Galton put into it far too

of Das Kapital by Karl Marx. The latter much for one book. His overflowing ability

book is its natural antithesis. Its central aim is, at one and the same time, offering his

is the political control of wealth, whereas readers an entirely new point of vantage from

Galton has his eyes fixed on biological well- which to view human affairs, deyeloping a

being; it dogmatically asserts human new technique for the study of human

equality, while Galton is concerned to problems, and presenting a condensed mass

measure the important inequalities; it of biographical detail as the objective basis

appeals to hatred and vindictive destruction, of his conclusions. Cautiously as he discusses

while Galton, not irrationally in his period, both sides of each question, there is never a

looks forward with confidence to the pro- doubt as to which side the facts favour. Yet

gressive improvement of existing institutions; the twenty-three years that elapsed before

above all Das Kapital appealed to passion, the second edition shows by how much his

but Hereditary Genius to an almost stoically ideas were too new for his own generation.

detached reason. Ideological war had broken No man could be more studiously impartial,

out, right in Bloomsbury. It is small wonder yet his detachment affronts many pre-

that the leftist tradition has never ceased to judices, and those who write "for the

assail Galton's work, with an animus that million " find in the accusation of partiality

Galton could never begin to understand. their best excuse for ignoring the solid body

Sooner or later, however, the world will have of fact he established.

to choose between them.

R. A. FISHER.

