HERBERT BREWER
Reversibility following Sterilization by Vasectomy

T HE REMARKABLE SPREAD in recent years
of the vasectomy operation as a means of
fertility control in India, the U.S.A. and elsewhere brings into prominence the question of
its reversibility. As the Director of the Population Council, Dr. Warren Nelson, has observed, "If the operation can be perfected so that the
success rate is 85 or 90 per cent, it is likely that
many people will find vasectomy an acceptable method of contraception."' In the U.S. according to a recent report, the number of vasectomies
performed for contraceptive purposes has doubled in the last decade and now amounts to about 40,000 a year. The states of Virginia and North Carolina have enacted laws specifically
permitting voluntary sterilization for the purpose
of limiting family size.2 It seems likely that more States will eventually follow suit.
In these circumstances it is readily intelligible that an increasing number of men are asking, what are the prospects of restoring fertility
following a vasectomy operation. The answer on the whole is fairly encouraging. When Dr. V. J. O'Conor circularized the majority of urologists in the U.S. prior to 1948, he elicited that con-
cerning the relatively few attempts at anastomosis following vasectomy that had been attempted, 45.5 per cent had been successful.3 This was surprisingly good considering that most of these operations were intended to be defini-
tively permanent and that surgeons rarely gave any attention to techniques calculated to maximize the prospects of success in reversal at a later time. More recently, with the development
of better techniques, percentage success rates have been reported of 77 by Roland.4 80 by Dorsey,5 the same also by JhaverP and 88 by Phadke.7 According to Dr. V. E. Goodwin of the Department of Urology in California University Medical School, "the sterility which results

from vasectomy is reversible in fully 90 per cent
of cases if a skilful surgeon is available."8 However, it seems clear that relatively few
surgeons have the opportunity of the extensive practice which is necessary to develop high skill in performing anastomosis of the vasa. Anything which can be done to simplify and, if possible, to speed up both the initial operation as well as its subsequent reversal would therefore appear to be
highly desirable. It has been noted by a number of authorities
that both as regards animal and human subjects, spontaneous reunion of several vasa is prone to take place with great facility, so much so indeed, that in the initial operation it is a major preoccupation of the operator to exclude that possibility. Dr. Walter Stokes, who has wide experience in this field, has stressed the importance of guarding against eventualities of this kind.9 Professor Elmer Belt of California University Medical School states that even when vasectomy is performed with great care, recanalization automatically re-establishes itself in rare cases. He refers to a recent national survey in the U.S.A. in which urologists were asked about this particular point; in 971 replies to a questionnaire, there were reported 41 proven cases of spontaneous recanalization. In a second series of 750 replies there were 55 spontaneous recanalizations.10 However, as Tietze has pointed out, vasectomy must still be regarded as the most certain of all methods ofpreventing conception.' According to Rolnick12
It has been recognized clinically for many years that attempts at sterilization by either cutting or tying the vas are often unsuccessful. I demonstrated many years ago that the vas deferens regenerates very rapidly after it has been cut or tied and that this regeneration is aided by its sheath. Therefore if vasectomy is to be properly done, a rather large portion of the vas should be

'47 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1964, 56, 3.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

resected and the cut ends crushed and turned similarly be obviated. An American surgeon who

backwards. Successful regeneration of the vas deferens is possible many years after resection. The remarkable regenerative capacity of all epithelial lined ducts is exemplified here as in other portions

claimed to have performed over 400 vasectomies informed me that he had never encountered such reactions in his own patients, though he had seen

of the body, and it is chiefly this regenerative them in other vasectomized men. This surgeon

capacity that makes urologic surgery possible. used pure phenol to cauterize the crushed and

This lucid exposition reveals how in attempt- ligated proximal ends of the vasa while leaving

ing to escape the Scylla of spontaneous recanali- the distal ends open. However, it may be noted

zation the surgeon is prone to run into the that surgical lubricating jellies are capable of

Charybdis of irreversibility. For O'Conor noted producing granulomatous lesions when they are

as among the most frequent causes of failure to employed without proper care.'5

effect anastomosis the fact that so large a portion It was noted editorially in THE EUGENICS

had been removed as to preclude bringing the REvIEW that some surgeons who perform

severed ends together; another common cause vasectomy leave the distal ends open in order to

was excising tissue too close to the globus facilitate recanalization later."' One great advan-

major.'3 As another American surgeon has com- tage which might accrue from the adoption of

mented, why should we find it so difficult to the proposed technique is that it would encourage

recanalize the vasa, when nature finds it so easy? surgeons to perform the sterilizing operation

What it is now desired to suggest is that it may with the idea of potential reversibility always in

be possible, by working with nature instead of mind. When surgeons approach the operation

against it, to take advantage of the very healing with the idea of cutting something out rather

power revealed in the tendency to spontaneous than of imposing a simple occlusion, they tend to

reunion, both to make the initial sterilizing conceive the whole procedure in an obliterative

operation more simple and certain, while at the light which is really not essential. That this may

same time conserving tissue and maximizing the be so is suggested by the fact that in a recent

prospects of success in a reversing operation, exchange of letters in the Observer a surgeon of

should that subsequently be found desirable. It consultant status claimed in effect that vasec-

would appear a sound principle in surgical as in tomy by definition is irreversible because you

many other arts to aim at achieving the maximum cannot replace something which earlier has been

by means of the minimum. Instead ofcauterizing, removed. It is true that, as a number of authori-

crushing and ligating, why not invoke the vis ties have agreed, the term "vasectomy" is open

medicatrix naturae itself to set up a barrier to the to objection on semantic grounds. Should the

exit of the sperms more effective than those im- proposed technique prove practicable and

posed by man's rather clumsy mechanical become widely adopted, it would seem a good

devices.

opportunity to bring medical nomenclature more

In other words why should it not be possible in accord with realities by distinguishing it from

by bringing the two proximal ends of the severed the earlier methods of vasectomy by designating

vasa into opposition and by allowing them to it specifically and accurately as "Reversible

unite, effectively to exclude the possibility of Occlusion of the Vasa" (R.O.V. for short). The

sperms getting any further than the lower part of operation of R.O.V. in itself would provide the

the scrotal sac, into which, if the distal ends were best possible education of the surgeon in the

left open, they would presumably drain? Should hitherto infrequently practised art of reversal of

it prove feasible, it would obviate certain draw- sterilization by anastomosis ofthe vasa deferentis.

backs which have come to light in a small In the initial operation a temporary sterility

nminority of vasectomies, in which ligating the would be imposed by anastomosis of the proxi-

distal ends of the vasa has caused discomfort by mal ends of the vasa, while in the reversing

reason of back pressure. Also in the few cases in operation fertility would be restored by a pre-

which inflammatory reactions have occurred as cisely similar treatment applied to the severed

described by Friedman"4 and others may be ends so as to reunite them in the same position

associated with a faulty technique which might where they were at the beginning.

I148

REVERSIBILITY FOLLOWING STERILIZATION BY VASECTOMY
In this connection, it would appear that both should be avoided; radiation of the female the initial sterilization and the later desteriliza- pelvis is especially dangerous because mutagenic tion might be immensely simplified, speeded up, effects, both somatic and genetic, are involved. and rendered less expensive by the utilization of Where the intra uterine device has failed to avert surgical stapling machines, which seem likely to conception (as it is reported to do in at least 5 per be adaptable readily to such operations as these. cent of cases) teratogenic effects may also be In 1961, a Russian surgeon gave a demonstration involved concerning the highly vulnerable in Washington and showed by an operation on a embryo. Failure to carry out periodical examinadog's blood vessels and organs that procedures tions may eventually confront the physician with which, by traditional surgical stitching methods a case like that described by Dr. Maizels where a would take hours, could be performed in minutes long forgotten Grafenberg ring seemed to have by the aid of these suture replacing surgical provoked a carcinoma.23 The impracticability of stapling machines."7 More recently, the Russian using intra uterine devices on a mass scale in the claims have been confirmed byAmericanworkers, backward countries has been well exposed by some of whom have devised improvements to Dr. Elkan.24 make the apparatus yet more simple and rapid in On reasons alike of harmlessness, reliability its operation. They claim that in this way it is and of cost, the vasectomy solution seems far now possible for ordinary surgeons successfully preferable to that of intra uterine contraceptives and rapidly to perform operations which other- which many authorities insist are really abortifawise would only be tackled by specialists using cients. The writer is not a surgeon but is enexacting and time consuming manipulations.'8 couraged to submit these suggestions because so
It will readily be appreciated how important far the inquiries he has been able to make of the application of R.O.V. by means of surgical medically qualified friends have raised no stapling might conceivably become in connection fundamental difficulty or objection. with the programme of voluntary sterilization on In view of the almost desperate demographic mass scale, such as are now being attempted in situation that is building up in the world as a India. For example, it is stated that in the Punjab whole, it is surely only common sense to give the government has set itself a target of 100,000 attentive consideration to every constructive vasectomies a year, but is finding it difficult to suggestion, regardless of whence it comes. If that achieve it by reason of shortage of qualified were always done we might be in less danger of personnel.19 Even though, as Gopalaswami has the tyranny of inert ideas which, as A. N. Whiteclaimed,20 the cost of a sterilization operation in head stressed, represent a major menace to India is only one-tenth to one-twentieth that of progress. providing a free supply of contraceptives to It is well to remind ourselves that Western cover the reproductive span, the factor of cost is Europe too has a problem of fertility control and still critical. The idea presently being mooted2' that we can hardly be content to let it be solved that the chief hope of overcoming the population by abortion which, as Professor Harmsen of explosion lies, not in the pill, but in the revival of Hamburg has reminded us, takes terrible toll of the intra uterine devices that were emphatically female health in destroying every year more condemned by the Family Planning Association human life than all the infectious diseases coma few years ago,22 needs to be scrutinized bined. The example of India surely reveals that critically from the cost angle also. Intra uterine voluntary sterilization by vasectomy offers a devices demand periodical examination and harmless and effective alternative to the policy of gynaecological check, and even, according to legalized mass abortion, whose evils are well some advocates, repeated X-ray examinations to recognized in the countries where it is most ensure that they have not dropped out unob- prevalent. served. The latter practice appears completely to One last thought concerning the legal position ignore the warnings of the United Nations in Britain. The possibility of reversal has an Committee on Atomic Radiation, which stressed important bearing on the question of whether that all forms of unnecessary radiation exposure voluntary sterilization for purposes of contra-
I49

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ception is lawful. For if it can be shown that in accepting surgical occlusion of the vasa in order to avoid producing unwanted children, a man is only establishing a condition of temporary infertility which is capable of being removed, should he wish it, there can hardly exist any reason for treating him any differently from those who accomplish the same end by other contraceptive means. As Dr. Glanville Williams has pointed out,25 vasectomy cannot be brought within the legal definition of a maim, if it can be shown to be reversible, because the legal meaning of a maim (as contrasted withawound) is that it is permanent. The development of better methods of restoring fertility following vasectomy might indirectly help to clear up the medicolegal ambiguity which still surrounds voluntary sterilization in this country.
REFERENCES
1. Nelson, Warren 0. 1961. Fertil. and Steril., 12, 109. 2. Newsweek, 16.9.63. 3. O'Connor, V. J. 1948. J. Amer. med. Ass., 136, 162. 4. Roland, S. I. 1961. Fertil. and Steril., 12, 191.

5. Dorsey, J. W. 1957. J. int. Coll. Surg., 27,453. 6. Jhaver, P. S. 1962. J. Family Welfare, 9,5 7. 7. Phadke, F. M. 1959. J. Ind. med. Ass., 36, 19. 8. Goodwin, W. E. Personal communication. 9. Stokes, W. R. 1941. Human Fertil., 6,79. 10. Belt, E. 1964. Sterilization: Can It Be Undone?
Pamphlet issued by the Human Betterment Association. 11. Tietze, C. 1960. The Current Status of Fertility Control. National Committee on Maternal Health Publication No. 9. 12. Rolnick, H. C. 1954. J. Urol., 72,915-16. 13. O'Connor, V. J. 1953. Second World Congress on Fertility and Sterility. 14. Friedman, N. B. et al. 1949. J. Urol., 62. 15. Brit. med. J. 1961, 1082. 16. Eugen. Rev., 1956, 48, 139. 17. Washington Post, 12.7.61. 18. Mallina, R. F. et al. 1962. Surgical Stapling. Scientific American, Oct. 19. Amirichand, Col. 1962. Licentiate, 12, 52. Reported in J. Amer. med. Ass., 6.10.62. 20. Gopalaswami, R. A. 1962. Family Planning Outlook for Government Action in India, in Research in Family Planning. Editor, C. V. Kiser. p. 79. 21. New Society, 12.3.64, p. 19. 22. Brit. med. J., 19.10.46 and 4.2.50. 23. Maizels, G. 1964. Fate of Grafenberg Rings. Brit. med. J., 14.3.64. 24. Elkan, E. 1964. New Scientist, 9.1.64. 25. Williams, Glanville. 1958. The Sanctity of Life and the Criminal Law, p. 103.

EQUEJNtlCbll UARTERLL Y

Vol. 11, No. 3

Contents

September, 1964

The New Outlook in Eugenics, FRANK LORIMER
Decline of Consanguineous Marriages in France from 1926 to 1958, JEAN SUTrER AND
JEAN-MICHEL Goux Does the Effect ofa Family Planning Program Continue?, YosHio KOYA
White and Non-white Fertility by Census Tract for 1960, J. WILLIAM LEASURE AND
NICHOLAS W. SCHROCK Relation of Fertility to Occupation and to Income in the Male Population of Ann Arbor,
Michigan, 1951-1954, LEE R. DICE, PHILIP J. CLARK AND ROBERT I. GILBERT
Brief Reports: Appraisals of Civilized Man and Savage, R. H. POST Fertility Management and Concern with Over-Population in Mainland China, AMRIT LAL
Book Reviews, CLYDE V. KISER, Book Review Editor Recent Publications, HELEN G. HAMMONS

EDITORIL BOARD

Frederick Osborn, Chairman

Gordon Allen

RICHARD H. OSBORNE, Acting Editor

Frank Lorimer

Consulting Editors: JAN BOOK, F. CLARKE FRASER

CLYDE V. KISER, LEIGHTON VAN NORT, L. D. SANGHVI, JEAN SUrrER

Published by AMERICAN EUGENICS SOCIETY
230 Park Avenue, New York, 17, N.Y. -___________________ Subscription $7.00; Single current copies $1.75; Single back copies $2.00

