PLANNED PARENTHOOD IN INDIA
By VERA HOUGHTON
(Secretary, International Committee on Planned Parenthood)

IT will soon be three years since the
International Congress on Population and
World Resources in Relation to the
Family met at Cheltenham. During that time a great deal has been said and written on the problem of growing pressure of
population on food and other resources. The
Colombo Plan stresses the formidable task of raising standards of living in South and
South-East Asia while trying to keep pace with growing populations; Japan has been told that if her population reaches ioo million
or more, it will be impossible to maintain even
a bare subsistence diet without foreign aid being continued indefinitely. In the West Indies the chairman of the Development and Welfare Organisation has drawn attention,
in his report for I947-I949, to the serious economic implications of the excessive rate of population growth in that region.
Despite these and other warnings, Governments have so far failed to initiate positive population policies in relation to the resources of their respective areas. Dissemination of family planning knowledge is still in the hands of voluntary organizations, inadequately supported and ill-equipped for tackling this problem on a large scale.
The need for an international organization to bring together all organizations and individuals concerned with population problems and family planning in each country, for the promotion of a world population programme, is becoming increasingly obvious. To prepare for this, the Cheltenham Congress set up a small committee of representatives of the national organizations of America, Britain, Holland and Sweden, and the title of " International Committee on Planned Parenthood " has been provisionally adopted.
The main task of the secretariat has been to establish contact with planned parenthood movements in other countries and to clarify the legal and practical difficulties which

impede the introduction of family planning
and sex education programmes. We are now in touch with organizations or individuals in
forty-eight countries and there is a fairly
regular exchange of news and information.
Much of this information is of general
interest, and the invitation to make it known
to readers of the EUGENICS REVIEW is
welcomed. In the months ahead the International
Committee hopes that pressure will be put on the British Government not only to implement the recommendations of the Royal Commission on Population but to make the dissemination of family planning knowledge an integral part of the Colonial Medical Services. We hope to encourage fresh ideas and proposals for tackling some of the difficult and almost insurmountable problems with which voluntary workers are faced, and to stimulate research for a simple method of contraception suitable for backward peoples.
There is special need for this in India where the population is increasing at the rate of nearly five million a year, and where the already inadequate food resources have recently been depleted by a series of natural calamities. As the plight of Indian women has been recognized in recent years by Indian sociologists and demographers, India is perhaps a good starting-point. What are the difficulties in the way of a family planning scheme ?
Dr. S. Chandrasekhar says:
Apart from the general rural conservatism of the masses that offers resistance to every reform, there is no organized resistance either by the Government or the Church as in some countries. Nor are the Indian religions opposed to planned parenthood.... It should be recognized that both in India and in Pakistan a majority of the people live under backward conditions. Matters like bathrooms, running water, privacy, the cheapness, reliability and availability of contra-

33

34 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ceptives, and the illiteracy of women need Other departments and Governments of

attention. No matter what the obstacles, this reform must be carried through.

India have fortunately not waited for a lead from Delhi. The films division of the

Before India obtained her Independence Ministry of Information has produced a

these problems had been considered by two documentary entitled Planned Parenthood.

Government committees: by the Health This film explains that by limiting the size

Survey and Development Committee (the of families, a better chance, in education and

Bhore Committee), which reported in I946, in life, can be given to India's children.

and by the National Planning Commission Family planning lectures have become a part

set up by the Indian National Congress of military training in the Army and Air

during the war. The Bhore Committee Force. An experimental scheme of clinics

recommended that " when childbearing is is being tried out at certain selected stations

likely to result in injury to mother or infant in the Army, and the Air Force is to give

. . .it should be the responsibility of advice in all its maternity and child welfare

Governments to provide instruction regard- sections.

ing contraception in maternity and child Hyderabad State Government has set up a

welfare centres, dispensaries, hospitals and Bureau of Health Education and Propa-

any other public institutions which adminis- ganda, and a Health Museum, which will

ter medical aid to women." It also recom- include propaganda for family planning. A

mended that the means of contraception be Family Planning Society has been formed by

made available free of cost in necessitous Mrs. Vellodi, the Governor's wife, and a clinic

cases; that control be exercised over the has been opened at the Central Military

manufacture and sale of contraceptives, and HospitaL. In East Punjab, training in

that public funds be used for research into contraceptive techniques has now been made

more effective methods.

part of the medical curriculum, and the

The National Planning Commission, of Director of Health Services is in touch with

which Pandit Nehru was chairman, advised us here. In Mysore, birth-control clinics were

the State to adopt a policy to encourage established at State hospitals as long ago as

family planning and limitation of children. I930, when they were the first Government-

The measures outlined included sterilization controlled clinics in the world.

of persons suffering from transmissible In Madras, where several attempts were

diseases of a serious nature.

made before the war to start clinics, the All

Since Independence, no action has been India Women's Conference has formed a

taken to implement the recommendations of Family Planning Committee to stimulate

either of these committees, despite the fact public interest.

that the chairman of one of them is now the Free birth-control clinics have been

Prime Minister. This omission may be established by the municipalities of Bombay

explained by the fact that there are other and Poona. Bombay Municipality was the

Ministers, both in the Union and in the first to take action, opening two clinics in

States, who are opposed to birth control. I947; there are now four. Poonahasoneclinic.

The Minister of Health, for example, has not It is estimated that about 3,000 married

spoken in favour of it.

couples have so far used these facilities in

The Indian Director-General of Health Bombay, which, for a city of that size, is not

Services went very fully into the question of an encouraging response. A need is revealed

family planning when he was here in I949 for propaganda on the part of doctors,

with a view to bringing this matter before nurses, health visitors ancd other social

the provincial and union Governments, who workers, to persuade the poorer sections of

are ultimately responsible for health matters the benefits of family planning. Bombay has

in their areas. But after two years we are been fortunate in having a long record of

officially informed that the matter is still voluntary help, and the newly formed Family

under consideration.

Planning Association, under the presidency

PLANNED PARENTHOOD IN INDIA

35

of Lady Rama Rau, is doing valuable work invited to the tenth annual meeting at

in making direct contact with the people and Travancore. For three years in succession

in gaiInig the co-operation of the medical Mrs. Edith How-Martyn, Honorary Director

profession. But few doctors and social of the Birth Control International Informa-

workers have as yet taken this matter up; tion Centre, visited India, and in I935 she

more financial help and many more voluntary accompanied Mrs. Sanger on a world tour.

workers will be needed.

Between them they covered thousands of

Elsewhere in India, a number of hospitals, miles in India, giving many lectures and

dispensaries and maternity and child wel- demonstrations. This work was continued

fare centres give advice to patients, but the by the Family Planning Association (Great

responsibility for doing so usually rests with Britain), who appointed Mrs. Rena Datta

the doctor or other person in charge. Facili- India Organiser in I938. Mrs. Datta returned

ties therefore vary between one centre and to this country in I945.

another in the same area. Some private It is now for India to decide how her

maternity homes and doctors in practice are population problems shall be solved; last

also willing to help patients, but their work year the Indian Institute of Population

does not reach the cases that most need it. Studies was founded by Dr. S. Chandrase-

In the past the movement has found its khar, to study the basic relation between

most vigorous advocates among voluntary population and natural resources. Much of

workers, and over the years many distin- the hesitancy of Government officials and

guished Indian women have devoted them- members of the medical profession is due to

selves to it. The All India Women's Con- the absence of simple, effective and cheap

ference repeatedly passed resolutions in methods, in the discovery of which India

favour of disseminating birth-control know- would doubtless be glad of help from the

ledge and, in I935, Mrs. Margaret Sanger was West.

Eugenics Review, VoL XIM, No. 1

