TWINS*

By J. A. FRASER ROBERTS, M.A., D.Sc., F.R.S.E.

T HE founder of our Society, Sir Francis therefore be regarded as one index of the

Galton, was the first person to point fertility of the stock.

out the importance of systematic In the sheep and in man, fraternal twin-

observations on twins, especially in regard to ning must depend entirely or almost entirely

the problem of Nature and Nurture. Since upon the female. The male can produce no

the publication of his work an enormous direct effect. But it has been amply demon-

amount of research has been carried out on strated, notably by Heape, that the male of

twins and twinning. The subject is so varied fertile stock can transmit hereditary factors

that all I can attempt to do is to, present a for fertility to his daughters. It has been

bird's-eye view. You must forgive me if I shown by Heape, Marshall, Hammond and

deal very briefly with some topics and if others that the hereditary element in the

some are omitted altogether.

sheep is a large one. In one case a sheep

We all know that there are two sorts of breeder increased the fertility of his stock

twins. First of all there are the twins that from about I40 lambs per ioo females to over

resemble each other no more than do ordinary 200, simply by selecting over a period of

brothers and sisters. They may be of the years rams that were themselves one of twins

same or of different sex. Such twins are or triplets.

called fraternal. In the second place there are It is not perhaps likely in the human that

identical twins which are always of the same hereditary influences are relatively so impor-

sex and which resemble each other to a tant, but nevertheless there is little doubt

notable extent. The resemblance may be so that they are considerable. Pedigrees are

close that even parents may make mistakes. found in the literature that show a concentra-

tion of fraternal twinning. It is the heredi-

FRATERNAL TWINNING

tary aspect of fertility that is associated with

The causation of fraternal twinning is very fraternal twinning.

simple. The human species is one that usually Members of the Eugenics Society will be

produces one offspring at a birth. In a familiar with the recent work of Professor

proportion of cases, however, two are born, Fisher, which shows the immense importance

or occasionally three or more. This may be of natural fertility, and the results of selec-

regarded as an ordinary biological variation, tion in this respect. It is clear that under

for no species has the number at a birth present social and economic conditions infer-

absolutely fixed. Fraternal twins are born tility is rewarded-with a profoundly dygenic

because at ovulation two Graafian follicles effect. The study of fraternal twins is thus

have matured simultaneously and two ova closely linked up with that of differential

have been shed.

fertility, which is one of the most important

One of the most interesting things about of eugenic problems.

fraternal twins is the close connection with

fertility. It has been shown in animals, such IDENTICAL TWINNING

as the sheep, which usually produces one or two offspring at a time, that a stock that is producing a high proportion of twins and
triplets shows a low proportion of sterility. The occurrence of fraternal twinning may

The causation of identical twinning is
totally different. In this case the zygote at an early stage of its development divides into two. Identical twins therefore are persons who once were a single individual and neces-

* A lecture delivered before the Eugenics Society on January I5th, I935.

sarily commenced their life with an identical hereditary constitution.

25

26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Identical twinning as anything more than result in the one case and a variable result in

an excessively rare occurrence is only found the other. These and other considerations

in three species-in man, and in two species would seem to point to the conclusion that

of arnadillo. Needless to say a phenomenon identical twinning occurs because of the

of such biological interest has been studied genetic constitution of the zygote, and the

by many workers in very great detail. In constant process in one species of armadillo,

spite of this, however, we still are not certain the variable one in the other, and the occa-

why the zygote should split in this fashion. sional one in man are likely to be due to

Newman,* Stockardt and others have put genetic constitutions of the appropriate sort.

forward an essentially physiological explana- Hamlett suggests that double monsters are

tion. They consider that when identical due to an entirely different process, which is

twinning occurs this is due to an arrest of very likely physiological, as has been shown

development, probably caused by a deficient experimentally. Of course we know, too,

oxygen supply to the zygote. This hypo- that all grades of union can be found in the

thesis was undoubtedly suggested because, human from a vestigial remnant of one twin

in the species of armadillo in which identical to Siamese twins, and finally twins that are

twinning occurs, a resting phase can be joined together by a small area of skin. If the

demonstrated. Further, it has been possible genetic hypothesis is accepted we should have

under experimental conditions in other to assume that in certain cases a totally

species of animals to produce double monsters different mechanism was operating to produce

by interference with the developing zygote. essentially the same result. This offends

Recently, however, there has been grave against the principle of economy of hypo-

doubt as to whether this hypothesis is a thesis. It must be pointed out, however, that

likely or even a tenable one. Fischer$ and in the armadillo double monsters do not

Hamlett§ among others have expressed the occur, so that this difficulty may not be such

most vigorous doubts. I have only time to a serious one.

refer to some of the considerations that seem To sum up, it is impossible to pronounce a

to make a physiological hypothesis unlikely. final judgment at the present time, but on the

It is now known that in some other species, whole the genetic hypothesis would seem to

for example the badger, precisely the same fit the facts much better than the physio-

type of arrest occurs that should produce logical, although there are some difficulties

twins if the physiological theory is correct. about its acceptance.

In this species, however, identical twins are It is clear that the occurrence of identical

unknown. Moreover, in the armadillo itself twinning cannot have the same relation to

during the phase of quiescence, cell division the fertility of the stock as has fraternal

does not take place. In the nine-banded twinning. The stock that is producing a

species the number of young produced from relatively high proportion of identical twins

a single fertilized ovum is almost invariably is only increased thereby by half the number

four, litters of three or five being extremely of these twins. Identical twinning is not

rare. In the other species the number is related to fertility in any general sense.

variable and may be anything from seven to Further, identical twinning depends upon the

twelve. It is difficult to see why the same constitution of the zygote and not of the

physiological process should show a constant mother, and to the extent that it is genetic,

the male and the female are both contri-

* Newman, H. H., " The Biology of Twins," I9I7; buting. This is the explanation of many

and " The Physiology of Twinning," 1923.

pedigrees that show direct influence of the

t Stockard, C. R., " A probable explanation of polyembryony in the Armadillo," Amer. Naturalist,

male.

1921, LV.
: Fischer, E., Verh. d. Anat. Ges., Erganzungscheft

A " CONTROLLED EXPERIMENT"

sum Anat, I93I, LXXII. § Hamlett, G. W. D., " Polyembryony in the Arma-
dillo," Quart. Rev. of Biol., I933, VIII.

The study of twins is of particular interest to the biologist and most essential to the

TWINS

27

student of genetics. Nature has provided the with some of the results that have been

biologist with a controlled experiment. This obtained, it is necessary to study in some

experiment is so well controlled that for detail precisely what differences there are

many purposes it would be difficult to equal between ordinary brothers and sisters, and

it under laboratory conditions and to equal fraternal and identical twins respectively.

it in man would be fantastically impossible. We know that identical twins have an

The intensive study of pairs of twins has identical genetic constitution and that fra-

therefore been a feature of much biological ternal twins differ in hereditary constitution

research in varied fields.

owing to mendeian segregation, and there-

Before turning to the subjects that I should fore fraternal twins have only some of the

like to mention in more detail, some reference same genes in common. The difference

must be made to the light that twins have between fraternal twins and sibs is much less

shed on the subject of sex determination and profound. As regards their hereditary make-

sex differentiation. As regards sex deter- up both classes will show on the average the

mination the evidence from the human and same variability, but it might be expected

the armadillo is sufficient to show that sex that fraternal twins would be somewhat more

in the higher forms is determined at the time alike because there is no age difference. The

of fertilization and cannot be affected in any maternal age is the same-to the extent that

ordinary case by anything that happens this factor is important-and it will be

subsequently.

expected that children of the same age will

As regards sex differentiation we may con- receive more similar treatment in the family

sider very briefly another twinning pheno- than would children of different ages.

menon, that of the freemartin. When twins

occur in cattle they are of the fraternal type MIRROR-IMAGES

and can therefore be of unlike sex. It has It is much more important, however, to

long been known that when male and female consider if we are justified in saying that

twin calves are born the female is abnormal the difference between fraternal and identi-

and sterile seven times out of eight. The cal twins is wholly genetic. Newman* has

reason is that seven times out of eight on the drawn attention to the fact that a pro-

average the foetal circulations of the twin portion of identical twins are mirror-images.

calves fuse. Hormones are elaborated by the This is not true in the case of identical twins

male and circulate in the body of the female that are extremely alike. The kind of twins

entirely upsetting and altering its sexual about whom their parents frequently make

development. While the external genitalia mistakes are not mirror-images. In such a

of this abnormal female-the freemartin- case we may suppose that division took place

are not conspicuously abnormal, the internal very early in development, so early that

arrangement is far more of the male type, right and left sides had not been established.

and in the typical case the gonads are male. Identical twins, however, are not always as

The study of the freemartin has therefore alike as this, and it is frequently noticed that

been of great value in elucidating the one is right-handed and the other left-handed.

important part played by hormones in sex The whorl of hair on the crown of the head is

development.

clockwise in the one and anti-clockwise in the

other. If their faces are asymmetrical as is the

COMPARISON OF IDENTICAL AND

case in most human beings, a deviation of

FRATERNAL TWINS

the nose, for example, to the left in one will

The study of twins is probably of most be mirrored by a deviation to the right in

importance to the geneticist and the eugenist the other.

because of the light it can throw on the res- We can safely say that the fact that the

pective contributions of heredity and environ- twins are mirror-images is due to the division

ment with reference to human characteristics both physical and mental. Before dealing

* Newman, H. H., Numerous papers in the Journal
of Heredity, etc.

28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

into two having taken place later during extent the living organism chooses its

development and the later this process takes environment for genetic reasons.

place the more pronounced will be the mirror- I think we can fairly sum up by saying that

imaging. It has been observed that the more if we use the increased resemblance between

marked this phenomenon the more unlike are identical twins as against that of fraternal

the twins, and it is also a remarkable fact twins as an index of the importance of

that the right-handed twin is slightly heredity, we shall somewhat underestimate

superior both physically and mentally to the rather than overestimate the genetic fraction.

left-handed twin.

CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF TWIN

GENETIC AND NON-GENETIC FACTORS STUDIES

There has been some discussion on how It is impossible to do more than give a few

the differences that have been produced in examples of the human problems that have

this way should be regarded. They are cer- been clarified by studying pairs of twins.

tainly not genetic, but on the other hand they For example, physicians often ascribe

are not environmental in any ordinary sense. mental deficiency associated with paralysis

We shall avoid this difficulty if we consider as to secondary causes. It has been found, how-

genetic everything that depends directly on ever, that while both members of a fraternal

the genes present in the fertilized ovum. pair are seldom affected, both members of an

This will also exclude the mutation of genes identical pair usually are. This is just what is

during development. Non-genetic influences found in ordinary low-grade amentia. It can

will also include any differences in the host of be concluded therefore that secondary causa-

chemical and other stimuli operating before tion is not likely to be more common in

birth and finally all those infinitely varied mental deficiency associated with paralysis

influences that operate afterwards. It is than it is in ordinary mental deficiency.

much safer to use the word non-genetic Identical twins always belong to the same

rather than environmental. For the word blood group, fraternal twins differ in more

environmental has a popular meaning and than a third of cases. Here, then, is an

would only be used popularly to describe example of a characteristic that is effectively

some of the influences that operate after determined solely by heredity. As a contrast,

birth. in schizophrenia both members of an identical

Defining therefore the word genetic in this pair are usually affected, though according to

sense we see that the difference between some authorities in not more than 75 per

fraternal and identical twins is not wholly cent. of cases. In fraternal twins it is very

genetic. The mirror-imaging phenomenon rare to find both members affected. While

will introduce some non-genetic variability therefore hereditary constitution is impor-

and this will of codise tend to make iden- tant, non-genetic influences are effective to

tical twins less alike. If therefore we use some extent in determining whether a person

the difference as an index of the importance is affected or not.

of heredity we shall slightly underestimate it. In tuberculosis one series of figures gives

On the other hand, there may be non- 70 per cent. for identical twins and 25 per

genetic influences that tend to make identical cent. for fraternals. Hereditary constitution

twins more alike. For example, it is is therefore still important but relatively less

often contended that identical twins, owing so. Finally some figures for pneumonia give

to the peculiar psychological relationship 25 per cent. for identicals and i8 per cent. for

that exists between them, tend to choose a fraternals. This points to the fact that non-

more similar environment than do fraternal genetic influences are likely to be much more

twins, who often show the same incom- effectively important in this disease.

patibilities as do ordinary brothers and I will just refer to one more instance of this

sisters. I am doubtful, however, if this kind. Two Japanese workers have recently

consideration amounts to much. To a large described a case in which the twins were

TWINS

29

almost certainly identical. They showed, however, very different growth-rates. The smaller twin suffered from diabetes insipidus, and X-ray pictures of the skulls showed that his pituitary was smaller than that of his brother. Here, then, is an example of a pro-
found endocrine difference associated with a condition that is often hereditary. In this case, however, if the twins are definitely identical, the phenomenon is non-genetic.
GENETIC AND NON-GENETIC INFLUENCES ON I.Q.
The subject of this paper is so wide that one must select certain special problems. A problem that I am anxious to discuss in rather more detail is the use of twin studies in estimating the relative contributions of
genetic and non-genetic influences to mentality, as estimated by the intelligence quotient or mental ratio. In the I.Q. we possess an objective measure of abilities that are held to be closely related to intelligence. If we test a large number of children we find that their I.Q.s tend to be normally distributed, and the variability can be expressed in terms of the usual statistical constants. Perhaps the simplest way to regard the variaability is to think of it as the average difference between pairs of individuals. We may find for example that in our group the average difference between pairs of individuals selected at random is 20 points. In a normal population this difference is proportional to the standard deviation. The standard deviation is not, however, itself a direct measure of variability. The correct measure is the square of the standard deviation, that is the variance. Why we should use the variance and not the standard deviation is a point to which I shall return in a few minutes. In our example, therefore, the variability is proportional to the square of the average difference between pairs, that is, it may be represented by the figure 400.
If we now select our pairs not at random but take brothers and sisters, we shall find that the average difference between pairs is smaller. Let us suppose that it is found to be I7 points. The variability has now been reduced to seventeen squared. This is 289.

The reduction from 400 to 289 represents the
increased likeness of brothers and sisters as
compared with the average differences found between random unrelated persons. The reduction of variability will be due partly to
genetic causes, for brothers and sisters tend to share the same genes. It will be partly due
to non-genetic causes because the non-
genetic influences that undoubtedly effect mentality tend to be similar for brothers and sisters. If we now measure the average dif-
ferences between fraternal twins instead of ordinary brothers and sisters we shall find that the variability may be slightly more reduced. This is clearly due to non-genetic
causes such as the more constant pre-natal and post-natal conditions that twins tend to share as compared with ordinary brothers and sisters.
Finally, we may measure the differences between identical twins. We shall now find a further considerable reduction. Let us
suppose we find that the average difference is now io points. The variability may be represented by ioo. There is no doubt that
the greater part of this further reduction must be due to genetic causes. Some non-
genetic influences that may operate in the case of identical against fraternal twins have
already been mentioned. The asymmetry mechanism which is peculiar to identical
twins will tend to make them less alike, so that the importance of heredity will be underestimated if we use the reduction in
variability as the measure. On the other hand, it may be that in certain cases iden-
tical twins tend to have a more constant
environment than do fraternal twins. This
point has already been discussed. To the extent that it operates it will mean that part of the reduction in variability is due to nongenetic causes. In view, however, of Newman's results in regard to the importance of
the asymmetry mechanism, it is likely that we shall actually underestimate the contribution of heredity if we ascribe to genetic causes all the reduction in variability in identical as compared with fraternal twins.
There is a remarkable constancy in the findings of vanous workers as regards the reduction in variability as we proceed from

30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

one variety of pairs to another. One of the happen if the reverse procedure could be

latest results is that of Dr. Louis Herrman and adopted. If it were possible to leave the

Professor Lancelot Hogben* who have studied genetic variability of fraternal twins just as

brothers and sisters and twins at the London it is and to eliminate all non-genetic dif-

schools. Their results are as follows. They ferences as between members of our pairs,

found that the average differences between we should find that the average difference

sibs that did not differ much in age was i6 * 8 was reduced not from I7'7 to I7'79-92=

points, between fraternal twins of like sex 8-5 but only to I51i. This is a reduction of

I7 *7 points, and between identical twins 9 * 2 about one-seventh. If, therefore, we make

points. If we use the reduction in variability our genetic constitution constant, as we did

shown by identicals as compared with when we selected identical pairs, and find

fraternals as an approximate measure of the that the average difference is reduced to

contribution of heredity we are very unlikely about half, we must not say that heredity

to overestimate it. This is in fact what Dr. and environment are in this group of about

Herrman and Professor Hogben have done in equal importance, because we should have to

their paper. It must be pointed out, how- use just the same argument as regards the

ever, that they adopt this criterion tenta- reverse case. If genetic differences are left as

tively, and somewhat reluctantly, for pur- they are and non-genetic differences, to

poses of argument.

which must be added errors of observation,

They sum up their results as follows. are eliminated, the average difference is

"Contrary to the widespread belief which reduced to one-seventh. But if we had drawn

attributes difference in I.Q. predominately to the erroneous conclusion that I mentioned a

genetic differences it is extremely unlikely moment ago as regards the evidence from

that genetic differences account for more than identical twins, we should have to say on the

one-half the mean differences among off- very same material that heredity was six

spring of the same parent, having the same times as important as environment.*

birth rank and brought up together in the Actually, of course, if it is realized that the

same family environment." A hasty reading variability is measured not by the differences

of this conclusion might lead one to suppose but by their squares, either way by perform-

that I.Q.'s are determined in about equal ing the experiment would yield the same

measure by genetic and non-genetic causes. result, namely, on the figures given by Dr.

Actually it means nothing of the kind. The Herrman and Professor Hogben and adopting

true measure of variability is not the dif- their criterion, heredity is nearly three times

ference, but the difference squared. Thus, as important as environment.

I7.7 units of average difference may be We must realize, however, that there is

represented by a total variability of 3I3; another source of variability which this cal-

9 * 2 units of difference means that in identical culation ignores or rather puts into the

twins the variability has been reduced to environmental side of the scale. This is the

85 points, that is s. of what it was before. variability due to errors of observation. If

We can say, therefore, that on these figures it were possible to examine the same child,

heredity is nearly three times as important using the same test, on consecutive days, and

as environment.

if the result of the first test did not affect the

second test, the two results would not be

MEASUREMENT OF VARIABILITY

exactly the same. Differences in the response

That the true method of measuring vari- of the individual must exist. It has been

ability is to consider the squares of the dif- found that with appropriate intelligence

ferences, and not the differences themselves, tests the variation is not very great, though

may be illustrated by seeing what would compared with the small variability of

* Heirman, L., and Hogben, L., " The Intellectual identical twins it may be considerable. Dr.

Resemblance of Twins," Proc. Roy. Soc. Edin., 1933, LIII, 105.

* In a word variances can be added and subtracted, but differences cannot.

TWINS

3'

Herrman and Professor Hogben have not It should also be noted that all the calcula-

determined the errors of observation from tions refer to the population as it is. If

their own material. They quote the results environmental conditions were radically

of an American worker, who found the very altered the relative importance of heredity

close correlation of o 97 between repeated and environment might be changed. In

tests on the Otis scale, which is the one they general, however, this can be expressed quite

used. They concluded that this contribution simply. If environmental conditions are

to variability was so small that it could be made much more variable, and that in prac-

neglected.

tice would almost always mean making them

This assumption is unjustified. First of all worse on the average, total variability would

the very high correlation of o * 97 might very be increased and also the relative importance

well not be realized if the experiment were of environment. If these conditions are made

repeated. Further, if age corrections are more uniform, which again in practice means

introduced, as in the case of these twins, this making them better, total variability is

source of variability is considerably in- reduced and the contribution of heredity

creased, especially as the published tables of becomes relatively more important.

norms for the Otis test appear to be very

inaccurate. The errors of observation would affect the identical pairs proportionately much more heavily. It is quite possible

ESTIMATING ENVIRONMENTAL INFLUENCES

therefore than an appreciable part of the Identical twins can be used for another

variability still remaining when identical type of experiment. This is to see how far

twins are considered is due to errors of environmental differences can produce dif-

observation. In the calculations of Dr. Her- ferent results in the two members of a pair.

man and Professor Hogben, this contribution In animals it has been increasingly realized

to variability is automatically included with how valuable it is-in, say, a nutrition

environmental influences. The figure of 3: I experiment-to start with individuals that

for the relative importance of heredity and are genetically identical or very alike. Many

environment would undoubtedly be raised if years of patient work have produced the

these errors could be estimated and elimin- Wistar stock of albino rats in which genetic

ated. It is not inconceivable that half the variability has been almost eliminated. In

variability shown by the identical pairs is due the case of man the very same thing is even

to this cause. If so, the relative contributions better done for us by Nature. The biologist,

of heredity and environment would be as six the psychologist and the physician, by using

or seven to one.

identical twins, can test the effect of differ-

It can be concluded that for a population ences of all kinds in persons who are geneti-

such as that of London school children, as in cally identical. That man should be one of

most populations that have been studied, an the few species that produce an abundant

examination of twins indicates that heredity supply of identical twins is so fortunate that

is considerably more important than environ- it might be regarded as a direct intervention

ment in determining the I.Q.-that is to say, of Providence!

it is not less than.three times as important A certain amount of very careful work has

and may be considerably more.

been done on identical twins reared apart,

It should be noted that the contribution of especially by Newman.* As yet not many

heredity to level of I.Q. is not as great as it is cases have been collected, not enough to

in the case of many physical characteristics permit general conclusions being drawn. The

such as stature. Twin studies as well as other cases described are, however, extraordinarily

lines of research indicate that in an ordinary interesting. It seems clear that differences in

population the contribution of environment

to many physical differences is relatively small.

* Newman, H. H., Numerous papers in the Journal
of Heredity.

32 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

home surroundings and education may some- active co-operation of the parents of twins,

times produce remarkable differences in per- of twins themselves and of physicians. I have

sons who start life with identical genes. New- not mentioned one important aspect of twin

man goes so far as to suggest that the effects studies. This is how to decide with certainty

of different environment on the same heredity which twins are identical and which fraternal.

may be as great as the effect of the same While in the majority of cases it is not a very

environment on different heredity. He difficult matter to come to a decision, a pro-

makes it clear, however, that far too few portion of cases remain in which it is not

cases have been studied as yet for any con- easy. The work of Dr. Stocks* on finger-

clusion to be stated. The differences between prints, and other studies, are of great value,

these pairs may be exaggerated because they but still a proportion of cases usually remain

are adults, and the higher ranges of the Binet that are not free from all doubt. I will not

scale applied to adults do not give very stress the point that the existence of doubtful

reliable results. Average differences between cases obscures experimental results and

adults cannot easily be compared with makes their interpretation more difficult.

differences found in children.

The person who can give help here is the

A number of psychologists, for example physician who witnesses the birth. If, in the

Gesell,* have already used identical twins for case of a twin birth, the nature of the mem-

most fascinating studies on the effects of branes could be placed on record, twin

training. Different types of training can be material would become even more valuable

given to each member of a pair of identical than it is.

infants, or the same training given at Another point in this connection is the

different ages. There can be no doubt that fact that twins are subject to a higher mor-

big advances in psychology will be made along tality at birth than single children. Further,

these lines, especially as regards the intricate if a condition is being investigated that

relationship of training to inborn potentiali- shortens life, one member of the pair may

ties. Gesell has devised an extremely com- have died and so that pair will not come into

plete scale of physiological and psychological the survey at all. This will upset to some

points, against which the development of the extent many calculations of the kind we

child almost from birth can be compared. have been considering. The ideal would be a

He has already made detailed observations complete register of all twin births with some

on pairs of twins.

account of their subsequent history.

Human biology will progress more rapidly

NEED FOR ACCURATE RECORDS

if the importance of full and accurate records

In twins of both types we possess experi- of twin births is realized; if the details of

mental material of incomparable value. I such births are recorded; if records are kept

have only been able to mention in this paper of the subsequent history of twins; and if

a few of the lessons that can be learnt from twins and their parents realize how much

them. It is safe to say that even more vital they can do by co-operating in research to

information will be obtained in the future. help the advance of knowledge and so to

If, however, this is to be done it will need the perform a real public service.

* Stocks, P., " A Biometric Investigation of Twins

* Gesell, A., article on " Twins " in A Handbook of and their Brothers and Sisters," Annals of Eugenics,

Child Psychology, 193I.

1930, IV.

genics Review, Vol. XVIV, No. 1.

