FAMILY ALLOWANCES

In the Contemporary Economic Situation

By R. A. FISHER, Sc.D., F.R.S.
(An Address to the Eugenics Society, April 12th, 1932.)

T HERE is apparent at the present (c) Thirdly I would stress the general in-

time a rather remarkable convergence tellectual and moral atmosphere, the mood

of interests, both from the economic of the times with respect to national well-

and from the biological viewpoints, on the being. The easy optimism which assumes

sociological possibilities, as well as the im- that we can enjoy prosperity without earn-

mediate practical consequences, of systems ing it, both by forethought and effort, is

of national economy which make direct, practically extinct; and it has not yet been

instead of indirect, provision for the support replaced, in the body of the people, by a

of the rising generation. My object is to set superstitious and fatalistic pessimism. I

forth the reasons which have influenced the believe we could sum up the mood of the

Eugenics Society in adopting a positive and present generation in two propositions:

explicitly stated policy on this question:

and I should like to begin by emphasizing some of the current circumstances which seem to render possible a very substantial

(i) that all is not well, and (ii) that the future is in our own hands.

advance in positive eugenics in the compara-

tively near future.

(d) Turning from the moral attitude of

(a) The first factor which I should, I our times to the scientific position, with

think, mention is the more active and effi- especial reference to the eugenic problem,

cient organization of the Eugenics Society, we have equal grounds for affirming that the

made possible, partly, by its 'increased time is ripe for action. There exists a very

resources, but more especially by the keen- general agreement as to the magnitude and

ness and enterprise of our General Secre- proportions of the racial danger with which

tary, Dr. Blacker.

we are threatened; a doubtless imperfect,

(b) The second point one dare scarcely but rational and coherent, theory of the

mention to a generation so disillusioned of causes at work, which is certainly in har-

politics as is our own. But it is a fact, and mony with the major facts known; and lastly

I think an important fact, that we have at a remedial principle, simple in itself but

the moment and for the next few years, a adaptable to every variety of economic orga-

Government with power and authority to act nization, which, though acting slowly, could

on its convictions, pledged to diagnose and certainly in time remove, and even reverse,

remedy, at their source, the causes of the major causes of racial deterioration.

national weakness.

In addressing this Society it may be worth

We may remember, too, that the Govern- while to say a few preliminary words upon

ment is pledged as a first charge upon the nature of the eugenic policy in its prac-

returning prosperity to restore to a large tical application. In dealing with detail we

class of salaried servants, in the teaching are sometimes liable to forget the magnitude

and other professions, the deductions or cuts of our enterprise. Our aim is no less, and

by which their salaries have been reduced. cannot be less, than to improve the heredi-

The restoration of these cuts will form an tary gifts of the whole of our population.

exceptionally fine opportunity for pressing We are sometimes told that we should start

the just claims of parents upon the national upon this task by concentrating -our atten-

resources.

tion upon rare and extreme defects, such as

87

88 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

lunacy and feebleness of mind, and that The extreme incompetence of any system

these will provide the thin end of the wedge of eugenics based upon personal interference

in the education of public opinion towards with the main body of the population may

a more general and comprehensive eugenic be seen by comparing our eugenic aims with

policy.

the economic aims of a national character

Now it is true and important that these which have been recently much under dis-

extreme cases do provide a good object- cussion. If a project were under considera-

lesson on the importance of inheritance for tion for increasing the consumption of

human well-being, and on our power by con- British dairy products in place of the mate-

certed national action to diminish in future rials imported from foreign countries, we

generations the grievous personal distress should not expect to be told that this policy

which they occasion. But in another way involved the appointment of a new army of

they provide a very bad example of eugenic inspectors employed by the State to raid the

action. The feeble-in-mind, paupers, crimi- larders of individual citizens and to deter-

nals, and lunatics already cause endless mine, by methods of chemical analysis, not

trouble and expense, and the payment of yet discovered, whether their butter and

numerous officials to investigate, care for, cheese were or were not imported. We should

and control them. The proposal that this not expect to be told that we should need to

care and control should be directed, inter remove these comestibles from their tables

alia, to eugenic ends does not imply any and to replace them at public expense by

serious increase either in officialism or in the articles of British manufacture; yet this is

restriction of individual liberty. Yet it is not an extreme equivalent of the extravagant

very widely believed that the exercise of interference with private lives which seems

eugenic influence over the great body of the to be expected of eugenics; and it is worth

population does necessarily imply individual giving a moment's attention to the principles

investigation and official control applied to of State action by which the economic reform

the whole population. I have heard a very can be brought about more easily, than, it is

highly placed and distinguished scientific supposed, can the eugenic reform.

man explain to his audience that the eugenic I submit that the difference in principle is

programme involves, first, a minute genetic a very simple one. We take it for granted

analysis of the human race, to discover that economic action by the State shall be

what genotypes are available, next, a public based upon a general knowledge of the struc-

and officially accepted agreement as to which ture and laws of working of our economic

of these types is the most desirable, and system; that it is known that the imported

finally, the intensive crossing and inbreed- butter and cheese must be unloaded at cer-

ing of selected individuals in order to build tain ports; that an import tax levied at these

up the chosen genotype. After which, I sup- ports must either be paid by the foreign pro-

pose I should add, all who are not the pro- ducer, to the benefit of the Treasury, or

ducts of the State stud will be quietly elimi- must be added to the price which must be

nated. The speaker was not attacking asked for his goods in this country; that

eugenics, but rather went out of his way to many of those who now consume these goods

say how important he thought it was.

in preference to home productions would be

We can all see, in a particular instance, unwilling to do so at the enhanced price;

how harmful and misleading this impression that many foreign producers, who now find

is, but in a lesser degree it is certainly very here a satisfactory market for their output,

widespread and is responsible for the widely would no longer do so if their receipts were

held opinion that eugenics is a fantastic and diminished; that the home producers, if

impracticable scheme appropriate to some assured of support by the national policy,

of Mr. H. G. Wells's visions of the future, would find the capital and employ the labour

but having no relation to the needs and needed to increase their production. With

possibilities of our own time.

this kind of knowledge of the workings of

FAMILY ALLOWANCES

8o

the economic system it is possible to regulate its workings to the national advantage, as circumstances may, from time to time,
require.
THE SOCIETY'S POLICY
Now students of eugenics, during the last three-quarters of a century, have developed a broadly comparable body of knowledge of the biological system by which, from generation to generation, the nation reproduces itself. And this knowledge points to certain fundamental, but not very revolutionary, reforms, which would be needed to set the system working in a eugenic direction. The principle is summed up in the words of the Society's Outline of a Practical Eugenic Policy, adopted by the Council some years ago, but which has not been, perhaps, made sufficiently prominent in the Society's propaganda.
The great economic advantages enjoyed by children from small families is the most serious obstacle to a successful appeal to those well endowed by nature to make an adequate contribution towards the reproduction of the next generation. In addition, the social promotion, within groups of equal civic worth, of the children from the smallest families, cannot but tend to diminish the innate fertility of the more skilled occupations. For both reasons the economic motive for childlessness should by all possible means be diminished, in all classes doing skilled work. The most potent means of effecting this end is a scientifically designed system of family allowances. The aim of such a system should be to equalize the standard of living between parents and nonparents doing equivalent work, within all grades affected, in such a way that the amounts recovered per child by each class of earner shall be proportional to the earnings. The Society is strongly opposed to redistribution by means of taxation, or to the allowances being made a charge on the State, and favours the establishment of equalization pools among the employing bodies of the salaried professions and skilled occupations.
The scientific basis and the economic application of this item of policy are what I wish to discuss.

What are the broad and unquestioned facts of the biological situation, with which
we are concerned? The birth rate of the
country as a whole has, as is now well
known, fallen to a level much below that
needed to maintain a stationary population.
Approximately, we may say that the rate
at which children are now being born is
rather less than four-fifths of what would be
required to maintain our numbers. If we
pay attention not to the whole population,
but to a portion of it, in which the Eugenics Society has always been especially interested, that portion which is popularly
called the upper and middle classes, using the term in an extensive sense, so as to include not merely the learned professions, the doctors, clergymen, lawyers, and university
teachers, but the whole range of every grade of teachers and clerks, taking, like the
Census authorities, all occupations socially equal to, or superior to, that of a railway booking clerk, we know that the rate of production of children is only about half that of the general population, or, say, 40 per cent. of the numbers needed to replace those engaged in these occupations.
In order to avoid over-statement let us suppose that sufficient children are pro-
duced to replace half the members of these classes, then, biologically speaking, half of any eugenic value which these classes may
possess is being destroyed in every twenty-
five or thirty years. We lost a million men in the five years of the War, and certainly the class of which I am speaking-about io to I5 per cent. of the population, bore more than an equal share of this loss; but the
excess of deaths in the War years is already far less than the deficiency of births in the years of peace that have followed. Perhaps a better parallel is the policy of massacre of the intelligentsia which has been advocated, or practised, from time to time, in Soviet Russia. If the Russian intelligentsia have a birth rate fit only to maintain their numbers they could afford the massacre of one-
tenth of their men, women, and children every five years, and still decrease no faster
than does the intelligentsia in this country.

go THE EUGENICS REVIEW

WHO ARE THE MIDDLE CLASS?

which our class is the product. It is true

The next point about this class is that that in the last two generations the great

they are the product of an intense selective agency of universal education has played a

process. Those of us who have made any specially important part in promoting the

study of middle-class genealogies-I mean children of the poor into the clerical and

a biological study, which counts every an- teaching professions; but even scholastic

cestor of equal importance, and attempts to promotion is not wholly a matter of intelli-

trace the whole of their descendants-will gence. Ambition, perseverance, and the

know that a large proportion are in the first driving force of self-respect are extremely

generation the children of persons in very important, even in purely scholastic suc-

humble circumstances, who have been pro- cess, and continue to act throughout life in moted by their own talents, and by the determining the status of the children. In

facilities afforded by our State educational a word, we have reason to think that the

system; but that perhaps the larger num- section of the nation under consideration is

ber of the ramifying lines of inheritance characterized, in a higher degree than the

will lead back to shopkeepers or workshop remainder, by all the qualities which make

owners, who by their enterprise, foresight, for successful citizenship, and if the destiny

and thrift rose to a certain level of affluence of a nation depends, as I believe, on the

at some time in the eighteenth or mid-nine- extent to which its citizens combine, for

teenth centuries. The intensity of the selec- example, enterprise with prudence, or

tive process of which the English middle character with intellect, the fate of this class

class is the product, is excellently brought is of the deepest concern for the future of

out by the seamy side which all these genea- our nation.

logies contain. I believe a genealogy would

be exceptional if it did not contain a sprink- WHY ALSO STERILE?

ling of individuals of great apparent pro- But the characters of good citizens are

mise, who, through drink or debauchery, not the only ones for which it has been

have gone to the bad and disappeared from selected. Malthus, studying the peasantries

the cognizance of their family, as well as of France and England in the eighteenth

other lines which have never even shown century, was led to point out that when the

signs that they might do credit to their population required more food than the land

name.

would easily yield, a smaller population

In consequence of this selective process would be better off than a larger one. The

this class has necessarily become differen- limitations of Malthus's premises have been

tiated in certain hereditary respects from often forgotten, and throughout the nine-

the general body of the population from teenth century, when the population was

which it is continually recruited. In the rising rapidly, and the standard of living

case of intelligence this difference is readily rising as never before, it was still often

demonstrable by applying the psychological taken for granted that the increased popula-

tests to the children of different occupational tion hindered rather than helped the

groups. But we should be altogether mis- increase in material well-being. A less

taken if we took it that the only important questionable truth, however, was soon dis-

difference lay in intelligence.

covered by the later followers of Malthus,

There must be at least a dozen other namely that whether or not a larger popula-

psychological characters of importance tion was of economic advantage to the nation,

governing self-control, ambition, persever- it was certainly of economic advantage

ance, judgment of character, aesthetic taste, to the individual to divest himself of the

foresight, grasp of moral principle, which burden of parenthood. Human childhood is

have been at least as influential as intelli- long; the expense of food, clothing, and

gence in guiding the process of social pro- care has to go on for some twenty years

motion during the last two centuries, of before the individual begins to produce

FAMILY ALLOWANCES

9I

wealth, and though during his working general debility in that group of qualities

life he produces on the average more wealth which make for effective reproduction as we

than he consumes in the whole of it (else have for anticipating a general ability in the

national wealth would not increase, as it has conduct of the other affairs of life; and just

done) yet his parents, as mortal individuals, as one conclusion may be verified by the

see chiefly the debit side of the account. intelligence tests, so the other may be veri-

The motives to which the Neo-Malthu- fied by a striking contrast in the rates of

sians appealed were not wholly selfish; a reproduction.

prominent and important part of the argu- How much a selection of this type is

ment was not only that, as potential parents, capable of achieving may be illustrated by

we are better off the more thoroughly we an extreme instance, drawn from a former

leave to others the trouble and expense of civilization. In the first two centuries of the

actual parenthood, but that the advantage is Roman Empire the throne was occupied in

in a most marked degree shared by our succession by members of an extremely

children, that members of small families wealthy group of senatorial families, who

enjoy many advantages over members of drew their names, for the most part, from

large families, supposing these to be the ancient patrician clans, but much of their

children of parents of equal affluence per- wealth and blood from the plebeian or even

forming, in other respects, equivalent ser- provincial families with which they had

vices to the society to which they belong. inter-married. On the succession to the

They can be better fed and cared for in throne during this perioA Gibbon remarks:

infancy, better educated and dressed in There had been no example of three

adolescence, have a better financial backing successive generations on the throne; only

in entering business or the professions, and three instances of sons who succeeded their

inherit a larger share of the family property. At every economic level some one or
more of these advantages is substantial, so that, from top to bottom of the social scale,

fathers. The marriages of the Caesars (notwithstanding the permission, and the frequent practice, of divorces) were generally unfruitful.

members of small families enjoy a better One of the most remarkable characteristics

' start in life ' and thus obtain a more of Natural Selection is that we constantly

rapid social promotion than members of find the same end achieved through its

large families possessing the same intrinsic agency by a surprising diversity of means,

gifts and born to parents of equivalent social according to the circumstances in which the

status.

selection is applied. A temperamental pecu-

To the list of the qualities which make liarity which no doubt contributed to the

for social promotion, through contributing infertility of this remarkable group of men

to successful citizenship, we must add a is adumbrated in another of Gibbon's

further list of those which do so through inimitable footnotes: "Yet we may

being antagonistic to reproduction. What- remark," he writes, " that of the first

ever qualities make for caution and post- fifteen emperors, Claudius was the only one

ponement in entering the married state, and whose taste in love was entirely correct."

so increase the proportion of celibates, and raise the average age at marriage, and what- TWO KINDS OF OPPONENTS

ever mental and temperamental qualities Eugenics, like any other rational policy,

have favoured the limitation of offspring by is liable to find itself opposed by objections

married couples, have been promoted into flowing from purely temperamental causes.

the upper and middle classes with the same If we propose sterilization for that small

regularity as the mental and moral qualities group of cases to which that remedy is

upon which their social utility depends. We applicable or if we advocate the exten-

have thus the same reason to anticipate in sion of contraceptive advice by public

the more affluent class of the population a authority to poor women who are in-

92 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

capable, financially or constitutionally, tirely removed, the other motives for child-

of discharging the important responsi- lessness, freedom from pain, and worries,

bilities of parenthood, we are met by the and cares, would prove sufficiently strong to

opposition of those who claim that contra- prevent this class from maintaining their

ception is, in all cases, a sin, and that numbers.

parenthood is a natural right, irrespective Eugenically we have no objection to the

of the responsibilities it entails. These are qualities which make for ability and social

the temperamental objections to negative competence segregating themselves into those

eugenics. To positive eugenics an equally classes of society where this ability has the

obdurate temperamental objection is notice- greatest scope for its exercise; eugenically,

able. It is inevitable, in the conditions of again, we can have no objection to defects

social promotion which I have outlined, that of the reproductive instincts, like other

many should owe their social position and defects of the mental or bodily organization,

present affluence, less to the natural abili- weeding themselves out by Natural Selec-

ties, than to the constitutional aversion, of tion as fast as they are supplied by muta-

their forbears, to normal reproduction. tions. The point to which we have traced

These will naturally feel resentment at the the source of the evil lies in the social pro-

proposal that the rate of reproduction motion of the factors favouring infertility

among the well-to-do classes must at least which leads to their destroying, not them-

be doubled, and will endeavour to represent selves only, but every kind of admirable

that the disastrous eugenic situation with quality which, like them, is liable to lead

which we are faced is due more to the fer- to social promotion. The economic motive

tility of the poor than to the infertility of for childlessness is therefore to be combated

the well-to-do. It is evident, however, that, not only for its direct effect upon classes

as the fertility of the more affluent classes is whom, apart from yielding to this motive,

already very far below that needed to main- we should judge to be eugenically desirable,

tain their own numbers, and is apparently but for its indirect effect in weighting the

still falling, the trouble lies not in the scales against the survival of every sort of

difference in fertility between different quality which meets with social approba-

classes, but in the absolute paucity of tion.

children among the more prosperous. The complete cessation of childbirth in the THE ECONOMIC CASE

poorer half of the population, though it We are led, therefore, on purely eugenic

would leave a most favourable differential grounds, to the same conclusion at which

birth rate, would not take us a step nearer advocates of family allowances have arrived

to arresting the process by which the from purely economic considerations. But,

eugenically valuable qualities of the nation though a complete system of family allow-

are being destroyed.

ances, which should entirely neutralize the

economic motive for childlessness, is the

THE REMEDIAL PRINCIPLE

logical aim of both groups, yet, since our

Although, therefore, I know many well- motives are different, we shall lay very

to-do women ready to tell me that in no cir- different emphasis upon the different steps

cumstances could the birth rate of their by which this aim might be achieved.

class be doubled, I think we should hesitate Those whose chief aim is expressed in

to accept this conclusion until we have tried Sir William Beveridge's opinion that

the experiment under an economic system family allowances constitute the greatest

more favourable than the present. At step now in our power towards the abolition

present every potential parent has the of poverty, might be content, if a Socialist

strongest economic motive for having few or Government were in power, to advocate a

no children, and it is, I still think, an open flat rate allowance of 5s. per week, paid

question whether, if this motive were en- through the Post Office to employed and un-

FAMILY ALLOWANCES

93

employed alike; a proposal which could be in her book The Disinherited Family. In

received with but little enthusiasm on industrial disputes it is customary for the

eugenic grounds. Yet such a proposal trade union representatives to demand a

would be inadequate, even on its own pre- wage which will support in decency a man,

misses. Poverty is a relative term, and the a wife, and three children. On a flat-rate

evils which we designate by that name exist system it is not easy to see that they could

in the families of curates and school- demand less, yet, owing to the inequality

teachers, as well as in those of dock- between actual families at any one time,

labourers, and, indeed, wherever a family Miss Rathbone points out that if this

is hard put to it to maintain the standards demand were met in industrial England, the

of its class; wherever, in fact, equal social wage-bill would be saddled with the support

services are rewarded with an unequal stan- of no less than I9,000,000 non-existent chil-

dard of living. It is only fair to say, in dren; while at the same time 50 per cent.

addition, that Sir William has established of the real children, belonging to families

among the professors and lecturers at the of more than three, would be unprovided

London School of Economics the first for. Instances of this kind could easily be

English system of family allowances for multiplied. It is sufficient for our purpose

university teachers.

that a wage including family allowances,

Others, again, are more influenced by the sufficient to meet the entire cost of children,

argument which was influential with the enables an equal standard of living to be

French industrialists after the War, when given for equal work, and cuts out the

they inaugurated the French system, that heavy bonus for childlessness which is the

industry cannot afford to give a decent stan- outstanding feature of our present system.

dard of living to the operatives who have Now, it is evident that exactly the same

children, so long as it is saddled with the principle applies, whether the recipients are

necessity of paying to those who are child- coalminers or schoolteachers or civil ser-

less wages 20 or 30 per cent. above what vants or clergymen. If the funds available

would give them the same standard. They, for educational salaries are limited, as they

therefore, in the teeth of the opposition of certainly are, they can be more efficiently

the labour unions, refrained from raising applied, on the principle of equal standard

the general wage-rates, and instead insti- of living for equal work, than on the crude

tuted family allowances out of the wages system of equal pay for equal work, with-

fund. The temptation to the employer to out regard to family responsibilities. If

give employment preferentially to the less rewards are given for the negative ser-

childless was removed by the simple expe- vice of not having children, more funds are

dient of pooling the cost of the allowances available for rewarding work of exceptional

among all the employers of the industry, professional merit. Incidentally it may be

in proportion to their total wage-bill. The mentioned that if the io per cent. cut in

consequences to French industry are well the schoolteachers' salaries were returned

known. Whereas in England the excessive entirely in the form of family allowances, it

post-war wage rates, by which industry has would suffice to give an allowance of I2 per

been crippled, have been whittled gradually cent. of the childless man's salary to every

down, under the pressure of chronic un- dependent child supported by the profes-

employment and successive industrial dis- sion, and, without the figures before me,

putes, French industry has made almost I should guess that it would suffice also to

uninterrupted progress, and has absorbed restore the io per cent. to unmarried women

a continuous stream of Italian and German teachers.

immigrants.

The example of the schoolteachers

The bearing of the family allowance serves well to illustrate some of the diffi-

system on the industrial wage question has culties which arise in discussing the ques-

been put very forcibly by Miss Rathbone tion of Family Allowances, difficulties due

94 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to approaching the question with a vague the poorer man, and all idea of differential

feeling of benevolence, but without any payment in accordance with the value of

clear grasp of the economic principle in- services performed must be abandoned. It

volved. From the eugenic standpoint it is may be that headmasters are paid more

obvious that the allowances payable in each highly than they deserve in comparison

grade should be proportional to the basic with assistant masters, or the reverse may

salary in that grade. For, what we are con- be the case. That is purely an internal

cerned with is the neutralization of the eco- matter for the education authorities to

nomic motive to childlessness, and this determine; but, whatever differential rates

motive can only be neutralized by making of pay they fix upon, ipso facto, they fix

the allowances equivalent to the actual cost, upon proportionate differential expenditure

in expenditure and savings, incurred, on or savings on behalf of children. The allow-

the average, on behalf of each child in the ances should be regarded not as a charity,

group. This cost is not far from I2 per but as an integral right attaching to the

cent for all incomes at least up to £2,ooo a salary. It is, of course, quite possible that

year. On the birth of a child the wealthier in other services, though not, I fancy, in

man at, say, £8oo a year, would therefore the teaching profession, increments of pay

receive a larger accession to his income than with length of service should be regarded

the poorer man at £30o a year, and this not wholly as due to increased efficiency,

may be represented as very unfair. It may but partly as a means of allowing for a

even be said that poor childless men, at the normal increase of family responsibilities.

lower grade, are paying by lower salary, In the light of experience with direct family

for the large family of their headmaster. allowances, the increment scales in such

This, of course, would not be true, in fact cases would, in time, presumably be graded

really the reverse of the truth; for at the down.

present time, and it is to be feared, for Another argument has a more eugenic

some time to come, the more highly paid appearance. " There is Brown," it will be

support, if anything, a smaller proportion of said, "earning twice as much as Smith, but

children than the less highly paid in the he is tuberculous and going deaf, whereas

same occupation. The allowances paid Smith is a splendid specimen. You're not

within the higher grade will, in fact, be no going to tell me that Brown's children are

more, but rather less, than the deductions worth twice as much as Smith's! " Natu-

incurred by that grade will amount to. rally, I am not going to tell my assailant

However, if ill-feeling arose on this subject anything of the kind. Individual diagnosis

it would not be a difficult matter, from the is fortunately no part of our proposals. A

point of view of accountancy, to keep family allowance system provides no econo-

separate funds for different salary levels. mic motive for having children, or for

NOT A CHARITY

refraining from having them. It merely abolishes the economic bonus which at pre-

The other reason why proportional allow- sent we offer to both Smith and Brown for

ances are thought of as unfair is because every child they refrain from having. This

many people approach the whole question as will allow them, more freely than at pre-

though it were a kind of charitable enter- sent, to regulate their reproduction as they

prise. Charity, I mean, not in the sense of think best in the interests both of the

brotherly love, but in the sense of the non- family and of the nation. The fact that one

economic relief of poverty. Obviously, such man is earning twice as much as another

a principle cannot be introduced into an seems to me no good reason for bribing him

economic reform without destructive con- twice as much to refrain from parentage.

tradictions, for if our motive is purely Prima facie, it is a ground for thinking

charitable, every change must be made at that his services to the community are

the expense of the richer for the benefit of worth more, but it is not on that ground,

FAMILY ALLOWANCES

95

but on the actual amount that his children benefit, clinics, playgrounds, et hoc genus

will cost him, that the family allowances omne.

should be reckoned.

One might even say that we have a

It will be seen that the economic methods Family Allowance system already in this

of establishing Family Allowances are very
various. According to your political colour you can arrange the scheme to cost the Treasury a £ioo,ooo,ooo a year, or, by a re-allocation of wage and salary payments to
cost it not a penny. You can have a scheme
in which the organizing officials cost more than the children, and as in the proposal
I once encountered that inspectors should be appointed to see that the allowances were really spent for the children's benefit, or, if we indulged in equally futile expenditure, on eugenic diagnosis. We may have a scheme which restricts itself severely to its

country. The allowances are paid only to children of the unemployed, and to those in
receipt of poor relief. A consequence is that the men with sufficiently large families are better off when unemployed than in employment. The alternative of letting a number of poor children starve will not, I think, be readily faced by this generation. What we need, however, is not a merely emotional rejection of such a policy in particular cases, but a broader recognition of the fact that the nation only continues to exist by reproduction; and that, for this reason, the act

economic aim of equalizing the standard of and cares of parenthood, if properly exer-

living of parent and non-parent doing the cised, constitute a social service, which can

same work; or we may, like the French be better provided for directly than by the

funds, include social services, maternity indirect methods employed in the past.

THE TRILOGY
*IDEAL MARRIAGE, 25s. net.
SEX HOSTILITY IN MARRIAGE 17S. 6d. net. * FERTILITY AND STERILITY IN MARRIAGE, 25s. net,
By Dr. Th. H. van de Velde The Trilogy deals with an aspect of normal life that is of supreme importance to nearly every man and woman, and about which instructed opinion has hitherto been little accessible."-Bristol Medico-Chirurgical Journal. "We feel that in this Trilogy we have a series of treatises unsurpassed for seriousness of treatment, soundness of judgment, and withal a rare comprehensiveness not to be obtained outside the pages of these erudite volumes."-Medical World.
The sale of the Trilogy has already exceeded 500,000 copies, and it has been translated into nine languages.
* A layman can only obtain these volumes on the written recommendation of a doctor.
WILLIAM HEINEMANN (MEDICAL BOOKS) LTD.
99 Great Russell Street, London, W.C.I.
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 2.

