FALLING POPULATION AND POSITIVE EUGENICS

By B. S. BRAMWELL, M.A., LL.B.

M R. D. V. GLASS has shown in his the bar and the number of operations for

book, The Struggle for Population, appendicitis should not depend upon the

that the steps taken in other coun- number of Fellows of the College of Surgeons.

tries as well as here have had little effect, If sin increases, more people do not take

except perhaps in Germany, in arresting the orders, though if crime increases, the police

fall in the birth-rate. He reckons that a force may be increased. National services

child adds 22 per cent. to the family cost of in general differ from the professions as the

living. No country at present offers induce- attempt is made to adjust their size to the

ments which approach this figure.

amount of work to be done. The skilled

In the Eugenics Society we are concerned trades unions are also wiser in their genera-

with quality rather than quantity. It is tion than the professional bodies, for they

difficult to make a democracy realize the restrict the number of apprentices in the

disastrous effects of the differential birth- interests of the whole body-a policy which,

rate. Its machinery works by counting if not overdone, is a good thing.

heads, not by appraising their contents. It There is a pool then in most professions

behoves us therefore to consider what steps from which its numbers draw their remunera-

we can take, independently of the democratic tions. The more some members draw from

system, to arrest the falling birth-rate it the less is available for others. A barrister

amongst the more able and more prudent is employed on the advice of a solicitor; a

members of the community. These in youth surgeon on the advice of a general practi-

are probably aiming high; they have to tioner. If the man with the biggest reputa-

wait for a position and an income upon tion is employed, the professional man

which they could marry without jeopardizing recommending him is freed from all respon-

their career. Most of them have to depend sibility, however much the great man may

on their own exertions for a livelihood, bungle the case. Not so if he recommends an

and even where their family has private unknown man; his position then may be

means an allowance on marriage is excep- very unpleasant. So the man with the big

tional.

name may draw an inordinate amount out

What do we want them to do? The of the pool and continue to do so when long

eugenic answer may be stated in simple, past his prime. In business you get a some-

concrete terms. We want them to marry at what similar position; in a stable business

about the age of twenty-five and to have the amount set aside to reward management

four or five children by the time they reach is more or less a fixture. If the older men at

thirty-five.

the top draw too much, there is little left

Economics of the Professions

for their juniors. Most men making a good income are loath to retire and, whatever

In most professions the amount available their age, assert that their faculties were

to reward the members has little correlation never brighter. In two of our professions,

to their numbers. If the amount falls off or the Church and the Bar, one of the greatest

increases, there will be a gradual adjustment prizes is elevation to the Bench. It is of

of numbers, but the time lag is very great. interest therefore to note the ages of the

Speaking generally, the amount of litigation present occupants. In the following table

does not depend on the numbers called to the facts may be seen at a glance:

273

274 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Age groups (inclusive) Bishops Judges

Gladstone had not been too deaf to hear an

Over 75 .. 4

2 offer made by Mr. Chamberlain, which his

70 to74 ... 9

2 set speech naturally ignored.

65 ,,69 .. I3

II

Take the Church; are celibate bishops of

6o ,,64 ... 7

5 over seventy likely to command much weight

55 ,59 ... 4 IO in matrimonial questions from young persons

50 54 ...

4

6 of under thirty ? It is said that their work is

45 ,,49 ... 2

0 largely administrative; it would be cruel to

suggest that a septuagenarian was in as

43 36 sorry a plight as the nonagenarian Arch-

deacon Pulteney, in the\Stalls of Barchester

Cathedral-" there was no single paper that

Retirement Age and Eugenics

he could lay hands upon, no syllable of mine

What do we want from the point of view of that he could hear, and no fact in connection

positive eugenics? I think that men should with my business that he could remember."

retire at the age of 55, making room for Still, three score years and ten on biblical

younger men. If men married at the age of authority is an advanced age.

25 they would have educated their families With regard to the judges there have

and started them on their careers by the time certainly been a number of remarkable

they reached 55 and could afford to retire on instances where age has not dimmed their

a comparatively modest pension.

faculties. But then they are mostly old. In

Are there any occupations where men the case of one younger man, Lord Birken-

succeed at an early age or retire so soon as head, his judgments surprised his older

55 ? One may instance the head masters of colleagues by their depth and erudition.

our public schools. We have lately had an The time lost by indisposition is a matter

appointment of a man under 30. Some of worthy of study and of real relevance to

the banks allow their managers to retire at litigants. We have recently had a delightful

55. In many hospitals the retiring age of correspondence in The Times, the gist of

the staff is now 6o. Most officers in the which seems to be that unpaid justices

Services have to retire long before this age. become more futile and acid with increasing

Would the community suffer if this early years and yet their salaried colleagues

age of retirement became general ? We may mellow like old wine.

consider the various occupations. I remem- As for generals, I put down a number with

ber recently being puzzled by the poor their age at the important date of their

financial results of a company whose products career. Cromwell was 5I at Dunbar;

one met with in every office. One day I Wolfe was 32 at Quebec; Marlborough was

read in The Times the will of its managing 54 at Blenheim; Clive was 32 at Plassey;

director, aged over 8o. I was puzzled no Nelson was 47 at Trafalgar; Wellington was

longer. I had a friend, a solicitor, with an 46 at Waterloo; Nicholson was 36 at

aged partner who drew most of the profits Delhi; Roberts was 48 at Kandahar;

of the firm. When my friend returned from Kitchener was 48 at Omdurman; Buller

the war, his partner was go, and after the was 6o at the Tugela; French was 62 in

trenches my friend's courage was sufficient I914; Ian Hamilton was 62 at Helles and

to tackle the matter. The old man admitted Stopford 6i at Suvla; Maude was 52 at

that his partner did nearly all the work, but Baghdad; Haig was 57 at Passchendaele;

pled in justification that he could not live on and Allenby 58 at Damascus. Of foreign

less! In politics Lord Haldane said that the generals we may note Hannibal was 29 when

House of Commons was no place for a man he crossed the Alps; Alexander was 32 at

over 6o. It is reported, on what authority his death and Gustavus 38; Napoleon was

I cannot say, that the Irish question might 36 at Austerlitz. What is the best age for a

have been settled in the 'eighties if Mr. general? Would we have suffered much in

FALLING POPULATION AND POSITIVE EUGENICS

275

;course of our history by having a will become more aggravated. The producers,

g age of 55 ?

practically all under 55, will be a smaller

g generally on the question of age, percentage of the community than at

has often heard said that if a man has present. Apart from a strike of producers,

done original work by the age of forty, if industry were to languish, the matter

ver will. No doubt there are numerous would probably be adjusted by the new

tions. technique of devaluation, by which industry

should also like to draw attention to is stimulated, wages can easily be raised, but

attell's statement.* "I have shown else- the pensioner and the rentier suffer.

e reason to believe that intelligence or

y rate success in intelligence tests, A Practical Proposal

es in most people after about the age Now suppose these changes resulted in

There are some striking exceptions to the class in question marrying at an earlier

and the nature and causation of the age, would there be any likelihood of larger

are not at all clear."

families ? We may note in passing that even

if no larger families resulted, the space

ka for Modest Pensions

between generations would be lessened and

word as to pensions. I have said these this would in the long run be a gain to the

need to be modest. But the pensioners' community. Professor Carr-Saunders thinks

ements are really easily met. The that without a change of -outlook, we cannot

t items of expenditure of the pro- expect much result. He is not unhopeful of

onal man liable to surtax are generally this change of outlook. Events in Germany

tion and the education and maintenance are rather suggestive. Should this change

family. The latter under the system occur, anything which would make the way

ed will have ceased at 55. Surtax easier for those who desire more children,

no longer worry and income tax will be might produce big results. He is also hopeful

rery reduced rate. Housing accommoda- that it would have an advantageous result

can be on a much smaller scale; food for positive eugenics, as the larger families

ements are distinctly less. If any of would be produced by the more sober and

ily still live at home, they can con- thoughtful members of the community.

e out of their earnings or by services A helpful innovation might be for eugenic-

ed to the household. Moreover, it is ally minded persons to found scholarships

that pensions should be modest. The confined to second or third sons and

oner and the rentier are rewarded for daughters. The class in question can

services, but are paid out of present probably provide for the education of one ction. If their demands are too great, child without much strain. To provide for

the consumer will pay too much, or several is quite another matter. The donor ctual producer will receive too little and could define the qualifications of the parents
strike. With a falling population this of the recipient; the award amongst those qualified could be based on intelligence tests

* EUGENICS REVIEW, I936,'XXVIII, 202.

rather than book learning.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVIm, No. 4.

