MENTAL DEFICIENCY-I

Some Family Histories of an Unselected Group
By PROFESSOR R. J. A. BERRY, M.D., F.R.C.S., F.R.S.E.
(Director of Medical Services, Stoke Park Colony, Stapleton, Bristol.)

T HERE are, in this Institution, some I,700 certified mental defectives of
all legal grades, of both sexes, of all
ages, and from practically all parts of England and Wales. They may, therefore, be regarded as a random sample of the sub-
normal population of this country and, perhaps, not altogether unjustly, as something
of a satire on modern population. Though it is not claimed that the results

GROUP 11I.-The parents were definitely of defective or insane mentality in 99 cases, or 6o per cent.
Sub-Group A.-Parents said to be mentally defective.
Sub-Group B.-One or both parents believed to be insane.
Of these groupings the following are
typical examples:

herein described have been attained by the

rigour of scientific method, or even that they GROUP I. PARENTS SAID TO BE OF

prove anything, yet they are sufficiently NORMAL MENTALITY

arresting to afford food for necessary, even Example i.-S.G.2429 F. Imbecile.

if unpleasant, thought.

Chronological age i8 6 years. Binet mental

It has to be remembered that many ratio 6-5 years, Porteus 4 years, combined

mental defectives are illegitimate, and the Binet-Porteus I.Q. 35. Cannot read or

parents have disappeared, consequently it write. Sulky, untruthful, dishonest, lazy,

need cause no surprise that in I85 of the excitable.

350 cases no information was available of Family History.-Father and mother

the parental or familial ancestry. In the said to be normal. One brother also said to

remaining I65 cases (47 2 per cent.) local be of normal mentality.

and other authorities furnished the in-

formation, of which what follows are GROUP II. PARENTS OF DOUBTFUL

examples. A careful analysis of this in- MENTALITY

formation seemed to show that the i65
cases divided themselves quite naturally into three groups as follows:
GROUP I.-The parents were said to be of " normal " mentality in I5 cases, or 91i

Sub-Group A.-One or both parents mentally weak but not certified defective.
Example I.-S.G.2333 F. (Sister of following patient). Microcephalic, low-grade feeble-minded. Chronological age 22 8

per cent.

years. Binet mental ratio 7-4 years, Por-

GROUP II.-The parents were of doubtful teus ii years, combined Binet-Porteus I.Q.

mentality in 5I cases, or 30 9 per cent.

57. Incapable of carrying a message, lack-

Sub-Group A.-One or both parents ing in comprehension, dull and stupid.

mentally weak, but not certified Family History. - Father a casual

defectives.

labourer, said to be " dull." Mother also

Sub-Group B.-One or both parents reported dull and incapable of managing her

of criminal type, but not certified children. A sister is at Stoke Park and a

defectives.

brother is defective and in another institu-

Sub-Group C.-Patients with mentally tion. An elder sister has had two illegiti-

abnormal brothers and /or sisters mate children. The home is very poor and

(sibs), but mentality of parents not the family has been in receipt of parish

specified.

relief for many years.

285

286 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Example 2.-S.G.2I86 F. (Sister of pre- addition to being flogged) for robbery with

vious patient). Microcephalic, low-grade violence in a brothel.

feeble-minded. Chronological age I6 3 Patient admitted to Stoke Park in April

years. Binet mental ratio 6*io years, Por- i919 under the Children's Act, having been

teus ii * 6 years, combined Binet-Porteuls charged with " living in circumstances

I.Q. 57-5. Very limited educational attain- calculated to cause the seduction of the

ments. Poor vocabulary.

child." At this time patient's age was

Family History.-As in previous case. about I2 years.

Example 3.-S.G. I550 F. Microcephalic

imbecile. Chronological age 22 9 years. GROUP III. PARENTS DEFINITELY STATED

Merrill-Palmer mental ratio 6-6 years. No TO BE EITHER DEFECTIVE OR INSANE

educational attainments. stupid.

Dull, dirty, and

Sub-Group A.-Parents said to be mentally
defective.

Family History.-Both parents dead,
both said to be of low mental type. Patient is one of a family of 8 or 9. A brother is at Stoke Park Colony and another brother
in the Royal Albert Institution, Lancaster. The whole family have been under the care
of the Public Assistance Committee.

Example i.-S.G.I7i9 F. Microcephalic, medium-grade feeble-minded. Chronological age 22 *8 years, Binet mental age 8*4, Porteus io*6 years. Patient suffers from spasmodic torticollis. Said to be untruthful, dishonest, and cannot be trusted out of doors.

Sub-Group B.-One or both parents of criminal type, but not certified defectives.
Example I.-S.G.2436 F. Macrocephalic, low-grade feeble-minded. Chronological age i8 I0 years. Binet mental ratio 6 io years, Porteus 4*6. Cannot read or write.
Family History.-Father a German, said to be of criminal heredity, present whereabouts unknown. Mother a laundry worker, unmarried. Patient illegitimate.

Family History.-Patient born in wedlock. Father dead, killed in the War. Mother said to be feeble-minded, but has married again.
Example 2.-S.G.2399 F. (Sister of fol-
lowing patient). Microcephalic imbecile. Chronological age 24*7 years, Binet and Porteus mental ages 3 years. Patient cannot read, write, or count. Does not know her age. Speech almost unintelligible, requires supervision in washing and dress-

ing.

Sub-Group C.-Patients with mentally abnormal brother and/or sisters (sibs), but
mentality of parents not specified.

Family History.-Both parents are subnormal and are incapable of controlling children. A brother aged io years is men-

Example i.-S.G.2ogo F. Certified as a tally defective. There are three other

"high-grade feeble-minded patient, un- children at home, also three illegitimate

reliable owing to added psychosis, unstable. children of the eldest daughter. The

This is shown in her variable application to home consists of a living room and two bed-

industrial work."

rooms, and there are seven people inhabiting

Family History.-Mother earns her liv- them. At one time the home conditions

ing by making and repairing umbrellas and were reported to be appalling, the house

selling them in the market-place. Home is being described as a dirty hovel and the

in a thickly populated part of Birmingham, parents dirty. Father a labourer earning

with two bedrooms upstairs and one room 30s. a week.

downstairs. Two brothers living at home Example 3.-S.G.2400 F. (Sister of pre-

in exceptionally bad surroundings. One vious patient). Microcephalic. Low-grade

sister is a convicted prostitute and thief and feeble-minded verging on imbecility.

underwent I2 months' imprisonment. Inci- Chronological age 22-8 years, Binet mental

dentally, two brothers-in-law were also ratio 8 years, and Porteus 6*6 years.

undergoing i8 months' imprisonment (in Patient cannot read, write, or tell the time.

MENTAL DEFICIENCY-FAMILY HISTORIES

287

Fairly good worker under supervision. to present patient) mentally defective and

Depraved habits.

is in Cirencester Mental Home.

Family History.-As for previous case. Example 2.-S.B.2024. M. Microcephalic

Example 4.-S.G.2094 F. Microcephalic imbecile verging on idiocy. Chronological

imbecile. Chronological age 23*2 years. age 22*6 years. Binet mental ratio 7,

Binet mental age 6-6, Porteus 4-6 years. Porteus 4 years.

Patient said to be lacking in all moral Family History.-Father is dead, mother

sense, and cannot wash and dress herself mentally unstable.. Mother was put under

properly.

permanent detention in the Gateshead

Family History.-Father reported to be Union Hospital in December I9I5, but

feeble mentally and weak physically. absconded in February I925 and has

Mother immoral. Patient is the third of recently reappeared. Patient is youngest of

five children and at the time of her admis- 2I children, but at the time of his admis-

sion had an elder sister at a Rescue Home. sion to Stoke Park it was reported that only

The Matron of the Poor Law Institution, 6 were alive.

Westbury-on-Severn, says " the family is

bad; elder sister is in a Rescue Home-she is untruthful, immoral and when at school

BIOLOGY AND THE LAW

had to be kept away from other children on For the benefit of those who may not be

account of her immorality."

very familiar with mental deficiency as

Example 5.-S.G.i884 F. Microcepha- defined by English law, it may be stated

lic, medium-grade feeble-minded. Chrono- that four grades only of defectives are

logical age 34-I years. Binet mental ratio recognized - namely idiots, imbeciles,

8-7, Porteus 9 years. Patient youngest of feeble-minded, and moral defectives. Such

4 children, can read and write a little. Pre- a classification is entirely artificial and

cocious, facile, cannot tell the time or give without any scientific or natural basis, and

correct change. Family History.-Father a fireman.
Mother an inmate of the Frome Road House Imbecile Ward, Bath.
Example 6.-S.B.2394 M. Microcephalic, low-grade feeble-minded. Chronological age ii * I I years. Binet mental ratio 6 * io
years.
Family History.-Mother sub-normal mentally, physically, and morally. Unmarried. Has five illegitimate children, all of whom are imbeciles and three are notified by the L.E.A. as such. Mother has two sisters, one of whom is feeble-minded, and the other has two illegitimate children.

is not in accord with biological facts.
Under these artificial conditions it follows that the methods of diagnosis are often almost equally artificial. It will, however,
be observed that, in the foregoing cases,
more than one method of estimating the mental ratio has been employed and many other medical and biological tests have also
been made. Any ordinary child should have a combined Binet-Porteus intelligence quotient of from 8o to iio, but none of the foregoing are anywhere near it. Further, some of them are so hopelessly retarded mentally that it has been necessary to estimate their mental ratio by the Merrill-

Palmer scale, ordinarily used for normal Sub-Group B.-One or both parents believed infants of from 3 to 6 years of age. It will

to be insane.

also be noticed that almost every one of

Example i.-S.B.2375 M. Idiot. Chronological age 6 io years. Merrill-Palmer mental ratio 2-5 years. Cannot talk.
Family History.-Father has a sister and an aunt insane. Mother had a brother

the foregoing cases have abnormally small heads, an additional biological, though not legal, suggestion of an imperfectly developed brain. In only one of the above cases is the head macrocephalic, and even

and an uncle both insane. Seven children then it is pathologicallv abnormal.

in family, one of whom is also (in addition But a study of the histories of the inmates

288 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of this institution reveals other factors of with a combined Binet-Porteus intelligence

interest to the student of heredity. There quotient of 57 in each sister, both the

are no fewer than 50 families represented by parents are said to be " dull." The father

either two or three defective children. Of is a casual labourer, and the mother quite

these So families the following are examples. incapable of managing her children. An

SOME SAMPLE FAMILIES

elder sister has had two illegitimate children, another brother is mentally defective,

i.-Two imbecile half-sisters both over 30 and the family has been in receipt of parish

years of age, have a mental ratio of between relief for many years.

4 and 5 years, and a combined Binet- 5.-In another family represented in this

Porteus intelligence quotient of 33, and institution by two sisters, the father is

their family history reads as follows:

dead, the mother is in receipt of Poor Law

The father was killed in the war. The relief, and the patients are the fifth and

mother is deaf and by " no means intelli- sixth of thirteen children, two more of

gent." The grandmother is deaf and whom are reported to be " mental."

"simple." An uncle also is "simple."

An aunt is an imbecile in a home for defec- CONCLUSIONS

tives. The elder of these step-sisters is It is not improbable that any critical

also illegitimate, but curiously enough the reader with an acquaintance with the

mother was anxious to get the child placed elementary principles of Mendelism will

in a home in case she (the illegitimate realise that many of the foregoing examples

daughter) should " disgrace " her (then so strongly suggest heredity as the real

unmarried) mother. Another brother is basis and origin of the mental deficiency

" not sharp."

as to make it a practical certainty that,

2.-Another family has three children in though not certified, the parents themselves

this institution-all imbeciles, with mental are feeble-minded, or suffer from a grossly

ratios in no instance equal to that of a three- enfeebled nervous system. For one who,

year-old normal child, but with chronological like myself, sees similar cases and family

ages ranging from I5 to 2 I years of age. histories almost every day, it is difficult to

Further, all display other abnormal neuro- understand why heredity should not be

logical conditions, often believed and stated much more generally accepted than it

to be due to " birth injuries," but more actually is, as the cause of much, if not

probably owing to a rotten ancestry and a most, mental disorder;. nor why politicians

worse parentage.

should still go on regarding adult suffrage

3.-Two more adult sisters of different as the universal panacea for all human ills,

mentalities-one with a combined Binet- when it is indisputable that there are far

Porteus intelligence quotient of 29, and the more dull and feeble-minded folk outside

younger sister with one of 48, are the chil- institutions than in them. Lastly, advo-

dren of gipsies, and the father is now in cates of sterilization may possibly realize

a mental hospital. The elder sister, now from these facts, always provided extended

over 30 years of age, has also had an and independent research multiplies them,

illegitimate child, and is believed to have that it is the non-certified parents, rather

another feeble-minded relative in the insti- than their segregated and defective off-

tution.

spring, whose sexual instincts require some

4.-Of twto adult feeble-minded sisters, form of public control.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 4.

