FREDERICK OSBORN
American Eugenics Society
Biological Aspects of Social Problems*
A REVIEW

THE SIXTEEN PAPERS in this Symposium vary in interest if not in quality. The material on population and on medical genetics is already familiar, but the clarity and conciseness of the articles in these sections amply justify the reader's time. The sections on Social Mobility and Education and on various Aspects ofFertility Control contain much relatively new material. There are introductions by Sir James Gray, Sir Sydney Caine, L. S. Penrose and Sir Julian Huxley. Most are concerned with the single aspect of too rapid growth. Huxley seems best to grasp the significance of the papers as a whole.
Of the papers in the demographic series, Population Trends, that of J. M. Tanner of the University of London reports on a subject little discussed in the US, namely the trend towards earlier physical maturation in the past fifty years. Age at menarche is down from seventeen in Norway in 1850 to thirteen in the US in 1955. The adolescent spurt in growth starts with girls at ten and with boys at eleven instead of at twelve or later as in the not distant past. Menarche is earlier with the well-to-do, later with the poorer classes, earlier in the cities than in the country. In 1940 menarche was six months earlier among Negroes in New York than among Negroes in the south. The larger the family, the later the menarche. Is there a genetical explanation ? Does heterozygosity make for earlier menarche? Dahlberg thought the bicycle might be the cause of increased heterozygosity in Europe. If so, then the auto, by increasing outbreeding, might be thought the cause in the US! Tanner's material, which has aroused much interest in England, should get more attention in
* Meade, J. E., and Parkes, A. S. (Editors). Biological Aspects of Social Problems. Eugenics Society Symposia, Volume 1. Edinburgh, 1965. Oliver & Boyd. Pp. x+228.
Price SOs.

the US, for its possible effect on age at marriage
and size of family. In the section on Social Mobility and Educa-
tion, John Gibson and Michael Young correct the idea that old studies of social class differ-
entials in births offer proof of dysgenic trends. A pilot study in England confirms the findings of Higgins and Reed in Ann Arbor and of Bajema in Michigan; in the low intelligence groups the large proportion of siblings who never marry offsets the high birth rates of their married brothers and sisters.
Interest continues to rise with the paper on Education and Social Movement by J. W. B. Douglas. "As the educational process becomes more effective in sifting out the able from the less able, so the possibilities of social movement for an individual become concentrated in the
school years and limited after that.... The more education, the greater the likelihood of moving up socially. . . The educational system was
designed to give all an equal opportunity. ... But the General Certificate Examinations are only partially successful; they show a consistent picture of unequal opportunity and wasted talent. . . . The sifting out process is hampered by a number of enumerated advantages accruing to the upper classes." Whether this is equally true of American education is something to be considered. Here is a matter affecting fertility,
and perhaps the quality of future generations. This section, Social Mobility and Education, closes with the paper by J. M. Thoday, which can be summarized as follows: The doctrine of fixed abilities is nonsense. Environment determines how much of the genetic potential will be realized in the process of development. Each individual is unique, therefore each has his own optimum environment. This is not the same environment for all; it retards development to put a low IQ in a high IQ environment. It is

182

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, December 1965,57,4.

BIOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF SOCIAL PROBLEMS

necessary to understand the concept of genotype- of them, then the frequency of this condition

environment interaction in development. Every- in the population would slowly but inexorably

one knows these things. But they have not increase by the addition of new mutations. In

entered into our thinking as they should. The both these examples the defect is due to a single

section on education suggests some much needed gene. When he considers the effect of polygenic

re-orientation in educational policy, which might systems where many genes are involved in

indeed improve trends in fertility as well as determining a particular result he finds con-

improve the educational system.

tinuous variation of quantitative rather than

The section on Genetic Aspects of Medicine qualitative character, showing every degree of

presents a direct confrontation of the views of expression within wide limits. Selection may be

Penrose in the Introduction and those set forth stabilizing or directional. Readjustments are

in authoritative articles by Mather, Montalenti, slow but they are (now) going on as a result

Ferguson-Smith and Fraser Roberts. Penrose of preventive or curative medicine. One may

presents views widely held by many in the past. also infer that readjustments are going on with

He warns against the so-called "eugenics" of respect to intelligence, though on this the

Hitler. He is unafraid of an increase in the geneticist has as yet no evidence.

genetic load so long as the medical profession In a paper on Infectious Diseases as Selective

can find a cure. He thinks that eugenics is still Agents, G. Montalenti takes the advanced view

in a search for the "ideal" man. Thus he can that "Man represents very good material for

write "Changes [of the gene constitution] are studies on population genetics". He believes

deleterious only if the ideal constitution is that "For the experimentally minded geneticist

considered to be that required for life in an of to-day it is essential to demonstrate, and

uncivilized wild condition". He does not under- possibly to measure, at least some of the selective

stand that the present aim of eugenics is to pro- factors which are active in man". Montalenti

vide conditions in every environment which by believes that "We have entered an era in which

their effect on births, will maintain, and hope- rapid changes are occurring not only in our

fully, improve man's ability to cope with the environment, but presumably also in our gene

many complex environments which civilization pools . . ." Ferguson Smith in Chromosomal

demands he live in. We do not know what the Aberrations and Their Transmission reports that

present trends in human evolution are, but there about 20 per cent of spontaneous abortions, 11

is certainly no evidence that the present distri- per cent of high grade male sub-fertility and

bution of births in most civilized countries is about 6 per cent of institutionalized mental

maintaining, let alone improving, the genetic defectiveness have chromosomal abnormalities.

factors necessary for the development of abilities Two factors are known to increase their fre-

appropriate to present conditions. Following quency; increasing maternal age, and exposure

Penrose, Kenneth Mather gives a concise picture to radiation. He therefore advises to have

of what happens when the mutation rate is children while you are young, and avoid radia-

raised, as by an increase in radiation, or when tion. He stresses the importance of heredity

the previously unfit survive, as by improved counselling, especially in cases where there is

medical procedures. In achondroplasia, mediated already one mongoloid child in the family.

by an autosomal dominant gene, the frequency Continuing with further practical applications,

could be reduced to the mutation rate if there J. A. Fraser Roberts recommends early diagnosis

were no marriages between achondroplasiacs. as important, especially in diseases of infancy

Phenylketonuria is due to an autosomal recessive and childhood. Rapid progress is being made in

gene. It has at present an incidence of 1 to the detection of carriers, now possible in certain

40,000. It would ultimately disappear (except for types of diabetes and of progressive muscular

new mutations) if heterozygotes were recognized dystrophy and other defects. When we know

and not allowed to marry. But at present rates more, screening might be considered but at

of marriage, if medical techniques, now saving present the most useful thing to be done is to

a few phenyls for reproduction, were to save all provide genetic advice for those needing it. He

183

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and C. 0. Carter have been running regular the older methods. The pregnancy rate before

genetic clinics at Great Ormond Street since survey was 130- 2; during the survey it was 23 7.

1946. Almost all the women who have had one Failures were due to patient failures. At end of

defective child are worried. They are deterred survey, out of 150 couples, seventy-six were on

from having more children when the risk is too contiaception of whom forty-one were on the

high, but when the risk is as low as one in twenty pill and twenty-nine had been sterilized. In

most people don't worry too much.

Southampton, Dorothy Morgan made a similar

The last section was introduced by Julian study of 150 women who could be reached only

Huxley with a fine plea for help to the under- through home visits. In the three years prior to

developed countries, and a statement of the the study there were 142 births. In the three

social costs of a large family in countries whose years 1961 through 1963 when birth control was

national income must go almost entirely to the available, there were thirty-two births. The

bare sustenance of its people. P. Sargant total saving on 110 children who were not born

Florence notes that five studies in Great Britain, was £5,874 per year, in maternity services, child

sponsored by the Eugenics Society from 1948 care and child allowances. In the final paper A. S.

to 1950, showed five children or more among Parkes considers the future of fertility control.

48 5 per cent of the problem families as against The limiting factors of famine, pestilence and

only 2- 65 per cent of such large families in the war now have little effect as a result of advances

population at large. In England public funds are in medical and related sciences. The IUCD may

available to meet this problem. But in the under- be the answer. It is not abortifacient since

developed countries with population increasing conception takes place on implantation, not on

at 3 or 4 per cent a year, and with masses of fertilization. The parental urge must be further

people moving into the cities, it is hard to find diverted from quantity to quality.

the funds for child care, let alone for education. Sir Julian Huxley concludes that many animals

The experience of Taiwan shows that Asian have destroyed their own habitats by over

peoples will use the new plastic coil, and feeding when man has upset their ecological

that it may be highly effective in reducing balance. Man is on the road to doing the same,

births.

for the same reasons. What we all should be

Mary Peberdy reports a study in Newcastle engaged in is a co-operative attempt at world

upon Tyne of problem parents who had had development. We have not got an international

four or more children. Their average number of ecology going. That is our next job. The popu-

pregnancies was 6- 3. Forty per cent of the women lation explosion is part of a great world crisis.

were physically ill, 23 per cent mentally unstable. Our own evolutionary advance (which goes on

Though unwilling to visit clinics, they accepted primarily by cultural means) is reaching what

contraception when methods were taught to may be a point of no return, owing to our

them at home. In the third year of the experiment abusing the world's resources and destroying

when the pill was offered it quickly became the our own habitat. The realization of this fact is

most popular method of control, and the most going to mark the next decade. One wonders

reliable, with a failure rate of 9 per hundred whether some period in the future might also

years of exposure compared to more than 30 for see us at a point of no return in gene resources.

184

