SWEDISH LAW ON ABORTION
Act relating to the Termination of Pregnancy, 17th June, 1938

i. Pregnancy may, in accordance with this
Act, be terminated: (i) where, owing to the presence of disease, physical defect or infirmity in the woman, the birth of a child would entail serious danger to her life or health, (2) where the woman became pregnant in the circumstances mentioned in Chapter I5, Sections I2, I3, I5 or I5a, or in Chapter i8, Sections i, 2, 3, 8, 8a or 9, and where pregnancy occurred in the circumstances mentioned in Chapter i8, Section 6, of the Penal Code* and involved gross violation of the woman's
freedom, (3) where it may reasonably be assumed
that the mother or father of the ex-
pected child will, owing to hereditary
disposition, transmit to their offspring, insanity, mental deficiency, or serious physical disease. Pregnancy may not be terminated after the twentieth week of pregnancy for any reason other than the presence of disease or physical defect in the mother. 2. If the mother has become pregnant in the circumstances mentioned in Chapter I5, Sections I2, I3, I5 or I5a, or in Chapter i8, Sections 6 or 8a, of the Penal Code, pregnancy may not be tenninated unless, when possible, legal proceedings have been instituted in respect of the crime or the crime has been reported for such proceedings to be instituted. The pregnancy of a mother who, at the time of pregnancy, had not completed her fifteenth year, may not be terminated if the
* Chapter I5, Sections I2, 13, 15 and I5a, refer to rape, attempted rape, intercourse brought about by intimidation of any kind.
Chapter i8, Sections I, 2, 3, 7, 8, 8a and 9 refer to intercourse within forbidden degrees, with insane women, with girls under the age of I5 years.
Section 6 refers to intercourse between teacher and pupil, adoptive parents or foster parents with child; guardian with ward, warder, master, etc., with prisoner, inmate of workhouse, etc.

person in charge of her has not given consent to the measure, unless special circumstances make the measure desirable.
Pregnancy may not be terminated on grounds of hereditary disposition in the case
of a woman mentioned in Section i (3) unless
the woman is also sterilized, except when the operation cannot be performed owing to the woman lacking the power to give valid consent, or, for special reasons, it is found to be undesirable.
3. Pregnancy may only be terminated at the request of the woman unless, owing to mental disturbances, she lacks the power to give valid consent to the measure.
4. Pregnancy may not be terminated unless the doctor who performs the operation and a second doctor, of an official rank to be determined by the King, have stated in a written report, for reasons specified therein, that the conditions for the measure are
present. An enquiry by the Medical Board must be
made before pregnancy is terminated for the reason given in Section i (3). The same applies in cases where the woman, owing to mental disturbance, lacks the power to give valid consent to the measure.
5. Before enquiry is made whether pregnancy may be terminated, the following persons should be afforded an opportunity of expressing their opinion, where there is reason for so doing:
(a) the father of the expected child,
(b) the person in charge of the woman if she is under the age of 2I years,
(c) the guardian of the woman if she has been declared incapable of managing her affairs,
(d) the husband of the woman if she is married,
(e) the doctor and director of the institution if the woman is in a public institution.

lO9

IIO THE EUGENICS REVIEW

If the woman herself can give valid consent one year's imprisonment, or in the event of

to the termination of pregnancy no opinion particularly extenuating circumstances to a

shall be taken without her consent.

fine.

6. Termination of pregnancy shall be 12. A doctor who, knowingly, either de-

undertaken at a hospital or similar public clares in the report mentioned in Section 4

institution, or at a cottage hospital by a that the conditions for the termination of

doctor there employed. Notwithstanding pregnancy are present, or makes a false state-

what has been laid down, the Medical Board ment to the authority or to any other doctor

may, where it deems it necessary, grant a in matters relating to the termination of

particular doctor permission to undertake pregnancy, shall be sentenced, if he is not

this measure at an institution mentioned responsible for the expulsion of the foetus, to a

above or at some other institution.

maximum period of one year's imprisonment

7. Where, in a case regarding the termina- or in the event of particularly extenuating

tion of pregnancy owing to the presence of circumstances to a fine.

disease or physical defect in the woman, an A doctor who, in enquiring into the matters

enquiry concerning the presence of the condi- connected with the termination of pregnancy,

tions necessary for undertaking the measure or by infringing or disregarding the provisions

as required in Section 4, or the performance of this Act, is guilty of carelessness, neglect,

of the operation at an institution mentioned ignorance or want of skill, shall be sentenced

in Section 6, would entail risk owing to delay to a fine or to a maximum of six months'

or any other difficulty which might arise, imprisonment if he is not indictable for

pregnancy may be terminated by a qualified official breach of duty.

doctor without compliance with the said I3. A person who, in any case other than

provisions.

the case mentioned above, knowingly gives

8. A person who enquired into the condi- false information to the authority or to a

tions necessary for the termination of preg- doctor in matters regarding the termination

nancy or who performed the operation or of pregnancy, shall be sentenced, if he is not

assisted at the enquiry or at the operation responsible for the expulsion of the foetus, to

may not, without due cause, reveal anything a fine or to a maximum of six months'

that occurred in connection therewith.

imprnsonment.

9. No appeal is permitted against the deci- I4. A person who, in any case other than

sion of the Medical Board in a matter relating the case mentioned above, infringes the pro-

to the termination of pregnancy.

visions of Section 8 shall be sentenced to a

IO. A person who has terminated or fine.

attempted to terminate pregnancy after the I5. Offences under Section 8 shall not be

enquiry mentioned in Sections 4 or 7 shall dealt with by the Public Prosecutor unless an

not be sentenced to a penalty under Chapter action is brought by the plaintiff.

I4, Sections 26, 27 or 28 of the Penal Code, if Fines imposed under this Act shall be

the measure was performed in accordance payable to the Crown.

with the provisions of Section I (2) and i6. The King shall issue any further regu-

Section 3.

lations which may be necessary for the

ii. A person who, in a case mentioned in execution of this Act.

Section IO, not being a qualified doctor, has

terminated or attempted to terminate preg- This Act shall come into force on the ist

nancy, shall be sentenced to a maximum of January, I939.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXX, No. 2.

