REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

I65

instances, mostly well known, of this kind of relation, the book seems to shed little fresh light on the problem of evolution.
L. DONCASTER.

Haldane, J. S., sonality:

M.D., LL.D., An Examination

F.R.S. of the

Mechanism, Life, and Per-
Mechanistic Theory of Life and

Mind. London. John Murray; 1913; price 2S. 6d.; pp. 139.

IN this book of four lectures delivered last May at Guy's Hospital, Dr.

Haldane has his views on

developed, a subject

in of

a remarkably attractive and assimilable unfailing interest. Commencing with

form,
a fair

and lucid exposition of the mechanistic hypothesis of living organisms

and the physiological observations upon which this hypothesis is founded,

he discusses more superficially the objections raised in favour of vitalism,

only to reject this alternative hypothesis as "unproved, unintelligible,

and practically useless as a scientific working hypothesis."

find

On such that the

a clear and mechanistic

tangible foundation it hypothesis is rejected

is a on

little disappointing to
no better ground than

that of the extreme complexity of the intracellular mechanisms required

for the ordinary functions of cell life, and for heredity; in view of our

ignorance of the possibilities of molecular structure, such a conclusion

would seem to be somewhat presumptuous. Moreover, when we look

further for an alternative hypothesis, we are merely frustrated by a

philosophical discussion on the reality of the a not very relevant presentation of idealism.

phenomenal

universe,

and

That there is nothing in the mechanistic hypothesis which is incon-

sistent with the purest idealism must be familiar to all students of

Huxley; and we imagine that Hume would have particularly resented the

assertion (p. 74) that he had proved the world of matter to be non-

existent. Nor does it help matters to place organic beings in a special

category; if the physicist is right in attempting to express the relations

between physical quantities in terms of mathematical symbols, although

the symbols are avowedly not physical quantities, the physiologist is

equally right in explaining physiological mechanisms, even the most

obscure and intricate, in terms of physics and chemistry.

It is, indeed, to be regretted that Dr. Haldane, in developing specu-

lations of great philosophical interest, should have founded them, in appearance, upon the supposed inadequacy of the mechanistic theory; for

not only does he fail to establish this inadequacy, but there remains

between the physiological and the philosophical portions of his reasoning

an unbridged gap in an argument, which in other respects he has taken

pains to make complete.

Unquestionably the best lecture of the four, both from the literary

and from the scientific point of view, is the last, entitled "Personality."

Here, in a purely philosophical region, the author develops the conse-

quences of the thesis that the phenomenal world is a product of per-

sonality; and in particular of the personality of an organism, itself

adapted to its environment. The conception bristles with paradoxes,

and it is only by appealing to an ultimate unity in the universe of per-

sonality that solempsism ";

it is possible to nevertheless, it is

escape from by powerful

the sophistry reasoning as

of " racial well as by

brilliant creative thought that world and all that lies within it

we is

are led to the conclusion, that " This a spiritual world." R. A. FISHER.

Dealey, JAMES QUAYLE. The Family in Its Sociological Aspects. London.

G. G. Harrap and Co.; 1913; price is. 6d. net; pp. 137.

ccThuHalIpmStienlraistttilcneogmbpoirnoikstehdeoaemsossdoimenergwnuhlaafrtalmyiplolyoitrtolfeanjAdumsetuirncicecoatnonviintdsceimtnoigtclre.ahicsytT.ohreicaflirsotutsleivneen,

" It family,

is in

possible, therefore, its later aspects at

to get a much clearer idea of the least, from a study of the American

modern family

i 66 EUGENICS REVIEW.

than from a study of the varying types prevalent throughout Western civilisation as a whole. Modern democratic movements have affected it profoundly, and there is evolving in consequence a type of family which itself reacts on democracy and aids in its development. It is probable that the American family represents, notwithstanding its transitional con-

ditions, a movement towards a higher type of family than any now existing and will furnish the basis on which will rest the better civilisation ot coming centuries " (p. 76).
Primarily concerned as he is with this almost vestigial form of the family, surviving in modern conditions, we can perhaps understand why Mr. Dealey is satisfied to consider the position of marriage and divorce in relation to Church and State, as the principal sociological aspect of the

family in the past. The four remaining chapters, concerning subjects with which the

author is evidently better fitted to deal, contain an interesting account of the effects of urban conditions, and a survey of the methods by which these effects might be combated.
Mr. Dealey advocates a vigorous social policy for all the evils of city

life, including somewhat drastic restrictive eugenics; while powerful

efforts to inculcate higher ethical ideals are to complete the process of

racial regeneration.

"1 This is the age of the child, emphasising its rights and demanding

that every child born into the world has honourable parentage, right

training, a morally stimulating environment, and full opportunity through

education to make the most of his latent powers. A civilisation with such

aims need have no fear of racial decadence, but rather may rely on a

pure family life, a permanent monogamous tie, and a society largely free

from its Dresent defilements" (p. I34).

R. A. FISHER.

Sehofleld, DR. A. T. and Vaughan-Jaekson, DR. P. What a Boy Should Know. London. Cassell; 1913; price 2S. 6d.; pp. ii8.

THERE is little to be said about this book, except that of its kind it is good; it is written simply, clearly and delicately, and it is hardly possible to imagine the most fastidious parent taking exception to any phrase throughout.
Nevertheless, we cannot resist the opportunity of remarking that in our opinion the book is part of a mistaken system of giving moral instruction to young boys. We hold strongly the necessity of such instruction, but the grand question is not the what? but the how? and this question is not answered by any book, whether addressed to boys or to parents. That is to say, anyone with any insight into moral problems and boy life must be aware that even a book like this one is sure to be suited to a few youngsters and unsuited to a good many more. It is probable that to those for whom it is unsuited it would do no harm. Some, if left to themselves, would find it dull; some would feel their curiosity stirred and would wish to know more than the book tells them; to a small minoritv it would be exactly what is wanted; but those who would find it sufficient in itself would be only a handful.
The facts of human nature must be faced, and the first is the immeasurable difference between temperaments and minds. Among boys exposed to the same influences, one at 14 will be found to be wholly ignorant of natural processes, while another will have become morbidly interested in them at IO. If the problem is considered which arises out of this diversity, we think there should be agreement on the method of imparting the teaching; and we believe the soundest to be as follows:First, there should be a determination to make this instruction part of the general training in self-control on its moral side, and on its intellec-
tual side part of the general intellectual training given first by the mother, then by the father. Broadly speaking, it is hardly possible to avoid the

