368 EUGENICS REVIEW.

prehistoric archaology there is room for much diversity of opinion, and

it is not to be expected that an author and reviewer should agree upon

all points. Nevertheless, the present writer can cordially recommend

the book to those who desire an introduction to these fascinating subjects,

indeed, he has already done so with happy results. As was to be

expected, the author has followed Penck in his co-ordination of certain

flint industries with particular phases of the glacial period, and has

adopted his estimated chronology. The reader should remember that

most French archaeologists make a different co-ordination-making

paleolithic man appear somewhat later-and are satisfied with a con-

siderably less antiquity. The author rejects the oligocene flints, but

accepts " eoliths " from the Upper Miocene at Aurillac, which, by the

way, are very different in type from the Kentish " eoliths." A brief

account is given of Klaatsch's ingenious plan of the origin and dispersal

of human races and apes, and it wisely concludes with the statement,

" It would be well, however, to take the theory, cum grano salis." The

book forms an excellent, short, popular, and up-to-date introduction to

our knowledge of palaeolithic man, and is adequately illustrated with

capital fizures.

A. C. HADDON.

Gluffrida-Ruggeri, DR. V. Homo Sapiens, Einleitung au einem Kurse

der Anthropologie. Wien u. Leipzig. A Hartleben; I9I2; price

5 marks; pp. i98.

THE author points out that zoologists seeking to explain the various pro-

cesses which have led to differentiation have found it advantageous to

draw their material from the greater divisions or families of the animal

kingdom. These processes are not manifested only in crude differ-

ences between relatively remote species, but rather persist throughout the

genealogical tree even to its ultimate ramifications. Hence the justifica.

tion for the examination of the differentiation of the primates from the

standpoint of their influence on the production of the forms of man, fossil

and living, as we know them at the present day.

Having set this ideal before him, Professor Giuffrida-Ruggeri seeks

to carry it out with the most painstaking thoroughness, with the result

that the volume ably summarises our knowledge up to last year, though it

must be admitted that the author's scholarship and immense special

knowledge, combined with an extremely condensed style, make the book

difficult reading.

It is only possible to touch on a few points which appear to be of

special interest in this country at the present time: The modern mathe-

matical school of biologists is perhaps treated rather summarily; it is,

however, all to the good that its exponents should be reminded of the

necessity that the factors which they introduce into their equations should

have been determined by previous biological analysis.

A good deal is said concerning the newer forms of polygenism which

have been promulgated recently by the author's countryman Sergi as well

as by Klaatch in Germany. With these views the Neapolitan professor

has no sympathy. Not only does he consider the derivation of the different

early stocks of mankind from gorilla-like and orang-like ancestors absurd,

but he refers to Keith's conclusions that there is nothing orang-like in the

Combe-Capelle (Aurignacian) skull, and substantially agrees with the

views set forth by von Luschan in a paper read at the Peace Congress- in

London two years ago. It is not then surprising that Tetraprothomo

and Diprothomo are not accepted, and it is impossible to avoid a feeling

of regret that Eoanthropus was dicovered too late to come in for the

author's careful, if sometimes caustic, discussion.

C. G. S.

Walling, WM. E. The Larger Aspects of Socialism. London. Macmillan and Co.; 1913; price 6s. 6d.; pp. 406.
MR. WALLING'S earlier book on " Socialism as It Is " aimed at giving a descriptive account of a movement which has attained large proportions

REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

369

in recent years. In his present volume he discusses the ideas which have

given birth to the movement, and which still correct and inspire it. His

fundamental position is that of the pragmatist. As such, he has a horror

of logical systems and general principles, whatever their nature. The

" State Socialism " of Mr. Ramsay Macdonald is a mere substitution of the

bureaucrat for the capitalist. Under its regime individuality must be

subordinated to the State. The tyranny of the general will is not less

abhorrent than the tyranny of the strong man. Socialism for Mr. Walling

is only justified in so far as it provides freedom for individual develop-

ment. He is impatient of the sociologist who views the State as an

organism the cells in which are individual men and women, as he is

intolerant of the historian and the evolutionist who demands aeons of time

for effective social progress. History itself has few lessons to teach us-

ancient history none, but the " class system " imposes it upon our educa-

tional system because it tends to perpetuate an old and effete social

organisation. Eugenics is based on a pitiful fallacy, and the biologist is

no guide to the social reformer.

Mr. Walling finds his choicest spirits in the persons of Nietzsche,

Max Stirner, and Ellen Key. In their writings the individual comes to

his own, and the state in which their ideas are most nearly realised is

the most ideal democracy. Education as conceived by Dewey and (for

small children) Montessori is the type which the Socialism of Mr. Walling

demands.

Such is the current of thought upon which Mr. Walling bases his

hopes for the future. The State Socialism as advocated by the Chairman

of the English Labour Party in the House of Commons may come first,

but it can only be a preliminary to the freedom in which alone the

individua,l ran flnurish.

T. A. GrErE (the TTnivprsitv of Sheffield).

Elderton, E. MI.; Barrlngton, AMY; Jones, H. GERTRUDE; Lamotte,

EDITH M.M. de G.; Laski, H. J.; Pearson, KARL. On the

Correlation of Fertility with Social Value. A Co-operative

Study. Eugenics Laboratory Memoirs, XVIII. London.

Dulau and Co.; I913; price 6s. net; PP. 72.

FOR "fertility" read " size of family," and for "social value" read

" amount of weekly wages," and the title of this memoir will give a

fairly accurate description of its contents. Even when simplified in

this way the problem remains a complicated one, since both the size

of the family and the amount of the wages are directly influenced by

the age of the father-facts which must be allowed for if an attempt

is made to determine whether a man earning high wages is likely to

have a larger or a smaller family than one earning less. The principal

method adopted by the authors is to calculate three pairs of correlation

co-efficients (i) between age of parents and size of family; (2) between

age of parents and wages; (3) between wages and size of family. Then

by the use of the method of partial correlations an attempt is made to

find the degree of interdependance between wages and size of family

undisturbed by the influence of parental age. The results show that

when this procedure is adopted there remains a slight negative correla-

tion between wages and size of family. That is to say, workmen earning

high wages appear to have slightly smaller families than those earning low.

In emphasizing the importance of the question studied, the authors

enunciate the following statements of what they consider to be the " sole

conditions under which national progress can be assured ": (i.) wages

ought to be directly proportional to social value as measured by physique

and ability; (ii.) the size of the family ought to be proportional on the

average to wages. If the conditions laid down in the former statement

were fulfilled the results arrived at in the paper under review would be

of a very disquieting kind. That they are to some extent fulfilled can

well be argued, but to what extent remains to be determined-a work of

much urgency and importance.

EDGAR SCHUSTER.

