EUGENIC ASPECTS OF CHILDREN'S ALLOWANCES*
By SIR WILLIAM BEVERIDGE, K.C.B., F.B.A.

I DO not mind telling you that I have children's allowances hitherto has been

spent most of to-day in the gallery of wholly economic. In the Report which the

the House of Commons listening to the House of Commons is debating at this
opening debate on the Beveridge Report. moment I have proposed children's allow-

During the latter part of it-in fact just ances as a means of preventing want and

before I came here-Sir John Anderson was putting an end to lack of physical necessities

speaking amid considerable protest from the for the nurturing of children already in

other side because he was reading his speech, existence.

and a discussion arose as to whether or not Any of you who may have read my Re-

he was entitled to read a speech in the House port, or Part I of it, will note that it starts

of Commons. I am in rather the opposite by pointing out that there are two causes of

difficulty, in that I am supposed to be read- want in this country. One of these is the ing you a lecture, but I have nothing written interruption of earnings by unemployment,

which I can read. I shall have to " speak-" accident, disease, and so on, and the other a lecture, for I have not had time to give to is the non-adjustment of the family income

the preparation of what I have to say to you to the size of the family. The latter factor to-day anything like the care that my leads to a very sinister concentration of

subject deserves.

poverty upon the children. If one takes the

Nevertheless, just because the subject is various surveys made by sociological ex-

so enormously important, I felt bound to perts, like Mr. Rowntree, of want or poverty

accept your invitation, and, having accepted in the period between the two wars, one finds

it, to fulfil my promise. I ought perhaps to everywhere that of the people who have not

add that there was a secondary reason which enough to keep them physically healthy not led me to accept your invitation, namely far short of one-half are children under I4. that I did not answer it for some time, and The proportion varies generally from 40 to

when that is the case I find it harder to send 50 per cent.

a refusal than an acceptance. But I am glad I want to emphasize this fact because it

to be here, and I want to make it plain that has a bearing on what I am going to say later my title is, not the eugenic aspects of social about the working of our financial or eco-

insurance, but the eugenic aspects of chil- nomic system upon family life and the

dren's allowances. That is really what I amn prospects of people who belong to different

going to talk about, and I hope none of you sizes of families. Before the war more than

will be very much disappointed by that 40 per cent of the want in this country was

limitation.

experienced by children under I4. Another

way of putting it, by Mr. Rowntree, is that

The economic aspect

at least half the population pass through

In this question of giving allowances for two periods of physical want in their lives,

children-that is to say, adjusting the in- even in relatively prosperous Britain as it

come of the family according to the size of was in I936. One of these is the period when

the family and to the number of the children they are children, the other is the period

-there are both economic and biological when they are old; poverty in this later

aspects. My approach to this question of period has been diminished a good deal since

'The Galton Lecture delivered before the Eugenics Socicly ouPFebruary I6th, I943.

the social surveys were made by the grant of better old-age pensions. There is a third

117

ii8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

period of want which occurs very frequently, question. I will only say, as I have said in

namely, among young married people with my Report, that I do not imagine that there

dependent families.

will be much direct effect from children's

That is the problem with which I was allowances on the number of children born.

faced and for which I have recommended a Nobody is going to have children in these

system of children's allowances. I may days as a profit-making business, if he or she

remind you that my actual proposal is that does not want them otherwise; in any case

there should be an allowance for each child 8s. a week is not a profit, it merely neutralizes

after the first at the average rate of 8s. per the extra cost of the child. But I do think

week, in addition to the existing provision that children's allowances will have some

in the way of school meals and so on, which effect on the number of the population.

is taken as of the value of is. a week, There are certainly some parents who have

giving gs. as the assumed cost, on the already one or two children and would like

average, of children from o to I4. Of course, tb have more, but have been deterred

the cost is much less for the younger and hitherto by fear of damaging the prospects

more for the older ones. This cash allowance of their children already born. Children's

of 8s., plus is. by way of what is given allowances will make it easier for such

already, should be provided by taxation. parents to have additional children. But

I may say that about the last thing I making a large change in the birth rate will

heard, in the House of Commons just before depend not on children's allowances but on

I came away was Sir John Anderson's the formation of public opinion.

announcement that the Government pro- What I am concerned with to-day is the

posed to give children's allowances, begin- eugenic question, the effect of family allow-

ning with the second child, but that they ances on the quality of the population. The

thought that the services now provided thought of that makes me very much alarmed

might be regarded as equivalent in money indeed to come among you, partly because I

value to 2s. 6d. a head as against the is. come wholly unprepared, and partly because,

assumed by me, and that the rate of child- at one time at any rate, your Society con-

ren's allowances should be fixed at 5s. for demned in rather strong terms just exactly

the second and other children instead of the what I have proposed to the Government.

8s. recommended by me. That makes only Professor Fisher had the kindness to send

7s. 6d. as compared with gs., but it is a me a paper which he read to this Society in

forward step of great importance in dealing I932, in which he said that a proposal to give

with this problem. That is what Sir John 5s. for each child through the post office,

Anderson has announced, and one may whether the parent was employed or unem-

assume that children's allowances in one ployed, could be received with little enthusi-

form or other will become part of our social asm on eugenic grounds. In another paper I

and economic structure, and will do so think he referred to a statement of eugenic

essentially on economic grounds, as a means policy which this Society got out in I928 or

of dealing with want.

I929, saying that the Society was strongly

opposed to redistribution of income by means

Effects on numbers and quality of population of- taxation or to allowances being made a

That makes it all the more important to charge on the State. Well, children's allow-

consider what is likely to be the biological ances such as I have proposed, and such as

effect of such a change in our economic and to some extent the Government has ac-

social structure. What will be its effect on cepted, are a charge on the State and a

the number of the population and on the means of redistributing income by means of

quality of the breeding ?

taxation, as between those with family

On the first point, as to the number of the responsibility and those without it.

population, I have very little to say here What I am here to find out, among other

to-day. It is not essentially an eugenic things, is whether people who are interested

EUGENIC ASPECTS OF CHILDREN'S ALLOWANCES

in eugenics would take the same rather struggle for existence, which is essentially

critical view of the actual proposal which I dependent upon the birth rate, the man most

put forward and which has been accepted by likely to be selected as the ancestor of future

the Government to-day, of something like a generations is he who has been least successv

flat' subsistence allowance for children, as ful in getting either admiration or rewards in

expressed in those statements which I have this generation. Biological and economic

read. I rather hope they will not take a tendencies are in conflict. The position is a

critical view, and I am fortified in that hope bad one and not one to be contemplated with

by something else I read by Professor Fisher, contentment. But if one is asked how it is

in which he discussed the possible eugenic to be remedied, the first and most sensible

effects of a system of family allowances, as a thing is to find out what is the cause of this

means of correcting the main dysgenic factor state of affairs. There is an interesting

in our society to-day, namely, the inverted division of opinion as to the reason why in

birth rate.

Great Britain and other civilized societies

economic success means biological failure,

Economic versus biological success

or, if it may be put the other way, biological

As you all know-as everybody really failure means economic success. -The phe-

knows although they do not always realize nomenon has two sides, and raises, therefore,

how much it means-there is in Britain the question as to which of the two sides is

to-day an inverted birth rate, in the sense cause and which is consequence. Does success

that the poorer and, less successful sections lead to infertility? Do people tend to have

of the community, generally speaking, are relatively fewer children because they are

more prolific than the more prosperous and' rich, or is it the other way round, that

successful sections of the community. That, infertility is the cause of economic success.?

of course, is not confined to Britain. I think The common-sense view, of course, is the

Professor Fisher points out that it is found former; that wealth itself, or being suc-

in every civlized country wherever the data cessful in life, or being well-educated, taking

have been examined, and it is not, of course, a university degree, and so on, causes people

confined to the contrast between the wealthy to have less children, either because they

and the poor. The inversion of the birth rate do not want them or because there is some

extends right through the social scale. The connection between intellectual ability and

data derived from our census of I9II show infertility. Most of you who have read

that bricklayers' labourers, for example, Professor Fisher's work know that he takes

have more children than bricklayers; that the exactly contrary view, that it is the

agricultural labourers have more children biological failure which leads to economic

than agricultural foremen. All the way up success, because to belong to a small family

the scale you get fewer and fewer children. -that is, to belong to an infertile stock-

If you group together-I think Professor gives one the best chance of social promotion

Fisher gives .this figure-all the people of a to a position above that to which one was

social status equal or superior to a railway born. It is quite obvious that that does

booking clerk you will find that they have a happen. Consider the case of the labourer

birth rate just about half that of the popula- with six children and the labourer, with the

tion as a whole, which means that they are same income, with one child. The one child

replacing themselves to the extent of only has a far better chance of being allowed to

40 per cent, while the population as a whole stay at school and take higher education

is replacing itself to the extent of 8o per cent. than any of the children in the six-children

One need not use many words to suggest family, because the first of those six children

that that is an unsatisfactory state of affairs. will have to go out and earn at the earliest

It is summed up again by Professor Fisher possible moment and the others will be in

when he says that it means that economic want at some time or other during their

success implies biological failure, that in the childhood.

120 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

That is the argument of Professor Fisher, education is the boy from the small family;

which, of course, he deduces from the founder but secondary education is a modem

of this Society, Francis Galton. Biological development, and there have not been

failure is the cause of - social promotion, enough generations for selection to produce

and not the other way round. People the result which you see. Therefore I am

just because they come of small families rise inclined to think that probably there is also

in the social scale along with those who rise a reverse action; that economic or social

through their ability and service, and as success, rising in life, for one reason or

people tend to marry in their own social another has also a direct effect in causing

class, infertility tends to breed ability out of people to have fewer children than otherwise

the race.

they would have. Not only is infertility the

The classical illustration of that is found cause of social promotion, but social pro-

in Galton's study in which he pointed out motion in turn causes infertility.

how the able men who rose to eminence-

judges, statesmen, soldiers, and others- Social promotion of the infertile

having founded peerages, all thought they But whether I am right or wrong in

must marry a heiress, or have their sons to doubting the negative side of the theory, I

marry a heiress in order to maintain the do not myself see that one can reject the

peerage, and the heiress-not necessarily but positive side, namely, that so long as a

more often than not-came of an infertile premium is placed upon belonging to a small

stock. Galton speaks of the " destroying family, so long as in every class the child

influence of heiress blood." He even went so of the small family has an economic advan-

far as to say that the rate at which peerages tage over the child of a large family, forces

became extinct varied according to the are set in motion which bring about the

higher or lower scale in the peerage; that social promotion of the infertile. At the

dukedoms were more deeply infested with same time rendering special service also

heiress blood than earldoms, and earldoms leads to social promotion, putting people up

more than baronies. With each step in into a higher place on account of ability.

the peerage a fresh heiress was brought in; Ability and infertility rise together and in-

she brought money, but she destroyed the fertility tends to kill ability out of the race.

race. As a layman in these matters, I am inclined

The inverted birth rate is an established to accept that argument as a positive ex-

fact. The theory to explain it has, of course, planation, not necessarily of the whole but

two sides. It has a positive side, that the of a substantial part of the inverted birth

fact that infertility pauses social promotion rate.

must inevitably mean that the higher social I want to refer at this point to the figures

classes are less fertile. The other, the nega- which I gave you at the beginning, of the

tive side, is that there is no other cause of severity of the pressure from poverty on

this lower fertility of the higher social classes. children: that about half the population

I have some doubts myself as to the nega- passed through actual physical want at some

tive side. I do not feel that the evidence time in their lives, and that 40 per cent of all

which Professor Fisher gives for that view want is that of children. This means that

is as decisive as the rest of his evidence, and the difference between life in a small and life

it is not easy to believe that there has been in a large family in the lower economic groups

enough time for selection, working by itself, of the community is very great indeed. It

to produce those enormous differences be- means that the child of the small family may

tween the relative fertility of different classes. never have been in want throughout his life,

After all, natural selection is a relatively slow while of the children of large families in this

process. When the chance of secondary country only a very small proportion can have

education is accorded to the poorest class, avoided being in actual physical want during

the boy with the best chance of secondary their childhood, or can have avoided the

EUGENIC ASPECTS OF CHILDREN'S ALLOWANCES

121

necessity of going out to earn money at the which is above the subsistence level. Of

earliest possible moment. A very large pro- course, it is pretty certain that the actual

portion of all the children in this country expenditure on each child rises with the

come from the large families, and therefore income of the parent. It does not rise strictly

have passed through this period of want. in proportion; but there is no doubt that

The social promotion of the unfertile, the parent with an income of £500 a year is

therefore, tends to breed out ability from the apt to find each child a larger expense than

race. Professor Fisher introduces the bio- the parent with an income of £Ioo a year.

logical argument for children's allowances by The cost of children rises with the family

pointing out the fact that if you give sub- income. What people think they should

sistence allowances for children you equalize spend, and in fact do spend, on each child

the conditions as between large and small rises with the earnings. Thus, wherever you

families and therefore remove the present have a child according to the common

premium on infertility. The child of the standard costing more than subsistence, a

poor man who has six children has in that child's allowance based on subsistence does

event just as good a chance of living as the not equalize conditions between the large

single child of the poor man. The premium and the small family, does not remove the

on infertility is removed.

premium on infertility, and does not check

the social promotion of the infertile.

Eugenic consequences and limitations of

proposed allowances

Supplements to Government scheme

Accepting that, as one is entitled to do That leads to the suggestion that a system

from Professor Fisher's argument, I would of subsistence allowances for children such

suggest that the proposal I put forward in as I propose in order to abolish want, needs,

my Report so far as it goes is good and not from the eugenic point of view, to be supple-

bad eugenically. I think it is good eugenically mented in two ways. First I should like to see

for the reason that it will diminish the it supplemented by occupational schemes of

premium on infertility and so diminish the allowances in the various occupations which

social promotion of infertility and for a are open to ability and which have an

second reason, that in so far as it adds to entrance test of ability. Such occupations

the number of births at all, it can only do include teaching of all kinds, in universities

so by influencing parents who take some and schools, the civil service, local govern-

thought over the begetting of their children. ment service, law, medicine, accountancy,

You cannot influence people, whether by and others.

money or anything else, who take no thought One general thing which I would say about

at all. People who have no thought for the an educationalscheme of children's allowances

size of their families will not be affected by is that the cost would not have to be borne

children's allowances. The people who will by general taxation-for you cannot tax the

be affected are the parents who have certain general taxpayer for the benefit of members

social virtues, who want children and will of a particular profession. Every profession

take care in bringing them up. For that would have to deal with the children's allow-

reason also children's allowances, so far as ances for its own members. At the London

they go, should have a eugenic effect.

School of Economics, with the very important

But the children's allowances on this basis help of the late Lord Stamp, I did introduce

which I proposed-8s. a week, in addition to a system of children's allowances on a very

what is given in kind, for each child-do not much larger scale, namely, £3° a year for

go far enough from the eugenic point of view. every child up to the age of 8, and £60 a year

They will equalize the conditions between for every child from 8 to 2I, for as long as

the large and the small family in the very the child was being educated; that was

poorest families, but only in the very poorest paid by the School as an addition to the

families. They will not do so for any family standard salary. The exact nature of these

122 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

occupational schemes would depend upon the I am sure you will not think that I have

occupation. There is a good deal to be said any impression that intellectual ability is

for applying to children's allowances the now confined to a small section of the com-

principle of the superannuation scheme in the munity. It is not. Of course, you find more

case of university staffs, in which deductions of it in occupations which have been selected

are made proportionately to income from for it; but you find people of above the

everybody's salary and something is added average intellectual ability in all sections

by the employer. I do not see why that of the community, and quite a substantial

should be limited to providing for old age number of them. That is because they have

and should not be accepted as providing for not been socially promoted. But we are now

posterity. Such a scheme would have the busily engaged in looking for ability and

advantage of adjusting the allowance to the sending it up the educational ladder. If you

salary. Most occupational schemes probably are continually looking for ability and

should give allowances to some extent sending it up the educational ladder and, on

graded to income.

the other hand, by your salary and wage

The second direction in which subsistence system are putting a premium on infertility

children's allowances should be supple- and sending that up also to mate with ability,

mented is by the system of income-tax you are strengthening the tendency to the

rebates. Many people have suggested that inverted birth rate, and helping infertility to

if you give subsistence children's allowances kill out the ability. Everything we can do to

as I propose them, and as the Government give greater equality of opportunity as

say they are going to introduce them, you between different classes of the community

ought to abolish income-tax rebate. To me emphasizes the importance of giving greater

that proposal is both wrong and reactionary. equality of opportunity as between the large

The method by which you tax has nothing and the small family.

to do with children's allowances at all. On I have confessed my own doubt as to the

the contrary, I would like to see income-tax negative side of Professor Fisher's argument.

rebates for children maintained and even If, contrary to what he said, the lower

extended. They have one great advantage. fertility of the wealthy class is due, to some

The chances are that income-tax will fall extent, not to selection, but to the fact that

upon a larger proportion of the total com- they are wealthy or are educated, that still

munity after the war than in the past, and more strengthens the argument for what I

that means that if you get income-tax may call super-allowances for children, for

rebates for children you can get a scheme of allowances above the subsistence level in

children's allowances right down the social these higher grades so as to remove as

scale into groups of people like the .skiled completely as possible the premium on

wage earners, where it is very important infertility in these higher grades.

indeed to have them. I suspect that the

greatest store of unused intellectual ability Criticisms of the proposals

in the country is among the skilled wage I have already talked as long as I should.

earners. So many of these have been kept I want to conclude by looking at certain

where they are by their relatively high difficulties which will be put forward by the

fertility. The more easy you make it for general public against my proposal that the

them to rise now into the frigid unfertile community should concern itself with the

atmosphere of the social classes above them, future of its breed. First, I suggest that it is

the more you are going to breed out that not in the least undemocratic to consider

ability. I do not want people to rise out of children's allowances as a means of neutraliz-

that class by infertility. Instead of a policy ing the premium on infertility and improvng

of diminution of income-tax rebates for the quality of the race. The differential

children, I should like to see the maintenance birth rate is not a difference simply between

or even extension of them.

the rich and the poor. It extends throughout

EUGENIC ASPECTS OF CHILDREN'S ALLOWANCES

the social scale, and what I suggest as a thing in this generation, and probably not

reason for children's allowances is from many much in the next. It is not a question of

aspects extremely democratic. It is the to-day, but of 200 years hence. One of the

acceptance of the democratic idea of equality things which we in this country like to do

of opportunity. You do not get equality of is to look back with pride upon our

opportunity as between children of large and ancestors. As a nation we look back with

of small families so long as you have the cost pride on our ancestors of 200 or 300 years

of children wholly borne by the parents. ago, and some can look back individually to

You get instead inevitable inequality of ancestors of distinction. If we look back, I

opportunity according to the size of the do not see why as a community we should

family. Like most scientific arguments, this not look forward 200 or 300 years and see

argument cuts across the ordinary political that we ensure the best possible posterity.

differences. In one sense it looks -undemo- That depends on breeding not from the

cratic to say that people are unequal and worse stocks, but from the better. That is

therefore you must favour those who have worth doing and ought not to be regarded as

greater ability. On the other hand, it is anything fantastic or unreasonable. We

democratic because it favours equality of ought to take thought not of to-day, nor

opportunity for children whether they belong perhaps of to-morrow, but of ioo or 200

to large families or small. My argument is years ahead. We have need to look forward

" left-wing " also in the sense that it is an as well as to look back.

argument against inheritance of wealth I hope that what I have said will lead you

concentrated by infertility on heirs and to agree with my appeal that the biological

heiresses.

argument should be regarded as reinforcing

A second objection certain to be taken is the economic argument for children's allow-

that any interference with human breeding ances. The actual proposal which I have

is dictatorial and against the liberty of the made, with some modifications, seems likely

subject. What I am proposing here is not that at all. It involves no interference with the liberty of individuals in choosing their mates or in rearing their children. All that I am suggesting is that one should use children's allowances to bring economic and
biological tendencies into line with one
another. Finally, if one advocates children's allow-

to be accepted for a children's subsistence allowance for every family. That is good so far as it goes, but the next step, and an essential one on eugenic grounds, is to be sure that those allowances are supplemented in the two ways I have suggested, through income-tax rebates and through the development of schemes of occupational allowances,

ances as a means of improving the breed, including occupations of all kinds-whether

people will say: ".But what will it do in manual or intellectual-in which there is a

this generation ? " Well, it will not do any- test of ability.

genic Review, Vol. NXIV,No. 4

