THE NORDIC MYTH

A Critique of Current Racial Theories By PROFESSOR H. J. FLEURE, D.Sc.

W HEN the peoples of Europe ac- modern men, and, since the growth of the

quired the idea of spending the historic sense, we need to know the origins

earth's capital expressed in coal of our groups and their history, if our pride

and minerals in order to accumulate social is to have its chance. Now it so happens

luxury and political power for successful that a good many fair-haired, blue-eyed

business men, they also learned to think of people have long skulls; many have quite

themselves more highly than they ought. broad ones it is true, but the long skull has

This development of a good conceit of our- the additional virtue that it is the dominant

selves came to us in the days of the advance type in ancient Scandinavian burials, in the

of science into every field of thought, and a region where tall men with light hair and

supposedly scientific basis was found for this blue eyes are most widespread nowadays.

conceit. A white skin was obviously a mark So the combination of blondness and a long

of superiority, even though our ancestors head and tall stature has a special charm

had shown a then becoming deference in for certain minds. But this is not enough,

their contacts witlh the Yellow Emperor. for even the most enthusiastic racialist is

Moreover, was there not a sanction in not going to do his duty by organizing a

folk-tradition, and folk-tradition was reviv- Nordic Association to which might be ad-

ing everywhere with the decline of Christian mitted all men of any people on earth or,

belief. It is well to pause for a moment perhaps, in Europe and North America,

to realize that white-skinned, fair-com- who could show, not the sixteen quarterings

plexioned people seem to have played a big as of old at Baume-les-Messieurs, but, let

part in the disturbances of the days when us suggest, sixteen type-characters of the

many of the surviving early traditions of blond race. No, were this organized there

Europe were taking shape; they were ap- might be too few subscribing-members to

parently an aristocracy of that particular pay the secretary's salary. When Ammon,

time and so set the standards for bardic the well-known German racialist, was asked

flatterers to follow.

to select a typical Alpine complete in all his

In Germany, Wagner's strong imagina- characters he explained that this was im-

tion led a movement towards glorification of possible. It is as difficult to find the complete

native tradition, and found his great hope and perfect Nord.

in this respect in the possibility of a wide- Race-type is an abstraction, to be used

spread expansion of egoism into racialism with much reserve. But that caution does

under the guise of a glorification of the fair- not suit the temperament of the apostles

haired, blue-eyed white man. And, after of the Nordic Race. They want to use

Wagner, Houston Stewart Chamberlain that race to glorify some group or other

produced a work which was greeted with about which every one knows, be it the de-

amazement and laughter by serious scendants of the men of the Mayflower or

thinkers, though many a superficial writer the landed aristocracy of England or the

swallowed its follies whole.

masters of Germany. The Nordic cult is

But hair and eyes are known only for less violent in the Scandinavian lands where,

"17

ii8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

now at least, men have less mania for even if hair and eye are light. Moreover,

power. It is political ambition that is but will those who have seen a certain number

too often the deflector of science !

of people from the lands east of the Baltic

be quite happy about the hypothesis that

THE 'SUPERIORITY COMPLEX'

light hair and eyes are always a sign of intermixture with the tall long-heads of the

The expansion of the English who first West Baltic lands? A few years ago Pro-

developed modern industrialism, followed fessor Parsons took measurements of Ger-

by the miraculous development of German mans and showed that the average cephalic

scientific industry and the expression of its index for a region was nearly always above

ambitions in politics, made hasty writers 8o, a rather high figure for the purpose of

speak of Teutonic or Germanic superiority, the Nordic enthusiast who is so often anxi-

and this talk was not a little encouraged by ous to belittle the broad-headed Slav.

the feats of the German armies in I870-71. In the same way it is uncomfortable for

From this beginning it was easy to proceed this enthusiast that the British population

to the idealizing of the Anglo-Saxon- is to such an extent too dark to be accounted

Teutonic peoples which formed a part of the truly Nordic. The English-German basis

ancestry of both English and Germans. of the proud superstructure weakens at

The next step was naturally to think of the every stage of the examination, unless it

long-headed people of the north-west of can be shown that the great achievements

Europe, supposedly fair-haired and light- of the peoples in question are due to the eyed, as the essential type and to dig back Nordic element among them. So we get into the past and make them the founders the idea of looking for Nordic traits: long

of a pre-historic Baltic civilization, charac- heads (that may be of quite other origins), terized by battle axes, though the Danish prominent profiles (that may come from specialists, with customary wisdom, de- quite another source), light hair and eyes

clined to be drawn into the theory. So far, (that are shared with other East European

let us admit, there was a spice of truth; for, types), and many another feature may serve

though the battle axe and other things its turn at need, and the game goes on until

probably came to the Baltic from South all sorts of admirable people in all sorts of

Russia, these features may well have been circumstances are hailed as Nords. Perhaps

worked out, in their Baltic forms, by the the highest flight of imagination was reached

people concerned. But we may suspect that when Jesus was almost claimed as a Nord, those forms were but barbarous efforts to though all representations of him are made copy superior objects, in metal, made by without knowledge of what he looked like. mere Asiatics from Mesopotamia or else- Thus both in identification of examples,

where.

and in definition of type, the apostles of the

The trouble begins when having con- Nordic idea leave the ground of fact and

structed, not without a good deal of emo- soar into a very thin layer of the atmo-

tional subjectivity, the historical scheme, sphere where they may beat their wings for

our enthusiasts proceed to interpret all that ever, without fear of beating them against the peoples of north-west Europe have done the awkward data to which groundlings are as the work of this particular stock. This forced to give attention.

leads to little difficulties when, for example,

we laud the work of the broad-headed Bismarck, Gladstone, or Salisbury, or Darwin,

THE HOMETOFCIVILIZATION

or Luther, or some other public figure, as Unless the school of Kossinna, the the work of the race. Insensibly we lose archaeologist, is right about the Baltic origin

our hold on actual physical race characters, of the battle axe (and the Danish specialists for it is childish to say that a man is mainly are against this view, as are nearly all

Nordic when his head form is quite other, others), the Baltic has not been an original

THE NORDIC MYTH

IIQ

home of civilizations, however vigorously it In the first place, both Mendelian studies

may have developed imported ideas during and those of practical plant and animal

periods of favouring climate. Situated on breeders have gone far to show that particu-

the border-zone of temperate and arctic con- lar characters, or groups of characters, have

ditions, even little oscillations of climate their own modes of transmission: the whole

affect it very seriously, and, according to constitution rarely acts as a unit in inheri-

several students, these have much interfered tance. Thus we are all packets of inherited

with the continuity of history in that region, characters, and the contents of the packets

an important fact so far as strength to de- get re-sorted generation after generation.

velop new ideas is concerned.

We have to try to use as the centre of our de-

Civilization began, apparently without the finition of a race a packet of characters which

help of the Nord, in the riverine lands of is usually handed on fairly completely; and

Sumer and Egypt, to which pair may some fairness of hair together with greyness or

day be added one or two not unrelated areas blueness of eye and some other features make

that have not yet been fully examined. up such a packet, associated at different times

After a long period of I,000-I,500 years, with narrowness or broadness of head, with

it seems to have spread to India and to the tallness or shortness of stature, and so on.

A3gean and probably to China as well. In North-west Europe it seems, though it is

From the Eastern Mediterranean it spread not yet proved, that when fair and dark mix

to the Western; and the time this took is the fair colouring may affect the majority

suggested by the fact that, whereas the of the descendants; though, on the contrary,

second Hissarlik was founded about it must be said that Hurst found blue eyes

26oo B.C., the date given for the foundation recessive to brown eyes in England. It

of Rome is 753 B.C. Taking the city as a also seems that when some broad heads and

useful index of civilization, we note its some long heads mix, the majority of the

spread to Gaul under the Roman Empire, descendants tend towards broad-headedness.

and the extension of the idea into Central There is at any rate a considerable distri-

and North-western Europe, beyond the erst- bution of fair colouring associated with

while confines of the Pax Romana, only as broad-headedness in Europe north of the

the Dark Ages were giving place to the Alps, and one may be allowed to say that

Middle Ages some time after A.D. I000. In the idea of a tall, fair, long-headed stock as

other words, in city development the North the main feature of North-west Europe from

lagged more than 3,500 years behind the a far-off time is quite unproven. There

South-east.

seems further a good deal of reason for sup-

If, instead, we study the arts, we find posing that tendencies towards depigmenta-

again that the North has learned most of tion have been strong in North-west Europe,

its ideas from farther south, even the art of and that therefore blondness is not exclu-

war being a doubtful exception in this case. sively a feature of one type of man any.

The northern peoples may have been vigor- more than are long-headedness or tallness

ous barbarians at one stage and apt pupils of stature. At the same time, it is fully

at another; their record is not a great one admitted that these three characters, or

in the field of creative work in early times. packets of characters, often do occur to-

gether, especially in Sweden, though we

THE MODES OF INHERITANCE

cannot say that the ancient long-heads of

Sweden's early graves were blond-indeed,

Enough has now been said to show how there are remnants of darker folk here and

chimerical are the ideas of a pure Nordic there in the remoter corners even in that

race born to lead the world. Let us now country.

try to review the present position of scien- In Germany the observations of Ammon

tific observation on the subject of the blond were made on school children, and one can-

peoples.

not be sure that by any means all had

I20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

reacheed their final early adult colouring; it features are not always correlated with the

is probable that his figures made the popu- pigmentation types mentioned, which may

lation seem too blond. Parsons' studies of be the results of regional evolution and

head form of German soldiers could not which are certainly not confined to one type

deal with as large numbers as he would have in either case.

wished to use, but they at least suggest the There are many indications that the

abundance of broad-headed men in most period of growth is rather longer in cool

parts of Germany, and make one think that temperate regions than in warm ones, and

the long-headed are a minority even in the thus it is natural that among the blonds of

North-west.

North-west Europe there should be a good

Observations in Britain all show how proportion of tall people.

mixed we are and how dangerous it is to Moreover, under cool temperate condi-

argue from averages; moreover, we are cer- tions the body can easily get rid of the

tainly not more blond than brunet.

heat produced by muscular exercise, and,

at the same time, it is rarely in danger of

SOCIAL VALUE OF A TYPE

losing too much heat if reasonable clothing be used. The climate therefore favours

Nor can we say very much, at any rate muscular activity, while life near the sea

as yet, about the capacities and social values gives scope for fishing and maritime adven-

of tyrpes. Ammon found that in South Ger- ture. On the whole, therefore, we may

many the people of towns were less broad- say that the regions in which blondness and

headed than those of the country villages, tallness are common are also regions in

but this seems to mean merely that there which many men have a lot of muscular

are more non-local elements in the towns energy, and in which activity and adven-

in a country when the long-established type ture seem natural. Might one suggest to

is broad-headed. It seems likely that in a psychologists that this may go with the

region of long heads the town populations extrovert type of mental actiQn, and a cer-

would be less long-headed. There is little tain lack of subtlety in argument and criti-

in this to encourage speculations about social cism-?

values of types, as Hankins has well argued. No doubt all these characters are some-

What may we then say in the presence times found together in one and the same

of all these mixtures of difficulties? First person, the ideal whom Belloc ironically

of all, certainly, we must affirm that the bids us worship:

day for conclusions has not yet arrived, and

that Professor Karl Pearson was right in referring to a good deal of modern writing as unscientific dogma, that is in danger of

Behold my child the Nordic man, And be as like him as you can.

making the subject a happy hunting ground,

instead of a field to be cultivated carefully. The advice, if followed, would lead to a

With this preliminary reserve we may per- fair social success, no doubt, for approaches

haps suggest a few points that admittedly to the idealized type are commonest among

still need further examination and verifi- the rank and file of the upper social grades

cation.

-among officers in the army save in the

There is some ground at least for think- higher ranks, among hunting squires and

ing that the extremes of blond and dark their entourage, among school pupils who

colouring are specializations related-in cer- are good without being distinguished. But

tain ways not as yet fully understood to we are only at the beginning of studies of

intertropical sunglare in the case of dark correlation between the physical and the

colouring, and to cool temperate moist con- psychical; and the uppermost in society, or

ditions in the case of the blond. We must in the army, or in the school, are but too

nevertheless remember that these climatic often tainted with other characteristics,

THE NORDIC MYTH

I21

either breadth of head, or darkness of hair, ally difficult for him, which seems natural

or some other trait of the non-Nordic man. enough.

These tentative statements are set out

here less for their own sake than to suggest SCIENCE-AND PROPAGANDA

an affinity of the tall blond, when healthy, To sum up, we may hold with some like-

for outdoor life; and indeed it appears from some medical observations that he finds

lihood of correctness that tall stature and blond colouring do occur, not seldom to-

the cramped conditions of the poorer quar- gether, in parts of North-west Europe, and

ters of our industrial towns specially trying. Probably the rather high level of

that their possessors may have the long heads which are so characteristic of parts

metabolism keeps going healthily only with difficulty under these conditions.

of that region; but that the idea of a tall, fair, Nordic type existing in purity in the

It seems probable, further, that as a con- far past as the indigenous stock of the re-

sequence of ttis it is other types that tend gion is as yet quite unproven. Nor is it by

to multiply in big cities, while the energy any means certain that the type which com-

of the tall blond often lures him out to bines these characters is normally a highly pioneering work in far lands where there is superior one: the observations tend in quite a chance for every muscle and the level of another direction, and there is need for a

thought is a simple one.

great deal more work and quiet examina-

On the other hand, we do not know how tion, rather than rhapsodies wherein the far a tall blond is likely to be of real value language of science is used to veil, however

under hot inter-tropical sunshine. Several thinly, political propaganda of the simplist

observers think these conditions are speci- even when not the most sinister intent.

Eugenics Review, -Vol. XXII, No. 2.

