HUMAN STERILIZATION AND PUBLIC UNDERSTANDING

By CLARENCE J. GAMBLE, M.D., Milton, Massachusetts

H OW much can public education These were outnumbered by thirty-six who

influence governmental action? The told of an increase. Sixty had detected no

answer to this question was sought change(i).

on a large scale by a courageous individual Similar reports were collected fro-m thirty-

in 1929. The results of his exploration and six patients who had undergone vasectomy.

that of his successors are worthy of review. The five telling of a decrease in sexual

Beginning in I909 a number o_f the United activity were exceeded by nine who had

States had passed laws for the surgical noted an increase and twenty-two who

sterilization at public expense of those who reported no alteration(2).

might pass on to their children hereditary These findings and those of other studies

handicaps such as mental disease or mental were used in a widespread educational

defect. Observing that these laws had not programme of the Human Betterment

been extensively used, Mr. E. S. Gosney, of Foundation. Reprints of twenty-six articles

Pasadena, California, planned to increase in medical and sociological journals were

their availability to appropriate individuals. circulated(3). Meetings were held to discuss

His first step was to establish in I929 and the advantages of sterilization and these were

finance the Human Betterment Foundation, reported in the newspapers. A book,

of California. A study made by its Executive Sterilization for Human Betterment by Gosney

Secretary, Paul Popenoe, showed that there and Popenoe(4), was published and widely

was reluctance on the part of patients with distributed.

these handicaps to undergo the operation Emphasis was also placed on the un-

and of their relatives to give the needed desirability of the transmission of mental

consent, because they feared the loss of all disease and deficiency to the next generation

sexual powers and interests. Having heard and the unfavourable environment given

only of castration, the barnyard form of children by parents with such handicaps.

sterilization, they considered that a large The effect in California was striking and

sacrifice would be involved.

immediate. Sterilizations under the law,

The superintendents of State institutions which had averaged 480 per year in I928-29,

for the care of such patients undoubtedly rose to 870 in I935, equalling I4 per ioo,ooo

knew that salpingectomy or vasectomy population. The literature distributed

removed no organ from the body and did not throughout the country and perhaps the

alter sexual characteristics. They probably example of the superintendents of State

felt, however, that as State employees they institutions in California appear to have had

must be guided by public opinion and an effect in other States, for their eugenic

consequently did not often advise the sterilization rates also rose, reaching 7 per

operation.

i00,o00 in I935, and continuing near that

To provide first-hand information Popenoe level until I940 (Figure i).

arranged for a follow-up of tubectomized Since many other factors- were operative

cases, both male and female. Of ninety-nine and conditions cannot be- considered to have

salpingectomized women three reported a been the same in I929 and I935, it was not

decrease in their sexual life, for reasons possible to conclude that the educational

probably not connected with the sterilization. programme of the Foundation was the

i65

I66 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

entire cause of the increased sterilization rate.
In a laboratory inquiry, having found an
7 jlico

4~~~~~~~~~~~~.

3/

) E/
2

kE.

HUMAN TTERMENT FOU DATION

HUMAN BETTERMENT
LEAGUES
N. C. IOWA
GA. NEB.

99999 3 34 4 5 0505 0
FIG. I.
Sterilizations under State sterilization laws, per year, per ioo,ooo population in the four States (Georgia, Iowa, North Carolina, and Nebraska) having Human Betterment Leagues, and in the remaining 23 States with sterilization laws, but without Leagues. The horizontal lines indicate the times of major activity of the Human Betterment Foundation of California and of the four
Leagues.

association of cause and effect, an investiga-
tor often performs the further experiment
of removing the supposed cause and of observing whether the effect also disappears.
This is what an unkind fate did for the
Human Betterment Foundation which, after a period of decreased activity connected with
Mr. Gosney's illness, was brought to an end by his death in I942. There followed a' decrease in eugenic sterilizations shown in the Figure, a decrease which has continued through I95I.
Further confirmation of the hypothesis' that pamphlets and publicity. can increase
the eugenic protection of the next generation is provided by the experience in four States.
Inspired by the Human Betterment
Foundation's apparent effect on the protec-
tion of the next generation, groups of interested persons formed the Human
Betterment Leagues of North Carolina and of Iowa in 1947. Guided by the Foundation's experience and Dr. Popenoe's advice these
groups began an educational programme.
The importance of preventing hereditary disease and defect was pointed out in pamphlets, together with the lifelong psychological crippling which may result
when a child is brought up by an insane or feeble-minded parent. The nature of a
sterilization operation consisting only of the closing of the sperm or egg tubes without removal of, glands or organs was described, as well as the finding that in most cases there was no change which the patient could detect except that children were not born. Reprints of medical articles on sterilization were mailed to community leaders. Encouragement and moral support were given to the heads of State institutions and to the county superintendents of public welfare.
To supplement the earlier work, scientific studies were encouraged. Professor Jordan, of the University of North Carolina, tested I,980 whife children in rural schools and found that 8 6 per cent had intelligence quotients under 70(5). In a similar series in a city, 2 4 per cent showed an I.Q. below 70 (6).
The high rate of inheritance of mental deficiency was shown by a study made by

HUMAN STERILIZATION

I67

Johnson of the children of the mentally These new organizations have made it

deficient later sterilized in New Hampshire(7). possible to test once again the relationship

Of these children, 36 per cent were rated as between public education and the use of

mentally deficient and an additional 38 per eugenic sterilization laws. In the Figure the

cent as retarded. A review of the pre- eugenic sterilizations per Ioo,ooo population

sterilization fertility of these patients led to in the four States having Human Betterment

the estimate that each sterilization had Leagues, North Carolina, Iowa, Georgia and

prevented the birth of 2-5 children, of whom Nebraska, are shown by the solid line. This

nearly I (o09) would have been mentally programme, beginning somewhat later in

deficient(8).

these States than the remaining twenty-three

Encouragement was also given to a review with sterilization laws (broken line),

of the sexual effects of sterilization. Garrison increased until in I94I the rate was

and Gamble(g) interviewed fifty vasectomied approximately the same in the two groups.

patients and Woodside(io) talked to forty- In the subsequent years the downWard

eight upon whom salpingectomy had been trends in both areas were about equal,

performed. For each sex the few who told of but educational activity in the four States

some decrease in sexual activity were out- was followed by a steady increase which

numbered by those who reported an increase. began in I948. In the four years I948 to

The great majority had noted no change. 195I there were 2,447 eugenic sterilizations

Since there is no accurate " sexometer" to reported in the four States with Human

estimate the intensity of sexual activity Betterment Leagues, an increase of I,453,

either subjectively or objectively, the authors or 146 per cent, over the preceding four

concluded that many of the changes may years. In the corresponding periods there

have been based on factors not physically was a decrease of 897, or 2I per cent, in the

connected with the operation. Many of the remaining twenty-three States. In I95I the

reported increases in sexual activity, for 772 operations reported from the Human

example, may have been due to the removal Betterment League States were more than

of anxiety over the possibility of a damaging half of the I,459 for all States having

pregnancy.

sterilization laws, and the rate of 6-7 per'

Woodside also studied the sociological ioo,ooo inhabitants in the four States was

and governmental aspects of sterilization, five times that in the remaining twenty-three.

reporting them in a book Sterilization in This finding that the application of the

North Carolina(ii).

eugenic laws has twice increased after the

Reprints of these and other reports were institution of measures to educate the public

generously distributed to State and county and has decreased after their discontinuance

officials and other community leaders.

strongly suggests that the education has been

In I948 the educational work was extended causative.

by the formation of Human Betterment

Leagues in Georgia and Nebraska. The four Summary

State leagues in I949 joined to forn the Pamphlets, reprints and newspaper

Human Betterment Federation for theirunited activities and for education in other

articles have been used to educate the.public
to understand the undesirability of the

States.*

hereditary transmission of mental disease

and defect, the psychological damage which

* Reprints of articles on sterilization may be secured may result from upbringing by parents with

from the Human Betterment Federation, 5i2 Ninth Street, Des Moines 9, Iowa.
Birthright, a group with offices in Princeton, New

these handicaps, and the lack of sexual change following the preventive operation of

Jersey, and New York, which had been studying the surgical sterilization.

field of sterilization, changed its name in I950 to The Human Betterment Association of America, Inc. It has been invited to become a member of the Federation.

Such education has twice been followed by an increase in the use of State eugenic

'i68 -

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

sterilization laws, and an intermission in the educational programme was followed by a decrease in the sterilization rate.
REFERENCES
Ile Vruwink, John, and Popenoe, Paul. " Postoperative
Changes in the Libido Following Sterilization." Am.J.Obs. and Gyn., 19, 72, January I930. 2. Popenoe, Paul. " Effect of Vasectomy on the Sexual Life." J. Abnorm. and Social Psychology, 24, 25I, October-December 1929. 3. Collected Papers on Eugenic Sterilization in California. The Human Betterment Foundation,
1930.
4. Gosney, E. S., and Popenoe, Paul. Sterilization for Human Betterment. New York, 1929. Macmillan.
5. Jordan, A. M. " Testing the Intelligence of the Children of a Rural County." The High School journal, 30, 35, January-February 1947.

6. Jordan, A. M. " Efficiency of Group Tests of Intelligence in Discovering the Mentally Deficient." The High School Journal, 31, 73, March-April 1948
7. Johnson, Betsey Scott. " A Study of Sterilized Persons from the Laconia State School." Am. J. Ment. Def., 54, 404, January 1950.
8. Tietze, Christopher, and Johnson, Betsey Scott. " Observations on the Fertility of Patients Discharged from the Laconia State School, 1924 to 1934." Am.> J. Men. Def., 54, 55I, April I950.
9. Garrison, Paul L., and Gamble, Clarence J. " Sexual Effects of Vasectomy." J. of Am. Med. Assoc., 144, 293-95, September 23rd, 1950.
io. Woodside, Moya. " Sexual and Psychological Adjustment after Sterilization." West J. of Surg. Obst. and Gyn., 57, 6oo, December 1949.
ii. Woodside, Moya. Sterilization in North Carolina: A Sociological and Psychological Study. Univ. of
N.C. Press, 1950.

THE ECONOMIC JOURNAL

The Quarterly Journal of the Royal Economic Society

JUNE 1953

ACCUMULATION, PRODUCTIVITY AND DISTRIBUTION IN THE

BRITISH ECONOMY, I870-I938 E. H. PHELPS BROWNand B. WEBER

FOREIGN EXCHANGE RATES AND MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITION

H. BREMs

A COMMENT

R. F. HAROD

DEVELOPMENT CHARGES AND THE COMPENSATION-BETTERMENT

PROBLEM

R. TURVEY

A MODEL OF INCOME DISTRIBUTION

D. G. CHAMPERNOWNE

CHOICE IN PSYCHOLOGY AND AS ECONOMIC ASSUMPTION

A. L. MACPF

NOTES ON USER COST

A. D. Scorr

WAGE CLAIMS AND THE PACE OF INFLATION (I948-5I)

A. T. PEACOCK and W. J. L. RYAN

REVIEws, RwENT PEuODICALS AND NEw BooKs

MACMILLAN & CO., LTD., LONDON, W.C.2

Applwation for Fellowship to

ROYAL ECONOMIC SOCIETY, 4 Portugal Street, London, W.C.2

Annual SubscriptionCx los.

Life Composition £22 IOS.

EugenicsReview, Vol. XLV, No. 8

