NISLE AWON ABO

sHE followingis anEnglish stranlation
of the full text of the Daish law on
abortion which came into- force on
ist.
w No. 163, I937, concerning Measures erning Pregnancy, etc., Amalienborg, i8th, I937. e Christian X by 'be grace of God King enmark and Iceland, of the Wends and
s, Duike of Schleswig, Holstein, Stor, Ditsmarsken, Lauenburg, and Olden-
:, proclaim: Parliament has passed and
kave ratified the following law:
§1I
kct. I. A pregnant woman may have her
hancy terminated in the following cases:
If the termination of pregnancy is
bsary m order' to avert serous danger ie iife and health of the woman. If the woman has become pregnant
br such circumstances'as dealt with in Civic Penal Code of April I5th, 1930,
or § 2I0 combined with § 212, or if xancy be due to violation of her sexual
ty under such circumstances as dealt Mi §§ 2i6-223 or these paragraphs comd with § 224 of the Penal Code.* If there is obvious danger that the child, g to hereditary disposition, will suffer insanity, mental deficiency, other grave al disorders, epilepsy or serious and ble physical disease. t2. Termination of pregnancy may ay not take place after the end of the month of pregnancy if there is no
s risk'to the woman's life and health. t. 3. If pregnancy is caused by violaof the woman's sexual' liberty under clrcumstances as' dealt with in §§ 2i6,
ect. 2 § 2I8 and § 22I, or these paracombined with :§ 224, pregnancy may e terminated unless the crnme has been ed to the police and'the notice,' after
investigation, has nuot been proved

210 and 2-2relatte* e

4 p.

§2

If the danger to the life and well-being of wmstehiicetntah.wttio2ho,menampnorafoiyvsitshnnieoootntpsrdetuuigaenkndeatenorcpys§liaicc,ikennseesaucstnc.lcteosihr,sedastnutecbhr-ee-
following conditions be carefully fulfilled:

i. There must be a testimoial of the clinics mentioned in §9
woman and possibly also the

from one that the
bearer of

parental received

responsibility or the. guardian have complete information as to the

htdaeaperenaxreldrnpep,mggeiencaonortatfasnnetcdheiayteco.hnrconehdnidoooltifmtdhshieppeciorrfsp,eaaosglsnhansdseaifbnotlglcreoeoygathclteohohrencnsrhseoatalesuhfrqsgeauihcoesotrtnnewacreniefctoswehhrhaoainttfndchh,dahee

hopraerr2he.aonstIwfanbltehaerefnefaswidporoesnmcsltaiahbnreielbdicetoiynnuscneoadrnpe,tarborlifees8tpoeyhfceetamibravesenalaoryfeg,riangoogeff

the guardian, to the termination pregnancy must be obtained.

of

the

3. If the woman is over i8 but under years of age her guardian should give his

2I
or

her consent to the termination of pregnancy. Should she not wish to obtain help from her

bdngeuoycamlriadnariaeatdni'oigrunaranebrsddypioatnsnhsheiobuSslopleec,dciciaaslolhnClesoyemnnmtoaitptmptaoehyiean.vbteeedgbievbeeynn

4. If the woman, owing to insanity, mental

deficiency or other causes, is understanding the significance

ifncapable of
of the opera-

gCstiutooaamntrmedia-itoatwndeneees,mdpaeocnrii,dnaslstlfhiyootruualtpiidtpoonsmihaneotyrbedebaetbnh.yemiatwyhdaseteridStbouoctyfiioaaanl

recognized according to § 67 of the Public

Welfare by the demand

hLebaaedwmoNafod.etheIt8hiiensotofipteuMtraiaotyni.o2n0Itfmh,sauyIc9h3b3e,a

performed without the testimonial of the

clinic in § 9 and § i.

5. If the woman=is mied .and lives with

43

AA THE PEUGENICS ItW,

her husband he shall be given opportunity the paisi,i t upto ,mn

to express his views unless special circum- No prosecution is p le i 2 years ha

stances are against it.

elapsed since the teinatiof en

Attempts ;with ineffetive means .are i

§3
Sect. i. Termination of pregnancy may only be undertaken by a qualified doctor after consultation with another qualified practitioner, usually the woman's family doctor.
Sect. 2. Termination of pregnancy may only be undertaken in one of the national or communal hospitals, or in a private hospital receiving public subsidies or one receiving patients at public expense.

punishiable. Under lparticrextenua'
circumstances the pnim nt ay be celled.
Sect. 2. If, during a trial for illegal t
mination df pregnancy or attempt ther of a woman who has become pregn
outside wedlock or of the person assist
her, information becomes available that.m be considered to prove who has rendered pregnant, the man will be liable to impiso ment up to I year in so far as it be prov that he has not given the woman reasona

aid and assistance despite her applicati

§4 to him for economic and personal supp

The doctors mentioned in § 3 as well as the and that this omission has been of decisi

staff of the hospitals mentioned in § 3 and importance to her taking the decision-

of the clinics mentioned in § 9 are bound terminate the pregnancy.

under § 267 and § 275 of the Civic Penal Sect. 3. A qualified doctor who termnin

Code to keep secret such conditions of a pregnancy or renders assistance thereto'

private life as may come to their knowledge the knowledge that the conditions for le

in connection with the subject of abortion abortion as defined in § i are not prese

or which they may suspect, unless they are will be liable to imnprsonment up to 2 ye

bound by the law to speak, or unless they Under aggravating circumstances, nm p

are acting in accordance with the safe- ticular if the operation has been perform

guarding of public interests or with their for the sake of profit, or if it has caused

own or other people's interests.

death of the woman or considerable injur

body or health, the penalty is impnso

§5
Anyone giving evidence that will be used in deciding whether conditions for the ter-
mination of pregnancy exist, and gives this
evidence without real knowledge of the facts, or who wilfully gives wrong information, is liable to punishment according to the
regulations of § i62 of the Civic Penal Code.

up to 4 years. If a legal abortion as stat under § i is performed without observatio of the regulations contained in .§ 2 and the penalty is imprisonment up to 6 mon or, under extenuating circumstances, a i If the pregnancy be terminated without
woman's consent the penalty is imprisnp
ment fr 2 to I2 years. Sect. 4. A person, who, not being a qu

§6

fied doctor, terminates or gives assista in terminating a pregnancy is liable t

Sect. i. A woman who terminates her imprisonment up to 4 years. Under aggra

pregnancy herself or who allows it to be vating circumstances, in particular if

terminated by a person who is not a qualified action,has been motivated by profit orif

doctor, will be punished, even if the condi- has caused the woman's death or con

tions for legal abortion as defined in § i able injury to body and health, the pen

are present, by up to 3 months imprison- is imp.rssoment up to 8 years. For a second

ment. If she terminates it or allows it to be offence, or in so far as the perpetrator hi

terminated in the knowledge that the condi- acted. without th.e woman's consent, th

tions for a legal abortion are not present, penalty is im ment from .z to I2 yean

DANISH LAW ON ABORTION

-45

§7 connected with, and the possible conse-

person who by means of, illegal coercion
2ording to § 60 of the Civil Penal Code by means of thteats of economic loss or of
to personal, familial or social standing by means of promises of reward induces a
man who desires to bear her child to have
pregnancy terminated, will be punish-
e, even if the termination is induced

quences, of, a possibly, the

termination of pregnancy, and, penalties provided by the law

in connection therewith.

ctehreSteircftei.gcua3tl.eatsiItonantstihnoogfsteh§ac2atsiaetsdiiissncnauesccsceiosorsndaahrnaycsetthwaaikttehan

place with the woman
nancy interruption can

in order that take place, it

pregis the

der the prescribed conditions, by imprisonnt up to 2 years; the penalty will, how-

obligation- of the clinic at the conclusion of such discussion to give such certificate.

r, be up to 4 years if the abortion is Sect. 4. It is incumbent on the Social

ormed by someone who is not a qualified Committees to give information requested

tor. by the clinics about women who have

§8

addressed themselves to these cerning the termination of their

clinics conpregnancy.

The expenses incurred by a termination

pregnancy will be borne by the party con-

§ Io

ed. If she has insufficient means the
enses will be borne by the State, or in so
as she is in the ward of one of the instituns referred to in § 66 of Law No. i8i
May 2oth, I933, by that institution.

Sect. to see

i. to

It is incumbent on the Counties it that the clinics mentioned in

§ 9 be set up in required numbers before

April Ist, I938, in connection with the public

hospitals according to § 3, sect. 2. In

§9 Sect. i. Clinics shall be established by blic initiative where persons- of both sexes all have access to correct and warrantable truction in sexual hygiene in which nnection pregnant women shall receive
vice and guidance concerning their state,

Copenhagen pality.

this

duty

rests

on

the

munici-

Sect. 2. If the Minister of Justice consider

that such

there is a clinic

need in a

for the establishment of
commune he may enjoin

mthueniccoiupnatlyityau-tthoorrietimeesd-yintCheopedenfhiacigeenncy.the

cuding information as to the aid and istance of legal and economic character uch, during pregnancy and after birth, are their disposal for themselves or for the. aintenance of the expected child.

§1I

The advisory functions of the clinics as

mentioned in § qualified doctors

9 shall assisted

be by

performed by trained nurses.

Sect. 2. If a pregnant woman who desires

have her pregnancy terminated of her

§ I}

hooseaccord, or at the suggestion of the
cial Committee or of others, applies to ch a clinic, it is the duty of the clinic to ase its discussions with her on the informaonwhich it, possibly after consulting the ocial Committee, may deem necessary to btain for each particular case. During its ealing with her the clinic shall endeavour )prevent her from taking hasty action as rell as give her information as to the aid and ssistance that are at her disposal if she
to bear;her child, together with com-
lete information as to the dangers and risks

The expenses incurred by the establish-

ment and maintenance of the clinics shall,

at the end of each fiscal year and subsequent

to the approval of the chief administrative

officer of the County, be apportioned to the

County Boroughs,_ towns and townships

according to the number of their inhabi-
tants. On Bornholmn the expenses for the

towns and the rural districts of the island

shall be borne by the joint distributive fund,

and The half

tirneaCsuorpyenwihlal.gernepabyythtehecommumnuicniepsaliotnye.-
of the expenses incurred.

THE EUGENICS REVWI

§ I3

Sect. i. The Minister of Justice shall lay This law comes into force on April

down further regulations for the carrying 1938.

out of the law.

Compliance therewith is enJoined on

Sect. 2. Infringement of these rules made concerned.

for the maintenance of the regulations in

Amalienborg, the x8th of May; 1937.

§ I to 4 is punishable by fine or by imprison-

Under Our Royal Hand and Seal.

ment up to 3 months.

CHRISTIN R.

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY
A record ofinternational research on the physiology ofembryonic and reconstitutional development, environmental relationships, the cell and protoplasm, the nervous system and behaviour, as well as research on hormones and other features ofchemical correlation, sex in its physiological aspects, and the physiological phases of genetics
and cytology.
Articles appearing inforthcom:ng issues:
DIFFERENTIAL GRADIENT FUNCTIONS IN THE FEATHER GERM. By RICARD M. FwAPS, Whitman Laboratory of Experimental Zoology, University of Chicago.
STUDIES ON HETEROPLASTIC TRANSPLANTATION IN TRICLADS. I. CEPHALIC GRAFTS BETWEEN EUPLANARIA DOROTOCEPHALA AND E. TIGRINA. By J. A. MLIR, University of Chicago and Marine Biological Laboratory.
SINGLE AND COMBINED EFFECTS OF CYANIDE AND METHYLENE BLUE ON RECONSTRUCTION IN EUPLANARIA DOROTOCEPHALA. By Oun RuLowt, University of Chicago and Wayne University.
THE FRAGMENTATION OF NAIS PARAGUYENSIS. By Lmmz H. Hw, Laboratory of Experimental Biology, American Muse of Natural History.
Edited by W. C. ALLEE, Profssor of Zo6logy, The University of Chicago. Published Quarterly by the University of Chicago. Press. Subscription: 35s. 2d. per yea.
English Agents:
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PARSS
EugeniNcsvsiwVOL No..

