THE DIFFERENTIAL BIRTH RATE

New Light on Causes from American Figures By R. A. FISHER, Sc.D.

AMONG the quantity of valuable data we have here a major and controlling cause

which is gathered together in Hun- of the differential birth rate, or a very minor

tington and Whitney's Builders of and subsidiary one. It is usual, for ex-

A merica, there are one or two tables of very ample, to ascribe the observed differences

particular interest to those of us in this in fertility to differences in social environ-

country who are concerned, not only with ment, or to some assumed physiological con-

the fact of the differential birth rate, but nection between infertility and the powers of

with the nature of its causes.

the mind. Causes which have been sug-

The present writer has more than once gested are: Excess of food, which the upper

put forward in the EUGENICS REVIEW the social classes are presumably believed to

ipinion that the principal cause of the differ- consume; excess of leisure; the stress of

ential birth rate lies in the inheritance of brain work; the enervating influence of com-

qualities, temperamental as well as physi- fort.

cal, which influence fertility; or to be more

precise, which influence 'the actual number THE TWO VIEWS TESTED

of children born. On this view the social However baseless these supposed causes

selections which sort out the population into may appear to be when each is examined in

the different social strata, favour the social detail, it is certainly possible that there

rise, not only of energy, competence, and in might be some subtle influence of the social

general the qualities which we admire and environment really unfavourable to normal

value in the practical working of our social family life. The sharpest possible test be-

institutions, but also of those qualities, tween the two views would be to ascertain

whether physical or temperamental, which the relative fertilities among men of a given

lead to small families, and consequently, as social class of those who had risen rapidly

the Malthusians insist, to a " Good start in in the social scale as opposed to those who

life." were born in that class. For on the theory

The links of this argument are all demon- that we have to do principally with heritable

strably sound. It is not only known that factors affecting fertility, the fertility of the

physical and temperamental peculiarities are upper social classes must be kept low by the

heritable, but it has been shown that per- lower fertility of those whom social promo-

\sons coming from smaller families, do, in tion brings into their ranks, the movement

equivalent environments, e.g., as peeresses, downwards of the more fertile members of

have on the average fewer children than per- the upper classes being relatively a very

sons from larger families. The importance feeble one; while the fertility of the upper

of the burden of large families is fairly class would be expected to recover, if it were

obvious, but it, too, has been the subject of left to itself, by the replacement of its less

detailed economic demonstration. The fertile by its more fertile strains. Conse-

reality of the selection which favours the quently the groups enjoying rapid social

social rise of all hereditary tendencies promotion should, on this theory, be even

favouring paucity of children must be ad- less fertile than the classes to which they

mitted; yet as the argument is somewhat rise.

subtle and indirect, it may be doubted, and If, on the contrary, the important causes

usually is doubted at a first glance, whether were any of those to be included under

C I83

184 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

" social environment,." we should certainly families of i to families of 2, and so on up

expect the families which rise in the social to the largest families. This, of course, is

scale to carry with them some measure of not at all what we should find, either in

the fertility of the classes from which they England or America, if we were to test the

originated. Now, Huntington and Whitney sons of the population at large. In the

give a remarkable table of the average num- population at large the classes which furnish

ber of children per person in the American the largest families would certainly show the

Who's Who, when the persons are sub- lowest average scores, whether we took a

divided according to the education they scholastic, an athletic, or an intelligence

received. They are given in descending test. But the Yale students are a selected

order.

group of the population, and Whitney and

Estimated Huntington appear to argue that they are

Kind of Education

Children

per person

-College and Professional ... ... 2.4

College and Ph.D. ... ... ... 2.3 )

College

2.3...

...

...

...

Normal, business, trade, secretarial 2.3

selected on the basis of an equal social status of the parents, and therefore that we should conclude that within the same class the abler parents have the more children.
I would not like to deny that this may be

High School

2.I

Elementary Schools and Home ... 2.I

Professional School Only I..

so; indeed, I hope that it may be. But the selection of the Yale students for examination seems to equalize the education of

As.the total number of persons dealt+with is about 25,000, the trend of these averages cannot possibly be ascribed to chance. The table appears to show unmistakably that among Americans who attain a sufficient level of eminence to be included in Who's Who, those whose social promotion has been most striking have on the average fewer
children than those whose social promotion has been less. Such a result would appear inexplicable on any of the views that connect the differential fertility of different classes with elements in their social environment, and is a striking confirmation of one of the most surprising consequences of the theory that the dominating cause lies in the social promotion of the relatively infertile. SOCIAL PROMOTION AT WORK

the children, rather than the social status of the parents. Remembering that the only child may be expected to get a " better start in life " than the member of a family of six, we may perhaps expect to find at Yale the only children of less successful parents, educated at equal expense and side by side with the children of the more stringently selected parents who are able, with families of six, still to send them to Yale.
In its general features the differential birth rate in America, as is most ably shown by Huntington and Whitney in this book, displays just the same characters as it does in England. If I have put upon the results of some of their researches an interpretation different from that which they themselves favour, I only hope that this may serve to call attention to a body of data and to a

Whitney and.Huntington give also the method of investigation which, in my opi-

results of another inquiry, which bear upon nion, has an even greater importance than

the same problem. They have studied the average abilities shown by Yale students coming from families of i, 2, 3, and up to 6

these authors at present attach to it. They have, in my opinion, hit upon a method, not merely of demonstrating the existence of the

or more. They find, in general, that the differential birth rate, but of discriminating

average ability rises as we pass from among its possible causes.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XX, No. 3.

