AN INTERNATIONAL UNION OF FAMILY ORGANIZATIONS

By ROBERT BOUDET
Paris, France

T HE most effective international rela- upheavals and disasters which have followed

tionships are not necessarily those in the wake of war. Confronted with the

which are either the most obvious or perplexities of the present hour, only two

the most spectacular. The failure of the courses of action are open to us-to multiply League of Nations has often been attributed the means and the opportunities to build to Hitler; yet it was in fact the ignorance solidarity among mankind; or to resign and the fickleness of world public opinion ourselves to founder in anarchy and chaos.

which played the decisive role in the collapse of the League as an instrument for the preservation of peace. The League, however, did not fail in many of its enterprises. It inaugurated abiding work which today is being sustained and extended by such bodies as the International Labour Organization, UNESCO, the United Nations Economic and Social Council. Those bodies are seeking to further the well-being of those underdeveloped countries which the more privileged peoples are no longer prepared to leave in ignorance and misery. If such work as this proceeds unobtrusively, that does not mean that it is unimportant. The visit to Central Africa of a specialist in the control of epidemic disease might attract little public attention; yet such an event could be more significant, in its implications for human welfare, than the international sports and athletic contests, or even some of the diplomatic meetings and conferences, which are so loudly acclaimed in the columns of the world press.
It is a sign of the times that a multiplicity of new international organizations, both
statutory and voluntary, have sprung up since the last world war. Nearly all instruments of political, economic, and social activity have today their international links. And this trend is not, as some sceptics would like to suggest, merely a fashion, a cult. It is an inexorable necessity, an inevitable manifestation of life in the modern world. It is a logical closing of ranks in their own defence on the part of men crushed by the
* See page 7.

In such a situation as this, it would be
monstrous if the interests of the family were the only ones not to be incorporated in the
current pattern of internationalism. There are of course those who will contend that
family affairs are essentially private affairs,
and that for this reason they have no proper place in legal or political planning. Indeed, it has been implied, if not declared, that to marshal families in their mutual defence would be to divert them from their true function and purpose. All this might be relevant enough in a world of saints and angels. But in the kind of world in which families must live today, the appropnate
riposte, both at the national and at the international level, is: " If you don't take charge of politics, politics will take charge of you."
United action in the interests of the family is therefore as appropriate and necessary today as was united action on the part of the workers when they took up the struggle for what they believed to be their rights. The nineteenth century saw the principle of cooperation develop, under the pressure of necessity, as a central factor in the life of nations. There is today an equivalent necessity for families to emerge from their isolation, from the refuge of their secluded intimacy, and to unite in the quest of their legitimate rights and goals. An inescapable necessity makes families from Cape Town and San Francisco one with families in Belgium, in France, in Germany; for in the modern world the way of life of South African and American families reacts, sometimes with

34

AN INTERNATIONAL UNION OF FAMILY ORGANIZATIONS

35

startling immediacy, upon the way of life they see clearly the need to encourage and

of European families, and vice versa. support a single co-ordinating organization

Menaced more and more by the incursions which, transcending unavoidable differences

into its privacy of the State or the machine; of opinion between private organizations,

happy indeed when it can escape total and rising above the divergent standpoints

strangulation by the mighty forces pressing of official and private bodies, aims at drawing

upon its life: the family everywhere today all who seek to serve the best interests of the

struggles grimly for the preservation of its family into a common fellowship.

essential responsibilities and its essential The International Union comprises at the

liberties.

present time I37 organizations and a number

***

of individual correspondents representing

The International Union of Family Organi- twenty-eight nations in five continents.

zations was ostensibly created when repre- These organizations display a remarkable

sentatives of twenty-seven nations met in diversity. They include the following-

conference in Paris in the summer of I947. associations of families and of parents

But its real origin lies in the social changes (Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, France,

of our time, in the new needs born of war Great Britain, Greece, Italy, Luxembourg,

sufferings, in the deeper understanding of The Netherlands, Peru, Switzerland); insti-

the root causes of most of our personal prob- tutions for the study of the family (Italy,

lems and social evils. The Union was born U.S.A.); institutions for demographic re-

in an hour when the family was more and search (Finland, France, Italy, Sweden);

more clearly being recognized as the " basic organizations for family service, marriage

social unit" (to use a phrase dear to the preparation and counselling (Australia,

Anglo-Saxon heart 1), and therefore as a Canada, Great Britain, Italy, U.S.A.); socie-

necessary and important subject for scientific ties for social welfare, social biology, eugenics,

and sociological study and research. We sex education (Great Britain, Switzerland,

have witnessed in recent years the inaugura- U.S.A.); parent-teacher organizations

tion of an impressive programme of investiga- (Belgium, Canada, France, Italy); bodies

tion, instituted by both private and public for the promotion of family grants and

institutions, into the conditions of family allowances (Belgium, France); government

living and the problems of family relation- departments with direct responsibility for

ships. One result of this awakened interest the family, such as the Ministry of Public

has been the increasing political recognition Health and of the Family (Belgium), the

of the family in a number of countries, Ministry of Public Health and of Population

indicated by the provision of new social (France), the Ministry of Social Affairs

services, and the enactment of new laws, (Egypt), the Institute of Social Insurance

designed to foster the well-being of the family (Greece), the Federal Office of Social Insur-

unit. For all this growing concern the Inter- ance (Switzerland), etc.

national Union of Family Organizations It is possible to classify this welter of

seemed to offer a natural and necessary organizations clearly and accurately by

centre of focus and direction. Its objective dividing them into three categories-associa-

was to represent family interests and family tions made up of families acting together;

needs on a world scale; and to do so in the organizations concerned with service to or

closest possible co-operation with other study of the family; and government

international organizations in allied fields. departments or public bodies charged with

It is significant that at the Paris conference the care of families in the community con-

the representative of the United Nations cerned. At the present time, it is particu-

expressed full accord with the aspirations larly important to bring together, in mutual

which found expression there. The readiness understanding and co-operation, the associa-

of official bodies to associate themselves with tions of families which are to be found every-

the work of the Union has indicated that where in the Latin countries and the family

36 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

welfare organizations which are more characteristic of Anglo-Saxon culture. The International Union, by the diffusion of information and the fostering of contacts,
can do much to clarify the exact nature and scope of the problems which all these organizations are alike seeking to solve. It may be feared that a task so comprehensive will
result in a very diffuse programme. Yet the
very existence of the Union, and the fact
that it has addressed itself to this task, is already making possible a development of understanding between the nations which could not have been achieved-or not nearly so quickly-otherwise. It is this fact, and this possibility, which provide the supreme
justification for the International Union's
existence.
The aim of the Union, then, is to link up
all organizations throughout the world,
irrespective of race and creed, which are
working for the welfare of the family; to work for the welfare of all social classes and
to strengthen the sense of solidarity between families the world over; and to create and encourage a spirit of friendship among families for the purpose of bnrnging about a lasting peace.
As part of its plan for co-ordination and
documentation, the union collects and dis-
tributes general information concerning activities of interest to families in all coun-
tries, and on problems inherent in family life. These are embodied in the various
sections of the surveys which the Union is making-family structure: social and econo-
mic structure: psychological problems of married life: childhood problems: the family and social life: family organizations within the nation and their relation to the State: economic problems of the family: biological problems in relation to the family: the family and social diseases: demographic problems. The Paris office of the Union receives numerous publications from many countries, goes through them, and makes a card index of the material so as to put it at the disposal of its members. The quarterly review Families dans le Monde seeks to provide a channel for liaison and information.

What progress has the Union made in its brief existence ? In I948, its first general assembly was held in Geneva. Besides transacting official business, it held study
sessions on the theme " Juvenile Delinquency as a Family Responsibility." In I949, the
General Council met in Rome, where the Italian committee of the Union extended
its hospitality and organized a highly successful conference. The president of the Italian
Council of Ministers, and several of the Ministers themselves, participated in that part of the conference which studied the
various means employed to assure to families adequate clothing, housing, education, vaca-
tions, leisure and financial resources.
Sessions were devoted also to emotional security in the family and to the psychological problems of married people. Those who shared in these gatherings will not soon
forget the reception given by the municipality of Rome at the Capitol, and the audience
with His Holiness Pope Pius XII and his important message.
In I950 Finland invited the Union to hold
its General Council in Helsinki. For the first time, a special conference for representatives of government organizations was convened. Despite the international crisis
created by the outbreak of war in Korea, fifteen governments were represented at Helsinki, sharing their experience in the field of effective State action for the alleviation of economic stress within the family. Simultaneously a conference was held for representatives of voluntary organizations, which included a study tour in Denmark and Sweden. This trip included visits to child-
ren's homes, homes for old people, model dwellings, social centres and the like; and discussions with specialists and officials.
In 195I Belgium undertook to act as host
to the Union and its General Assembly. It was with delight that this invitation was accepted, for much of the early enthusiasm
for the setting up of the Union, and a good
measure of the support given to it, have come from that country. Belgium has family associations of exceptional vigour, and its Government puts strong emphasis upon family welfare.

AN INTERNATIONAL UNION OF FAMILY ORGANIZATIONS

37

The Union arranged in Brussels, a further up by correspondence the groups of experts

conference of government experts to study whom it proposes to invite to its forthcom-

the financing of family housing. The Hel- ing conferences. For instance, there are

sinki conference revealed a strong desire for indications that economists, sociologists and

a comparative study of the experiences psychologists who are interested in family

gained by various governments in their problems are not always closely associated

attempts to promote family welfare. In a with the activities of the family movements

number of countries today, and particularly and associations. Indeed, sometimes they

in the new countnres recently established in are scarcely even aware of their existence !

the East and in South America, statutory Yet these movements could contribute much

instruments have been brought into being to the work of the thinkers and the experts,

expressly to promote the well-being of the while on their side the movements can and

family; while in all countries more or less must profit from the activities and researches

specialized governmental bodies are today of scientists and experts. Closer relation-

studying family problems of one kind or ships between the men of thought and the

another-living standards, working mothers, men of action are more necessary than ever

housing, divorce and the like. The Inter- in our modem world with its rapid and

national Union, if it is to carry out its task, complex developments. This is particularly

must be in close and continuous contact true in the field of the family, which marshals

with these plans and activities; for not only the contributions of men and women with

should the voluntary organizations know such a rich diversity of gifts.

what official policies are being fonnulated, All who work for the family should be

but government agencies also can learn much linked by a sense of common purpose. Little

about the real needs and aspirations of by little, to the extent which its still limited

famies from those who are serving the means make possible, the Union is string

family through unofficial channels. In Sept- to unfold to its members, to those who have

ember I952 a conference of the Union will influence in the international sphere, and to

be held at Oxford when the subject for world public opinion how vast and far-

discussion will be "The Stability of the reaching are the implications of family life

Family," in particular from the psychological and its problems. Those problems extend

and educational standpoints.

into the province of sociology, of economics,

In addition to the meetings of its General of biology, of demography and even of

Assembly every third year, and of its General political science. At the same time, the

Council every year; in addition also to the Union seeks to encourage family welfare

international study conferences open to all, organizations, and families themselves, to

the Union has judged it desirable to convene face and discharge the responsibilities which

special meetings, some on a regional basis, confront them. The existence of problem

some confined to participants falling within families, of children deprived of proper

particular categories. For example, in March opportunities, of situations which result day

I95I a meeting was held at Versailles, by day in the further encroachment of the

expressly for the study of family associations State upon private life and family life-

-their structure, their growth and develop- these things are a challenge to the Union

ment, the services they render, their relation- to strive for a restored equilibrium which

ship to existing public bodies. Nine countries will maintain the family group's essential

were represented at this meeting, and in the autonomy.

relatively intimate fellowship which was Social security meets a vital need today.

possible at such a gathering, discussion was It has taken its place as a central feature in

particularly stimulating and productive. the broad development of modern society.

In the future, the Union plans to promote It tends to create in the life of the nation-

further specialized meetings similar to the and today among groups of nations-a

one held in Versailles. It hopes also to link strong solidarity which is not always fully

38 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

appreciated. Yet at the same time social Yet we would be little better off if, by relin-

security carries within itself a menace to quishing these powers, parents merely found

personal and family responsibility to which themselves supplanted by an all-powerful

we need to be continuously alert. Are we corps of school-teachers, doctors, counsellors

to be, in the end, mere numbered units which and psycho-therapists !

the State promises to take under its care, in In a world of mass movements, of rising

return for services rendered-including pro- and falling empires, of unlimited material

creation ? Or shall we remain still individuals power, there is a great need to enhance, and

free to choose our destiny, to take risks, to if need be to recover, the dignity of the

found families and to raise children in a individual man and woman. Healthy family

world more amicable and better organized, life can breathe the living soul into the new

a world which holds inviolate the autonomy patterns of human society which are emerg-

of hearth and home ?

ing all over the world. If they will give

Even psychology and psychiatry, which themselves to the full exercise of their

by their discoveries have contributed so responsibilities, the families of today can

much to modem life, and which rightly used preserve human values in this impersonal

can render us such great services, must not scientific age. And, in a world where the

be allowed to take the place of parental former separations of distance are rapidly

responsibility in guiding children to make being eliminated, the increasing solidarity

wise choices and responsible decisions. In of good families can generate an humane,

the past, admittedly, parents exercised too kindly, community spirit, and thus lay the

much power in deciding the course of their foundations of that durable peace the true

children's lives. They chose for them their value and urgent importance of which all

way of life, their work, even their mates. home-lovers understand so well.

Readers of the

Annals of Eugenics

EUGENICS REVIEW

A Journal of Human Genetics

will be interested in the

Edited by L. S. PENROSE

INTERNATIONAL JOURNALofSEXOLOGY

Vol. XVI. Part 4.

May 1952

This Journal, with Editorial Boards in more different countries (rangitnghan
B4aRo,from Australia to America, Sweden to China,

twenty

dFhuarEttthrhaarelt,aresEads.eaaetmSmaiimaaovnmEmasigjemnonoorert.mi-,caIsn.Mdo.fCmoSioNclsrecoya'coGsy,.tdhMiaso.eeNmaTiseaALoo-rr

Israel to Czechoslovakia, and Germany to Spain),provides the only really international medium for the exchange of news and views

Body weight at different ages and heights.-
W. F. atdLfEYn
Blood groups in Jews from the Yemen.-A.

and the publication of original work on human relations in sex and marriage.

BRiz:zmNs, J.
G. MUNDEL.

GuREvrrcH,

D.

HERmom,

The standing of the Journal may be gauged from its Editorial Board for the

A NOsRtastAistiMcaCl ARstTuHdyU.of human twig.

British Isles (Mr. Clifford Allen, M.D., M.R.C.S.,

Blood agglutinogens of the Mexicans.-C.

M.R.C.P.; Mr. Ambrose E. Appelbe, M.A.,

ARTEAGA, M. S. MALLiN, A. V. BROZCO

LL.B.; Dr. Eustace Chesser; Mr. Alec

ELENA L. UGALDO.

Walk, F.R.C.S.;Craig; Professor F. A.
F.R.S.; Dr. E. Elkan,
WMwiritt.hhMrK.Mern.neCtyhrlWaBlikbebry,,

MMME...M.AAD....D,,,C.r,MseB...wLsSC,.cCHR....,M,,C..DFP.F...,L.;RS.D.C.,.aSSnCa.ad; BirtSih-mtopJgl.eewtBeht.ieersgSths.twfHioaAtrnLhdbDiAmmlNoaeEdnta.geltrihntayolfagnaedgset,baittiaponangreiontftyi,atlwiiatnnysd.,

Editor). Medical Practitioners, Lawyers, Teachers,
Biologists, Social Workers, Clergymen and others interested are invited to apply for a

Dastuuarrivoainvatlhe.M-gMeRAnRetYicNNs..

KAR. ofKAbRiNrt.h

weight.-L.

S.

Ss. p

specimen copy and details of subscription

Singl issue 55s., plusPostage

rates to the British Agents: A. Vernon

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS

Keith & Co., Napier House, 24/27 High
Holborn, London, W.C.z.

Bentley House, 200 Euston Rd., London, N.W.I

EPugenics Review, VoL ILIY., No. 1L

