THE EUGENICS REVIEW

somewhat discursive and diffuse, but on the other hand it does not suffer from the split between the two cultures and does not-as do some of our own popularizations-produce a detailed and elegant picture of a limited speciality-only to leave the reader to draw his own wrong-headed conclusions.
Covering a vast field of knowledge and a great span of time, and not working at a university, the author mostly had to draw on secondary sources. However, by submitting the manuscript to expert friends, he has avoided any glaring mistakes although there occur some errors and misconceptions. To the reviewer the most interesting parts of the book are those dealing with the contemporary efforts of racialists and with the speculations concerning the future of our species.
H. KALMUS
FINGER PRINTS
Galton, Francis. Finger Prints. Unabridged republication of the 1892 edition. New preface by Harold Cummins. New York, 1965. Da Capo
Press. Pp. XXIII+xvi+216. Price $6.95.

It is most fitting that this new edition of Galton's book should have been produced at this time under the guidance of Professor Cummins of Tulane University. Whereas in the past dermal ridge patterns have chiefly concerned the criminal detective, within the last few years they have become of great interest to those who study human disease, especially the chromosome disorders. In these disorders the dermal ridge patterns depart from normal to the extent that they can be used for clinical diagnosis. The first recognition of this fact was made by Professor Cummins thirty years ago.
In scientific work much is ephemeral. Methods are developed, are used for a time and are discarded. This book shows how good work may stand the test of time. The arch, loop, whorl system of classification and the recognition of triradii set forth by Galton are the foundations on which the new science of clinical dermato-
glyphics rests. The type in which this book is set and the
paper used are most pleasing. It is a fascinating little book.
G. H. VALENTINE

IT IS, OF course, an accepted fact of life that identity of finger prints establishes without doubt the identity of their makers. One wonders how many people realize that Galton, among his many contributions to knowledge, enunciated
and ratified in this book, first published in 1892, the principle: "complete or nearly complete accordance between two prints of a single finger ... affords evidence requiring no corroboration, that the persons from whom they are made are the same". If for no other reason than that it is a major pioneer work in criminology this late nineteenth-century book, now re-edited so beautifully, is well worth reading.
But there are other reasons. This reviewer had on a former occasion been
delighted by the vivid precision of Galton's writing in his slightly earlier book, Inquiry into Human Faculty. This book shows equally well Galton's superb yet simple command oflanguage, his aptness of simile and his ingenuity and persuasiveness of illustration. He is a master of clear expression. Would that there were more of them nowadays.

ZOOLOGY
Morris, Ramona and Desmond. Men and Apes. London, 1966. Hutchinson. Pp. viii+271.
Price 50s.
THIS IS A delightful book, a classic of its kind, which is calculated to appeal both to the professional zoologist and to the general reader. It concerns what may be termed the ideology of man in relation to the apes, apes here being read as including monkeys as well as man-like apes. This is the effort of a happy man and wife combination. Dr. Morris is a zoologist, specializing in animal behaviour research, who is also a painter and his wife Ramona is a historian who has spent a number of years scripting and researching on animal programmes for television. Here is displayed great erudition, combined with qualities ofreadability and liveliness, which passes in review man's ideas, more often illusions, about the nature of his nearer relatives in the animal world from the earliest times down to the present. The mythology of the apes is highly entertaining and often bizarre and it is salutary

162

REVIEWS OF BOOKS

to be reminded just how wrong intelligent work in breeding apes and monkeys in order to

people can be in reading their preconceptions elucidate problems of genetics has yet to be

into the behaviour of these animals. Even the embarked upon. Surely this is a field where

discovery of evolution by the agency of natural there are immensely instructive lessons to be

selection has contributed sometimes to obscure learned. The idea of a selective grading up of

the picture. People in search of biological an- human beings in respect of intelligence and other

alogies and missing links have over-simplified the qualities of positive biological value, suggested

distinctive and idiosyncratic qualities of the pri- by Professor H. J. Muller and the present writer

mates, both in a specific and an individual sense. as being feasible through the employment of

In helping to correct the picture, this book may artificial insemination, might be carried out in

be regarded as a valuable introduction to the apes without encountering many of the objec-

study of ethology in relation to the non-human tions which have been raised regarding donor

primates. The really scientific study of the insemination in the human subject. Breeding

behaviour of these animals may be considered apes by AID need excite no more moral

as dating from Sir Solly Zuckerman's study of objections than breeding cattle in the same way.

baboons, The Social Life of Apes and Monkeys, But it might throw immense light on what might

published in 1932. This work evoked a great be accomplished in the genetic ennoblement of

interest, but tended in some respects to distort the human species by voluntary choice of

the true image of the non-human primate, in germinal material, whose general image and

that the characteristics of the baboon were acceptability is likely to be very different in

sometimes extrapolated to other primates whose AD2000 from what it is to-day. The same idea

closer study revealed them to exhibit different might be applied to canines and breeding them

patterns. The phenomena of dominance, for for intelligence, longevity and other qualities

example, so markedly shown in the baboon are combining benefits for the dog with instruction

relatively weak or even absent in some other for its master should be far more rewarding than

primates. The picture of the gorilla conjured the senseless sort of genetic debasement which

up by the script writers of Hollywood was now goes on in selecting for arbitrary show points

perhaps partly built on the basis of such of negative biological value. One cannot help

unwarranted extrapolation. In real life, the thinking that a chimpanzee with a pongid IQ of

gorilla, far from being a brutal and pugnacious 160 plus might be a quite entertaining companion.

aggressor, whose diabolical nature might lead The authors of this work have happily

him to ravish beautiful women, is a creature summarized its spirit and content in these words:

who would rather flee than fight and who is "The real lives of monkeys and apes are quite as

quite disappointing from a Hollywood point of odd, and in many respects are still as mystifying-

view, when placed in a potentially piquant as the fanciful tales of yesterday. The truth may

situation. It seems that once a gorilla did by not be stranger than fiction, but it is just as.

accident get shut up all night with an attractive exciting". This indeed merits the verdict of an

young woman, but it displayed no attempt to exciting book.

do the things which provide headlines for the

HERBERT BREWER

more popular Sunday newspapers. In fact it

showed itself to be a little frightened, a little

lonely and snuggled up to the young lady, not

WORLD RESOURCES

for any unbecoming purpose, but merely for warmth and comfort. Clearly it is much safer
for a young woman to pass the night in the cage of a gorilla than in Central Park, New York.

Smith, G. H. (Editor). Conservation and Natural Resources. New York and London, 1965. Wiley. Pp. xi+533. Price 75s.

There is an informative account here of the Fisher, Joseph L. and Potter, Neal. World

studies being prosecuted in primate life and Prospects for Natural Resources. Baltimore,

behaviour and from the fact of it being un- 1964. Johns Hopkins Press (London, 1965.

mentioned it may be assumed that experimental Oxford University Press). Pp. vi+73. Price 12s.

163

