A PRACTICAL METHOD FOR THE MEASUREMENT OF SOCIAL COMPETENCE*
By EDGAR A. DOLL, Ph.D.
(Director of Research, The Training School at Vineland, New Jersey)

A SURVEY of family history studies make definite advances in standardizing

indicates that there is an important field work and in obtaining a better under-

need in the field of eugenics for a prac- standing of the laws of hereditary transmis-

tical method of measuring the general level sion of social competence. If by means of

of social ability. The problem of eugenics is such a device we could examine an individual

one of increasing the number of the socially either in person or in absentia by a simple

fit by selective mating and reducing the standardized schedule, we might expect to

number of the socially unfit by curtailing extend the scope of family history studies to

their reproduction. This problem requires a persons who are inaccessible by reason of

scientific understanding of the mode of death or geographical isolation. And if we

hereditary transmission of human ability could verify our measurements by re-

before sound administrative programmes for examination of the same person by the same

race betterment can be advocated. Our schedule from different approaches, we could

thesis is that quantitative measurement must greatly increase the reliability of the evidence

replace qualitative estimation if the in- on which eugenical programmes must be

heritance of human traits is to be clearly based.

understood.

Our notions of social competence have been The Vineland Scale

closely identified with concepts of general These considerations induce us to call

intelligence, as reflected in genius or mental attention to the Vineland Social Maturity

deficiency. We need direct measures of social Scale. This is a standardized device for the

ability as a practical expression of intefli- measurement of general social competence

gence, and we need these for the whole distri- from birth to maturity as a developmental

bution of ability as well as for the extremes or maturation process. The scale was

of superiority and inferiority. Without such originally devised to measure the social

measurement methods, field work in family abilities of persons suspected of mental

history studies is likely to be wishful or deficiency, in order to satisfy the first cri-

prejudiced, and the definite influence of such terion of mental deficiency, social incom-

variables as age, sex, environment, and the petence. The basic method is the same as

like cannot be allowed for. To infer a mode that employed by Binet and Simon in their

of transmission without adequate measure- measuring scale of general intelligence. Just

ment leads to loose definition and encour- as Binet's concept of general intelligence was

ages logical confusion of cause and effect. based upon a hierarchy of adaptive per-

If we could employ an instrument approxi- formances each of which reflected a general

mating laboratory accuracy for measuring factor of intelligence, so our scale is based on

social competence at successive age levels, for a succession of behavioural items each of

both sexes, and in varied environments, which reflects personal independence and

which would provide quantitative data of social responsibility.

known reliability and validity, we could This scale assumes that individual growth

and development are accompanied by a

* Presented at the Twenty-fourth Annual Meeting of the Eugenics Research Association, New York, June 6th, 1936.

maturation of behaviour which is socially significant and which represents the practical

'97

198 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

expression of increase in related abilities. The infant at birth is helpless and dependent.
As he grows up, he " takes over " more and more responsibility for his own care, gradually extends the scope of his personal responsibility to the management of his own affairs, and ultimately dominates the affairs of others. In infancy this increasing social com-
petence is expressed principally as self-help, in adolescence as self-direction, and at
maturity as an assumption of responsibility for the needs of others. In senescence the individual may again become dependent in the completion of the life cycle.
In formulating the modus operandi of
social competence, we have employed six
major expressions of social independence and
responsibility, namely; self-help, locomo-
tion, communication, occupation, self-direc-
tion, and socialization. Each of these major
categories of social behaviour has for our purposes been reduced to a succession of specific performances which increase in complexity with advance in age. Each detailed
performance has its own maturation period or growth curve which reflects individual differences in rate of development. The central tendency of each growth curve can be calculated and its dispersion determined in statistical terms. The sum of the item performances can be expressed as a total score
which reflects the degrees of maturation in social competence. The scores can be ex-
pressed as central tendencies for successive
life-age groups and thereby expressed as " social ages " which are methodologically and statistically comparable to Binet mental ages. Individual variation from these central tendency age scores can be calculated, and the influence of such variables as sex, race, cultural level, and the like, can be investigated. The items of the scale avoid the measurement of intelligence, personality, habit, skill, and the like, as such, focusing instead on the composite capitalization of such abilities for socially significant behaviour.
The method is not a rating scale, but is a genuine measurement device. It does not require the direct examination of the person concerned. On the contrary, information

regarding the person examined is obtained through an informant who is intimately
acquainted with the habitual social behaviour of the person examined. This aspect of this scale is a decided advantage, since it provides measurement of a subject without requiring his presence. However, a person may be examined directly by acting as his own informant.

VINELAND SOCIAL MATURITY SCALE*

Name .......

Age..... M.A...... Date.

Descent.... Sex. Grade... I.Q. Born.

Occupation....... Yrs. exp .....Class.. Res.

Father's occupation.............. Class...... Schooling.

Mother's occupation.............. Class...... Schooling.

Informant............ Relationship......... Recorder.

Remarks:

Basal score

Additional pts.

Total score

Age equivalent

.........

Social quotient

.........

Informant's est.

.........

Categoriest Items 0-I

C I. " Crows "; laughs S H G 2. Balances head

S H G 3. Grasps objects within reach S 4. Reaches for familiar persons

SHG SHG
O SHG SHG
C
SHE
L SHG
S SHG
SHE
C

5. Rolls over 6. Reaches for nearby objects 7. Occupies self unattended 8. Sits unsupported 9. Pulls self upright I0. " Talks "; imitates sounds ii. Drinks from cup or glass assisted
12. Moves about on floor 13. Grasps with thumb and finger
14. Demands personal attention I5. Stands alone i6. Does not drool 17. Follows simple instructions

L
0 SHE SHD
0 SHG
O
SHE SHG

I-II
I8. Walks about room unattended I9. Marks with pencil or crayon 20. Masticates food 21. Pulls off socks 22. Transfers objects 23. Overcomes simple obstacles 24. Fetches or carries familiar objects 25. Drinks from cup or glass unassisted 26. Gives up baby carriage

* Copyrighted. This sample blank is designed to

acquaint students with the Scale. The standard record

blank and the condensed Manual of Directions are on

sale by the Extension Department of the Training

School, Vineland, N.J., at $3.00 per ioo copies for the

blank and $.25 per copy for the Manual.

t Key to categorical arrangement of items:

S H G-Self-help general S D-Self-direction

S H D-Self-help dressing C-Communication

S H E-Self-help eating S-Socialization

L-Locomotion

O-Occupation

PRACTICAL METHOD FOR MEASUREMENT OF SOCIAL COMPETENCE I99

S 27. Plays with other children S H E 28. Eats with spoon
L 29. Goes about house or yard S H E 30. Discriminates edible substances
C 3I. Uses names of familiar objects L 32. Walks upstairs unassisted S H E 33. Unwraps candy
C 34. Talks in short sentences

II-III
S H G 35. Asks to go to toilet 0 36. Initiates own play activities
S H D 37. Removes coat or dress S H E 38. Eats with fork S H E 39. Gets drink unassisted S H D 40. Dries own hands S H G 4I. Avoids simple hazards S H D 42. Puts on coat or dress unassisted
0 43. Cuts with scissors C 44. Relates experiences

III-IV
L 45. Walks downstairs one step per tread S 46. Plays co-operatively at kindergarten
level S H D 47. Buttons coat or dress
0 48. Helps at little household tasks S 49. " Performs " for others S H D 50. Washes hands unaided

SHG SHD
L SHD
0
S

Iv-v
51. Cares for self at toilet
52. Washes face unassisted 53. Goes about neighbourhood unattended 54. Dresses self except tying 55. Uses pencil or crayon for drawing 56. Plays competitive exercise games

V-VI
0 57. Uses skates, sled, wagon C 58. Prints simple words S 59. Plays simple table games S D 6o. Is trusted with money L 6I. Goes to school unattended

SHE C
SHD SHD

VI-vII 62. Uses table knife for spreading 63. Uses pencil for writing 64. Bathes self assisted 65. Goes to bed unassisted

SHG SHE
S
S SHD

vII-viII
66. Tells time to quarter hour 67. Uses table knife for cutting 68. Disavows literal Santa Claus 69. Participates in pre-adolescent play 70. Combs or brushes hair

0
0 C SHD

viII-Ix
71. Uses tools or utensils 72. Does routine household tasks 73. Reads on own initiative 74. Bathes self unaided

Ix-x S H E 75. Cares for self at table
S D 76. Makes minor purchases L 77. Goes about home town freely

X-XI
C 78. Writes occasional short letters C 79. Makes telephone calls 0 8o. Does small remunerative work C 8i. Answers ads; purchases by mail

xI-xII
0 82. Does simple creative work S D 83. Is left to care for self or others
C 84. Enjoys books, newspapers, magazines

S SHD
SD S 0

xII-xv
85. Plays difficult games 86. Exercises complete care of dress 87. Buys own clothing accessories 88. Engages in adolescent group activities 89. Performs responsible routine chores

xv-xvIII
C go. Communicates by letter C 9I. Follows current events L 92. Goes to nearby places alone S D 93. Goes out unsupervised daytime S D 94. Has own spending money S D 95. Buys all own clothing

xvIII-xx
L 96. Goes to distant points alone S D 97. Looks after own health
0 98. Has a job or continues schooling S D 99. Goes out nights unrestricted S D ioo. Controls own major expenditures S D ioI. Assumes personal responsibility

xx-xxv
S D I02. Uses money providently
S 103. Assumes responsibilities beyond own needs
S I04. Contributes to social welfare
S D 1O5. Provides for future
XXV+
o zo6. Performs skilled work O 107. Engages in beneficial recreation O io8. Systematizes own work S io9. Inspires confidence S IIO. Promotes civic progress O iii. Supervises occupational pursuits S D II2. Purchases for others
O I13. Directs or manages affairs of others
O 114. Performs expert or professional work S ii5. Shares community responsibility O I i6. Creates own opportunities S I17. Advances general welfare

We need not describe this device in detail here. Preliminary reports* describing the method and presenting experimental evidence of its standardization, its reliability,
its validity, and the influence of numerous
variables have already been made, and additional reports of greater scope are now
being prepared summarizing an extensive body of experimental data obtained over a

* See Bibliography, p. 200.

200 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

period of several years. We may for present purposes state, somewhat dogmatically, that the scale is a calibrated instrument of known precision, and that the reliability and validity of the data are already known with some assurance. The scale has been successfully employed with the blind, the deaf, the crippled, the feeble-minded, and other mentally, physically, and socially handicapped groups. It is known to provide standard measures which can be verified by repeated examination and within known limits of error.
Value of the Scale
Our present purpose is to suggest that this scale affords a practical method for field work in family history studies. A preliminary investigation has been made, not so much to investigate the influence of heredity and environment, as to demonstrate the practicability of the method. This preliminary investigation amply supports our supposition that the scale has definite advantages over the customary methods of field work investigation. For example:
i. It provides a measure rather than an estimate of general social competence which has a known value and a known relation to other measures of human aptitudes and abilities.
2. It provides results by means of which the relative influence of environment and heredity can be investigated in quantitative terms and in relation to known variables.
3. It is simple to learn, easy to use, requires no apparatus, invites co-operation, avoids antagonism, and yet provides systematic data which approximate other accepted measures of laboratory precision.
4. It does not require the presence of the person examined, but does permit such

direct examination. It affords a standard measurement of a person who may be inaccessible through death or through geographical isolation. 5. It yields objective measures of various degrees of social competence. These measures are verifiable and comparable and can be interpreted in statistical terms and clear concepts.
A number of investigations have already been conducted bearing on the laboratory and experimental details of the method. The results of these studies can be applied directly to field work data, thus making unnecessary independent field studies of variable influences. This device is therefore immediately available as a practical instrument in field work, but of course it will be advisable to carry out a more protracted investigation of the special conditions encountered and the special modifications necessary for field work on a large scale.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
DOLL, EDGAR A. "A Genetic Scale of Social Maturity." American Journal of Orthopsychiatry. 5: i8o-8, April 1935. "The Clinical Significance of Social Maturity." Journal of Mental Science. 8i: 766-82, October 1935. " The Measurement of Social Competence." Proceedings of the American Association on Mental Deficiency. (Journal of Psycho-Asthenics). 40: 103-26, I935. " The Vineland Social Maturity Scale: Revised Condensed Manual of Directions." Publication of The Training School at Vineland, New Jersey, Department of Research. Series
I936, No. 3, April I936. PP. 30.
" Preliminary Standardization of the Vineland Social Maturity Scale." American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 6: 283-93, April 1936. "Mental Age versus Social Age." Proceedings of the National Conference of Juvenile Agencies, Vol. 32, No. 5, I936. " The Inheritance of Social Competence." Journal of Heredity, 28: 153-65, May 1937.

ugenics Review, Vol. XXX, No. 8.

