THE EUGENICS REVIEW

It is a typically Anglican report, valuable for
its endeavour to understand and do justice to both sides, and for its attempt to reconcile them in a practical, moral, and humane solution of this pressing problem of the termination of pregnancy. Both the extremes, of uncontrolled liberty and of absolute prohibition, are rejected,
and an ethical mean is established which pays regard to the rights of the foetus, the health of the mother, and the good of society. While relying no longer upon traditional beliefs about the point at which the "soul" was thought to animate the body, the committee is firm in its recognition of the moral significance of the foetus as potentially a human life which should be destroyed only for the weightiest reasons. Its "broad conclusion" is that "in certain circumstances abortion can be justified"-that is, if it could be "reasonably established that there was a threat to the mother's life or wellbeing, and hence inescapably to her health" the existence of such a threat being decided by the doctor concerned, in full consultation with those competent to advise him upon the different

professional and personal issues involved. In particular, such consultation would be important in cases of rape or incest, or where there seemed to be a risk of a defective or deformed child being born; always the decision taken should be grounded upon the "prognosis concerning the mother as affected by the pregnancy in question"-and in this connection it would be wrong to take insufficient account of the capacity of persons to respond to the challenge of difficult circumstances. Suggested amendments to Lord Silkin's Bill indicate the means by which reform could most satisfactorily be attained, though the Report stresses the importance ofsupplementing legal reform by education.
Should a second edition of the Report be called for (and it is to be hoped that it will be) consideration might be given to the claim that emotional stress during pregnancy may adversely affect the unborn child (pp. 37 and 46); many experts in the field involved would not accept such a claim on the basis of the authorities cited.
SHERWIN BAILEY

OTHER NOTICES

Barish, Natalie. The Gene Concept. London, index. Altogether the book is a "must" for the

1966. Chapman and Hall. Pp. xi+116. Price student who has not got a clue-he will soon

lOs. 6d. Paperback.

have one.

THIS LITTLE PAPERBACK iS one of the "Selected Topics in Modern Biology" series.

K. H.

The series editor, Peter Gray, describes it as a "background book" designed to help the young
student in his introductory biology course. Naturally, the author (of Chatham College,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania) starts off with a

Delevoryas, Theodore. Plant Diversification. Modern Biology Series. New York and London, 1966. Holt Rinehart and Winston. Pp. vii+145. Price 18s. Paperback.

chapter on "Mendel and his famous peas" and THIS LITTLE BOOK is an introduction to the

carries the reader along with her in her enthusi- study of plants. It is written from a new point

asm for all the "intriguing" and "exciting" of view in which fossils and classification, discoveries which have been made since then. breeding systems and physiology are all brought

There are plenty of good, clear diagrams-a in to play. The illustrations, both diagrams and

few of them reproduced from the classics of photographs, are a pleasure to see.

genetic writing-a very full glossary and a good

C. D. D.

168

