"EUGENIC" EXPERIMENTS CONDUCTED BY THE NAZIS ON HUMAN SUBJECTS

By C. P. BLACKER

T HAT I am talking to you this evening what I am going to say. I hope that such

on this painful subject is due to a will contribute to the discussion.

request I received four years ago. In The documents which came to me con-

July I947, I received from Lord Moran a sisted mostly of translations of correspon-

letter saying that the Prime Minister of the dence held during the war between leading

day, Mr. Attlee, had asked him to be Nazis and the persons concerned in directing

chairman of a committee to investigate the the experiments. There were also several

war crimes of German doctors. A mass of affidavits sworn after the war by Germans

material had been collected; the evidence and non-Germans. And there were some

in special fields ought, he thought, to be fairly long reports by English and American

considered by authorities in those fields. writers. The material varies in trust-

Would I read the evidence concerning worthiness. The documentary information is

eugenics, and let his committee have a authentic-that is to say, the letters, memor-

report embodying my opinion as to the anda, etc., were actually written between I940

scientific value of this evidence, if any? and I945 by various Germans, mostly Nazis,

I replied that I would do this, and shortly implicated in war crimes. Of the reports in

after, I received from the War Crimes Group, English I may mention one which was

North-West Europe, several massive folios particularly helpful. It is entitled Steriliza-

of documents. It is upon the contents of tion and Execution of Patients suffering from

these that this paper is based.

Nervous and Mental Disease and was written

Rarely have I performed a more distasteful by Major Leo Alexander, whose information

task than the preparation of the first report. was mostly obtained from ten Germans who

I did the work in I947, during my summer were carefully interviewed in Munich, Heidel-

holiday which was partly spoiled thereby. berg and Limberg, and from various docu-

Why, it may be asked, now rake up this ments mostly found in institutions with

matter? Why revive memories of terrible which these ten people were connected.

things best forgotten ? The answer is that The reports in English by Major Alexander

the events I am going to describe are widely, and others are well-produced and well-

though I think erroneously, connected with considered documents, prepared by men eugenics; indeed, eugenics has suffered much whose attitude was as objective as possible

because of them, and they should be frankly in the circumstances which prevailed when

faced.

they were at work, and who wanted to reach

Let it first be understood that I do not the truth.

regard myself as in any sense an authority on German war crimes. The account I am going to give is based on documents, mostly
photostatted, which deal with but a small segment of a wider subject. I have not read
the reports of war trials, wherein further
information, particularly on the scale of the experiments, may have been disclosed.
There may be present here this evening people who can supplement or even correct

The affidavits, on the other hand, were
mostly sworn by people who had suffered some serious mutilation or injury, such as sterilization, castration, or other experiment; they felt passionately about their experiences
and they were not cross-examined. There
was quite a lot of hearsay in the affidavits and there may have been some involuntary mis-statements. Indeed, they contain here and there contradictions.

* Paper given to a Members' Meeting of the Society on December IAth. I9SI.

The final information which emerges about the results and the scale of experiments is,

09

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

for several reasons, incomplete. Thus the Nazis took some pains to disguise the more reprehensible of their doings. They concealed under euphonious pseudonyms, as you will hear, the identities of the special organiza-
tions formed to carry out these activities; and they deliberately falsified, in returns and reports, what they were actually doing. Moreover, when, in I944 and I945, allied troops were advancing on Germany from both sides, incriminating documents and material were destroyed, and many people who knew too much were deliberately killed. I could give examples of the last two ways in which tracks were covered.
In what sense, we may ask ourselves, is anyone entitled to regard these atrocities as
connected with eugenics ? Some people relate the Nazi doctrines about race to eugenics. These doctrines encouraged people of supposedly Nordic or Aryan race to glorify themselves as the possessors of lordly or Promethean qualities; they also inculcated a contemptuous loathing of supposedly inferior races. This indoctrinated contempt was turned into a cult which taught that certain classes of people should be treated like animal pests. No more compunction should be felt about their extermination than should be shown, for example, to rats. It was permissible to vivisect them like rats and to kill them in order to stock anthropological museums with their skeletons. Certain German criminals were placed in a similar category. The following is a macabre example of the way in which human beings were regarded as commercial assets, like farm animals. A certain Dr. Hirt, of Strasbourg, wanted subjects for an experiment with a phosphorous-containing gas, and arrangements were made by a SS official called Sievers for the work to be done at a concentration camp at Natzweiler. But the authorities were unco-operative. I quote from a memorandum submitted by Sievers to Rudolf Brandt:
I was surprised that we are to be charged for the use of prisoners.... When I look back on the tests conducted at Dachau, I have to praise emphatically the understanding and generous manner in which our work was supported.... In

Natzweiler, on the other hand, they are trying to make money on these experiments.
Galton, as you will remember, defined eugenics as " the science which deals with all
influences that improve the inborn qualities
of a race; also with those that develop them to the best advantage." Galton further
declared, in the passage which is now printed on the cover of our REVIEw, that eugenics was, in essence, a merciful creed, to be held by men endowed with pity and kindly feelings. It is therefore both unjust and
deplorable that the word eugenics should be connected with Nazi racialist practices. But unfortunately the connection has been established in the minds of many people, including the War Crimes Commission which
sent me the folios.
These documents relate to three measures which should be distinguished. The first is the practice of sterilization under the I934 German Act; the second is the euthanasia of the chronically insane and congenitally defective; and the third is the use of human beings for experiments designed to discover a cheap and wholesale- method of steriliza-
tion. But the last-named experiments constitute but one category in a large range of experiments performed on human beings. These were carried out on many medical and other problems including spotted fever, the use of drugs in the treatment of certain infections, war gases of various kinds, including blister gases, the making of sea water drinkable, and the altitude at which it was safe to begin a parachute jump. Freezing and decompression experiments of a particularly revolting kind were here involved. Experiments were even performed on the technique of suicide. It will be recalled that several leading Nazis-including, I believe, Himmler and Goering-killed themselves by means of capsules of prussic acid. These were perfected on inmates of Ravensbruck: a phial of prussic acid was crushed between the victim's teeth. A certain doctor named in the folio admitted doing an
autopsy on such a victim. I will now say soriething about the three
measures which were regarded by the War Crimes Commission as having a bearing on

" EUGENIC " EXPERIMENTS CONDUCTED BY THE NAZIS

Il

eugenics. First comes the practice of A girl of sixteen was sterilized for answer-

sterilization under the I934 Act. The ing the question " What comes after the

provisions of this Act were restricted to nine Third Reich? " with " The Fourth."

mostly medical conditions, which were A man was sterilized for his remarks about

generally regarded as hereditary; and the Hitler's and Goering's neglect in procreation.

Act enjoined on German doctors the duty of I should add that these declarations were

notifying to a " eugenic court " every submitted in hand- or typewritten letters.

sufferer from these nine conditions of whom There is no evidence that the statements

he might take cognisance in the course of his made in these letters were verified.

practice. My information before the war was I now come to the application of

that the provisions of this law were being euthanasia to the chronically insane and

strictly observed, and that few, if any, congenitally defective.

iprinciplepeople were being sterilized outside the nine Before the war (summer of 1939) the

conditions specified. Race was not among

of euthanasia was secretly approved

them. by Hitler for these two categories of people.

But the information now available tells a Orders were given, firstly, for the merciful

different story.

killing of incurably insane persons according

A letter dated March 3rd, I938, from the to a specified procedure. Superintendents of

Gestapo Office, Cologne, relating to a all mental hospitals in the Reich were

petition from a man in the matter of the required to fill out a questionnaire for each

sterilization of his ward, contains the follow- patient in their institutions. Copies were sent

ing passage:

to four " experts" whose unanimous vote

Conforming with higher directives, all resulted in the patient being transferred to

descendants of occupying troops of foreign blood were sterilized in the summer of I937. As a result of this measure the child named, fathered
by an occupation soldier, was also sterilized.

an institution where he was kept under observation for a period of from one to three months. If the physician in charge of this

Since no documents are available, it cannot be " observation institution " agreed with the

stated with certainty if the guardian [named] four experts that the patient was in fact

was at that time informed about the sterilization.
Furthermore, the sterilization did not depend on the permission of the guardian.... I may point out that the matter is secret and may

incurable, the latter was sent to another institution-a so-called euthanasia institution-where he was killed by injections of

under no circumstances be discussed in public. various kinds or by gas. Hermann Brack,l

It will be remembered that, after the first a prominent Nazi, is reported as declaring:

world war, coloured French troops were in " To the best of my knowledge, about fifty!

occupation of the Ruhr.

or sixty thousand persons were killed in thi5

I also have an emigration certificate of a woman, a German national, who, in I947,

way in the period from autumn I939 to the summer of I94I."

emigrated to the U.S.A. The certificate states These activities were medically directed

that her father was a Moroccan corporal in by Prof. Dr. Carl Brandt. He disguised by

the French Army, and that, on June 22nd, means of euphemisms the nature of his

I937, she was sterilized on racial grounds. killing organization which was known by

Another document emanating from the such titles as " Reich Association-Hospital

Office of Chief Counsel for War Crimes, and Nursing Establishment," and " Charit-

United States Army, summarizes the letters able Foundation for Institutional Care,"

of twenty-six people who were sterilized for and " General Patient Transport Corpora-

absurd reasons. Here are three examples. tion."

One man was asked to name Hitler's, These activities were treated as most

Goebbels' and Goering's birthdays. He could strictly secret. But in the words of Professor

not answer these questions, and stated that Bumke, "While nobody was supposed to talk

he was not interested in such matters. His about it, the sparrows were whistling it from

sterilization was ordered.

the roof-tops." According to information

12 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

supplied to Major Alexander by a doctor subject as to whom a compulsory sterilization

who worked in an institution at Wesloch, order was made had, in theory at least, the

near Heidelberg, suspicions were aroused right of appeal to a "higher eugenic court,"

by the simultaneous dispatch to relatives of and the incurably insane person was sent for.

patients of a uniformly worded notification a period of one to three months to an observa-

of death. When several such stereotyped tion centre before being sent elsewhere to be

notifications were received in the same liquidated; and for the most part these

district by relatives of different patients who \people were mercifully killed.

had been transported at about the same time to an unknown destination, conclusions were naturally drawn and there was much indignation. According to this German doctor, the mass killing of patients in special killing centres was discontinued in the middle of 194I because of the wave of public protests; a policy of extermination by starvation in the institutions themselves, without transfer to a special killing centre,
was then substituted. But I know of no documentary evidence supporting this alleged change of policy about which, to my knowledge, only one doctor made statements.
There may have been other reasons, as will be seen in a moment, for closing down the euthanasia programme for the chronically insane; and there are also reasons for doubting that the chronically insane were deliberately starved to death.

But these discriminations (such as they were) were swept away some two years after the war had begun. Indeed, there is reason
to think that the euthanasia programme,
which, be it noted, was carried out on Germans no less than others, was initiated in the summer of i939 because Hitler had it in mind to make war in the autumn of that year. Thus Hermnann Brack declares in the document above quoted that " Hitler's ultimate reason for the establishment of the
euthanasia programme in Germany was to eliminate those people confined to insane asylums and similar institutions who could no longer be of any use to the Reich. They were considered as useless objects and Hitler felt that, by exterminating these so-
called useless eaters, it would be possible to relieve more doctors, male and female,
nurses and other personnel, hospital beds

The second category of people for whom and other facilities, for the Armed Forces."

euthanasia was secretly approved before the war consisted of children who were born mentally deficient or physically deformed. Doctors and midwives taking, cognisance of such children were under obligation to report them to a central office whose officials decided on their fate. We are told that the Director of the Central Office (it belonged to the Ministry of the Interior) was expected to ask for the consent of the parents. I do
not know how long this programme continued or how many children were liquidated under it.

But the materials submitted to me suggest that it was not till the autumn of I942, i.e.
till Russia had been invaded and an
" Eastern Question " had arisen, that a
decision was reached to exterminate whole populations. A document dated September i4th, I942, purports to summarize, in the
form of a memorandum, a discussion between Dr. Goebbels and a person named in the document which was sent to me in incomplete form. An item of this memo reads as follows:
" With regard to the destruction of asocial life, Dr. Goebbels has the opinion that the

Extermination Programme
Whatever, then, we may think of the prewar policies of the Nazis as to sterilization (which was in part made public) and euthanasia (which was kept entirely secret) the

following groups should be exterminated. Jews and Gypsies unconditionally, Poles who have to serve three-four years of penal servitude, and Czechs and Germans who are sentenced to death or penal servitude for

available documents suggest that these life or to security custody for life. The idea

measures were carried out, at the start at of exterminating them by labour is the best.9"

least, with a certain discrimination. A This policy, be it noted, is not restricted to

"o EUGENIC" EXPERIMENTS CONDUCTED BY THE NAZIS

Jews and gypsies: it includes Germans been regarded as unimportant for the new

condemned to life sentence.

purposes. What was now needed was a

How far the decision to efface these groups cheap method which could be used on a

was an extension of the practice, begun in the mass scale, irrespective of whether the

summer of I939, of destroying the incurably subject was merely sterilized or castrated

insane and the congenitally defective and" as well. Three methods were tried on inmates

deformed is not clear from the documents.. of concentration camps, but without satis-

Hermann Brack in the affidavit already factory results. These methods were the

quoted goes on to say that, in I94I, he following: the use of Caladium Seguinum;

received an oral order to discontinue the the use of X-rays; and the use of sclerosing

euthanasia programme; he was then asked substances. They will be considered in that

to send the personnel relieved of these duties order in what follows. But a general observa-

to Lublin where they were placed at the tion should first be made. It is that the

disposal of Brigadefuhrer Globoknic. Brack documents in the folio give a better picture of

says: " I then had the impression that these the steps by which these methods came to be

people were to be used in the extensive used than of their value as proved by use.

Jewish labour camps run by Globoknic. They describe the initial and formative stages

Later, however, at the end of ,1942 or the of the development of the three methods.

beginning of I943, I found out that they were They do not describe their actual applica-

used to assist in the mass extermination of tions. We are not told on how many people

the Jews which was then already common' they were tried, nor with what results. The

knowledge in higher Party circles."

main information as to results is contained

Masm Sterilization

in an affidavit obtained after the end of the war from Rudolf Brandt, who is not to be

The mass sterilization or castration of confused with Dr. Karl Brandt who has

races and specified groups seems to have been already been mentioned. Rudolf Brandt

approved because of two different considera- thought that, even for the purposes for which

tions. The first was the extermination they were intended, the three methods in

programme, which was conceived on a very question were of small value.

large scale; indeed it-was thought to be applicable to millions of people. The second Caladium Seguinum

was the need of the Reich for foreign labour. This is a plant which is said to grow in

To the original proposers of mass steriliza- tropical Brazil. It was the subject of a paper

tion it seemed wasteful to kill off so large a by Doctors G. Madaus and E. Koch published

number of potentially useful workers. Thus in I94I in the Journal for General Experi-

Dr. Adolf Pockorny, of whom more below, mental Medicine. The sterilizing effects of

wrote to Himmler in October I94I: " The Caladium had been investigated by these

thought alone that the three million authors in I937 on frogs and mice with un-

Bolsheviks, at present German prisoners, satisfactory results. Further experiments

could be sterilized so that they could be used were carried out in I939-40 on rats. The

as labourers but be prevented from repro- results were not such as to justify hopes. In

duction, opens the most far reaching some male rats " impotence " was produced

perspectives."

and in some females sterility. The general

But the operations (vasectomy and conclusions were preliminary and tentative.

salpingectomy) which implemented the There is no reason for thinking that the work

Sterilization Act of 1934 were thought to be would have attracted general attention had

too slow and laborious for use in the manner it not been for the action of a Dr. Adolf

that was now being envisaged. The two Pockorny, a specialist in skin and venereal

operations mentioned above sterilized but diseases, who, in October I94I, wrote to

did not castrate the patients. The distinction Himmler drawing attention to the work of

between the two processes seems to have Madaus and exaggerating its possibilities

14 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

as an instrument of mass sterilization. " In 194I it was an 'open secret' in high

Pockorny suggested that Dr. Madaus be party circles that the powers that be intended

told not to publish any more such articles to exterminate the entire Jewish population

(" the enemy listens ! "), that the plant be of Germany and the occupied countries. I

cultivated in greenhouses, that immediate and my collaborators . . . considered this

research on human beings (criminals) be intention of the party leaders not worthy of

promoted, and that bio-chemical inquiries the German nation and mankind in general."

be made with a view to synthesizing the They therefore proposed another solution

" effective chemical substance."

which was to deport all Jews to a far-off

Himmler took action on March ioth, I942, place. The island of Madagascar was

saying that he was interested and that suggested; but the proposal was not

contact should be made with Dr. Madaus, acceptable. " So we reached the conclusion

who should be offered " possibilities of doing that sterilization would be the answer to the

research on criminals." On August 24th, Jewish problem." Two further documents

I942, it was suggested that the necessary throw light on the part taken by Hermann

human experiments be carried out " on Brack. The first, dated March 28th, I94I,

the persons of the inmates of the Gypsy suggests that as many as 3,000-4,000

camp of Lackenbach in the lower Danube." persons could, by means of X-rays, be

On September 7th, I942, the transfer of sterilized per day. "One practical way,"

experiments is announced to another he suggests, " would be for instance to let the

concentration camp apparently situated at persons to be treated approach a counter

Lichterfield-West; and on October I4th, where they would be asked to answer some

1942, suggestions were made for the synthetic questions or to fill in a. form which would

production of Caladium Seguinum. The take them two or three minutes. The

cultivation of the plant in a large hot-house official sitting behind the counter could

was also ordered on June iith, I942.

operate the installation in such a way as to

Here the documentary narrative ends. turn a switch which would activate the two

That the efforts to grow the plant in hot- valves simultaneously (since the irradiation

houses and to make it synthetically were has to operate from both sides)."

unsuccessful is suggested in the affidavit The second document is a letter dated

above mentioned by Rudolf Brandt. He June 23rd, 1942, to Himmler. Brack writes:

states: "As a result of Pockorny's sug- " Among ten million of Jews in Europe are,

gestion, experiments were conducted on I figure, at least two-three million of men

concentration-camp prisoners in order to test and women who are fit enough for work."

the effects of the drug. Simultaneously all These, Brack suggests, could be sterilized or,

efforts were made to cultivate the plant rather, castrated. " Sterilization, as normally

in large quantities. . . . Hot-houses were performed on persons with hereditary

used with a certain amount of success to diseases, is here out of the question because

cultivate this plant and the experiments it takes too long and is too expensive.

were continued. I don't believe, however, Castration by X-rays, however, is not only

that it was possible to produce sufficient relatively cheap but can also be performed on

quantities of this drug to make a large-scale many thousands in the shortest time."

application possible."

Various documents throw light on the use

The Use of X-rays

of X-rays for castration. The first is an affidavit by a young Pole born in I920, an

The proposal to use X-rays on a large scale inmate of Auschwitz, who was transferred

for purposes of sterilization - or rather of to Birkenau to be X-rayed. He says:

castration, for that is their effect-seems " We had to undress and our sexual organs

to have originated with Hermann Brack were placed under an apparatus and kept

whose affidavit has already been quoted. there under the appatatus for fifteen minutes.

In this same affidavit Brack declares: The apparatus strongly heated the sexual

" EUGENIC " EXPERIMENTS CONDUCTED BY THE NAZIS

15

organs and the surrounding parts, and later of two hospitals in Upper Silesia. The

on these parts began to show a black colour. correspondence covers the period between

After this treatment we had to work again January iith, 1942, and August 6th, I943.

right away. After some days, the sexual In a letter dated May 30th, I942, to Himmler,

organs of most of my comrades became Dr. Clauberg, in effect, asks for Himmler's

purulent and they had great difficulties in support for the establishment of a Research

walking. In spite of this, they had to work Institute for Biological Propagation. This

until they collapsed and those who collapsed seems to have been a fairly ambitious

were sent to the gas chambers." Later- project involving the establishment of a

about October 1943-this man was marched farm and of clinical departments wherein

back to Auschwitz where he was anaes- animals and human beings were to be used

thetized by spinal injection and castrated for miscellaneous researches on nutrition,

by operation. "Both testicles were taken the treatment of sterility, and methods of

off." Various documents quoted below sterilization.

suggest that this man's testicles may have Subsequently written documents mention

been removed in order that the effects of only the experiments on sterilization: the

the X-rays might be microscopically farm, the work on nutrition, the research on

examined.

sterility drop out or else the relevant docu-

Another document is an affidavit by a ments were not sent to me. In a letter to

French surgeon, Dr. Robert Levy, who in Himmler dated June 7th, 1943 (written

October I943 was appointed surgeon in the more than a year after the letter previously

central infirmary at the concentration camp quoted), Clauberg writes: " The method I

at Birkenau. He declares: " In September contrived to achieve, the sterilization of the

I943, before I was appointed surgeon, I was female organism without any operation,

present at the selection of ioo Polish Jews is as good as perfected. It can be performed

aged from twenty to twenty-four years, in by a single injection made from the entrance

good physical and mental health. . . . All of the uterus in the course of the usual

these young men were later admitted to the customary gynaecological examination as

infirmary for grave sickness. They had great known to every physician . . . if my re-

deep ulceration of the scrotum, of the searches continue to have the same results

inguinal region, and of the inside part of the as up to now-and there is no reason to

thighs. Some of them declared to me that doubt that-then the moment is not far off

they had been treated by X-rays in when I can say: by one adequately trained

September I943 to be sterilized. I found physician in one adequately equipped place

that others had one or two testicles lacking with perhaps ten assistants . . . most likely

following a surgical operation performed in several hundred, if not even i,ooo, women

September 1943. Some of them had been can be sterilized per day."

treated before the operation by X-rays in
order to find out the effect of the irradiation on the microscopic sections of the testicles. . . . During I944, all these sick men either died or they became victims of the selection

About a year before this letter was written
a decision was reached by Himmler to place Auschwitz camp at the disposal of Prof. Clauberg as an experimental station.

for the gas chamber according to their There the narrative ends. But Rudolf

incapacity for work and their prolonged stay Brandt, in the affidavit previously mentioned,

in the infirmary."

refers to the matter. He declares: " Dr.

Clauberg developed further a method for the

Sclerosing Substances

sterilization of women. This method was

. The folios contained seven documents based upon the injection of an irritating which are copies of letters to and from solution into the uterus. Clauberg conducted

Dr. M. D. C. Clauberg who is described as the widespread experiments on Jewish women

chief physician of the gynaecological clinics and gypsies in the Auschwitz concentration

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

camp. Several thousand women were whom I referred earlier. A close connection

sterilized by Clauberg in Auschwitz."

existed between this organization and a

The experiences of a woman born in I9I2 concentration camp at Struthof. In the

-to whom Prof. Clauberg gave his injection laboratory of the Faculty were found fifty-

are described in an affidavit made after the four slides of human testicles, which, accord-

war. This woman, who was an inmate of ing to the inscriptions, related to seven men

Auschwitz, declares:

of which two were probably boys of from

" A second physician, Professor Dr. Clau- thirteen to fifteen years of age. The appear-

berg, performed operations on women and ance of these slides strongly suggested that

girls in Block io at Auschwitz during the the testicles had previously been injected

period I was there, from April I943 to June with a toxic and irritating substance.

I943.... Dr. Clauberg made X-ray pictures Tubules damaged by the injections were

of the uterus without narcosis while the found juxtaposed to undamaged tubules.

patient was conscious. The operation The histological examination was conducted

performed by him was very painful.... This by Dr. C. Champy. In the refrigerated room

doctor introduced a fluid into the uterus (glacidre) were found several cadavers of men

which, according to the patient's statements, who had been castrated. Doctors Champy

burned horribly. The operation lasted about and Risler, who furnish the report, conclude

ten minutes. The abdomen of the victims with the following general remark:

began to swell after the operation as if they " We have all heard the recital of atrocities

were pregnant. In order to save their lives committed everywhere by the Gernan

many patients preferred treatment by Dr. occupying forces. But one could still believe,

Clauberg to an extermination transport to for the honour of humanity, that they were

Birkenau, for every six weeks the victims the acts of men intoxicated by alcohol or

were subjected to another operation so that, excited by battle, in any case of brutes

during this period, they felt safe from the without education. The fact is that intel-

extermination camp at Birkenau. The lectual men, doctors, were able to devote

victims of Dr. Clauberg's operation suffered themselves to such work which lasted over a

from constant abdominal pains and period of months and gave them time to

menstruation ceased."

think.... We add that this experiment,

It seems probable that the preliminary when carried out on the human, presented

X-ray examination of the uterus above no particular interest and that its results

described was effected by a radio-opaque would have been equally valid if carried out

substance designed to establish the patency on animals-supposing that they had any

of the uterine cavity and tubes; and that scientific interest of any kind."

the subsequent six-weekly examinations, The folio also contains an affidavit by a

conducted after the introduction of the Frenchman who declared that, on January

sclerosing substance, were designed to test 7th, I944, he was deported to an extermina-

its non-patency. Nowhere in the folio are we tion camp at Watzweiler-Struthof. Among

told what was the substance which Dr. other experiences, he described the following:

Clauberg injected.

" Dr. Haagen also ordered the injection

Mention should be made here of the of sclerosing substances into the testicles of

injection of a sclerosing substance into the certain detained persons to further his

testicles of men, though there is nothing to research in complete sterilization of human

show that Prof. Clauberg was connected with beings. I, as well as several of my comrades

this procedure.

deported with me, were subjected to other

The relevant statements are made in a injections, of which at the time we did not

document written in French. When the know the contents and which have made us

French entered Strasbourg after the war, sterile to this day."

they were informed of an organization There is no information as to how far the

belonging to the SS directed by Dr. Hirt to use of sclerosing substances on women at

" EUGENIC " EXPERIMENTS CONDUCTED BY THE NAZIS

17

Auschwitz by Dr. Clauberg and on men at Germans than non-Germans, and, if the

Struthof by Dr. Haagen were parts of the account of mass starvation given by one

same plan. The two operations would have doctor on what seems to be unsubstantial

different effects: that on the testicle of the evidence is rejected, these people were

male, to be effective, might work like a mercifully killed. The idea of merciful

castration; -and that into the uterus (not killing is not unknown in this country;

the ovaries) of the woman should not.

indeed, a society exists to promote it, on a

The following are the main conclusions voluntary basis, for people suffering from

I submitted to Lord Moran's Committee: incurable and painful illnesses. The principle

Three crude attempts to devise a cheap of the inviolability of human life goes by

and effective method of mass sterilization the board in wartime, when it is our object

or castration were, between I942 and I9up4 to kill as many as possible of the enemy,

inclusive, at the instigation of Himmler, and when human life is held cheap.

Brandt and others, tried out experimentally But the vivisection of human beings falls

on the inmates of concentration camps by into an entirely different category. There is

German doctors. The following remarks are much to suggest that the experiments which

applicable to all of them:

I have described were planned and executed

(a) It was not necessary to use human by a small caucus of which Himmler was the

beings. Animal experiments would have met chief. These men took much trouble to

the purpose just as well.

conceal what they were doing; indeed, they

(b) No results of the slightest scientific sometimes falsified the actual happenings by

interest are recorded; nor in my opinion misleading returns and spurious certificates.

were any likely to have resulted even if more Those responsible were no less concerned

time had been available.

with the reactions of their own people than

(c) The experiments failed in their primary with those of their country's military

purpose of providing a cheap method of mass enemies. Indeed some Germans took risks

sterilization or castration. None of the three in denouncing these atrocities. Thus Major

methods was found to be applicable on a Alexander quotes the Bishop of Munster as

large scale.

having said in his pulpit:

(d) The documents in the folio do not for Who has knowledge of a murder and does not

the most part carry the accounts of the three
methods in question beyond the preliminary stages. There are no progress reports and no

announce it becomes punishable himself. I have personal knowledge of 300 murders which have been committed, and I herewith proclaim and denounce them publicly.

account of the results. It is, in my opinion, Disgust and condemnation, we are told,

within the bounds of possibility that further were widely expressed, but fearfully and

research on Caladium Seguinum, unreported sotto voce. It was dangerous to criticise.

in these folios, may have been carried out One doctor declared that he had protested

in Germany, and that the drug may later be against these activities: " I used to stick

found to have some usefulness. But much my neck out almost to the point of being

more research would be needed to carry the sent to a concentratibn camp." Many

matter beyond the preliminary and tentative leading scientists, moreover, refused to

stage reported by Prof. Madaus in his paper participate. Thus Professor K. Kleist, of

published in I94I.

Frankfurt, said of the extermination pro-

gramme for the insane that it was all done in

What, in conclusion, are we to think of great secrecy. " They never dared to bother

these various measures? Here are some me," he said, " they knew that I would not

suggestions. It may be thought, firstly, that, have any part in it. It was a lie organized

on a scale of turpitude, the euthanasia of by the state. The whole system depended on

the insane ranks lower than the vivisection enforcing silence by tyranny. To say any-

of human beings. We may recall that among thing against it was equivalent to suicide,

the insane and defective were included more because a word about it would have meant

D

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the concentration camp, which meant executions and tortures when such were

death."

publicly performed, and they would, I have

The impression is derived from the little doubt, now do the same if they had the

irresponsible manner in which the properties chance. The African slave trade, in parti-

of Caladium Seguinum were investigated, cular the capture and transportation by sea

and the still more irresponsible way in which of the slaves, was carried out with a brutality

numerous men and women were X-rayed, which sometimes defied description. Yet

injected, and subsequently castrated, that there was no lack of men in all countries,

the organizers of these barbarities had no our own included, to take part in this

scientific training or status. These men strike lucrative trade.

one as belonging to the type of person who, Between the years I933 and I945,

by reading digests of science in popular Germany's most degraded specimens found

journals, comes to imagine himself a scientist. their way to power. Two or three malignant

By such, the performance of experiments, geniuses at the top provided the inspiration;

however ill-conceived and futile, is thought below them was organized a sinister and

to be scientific. This is the view of ignorant obedient hierarchy of men, the personnel of

and uneducated people who look upon the SS, in whom callousness, in so far as

science with superstitious reverence.

this was not naturally inborn, was inculcated

There is, perhaps, a grain of comfort in this by training. Many of their atrocities were.

thought.

carefully concealed and were, I believe,

In the last I50 years there has been no largely unknown throughout Germany,

dearth in Germany of able scientists; and though rumours of fearful happenings in

we know that, during the last war, original certain baneful places were whispered from

work, parallel to our work on the atomic mouth to mouth.

bomb, was done by such men on rockets and It is possible to believe-and indeed I

other V weapons. A comparison between personally believe-that there exists among

these achievements and the inane experi- the general ruif of German men and women

ments I have described, suggests that no less kindness, neighbourly feeling, sym-

German scientists of weight and repute, pathy and goodwill than exist among the

such as Professors Bumke and Kleist, held people of other countries. The central

aloof from these activities of the SS. I do not problem which this evening's recital presents,

know enough about the other fields in which is, as I see it, that, while all countries have

vivisection of humans was conducted to say their quota of malignant and wicked people,

whether, in them, reputable scientists held most succeed, by means of public opinion,

aloof. judiciaries, police and psychiatric services,

Germany, moreover, has no monopoly of in restricting the harm these do. Many are

wicked and cruel people. These exist in all confined in prisons and criminal lunatic

countries, though they may perhaps be more asylums, and those at large are mostly

numerous in some than others. We have our recognized for what they are.

own quota of psychopaths, criminals and The tragedy of Germany raises complex

criminal lunatics, as anyone can recall if he problems of psychology, tradition and

thinks of the crimes of violence and the cases history, which can be much discussed. The

of ill-treatment of children of which the Germans are a sentimental and idealistic

Press continually informs us. I have no people, capable of great self-sacrifice. But

doubt that one could find, amid the gangs their idealism readily transforms itself into

of our own and of the big American cities fanaticisn-a change for the worse to which

which traffic in narcotics and deal in the all countries are liable during and after

white slave trade, men and women as vile revolutions. Tribal fanaticism enjoins the

as those I have been talking about. There killing of members of rival tribes, as we are

exists in all countries a minority of people reminded by the Old Testament. Religious

who delight in cruelty. These used to flock to fanaticism enjoins likewise of adherents of

" EUGENIC " EXPERIMENTS CONDUCTED BY THE NAZIS

rival religions: it is good to kill unbelievers and that when the enormity of what had

and infidels. In wartime it is difficult for the been done was later disclosed, it was too late.

best of us not to become, in this sense, One final remark. Some of you may think

fanatics. One of our leading men of letters that, in view of how irrelevant to what we

proclaimed, during the first war, that the understand as eugenics are the human

only good kind of German was a dead experiments I have described, the title of my

Germnan. This is the fighting soldier's creed paper is misleading. You may think that

and here it did not long survive the armistice I should have referred to " so-called"

of I9I8. German idealism is labile and eugenic experiments. Perhaps I should.

degenerates perhaps more easily than the But the inexorable fact remains that what-

idealisms of other Western peoples into ever our own views may be, the word

fanaticism.

eugenics has, through the events I have

The particular tragedy of Germany is that described, suffered degradation in the eyes of

from the ranks of its worst psychopaths and many people and organizations, including

crminals emerged gifted men who were the War Crimes committee which assembled

acclaimed as leaders; that these so.. the documents which were sent to me.

insidiously flattered and beguiled their un- It is a pleasure to thank Professor

perceiving fellow-countrymen with myths Alexander Kennedy for suggestions which

and promises that they were lifted into helped me in preparing this paper; also

sovereign power where they promptly estab- Lord Moran for permiission to discuss the

lished themselves in an iron tyranny; material sent to me by his committee.

The American Journal of Human Genetics

A quarterly record of research, review, and bibliographic material relating to heredity in man, and to the applications of genetic principles in medicine, anthropology, psychology, and the social sciences.
Edited for the AmucAN Socarrv or HumAN GENETCS by C. W. CoT'rmuN, University of California, in collaboration with C. N. HERNDON, M. T. MACKLIN, H. W. NORTON, BRONsON Psucz, N. F. WAuR
and A. S. Wmam.

Volume 3

CONTENTS

Number 3

WAARDENBURG, P. J.: A new syndrome combining developmental anomalies of the eyelids, eyebrows and nose root with

pigmentary lacrimalium

defects of the iris and lateroversa, Hyperplasia

head hair and with congenital deafness. (Dystopia superciii medialis et radicis nasi, Heterochromia iridum

canthi totalis

medialis et sive partialis,

punctorum Albinimnus

circumcriptus pilorum (leucismus, poliosis), et Surditas congenita (surdimutitas).)

COTTERMAN, C. W.: Some statistical problems posed by Waardenburg's data on dystopis anthorum and associated anomales.

STEINBERG, ARTHUR G., BECKER, S.WILLIAM, Jun., FITZPATRICK, THOMAS B., and KIERLAND, ROBERT R.: A genetic and statistical study of psoriass.
REED, S. C., CAMBIER, R. K., and APPLEN, J. E.: A colour vision anomaly showing holandric (Y-linked) transmission.

REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY OF HUMAN GENETICS, '951, PART I.

ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION, $8.o-SINGLE NUMBERS, $2.50

Subscriptions and inquiries regarding membership in the Society should be addressed to Dr. S. C. Reed, Dight Institute of Human Genetics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minn.

Eugosn Revbw, VoL XLIV, No. 1

