A NEW MOVEMENT IN FRANCE

By C. P. BLACKER, M.A., M.D.

FOR understandable demographic reasons birth control has been proscribed in France since I920. But in the last
eighteen months a movement led by an active and eloquent lady doctor has been gaining momentum. Dr. Marie-Andree Weill-Halle has formed an association auspiciously called La Maternite' Heureuse whose object it is to get rescinded two articles (quoted below) of a law passed in I920. Her aims deserve to be understood in this country.
France's Demographic Position
France's demographic history and background, which differ in important ways from our own, must be taken into account in assessing the new movement. France's birth rate began to decline about a hundred years before that of other Western countries. In- I650 France contained nearly a fifth of the population of Europe; in I930 about a twelfth. In i8oo France's population was second only to that of Russia; but in I850 she was overtaken by Germany, in i88o by Austria-Hungary, in I900 by the United Kingdom and in I930 by Italy. M. J. Bourgeois-Pichat, a distinguished French demographer, has shown that if France's fertility had held its 1770 level till i88o, when our own birth rate began to decline, her population would then have numbered 88 instead of 38 million.
During the later inter-war years France's birth rate fell below her death rate so that, immigration apart, her population was declining. This seemingly disastrous movement activated long-standing forebodings. These feelings were shared in attenuated form by many in this country who saw in current French experience a forewarning of what was in store for us. Our own misgivings, which were largely responsible for the appointment in I944 of our Royal

Commission on Population, were not effectively dissipated until the publication in I949 of that Commission's highly reassuring forecasts. Adequate fertility rates in the last seven years have still further assuaged the misgivings of twenty years ago.
A Conviction Shaken
In I948 the members of our Royal Commission held consultations with French demographers who then firmly believed that, in their bearings on population policies, humanitarian considerations were at variance with demographic necessities. In the words of a memorandum of France's Haut Comite de la Population (I946):
Experience has shown that all birth control propaganda, in a circumscribed population, carries with it a fall in natality much more rapid than the recovery which can be expected from a positive population policy.... The concern for humanity which inspires it (the birth control movement) rhust not make us forget vital necessities, for the risk is not negligible of seeing humanity disappear through an excess of humanitarianism.
This pessimistic assessment-that widening familiarisation with birth control was ineluctably followed by depopulation-has scarcely been borne out by .the events of the last twelve years. In most Western countries, what could be called contraceptive sophistication has spread; young people of to-day are less inhibited and better informed than their counterparts twenty years ago. Nevertheless birth rates have risen. Our own position, discussed by Mr. Peter Cox in a recent issue,* is now better (in the sense that numbers are larger) than the Royal Commission on Population thought probable. In the United States, where contraceptive
*Demographic Developments in Great Britain since
the Royal Commission on Population. EUGENICS REVIEW. April, 1955.

213
THE EUGENMCS REVIEW, January, I957. 48, 4

214 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

sophistication is almost certainly more wide- But the capable hand of M. Alfred Sauvy,

spread than before the war, the annual rate the distinguished director of the I.N.E.D.,

of increase during the decade I940-50 (I-36 is discernible.

per cent) was nearly double that of the Though the I.N.E.D. is keenly interested

decade I930-40 (0o70 per cent); the annual in welfare, its main concern is with

rate of increase has been sustained since I950 demography. Hence its statement pays

and the population of the United States is more attention to demographic issues

now thought to be increasing faster than than to those humanitarian considerations

that of India. But events in France naturally which weigh so heavily with would-be

have most weight with French demographers. revisionists of the law of I920. But within

It cannot- be said of France, as it can be the demographer's impersonal framework,

confidently said of the United Kingdom the discussion is balanced. A sincere effort

and the U.S.A., that there has been an has obviously been made to present fairly

increase in contraceptive sophistication in and impartially the relevant facts (mostly

the last twenty years. Nevertheless France's numerical) and factors (many intangible and

post-war upsurge of births (responsive to a psychological). A prefatory note declares

costly national programme of allowances that the I.N.E.D. advances no doctrine.

and other family benefits) has done some- " Its collaborators may have divergent if

thing to mitigate, though not to remove, pre- not opposed ideas on religious and moral

war misgivings. France's annual rate of questions and therefore on the propriety of

increase of population for the five years such or such legislation "; hence the article

before the I936 census was oo3 per cent; does not aim at imposing an opinion on

for the ten years before the I946 census, the reader but seeks rather to enable him to

there was an annual decrease of o034 per make up his own mind on the most solid

cent; while for the eight years before the attainable basis of facts.

I954 census, the annual rate of increase was Among the considerations set out by the

o-66 per cent. In I954, the rate of natural I.N.E.D. are the following:

increase (migration excluded) was, in France, The recent upsurge of births is acknow-

o-68 which was appreciably higher than ledged as an event without which the present

that of the United Kingdom (o039 per cent). controversy would not have arisen. This is

The results of an ambitious population understandable for while doctrinal positions

policy have thus been satisfactory so far. do not change, demographic events do. New

But can they be counted upon to persist? political orientations have a bearing: on the

Present Standpoint of the I.N.E.D. one hand conservative groups, hitherto

The Institut National d'Etudes Demo- " anti-malthusian" (opposed to birth con-

graplhiques (I.N.E.D.) is a state-sponsored organisation with an impressive list of publications to its credit, among them a valuable book on eugenics written by Dr.
Jean Sutter. * During the last eleven years, the Institute has produced a quarterly journal, Population, to which attention has been

trol) have in recent years been concerned with the high costs of family services;
socialist groups on the other hand have taken cognisance of recent changes of position towards birth control in China and towards abortion in the U.S.S.R. Formal depositions
have, moreover, been made that the law

frequently drawn in this column. In the should be changed by abrogating articles 3 April-June issue of last year (I956) promin- and 4 of the law of July 3ISt, I920 (see

ence was given to an important article below). entitled La Limitation des Naissances en The proposed abrogations, however, would

France which, we are told, has been jointly produced on behalf of the Institute by several authors who remain anonymous.
* L'Eugenique: Probhemes-Methodes-Resultats. 1950.
Reviewed in this Journal, October 1950.

-make fewer additions than might be supposed to the contraceptive appliances now available. The main change, says the I.N.E.D., would be that the diaphragm would become
obtainable. There is nothing now to stop

A NEW MOVEMENT- IN FRANCE

2I5

people using the rhythm method, coitus causes many deaths or much sterility. But

interruptus or the douche (more familiar to "the use of antibiotics has profoundly

French than to English women); or what modified the data" about deaths. Nothing

are called " dual purpose " methods is said about abortion as a cause of later

(produtits d double fin), which can be em- invalidism or ill-health.

ployed both with a contraceptive and a The change in France's fertility pattern

prophylactic intention (prevention of was sudden and there is little doubt that it

venereal diseases). Here are included anti- was largely the outcome of the allowances

septics, gels, foaming and lubricating tablets, and other benefits conferred by the Code

etc. (But the article does not draw attention de la Famille (July I939). " Our country has

at this point of its discussion to the fact that experienced a sort of sudden mutation whose

Article 4 (see below) of the law of I920, date accords well with the passing of the

which the reformers wish to abrogate, makes legislation of I939." But fertility is by no

it a punishable offence to designate, on a means " exuberant "; a birth rate of i8-8

label or by other means, the fact that such a per thousand in I955 provides a margin of

dual-purpose preparation is possessed of about IO per cent in excess of the level

contraceptive properties; and for some needed for replacement.

reason the sheath, the most effective of The change having been sudden, the new

produts d double fin, is not mentioned in this trend is still precariously based. The

connection.)

I.N.E.D. stresses the importance of an

Abortions would not be reduced as much intangible psychological factor-public

as some people expect by the proposed opinion. The attitude towards the mother of

reform. Swedish experiences, presented by a large family has changed since I939.

Dr. Axel Westman to the Population Con- "Formerly quipped, she has often since

ference held in Tokyo during October I955, been envied "; the priorities she now enjoys

are here quoted.

have played their part in the change for the

Nor would illegitimate births be much better in her status. The proposed abroga-

reduced. A table is given showing illegiti- tions might have unfavourable repercussions

macy rates per hundred births in nine in the sphere of psychology and morale.

western European countries; in some of " Legislative intervention of a kind opposed

these countries birth control practices are to the current trend could be interpreted as

discouraged and in others not. The rates an implicit disavowal of these trends (which

range from i6-5 in Austria (which has the favour the family) and might be followed,

lowest birth rate of the nine) to I-4 in the sooner or later, by a calling of the latter into

Netherlands. The U.K.'s rate is 4 8, question." France is sensitised by her long

France's is 6-7 and that of Sweden, where history of declining fertility; hence there is

birth control is widely practised, is 9 9. For a risk that the psychological or indirect

the years' i8oI-50, moreover, Sweden's effects (in undermining morale) of the

illegitimacy rate was 7-0 per hundred births; proposed legislation might outweigh its

but for the corresponding years of the direct effects (in promoting maternal well-

twentieth century (I90I-50), when con- being).

traceptive practices were more prevalent, Such legislation could also produce adverse

the illegitimacy rate was I3-2-nearly qualitative effects by widening the span of

double the figure for the earlier period. If, differential fertility: contraceptive facilities,

say the authors, we are justified in supposing which would be largely ignored by ill-

that illegitimate births are unwanted, these endowed parents of numerous children,

figures do not suggest that contraceptive would be sought by responsible parents. The

sophistication reduces the incidence of latter " could more easily prevent the birth

unwanted pregnancies.

of a fourth, a third, or even a second child"

Reasons are further given for doubting than the former could prevent that of the

whether the practice of abortion in France seventh child.

2I6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

To prevent the new legislation from producing demoralisation by seeming to counteract the trend of family legislation since I939, and also to prevent it from lowering the fertility of better endowed families, a special effort would at the same time be needed to improve the education, housing and general conditions of badly situated families.
The central conclusion reached by the I.N.E.D. is that caution is needed. The available data while not precise enough to point to a solution, nevertheless suggest a rule of conduct: " Since our position is unprecedented and experimental, and since another lapse in natality would probably be irreversible (or very costly to reverse), we would be wise to proceed step by step and to feel our way towards realising the diverse aims that confront us."
The authors of the I.N.E.D.'s report also convey the impression that they are more afraid of the "indirect" effects of an injudicious or unrestrained propaganda, and of possible excesses in the advertisement of contraceptive materials, than of the " direct " effect on fertility of contraceptive practices.
A French Opinion-Survey
In the most recent number of Population, the journal above-mentioned, are published the findings of an inquiry into public opinion in France about birth control.* One of the two authors, M. Raul Samuel, we are told, is a professor in the University of Chile. The inquiry was prompted and is sponsored by the I.N.E.D., whose advocacy of caution in respect of. abrogating the law of I920 iS endorsed by the two authors. The results, not all of which are in entire accordance with expectation, are interesting. They show how differences of opinion on the proposed abrogation follow scholastic, political, religious, occupational and other cleavages and
* Une Enquete sur l'Opinion Publique a l'Egard de
.la Limitation des Naissances, by Alain Girard and Raul Samuel. 1956. Population, July-September -number.

are also associated with age and size of family.
The inquiry is based on the replies, given between May 20th and June 30th, I956 (less than six weeks) by 2,432 men and women aged twenty and over, distributed throughout France, to a large team of 22I investigators. The report was published in November. The task was thus put through with what must be nearly record speed for peace time. Six months only elapsed between the beginning of the investigation in May and the publication of the results in November. The investigators were so numerous that each could actomplish his small task in a short time. The I.N.E.D. can clearly work quickly when it wishes. Background information was collected about age, marital status, number of children, occupation, religion and political affiliation. Questions asked on these topics were:
Do you belong to a religion? If yes, which? If yes, would you consider yourself as practising, not practising, or indifferent? If a general election were held tomorrow, for which party would you vote?
We are told that the question about politics evoked more reticence than those about religion. These " background questions " were supplemented by fifteen further questions of which the first five were concerned with general knowledge. One of these deserves notice. It asks: " Have you ever heard birth control mentioned?" (Avez-vous entendu parler de la limitation des naissances?) More respondents replied No (49
per cent) than Yes (44 per cent).' An analysis of the affirmative' responses shows that newspapers, reviews and books were included as possible sources of information.
These figures could engender misgivings about the design and conduct of the inquiry. How did the 22I investigators interpret this somewhat indefinite question? Was it explained in the same way by all? And were the respondents entirely truthful in their replies? The authors seem to have had doubts, for they draw attention to the misfit between what is professed and what is
practised (le decalage entre le realite et les

A NEW MOVEMENT IN FRANCE

declarations du public concernant la limita- gives figures for the 2,432 respondents

ti6n des naissances). French people, they according to distributions by sex, age,

go on to say, have practised birth control for residence, region and profession. The per-

I50 years. The reader may wonder how far centages accord well with figures for France

this " decalage " applies to the other as a whole, which suggests that much care

questions on the same topic.

was given to the sampling' problem. The

In the remaining ten questions, opinions following are the main findings: were sought on the following subjects: Family allocations are perhaps not as

family and other allowances (allocations widely favoured as might have been expected. familiales: are they approved, approved with A little over half (54 per cent) approve; but reservations, or not approved?); the present another 34 per cent approve with reserva-

French birth rate (is it too high, what it tions. Among these reservations are that ought to be, or too low?); sexual education in allocations may give rise to abuses such as

school (a good or bad innovation?); marriage idleness, alcoholism, waste and irresponsible guidance services (should these exist in breeding (" lapinisme "). Some 17 per cent

France?); birth control clinics (should these of respondents mention these abuses, but be established in France?); doctors at child the percentages in the two relevant tables

welfare and maternity centres (should these do not quite tally. Ten per cent of the

be allowed to give advice on birth control?); respondents disapproved of the allocations.

the proposed abrogation of sections 3 and 4 The question on the birth rate elicited the

of the law of I920 (is the abrogation, whose somewhat surprising result that 37 per cent

effect would be to widen accessibility to of the sample opined that the French birth

birth control knowledge, approved or dis- rate was too high. Opinion on this topic

approved?); and the effects on the birth rate varied with political party, the Poujadists

of a generalised knowledge of contraception being those who most widely held this view

(would there be no change, a slight fall, or a (48 per cent). Only 9 per cent of the sample

pronounced fall?).

thought that fertility should be higher. The

These are on the whole fair and nontendentious questions, though the last could scarcely fail to provide ammunition for opponents of the projected legal reform. It might, perhaps, have been balanced by another question such as the following:
Seeing that Britain and the U.S.A. have, since the war, maintained fertility at a level sufficient for replacement despite the wide

authors comment on a change of opinion since I947 when, instead of 9 per cent, a majority wished to see fetility higher. The factors which the authors hold responsible for the prevalence to-day of the belief that the current birth rate is too high were " a Malthusian outlook on economic affairs,
fear of strikes and of unemployment." This view is more widely held by workmen

accessibility in those countries of facilities for (ouvriers) than by other occupational groups

limiting births, do you regard it as possible that, covered by the sample.

with similar facilities for limiting births as widely available, and with present family allocations maintained or if needed increased,

Sexual education in schools is approved by a majority (57 per cent); 3I per cent

natality in France could similarly be maintained disapproved and I2 per cent expressed no

at replacement level?

opinion. Marriage guidance services are

The presentation of the figures can be supported by 'a majority-48 per cent in

criticised on the grounds that in the many favour against 33 per cent opposing. All

tables percentages only are shown; in but religious and political groups covered by the

two tables are the figures given on which sample agree in having majorities in favour

the percentages are based. One suspects of marriage guidance.

that, in a breakdown by political parties, The establishment of birth control clinics

of which nine are recognised, some of the in France receives less support than might

groups must be small. We are given no clue perhaps have been expected. A bare over-all

as to how small. The first table, however, majority is in favour: 45 per cent approve,

2I8 7

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

43 per cent disapprove. But among women The second and perhaps surprising finding aged 20-49, who are separately tabulated, is that opposition to the reform increases with

the proposal finds more favour; 52 per cent the size of the family. It might have been approve and 38 per cent oppose. There is supposed that the degradation and poverty much variation among adherents of the nine often entailed by numerous children would

political parties: communists are the best have disposed the parents to welcome the disposed group (68 per cent approve, I9 per reform of a law which penalised the practice

cent oppose), and socialists run second.
The M.R.P. are in strongest opposition with corresponding figures of 24 and 65 per cent.
That doctors in maternity and child
welfare centres should be allowed to give
advice on birth control commends itself more than does the establishment of special
clinics. Fifty-five per cent approve, 35 per cent oppose; but more than double the women aged 20-49 approve than oppose.
With respect to the abrogation of the restrictive articles of the law of I920-the
objective of Mme. Weil-Halle and her association-there is no preponderance of opinion either way. The policy of status quo and the policy of abrogation are each supported by 43 per cent of the sample. But again women aged 2-49 are more favourably
disposed to reform. Forty-nine per cent favour abrogation and 38 per cent oppose it.
The opinions of party groups are divided on the same general lines as over the issues of special clinics and advice by doctors. Among communists there. are more than three times more supporters¢;than opponents of abrogation; among the M.R.P. more than three times as many opponents as supporters.
The last question deals with the effects of the proposed abrogation on France's future birth rate. A large majority (78 per cent) opined that the rate would be lowered; I3 per cent only thought that no effect would ensue. The authors of the report consider that this finding has central importance.

of birth control. But not so. Among those respondents (married or widowed) who were
childless the attitude to reform was favourable in 50 per cent and unfavourable in 38 per cent; but among parents of four or more children 33 per cent supported the reform and 55 per cent opposed it. A partial explanation of this anomaly may be in terms of age; the more numerous the children, the older the parents are likely to be; and age is associated with a distaste for reform. Another ppssible explanation may be that old people who have completed their reproductive lives are grateful for the support they receive from numerous-children.
The finding on which the authors lay most stress is the prevalence of the view that abrogation of the law would be followed by a lowering of the birth rate. They conclude their report as -follows:
The population being persuaded that the publicity favouring the limitation of births and the newly acquired institutional character of the movement favouring limitation will have a negative influence on natality, its attitude towards fertility runs the risk of being changed by these measures because of the psychological reversal which must ensue.
If this is the major lesson to be learned from this inquiry, it confirms the standpoint adopted by the I.N.E.D. in the preceding number of Population. Prudence must be recommended to those responsible for action. They should, in any case, have a clear idea of the final objective they are pursuing in the sphere of political demography.

Two other findings are noteworthy. The

first is not surprising; the second perhaps is.
Opposition to reform increases steadily with age. The younger the respondents, the more

The I.N.E.D. in 1956 compared with the Haut Comite in 1946

favourable they are to the provision of Thus the position taken by the I.N.E.D.

knowledge and facilities and to Mme. Weill- has been conveniently fortified by the results

Halle's projected reform. Half the women of its swiftly conducted inquiry. This

of 20-34 support her compared to a quarter position, though cautious, differs from that of those aged 65 and over. The force of assumed by the Haut Comite in I946. Birth

tradition is hereby illustrated.

control, declared the Haut Comite', would, if

A NEW MOVEMENT IN FRANCE

widely practised in any country, be unavoidably followed by depopulation. The lotus (of planned parenthood) could, they said, indubitably mitigate suffering; nevertheless it was invariably lethal.
This fatal outcome, the I.N.E.D. now recognises, is not inevitable. Other countries have eaten the lotus and have not perished; indeed some almost seem to have benefited. France's present position nevertheless remains highly precarious. After a uniquely prolonged history of declining fertility, she has in peace time been confronted, as has no other country in like circumstances, with an actually declining population. But by bold and costly expedients her fertility has recently been hoisted to a level IO per cent above replacement. Can France's economy, like Atlas sustaining the heavens on his shoulders, continue to bear the strain? Like a patient making a suspiciously rapid convalescence, the birth rate is now being nervously watched. The family doctor and the specialist (the politician and the demographer), the one equipped with injections of strychnine, the other ready with expert advice, are alert and standing by.
No risks, both say, should yet be taken. The patient is not yet out of the wood. He must learn to walk before he can run and, above all, he should be protected from sudden shocks. What is more, says the anxious family doctor, we cannot yet be entirely sure that the patient can continue to pay for the very expensive treatment which has suddenly galvanized him back to life; and in any case the lotus, whose physiological effects are not wholly predictable and whose virtues can be most injudiciously advertised, may prove a damaging antidote to the stimulating treatment from which he is now benefiting. The " secondary" psychological effects on the patient of eating the lotus can, moreover, be more demoralising, and are more to be feared, than its " primary" physical effects.
The Law of July 31st, 1920
This law, we are told, was hastily passed, almost without discussion, during the troubled

aftermath of the first world war. It has, seven articles of whic-h the first two are concerned with the practice of abortion. Articles 3 and 4, here relevant and given below; are the ones which Mme. Weill-Halle's association is seeking to abrogate.
Article 3. He will be punished by one month to six months' imprisonment and by a fine of I,000 to 5,000 francs who, with the aim of anti-conceptionist propaganda, will have, by any of the methods specified in articles i and 2,* described or divulged, or offered to reveal, procedures appropriate for preventing pregnancy, or, further (offered) to facilitate the employment of these procedures. The same punishment will be applicable to anyone who, by any of the means set out in article 23 of the law of
July 29th, i88i, will have yielded to propa-
ganda against conception or against childbirth.
Article 4. By the same sanctions will be punished infractions of articles 32 and 36 of the law of 2Ist Germinal, year XI, whenever secret remedies are designated, by labels notices or any other means, as possessing specific properties preventive of pregnancy, even when the claims on behalf of these properties are mendacious.
La Maternite Heureuse
The object of the association which bears the above title is to abrogate the two articles above set out. In the first of what is promised to be a series of bulletins, published during Septemnber I956, Mme. Weill-Hall', the president of the association, declares her position. Something, someone, she says,
* Article i is concerned with propaganda (in favour of abortion); article 2 with the traffic in abortifacient drugs and appliances. The following methods of propaganda about abortion are made punishable in article i: public discourses; the sale, offer of sale (public or private), exhibition, postering (affichage), distribution to people's homes or through the post or through agents concerned with distribution and transport, of books, writings, printings, announcements, posters, drawings, pictures or diagrams; publicity given in the premises of doctors or selfstyled doctors.
Article 2 makes punishable the sale and distribution, or responsibility for the sale and distribution, of abortifacient objects or of objects purporting to be
abortifacients.

220 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

has been left out of the controversies in What, then, Mime. Weill-Halle is essentially

which churchmen and demographers have so expressing is a protest on behalf of

vigorously participated the woman. French French women at being callously regarded

women, she says, are to-day confronted by and irresponsibly treated by laws affecting

dilemmas. One of these is created by the the intimacies of family life. Women are

new responsibilities now being undertaken not abusing the responsibilities now being

on the plane of the family and through extended to them in other walks of social

women's participation in the country's social life; they will not do so here. A false dilemma

life. Another is that acknowledged but is being buttressed by a false assessment of

arbitarily dismissed by the Haut Comite in women. If liberated from the repressive and

I946-which should come first, Nation or outmoded articles of the I920 law, they will

Family? But this, we are assured, is a false prove the baselessness of the demographer's

dilemma, an artefact. If women 'are to play misgivings.

a full part in social life, their new responsi- The booklet further includes a useful

bilities entail the wife's liberty to regulate account of how the movement for reform has,

her conceptions-" aliberty on which depends in a short time, gained momentum. It began

a large part of her equilibrium and dignity with a law suit in March I955. There followed

and which conditions in similar degree the. a crescendo of discussion in the Press wherein

dignity and harmony of the home." Attempts many newspapers and journals joined. And

to raise the birth rate by suppression have in I956 three propositions de loi have been

failed. France's savage legislation against deposed by sixteen deputies. All these call

abortion has been a noteworthy failure. for the abrogation of the above-quoted

Abortion, the volume of which in France it is articles.

useless to discuss, is increasingly rarely It would be interesting to know what are

followed by death or invalidism. " Happily the predominant reactions of the I.N.E.D.

for the health of women and for the demo- to this proposal. Would the suggested

graphic future of the country, many abor- abrogation be regarded as too big a jump?

itions have no histories." Nevertheless the Would it be likely to let loose the sort of

results are serious. " Abortion, even if propaganda of which many demographers

desired by the woman, constitutes a profound are particularly afraid? It is possible that

physical and moral frustration of her whole M. Sauvy would prefer a more cautious

being which can have grave after-effects." approach, such for example as the authorisa-

It is deplorable that. "clandestine abortion tion of doctors in maternity and child

remains, at the risk and peril of women, as welfare centres to give advice according to

the only sa'fety valve which enables them to their discretion. There was a 20 per cent

avoid the birth of an unwanted child."

majority in favour of this proposal among

Women, the bulletin affirms, will, if the respondents to the I.N.E.D.'s question-

treated as responsible beings, rise to their naire; and the risks of irresponsible publicity

responsibilities. The recent increase in through advertisements and propaganda

fertility is welcomed. " For good Frenchmen would be less than with the more drastic

the question does not arise of wanting to measure of abrogation.

reduce a natality which has been so much

desired." Predictions about future movements in fertility are notoriously precarious.

A Relevant Inquiry

M. Sauvy has reminded us of how the Mme. Weill-Halle favours research. An

twentieth century is surfeited with mistaken inquiry which, rather surprisingly, has not

previsions about natality. " The factors now been pursued as far as it deserves is the

operative are so numerous and so complex relation between the mental health of

that our best demographers are swimming children and the size of their sibships. The

in open hypothesis (nagent en pleine only -child is apt to be spoiled and may

hypothese)."

suffer later from this; the numerous children,

A NEW MOVEMENT IN FRANCE

22I

many misconceived and unwanted, of
irresponsible parents are apt to be neglected
and soured. From the child's point of view, what is the best sibship size? The records of peediatricians and child guidance clinics might throw light on the matter.
Common sense suggests that, provided the children are planned, wanted, welcomed
and properly cared for, the larger the sibship the better for the child's character and mental health. In a large and well-knit family, a child is taught to take its place. For but a short time it is the centre of attention, from which precarious position it is displaced by the next child. It learns early that others besides itself have claims; and the edges of selfishness are early worn
down. If it could be clearly shown that a child
benefits in mental health and character by having two or three brothers and sisters, a powerful argument would be placed in the hands of those -who fear depopulation-an
argument which carries much more weight with parents than do the impersonal exhortations of demographers about maintaining national levels of fertility. Economic considerations of a prudential character are to-day mainly responsible for keeping down the number of planned pregnancies. How effective a counterweight to these prudential considerations could we make out of the argument that the first child should, in its own psychological interests, be provided with two or three sibs? Philoprogenitiveness is no less powerful a motive than prudence. Fortified by moral encouragement, enlightened by a judicious publicity, and buttressed by appropriate material aids, more could be made of this sentiment, to the advantage of both the individual and the country, than

has been done hitherto. From the standpoint
of countries placed in the low fluctuating stage of the population cycle, where misgivings exist about the possibilities of depopulation, this " paediatric argument "
for a family-size of over two has a double merit. Not only could it allay fears 'of a
quantitative decline below a desired level; it could also assuage misgivings about quality. These apprehensions are advanced by conservative French demographers who
oppose the projected reforms. As mentioned above, these contend that the best elements in any population will be first influenced, and
the worst elements last influenced, by a propaganda favouring birth control. The opposite could be said of the paediatric argument here described; it would appeal most to the best elements and less to the
others. Its effects would thus be eugenic. The proposed investigation would be deli-
cate but not impossible. If the expected findings emerged, the paediatric argument for a family size of over two would, in an age of increasing statistics-sophistication, be much
strengthened. Mme. Weill-Halle'could then say,
to the French Minister of Health and Population: " Soft-pedal the argument that French mothers are behaving selfishly by permitting France's national level of fertility to sag.
Tell the mother instead-and get your doctors at child welfare centres to tell herthat the kindest and best thing she can do for little Jean (or whatever her first-born child is
called) is to supply him with two or more brothers or sisters."
The " paediatric argument " could become a potent instrument in the hands of the demographer concerned with positive population policies; also in the hands of the eugenists.

