MULTIPLE INTEST1NAL TUMOURS: A FAMILIAL DISEASE
By CUTHBERT DUKES, M.Sc., M.D., D.P.H.

T HE object of this paper is to bring to

the notice of students of eugeics a

rare form of s nal disease which

.aj9

may be traced through tain families. In

individuals affected by this disease the lining

membrane of the large itestine (colon and

rctum) becomes covered with umerable

tumours, varying from a pin's head to per-

haps an inch in diameter. These are formed by the prolifer~tion of the cells of the intestinal mucous mebane, and are somewhat
milar nm their character to warts on the
skin. Because of their shape these tumours are called polypi, or, from their microscopic characters, adenomata. The disease i known to doctors as polyposis intestini or multiple adenomata, and its interest to students of eugenicsliesinthe fact that it is transmitted as an inherited defect.
Children born of parents suffering from polyposis testini exhibit no symptoms of intestinal disease for the first few years, during which time the surface of the bowel is

normal in appearance. In the later period of childhood or early adult life the inner lining
membrane of the large intestine gradually becomes covered with tiny little swefings. At first these changes do not give rise to any
symptoms but as the tumours grow in size they cause intestinal irritation and later perhaps diarrhoea and small haemorrhages. The true nature of the disease can only be determined by examination with the sigmoidoscope, an instrument *hich gives the surgeon a view of the rctum and pelvic colon. it is surprising to see how widespread the tumours may be and yet how slight the inconvenience or ill health they cause. Before

KE so-Tmws usw

mocau

rez"seti.fci o RL.sss !w7u.yt,

long, however, many serious signs make their appearance because one or more of these

simple tumours may undergo a malignant

O r nB

change. For the benefit of those to whom this

subject is entirely new it may be well to

explain that pathologists divide tumours

L FAMLY.

S Cb* I

wt g Vs.Tw.OAO." .ea.lv

Coa"se O W^* *4

1k.

CoArS S
S

@ ro.ws

su c U qP LsS'
241

4 .43

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

into two min groups: (I) the simple, b

or non-mainant, and (2) the malignant

group (which icludes cance and similar

tumours known as sarcomata). The chief

points of disiction are that the non-

malignant tumours remain clied to the

place from which they arise and cause njury l& * w *

0

only by their local effect. The malignant

tumours, on the other hand, gradually

infiltrate the surrounding tissues and frag-

ments may be carried by the blood-stream or lymphatic system to distant organs to become the seeds of secondary growths. To decide whether a tumour is non-malignant or malignant, microscopic examination is often necessary. The appearance and arrangement of the tumour cells is very different in each

the thirtieth year of life and it may commence even in hildhood.
It would be out of place in this journal to go into further details of the diagnosis, course, and treatment of this disease.* My object is only to draw the attention of students of eugenics to a disease which

certainly belongs to the group in which a

M. FAMILY

hereditary factor can be observed. There are

many details of the mode of inheritance in

which our knowledge is incomplete, but

sufficient has been learnt so far to show that

the defect responsible for this disease may be

transmitted by both males and females, that

both males and females suffer from the

disease, and that the inheritance can be

traced through several generations. Because

of the great frequency with which this defect

leads to cancer a further study of its path-

ology may throw light on the aetiology of

malignant disease in general, but it must be

group. The non-malignant tumours were pointed out that the remarkable incidence of called innocent (and even designated benign) cancer in these families does not prove that

because of their less serious nature, but

certain varieties show a tendency to change

5 FAmILY

and assume malignant characters. The

likelihood of this most senous occurrence depends on the character and situation of

I

.Q A 5

4

the growth. The adenoma, or non-malignant

tumour of the intestinal epithelium, is very

liable to change to a cancer.

This is the tragedy whichthreatens families

afflicted with polyposis intestini, and cancer

6

of the intestine becomes a very common

cause of death. Malignant disease develops

at an earlier age also in such families than

amongst the general population. Intestinal

cancer is usually a disease of the later part of middle life or of old age, but in the polyposis intestini families cancer often appears before

* Readers interested in the medical details will find a general review of the history of the disease with a comprehensive bibliography in an article by Cuthbert
Dukes in the Caxcer Rvew, April 1930, pp. 24x-56.

MULTIPLE INTESTINAL TUMOURS: A FAMILIAL DISEASE 243

cancer it is inherited. T"he n ted defect

appears to be an increased tendency to

mepuicthoeulsiamlempbrorlainfeer.atiTohniss

of the leads to

intestinal the growth

of the adenoma, a variety of non-malignant

tumour which is notoriously liable to undergo

malignant change. For this reason it is

lhe accompanying pedigree charts are all preaed from patients who have attended or are attending St. k's Hospital, London, and I am very much indebted to the hospital surgeons, and particularly to Mr. Lockhart Mummery, for facilities for carTying out the inquiries necessary for the

sometimes described as a precancerous lesion. compiling of these family trees.

READY SHORTLY WITH NUMEROUS ILLUSTRATIONS, DEMY 8vo. PRICE 15.. net.
THE CHANCES OF

MORBID INHERITANCE

duted by C. P. BLACKER, M.C., MA., M.D., M.R.C.P.

GCrat Secruday of Oh Euozmcs SocITY

COJVTENTS:

introduction. By Sm HUMPHRY ROLLESTON, Br., G.C.V.O., K.C.B., M.D., D.Sc., LLD.

G tc P pl By Poa. R. RUGGLES GATES, F.R.S. Hereditary Nervous De . By W. RUSSELL BRAIN, D.M., F.R.C.P. Inertance of Epilepsy. By W. RUSSELL BRAIN, D.M., F.R.C.P.

Inheritance of Mental Disorders. By A. J. LEWIS, M.D., M.R.C.P.

Inhertane
Hereditary

of Mental Deficency. B
Dl of th E". By SI

HENRY HERD, MA., M.B. STEWART DUKE-ELDER,

D.Sc.,

PH.D.,

M.D.,

F.R.C.S.

Hereditary Dsae of the Ear. y R. J. CANN, M.S.

Inheritanc of Asthma and AMerlc Di . By GEORGE BRAY, M.B., CH.M.

Heredtay D of the Blood. By L. J. WITTS, M.D., F.R.C.P. Heredtar Cardio-Vacular Diseas. By MAURICE CAMPBELL, M.D., F.R.C.P.

Hereditary Rnal D . By A. A. OSMAN, D.S.C., F.R.C.P.

HHHHHHeeeeeerrrrrreeeeeeddddddiiiiittttttaayayyrrrIayiyynnnSGNdDCaeirosTneputtlbrDaneosir-tisuIimlnca.MotesDe.litlsinii.amtBalpuyBlD.yeLa.nEia.dFnBaOdRyR.Re.TAnMBo.aAxOlPiLBNIcGyA,NlNGEMyMoDY.ci.,,otDEur.M.Mer,...iSDRMa..H.B.C,RAy..WPMBCH..,y..,RP.RM.GDC...A.DPDPR....,DHL.IMAN.ERW.RRC-E;HPNI.CLEL,,MM..DD..,,FF..RR..CC..PP..

Congtal Appd

Abnormalities " AeInAysis

of the Skeleton.
of Pedigrees."

By PaO. H. A. HARRIS, D.Sc., By Ptov. LANCELOT HOGBEN,

M.B.
M.A.,

D.Sc.

Glossary of Genetic and Psychiatric Terms.

Schedule for Recordingl Pathological Pedigrees.

Index.

LONDON: H. L LEWIS and CO. LTD., 136 GOWER STREET, W.C.1

E nic Revi, VoL XXV, o. 4.

