INFANT AND MATERNAL MORTALITY

By RICHARD M. TITMUSS

O UR knowledge of the processes of The Problem. The investigation sought mammalian reproduction, and par- information on:

ticularly of human reproduction, is (i) The influence of the age and parity

still pitifully inadequate. We know far too of a woman on

little about the etiology of reproductive waste-i.e. about infantile and matemal mortality, stillbirth, and prematurity-and
are even hazy about the magnitude of the problems they constitute. We do not know,

(a) Her own chance of survival in child-
birth. (b) Her own chance of survival for five
years after child-birth. (c) The child's chance to survive till five

for example: (i) the total number of deaths

years of age.

directly and indirectly due to maternity, (2) the true rate of infant mortality (by
order of birth and age of mother), (3) the
incidence of spontaneous abortions, and (4)

(d) The probability of the child's death occurring before or during birth, in the first month of post-natal life, from
I month to i year, or from I-5 years.

the size and structure of British families and (2) The influence of a high death rate at

the relationship of mortality thereto. Defects any stage on later death rates among the

in the classification of infant deaths were same group of children.

revealed recently by Miller(') and until this (3) The influence of the rate of reproduc-

year we had no precise knowledge of the tion on the chance of survival of mother

ages at which child-bearing occurred. (2) and child.

Even in such a simple matter as the crude (4) The. possible effect of certain social

infant mortality rate, serious distortion may factors such as father's occupation, housing

arise owing to the time-lag between birth and legitimacy on the conclusions drawn

and its registration. Thus the introduction from consideration of the biological factors.

of an incentive to immediate registration The material comprised the records of the

(e.g. rationing) might, by artificially inflating Health Visitors of the Maternity and Child

the annual number of births by 70,000, Welfare area of the County of Durham for

reduce the apparent rate of mortality in one the years I930-37. The.major part of the

year by as much as I5 per cent.

work concerns I7,049 births in I930, the

These are serious obstacles to progress history of the survivors for the first five

from a medical repair scheme to a social years of their lives, and the history of the

prevention service. Without the facts, previous pregnancies in the families studied.

physiological, chemical, genetic, social -and The text of the report is closely packed with

environmental, there can be no true com- statistical matter and there are 76 Tables,

prehension of the causative agencies. In the 6 Diagrams and I2 Appendices. It is im-

past we have often had to rely on a few possible in this notice to summarize the whole

public-spirited workers for the garnering of of the investigation but we may record some

new facts or the employment of existing, of the more important findings.

but unutilized, sources of information. To Infant Mortality. The study confirms,

this category belongs Mrs. C. M. Burns, the indisputably, that too rapid breeding is

author of a recently published study on harmful to both mother and child, and that

infant and maternal mortality.(3)#

very early and very late child-bearing are

*Infant and Maternal Mortality in relation to size of
Family and Rapidity of Breeding. With a Foreword by Lord Eustace Percy. University of Durham. Price ss.

also productive of high mortality. These findings are not new but they emphasize afresh how undesirable is the structure of

85

86 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a society in which in one class very early nowhere told the number of deaths on which

marriage is provoked by maximal earnings the report is based. It would seem, according

occurring at youthful ages, and in another to the rates given, that there were approxim-

undue postponement of marriage results from ately 2,452, of which 656 were stiRlbirths,

incomes being inadequate until middle-age. 1,270 infant deaths, and 526 deaths at ages

The lowest death rates for considerable groups 1-5 years. A further calculation seems to

were found among first, second, and third show that these figures include io8 deaths of

children born to mothers between 20-35, illegitimate children and I3I multiple deaths

and fourth and fifth children to mothers (some of which were presumably illegitimate).

between 35-40. Of all children born alive, A total of 2,452 deaths divided into four age

first children had the lowest death rates. groups (stillbirths, neo-natal, I-I2 months

The incidence of stillbirths per I,000 total and I-5 years), divided again into birth-rank

births varied from 43 for first births, 26 for up to I3 plus, and further subdivided accord-

second, 32 for third, rising thereafter to 64 ing to maternal age, leaves a very small

for seventh and later births. Late children of number of deaths in each group. Further-

large families returned high mortality at all more, we cannot, in many of the tables, tell

stages, i.e. before, during and after birth and the proportionate weight involved by the

up to five years of age. Throughout the inclusion of the deaths of illegitimate children

investigation it is shown that maternal age and of multiple births. 'When the number of

and rate of breeding are of considerable deaths is so small (ranging in many cases

importance whatever the parity of the child. from 3-50) these and other factors may be

Thus, at all stages, births to older women are important. Thus one third of the births

more frequently associated with stillbirths under twenty were illegitimate, and multiple

and neo-natal deaths. Tables and diagrams births (the incidence of which apparently

are provided which show (a) the number of rises with increasing birth-rank) must have

births in each group, and (b) death rates at a considerable effect on the death rate

different stages (stillbirths, neo-natal, I-I2 of later children. The influence of the

months and I-5 years) according to parity, abnormally high twinning rate in Durham

maternal age, rate of breeding, legitimacy in I930 was not negligible, because it

and illegitimacy, type of area (urban and produced 25 per cent of the excess infant

rural), social class and rooms per person and mortality and stillbirths over the rate for the

per family. The results of a study of previous whole country.

pregnancies of mothers who gave birth in The variable weight of these disturbing

I930 are shown in tables of rates per I,000 factors coupled with the small number of

pregnancies according to parity, maternal age deaths involved makes many of the conand the incidence of miscarriages and still- clusions somewhat unreal. Thus a discussion

births. Death rates among the previous on illegitimacy (page 36) is based on 7 and 34

children are also given, including estimated deaths; on stillbirths to mothers under

rates for ages up to five and twenty. The twenty (page 36) on 5 and I4 deaths; on a influence of multiple births and the birth comparison of the mining and illegitimate

weight of first children are also studied. groups (pages 36-7) on i86 and 29 deaths;

Part III of this book, which is concerned on mortality among second children to

with maternal deaths and mortality among mothers under twenty (page 32) on i and 8

women of reproductive age, is similarly deaths; and on stillbirth and neo-natal

complex in its study of the age, rank, social rates among first pregnancies to the over 35S

class and other factors. The result of these immense labours is a painstaking report, the

(page 32) on 9 and 9 deaths. The arguments in the text proceed from the death rates (it is

importance of which it is difficult to judge. not always clear whether they are based on

Statistical Problems. It is curious that live or total births), the number of deaths not

although over two-thirds of the work is being shown either in the text or in the tables.

concemed with infant mortality, we are In a great number of cases the differences are

INFANT AND MATERNAL MORTALITY

87

not statistically significant and consequently tion than two adults and five children living

the tables and the conclusions must be in the same degree of overcrowding ?

interpreted with caution. It is clear that if Although Mrs. Bums does not bring out the

any firm conclusions are to be drawn on the point, her study is concerned with a popula-

wide range of problems covered by the report tion which, according to the Registrar-

the sample must be much larger-a task, General, is 52 per cent rural and 48 per cent

in terms of labour, beyond the capacity of urban (the County. Boroughs are excluded

one individual.

from the investigation). This contrasts

The Influence of Overcrowding. From
what has been said about the.basic material, it is apparent that some of the conclusions are insecurely based. Thus, Mrs. Burns finds no association between housing space and
child health. This is contrary to the results obtained by other workers. D'Arcy Hart and Payling Wright(,) in their study of tubercu-

strongly with the position for the whole of England and Wales, where only 2o per cent of the population live in rural areas, 34 per cent in urban districts, and 46 per cent in London and the County Boroughs (193I proportions).
In I93I Durham was the worst housed county in England, and in the field covered

losis considered housing to be an important by the report the degree of variation in factor, while the Registrar-General(5) found housing standards must have been extremely

a high correlation between mortality and slight. Because, therefore, no association was housing even when the two factors of latitude found between housing and child health in and social status were held constant. Durham, it does not necessarily mean that

Stocks(6) in his study of child mortality no such correspondence exists in the whole

showed that density per room at constant of the country. Nor does it mean that there density per acre had the effect of increasing is no association in Durham, for causes of mortality step by step with increasing death, incomes, rents and other factors were density. Tables 32-39 in the Durham report not studied.

which deal with housing are not altogether Social Conditions. The infant death rate

satisfactory. In some comparisons the better per I,000 total births in I930 in the area

housed, in others the worst housed, register covered by the report was 77 (for the I6,500

the heaviest mortality. Again, however, we births of known parity); in the whole of

do not know the number of deaths in each England and Wales the corresponding index

group, although they must be small, nor do was 58. The rate for children of all unskilled

we know whether or not the illegitimate and classes in the country was a little lower than

multiple births are included. The disturbing that of Durham.

effects of rent and family income are not In discussing the causes of this excess

studied, nor is there any consideration of the mortality Mrs. Burns concludes that, in

diseases which resulted in death. The tables addition to housing, " geographical and

combine urban and rural experience, yet climatic conditions are not very important

overcrowding in rural districts is, from many in determining infant and child death rates

aspects, a very different thing from over- compared with other biological and social

crowding in congested urban areas. On factors." An analysis of the I7,000 births

page I90 Mrs. Burns remarks that: " after further subdivided into three groups-

the first month or so, environment plays an miners, other manual workers and black-

enormous part in determining death rates." coated and independent workers-shows the

It is precisely because the infective diseases first group to have. the highest mortality.

become of such importance in this period of This is the nearest approach to a study of

a child's life that, other things being equal, economic causes, but unfortunately we do

housing conditions must play some part -in not know what proportion of the fathers in

determining morbidity and ultimately mor- each group were unemployed, the duration

tality. Surely two adults and one child with of unemployment and so on. In these days

o.6 of a room each are less exposed to infec- of full employment it is a little difficult to

88 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

recapture the economic and psychological between i92i and I935(8). This outward

atmosphere of the depressed areas in the movement must have been selective. In

I930's, but it is important to do so in order other words, the young, the unattached, the

to understand the background of Mrs. small families and probably the most fit and

Bums' work. Lord Eustace Percy in his enterprising would go in search of work else-

Introduction remarks that the report, where. Then again in I93I there were only

" rather understates " the social disfigure- 965 females to I,ooo males in the County

ment of the Durham coalfields. But, with a (excluding the County Boroughs), as against

little imagination, abundant material can be i,o88 for the whole country. This emigration

extracted from the 'Local Unemployment would mean, among other things, that the

Index issued by the Ministry of Labour. larger families would figure prominently in

From I927 to I936 Durham never had less Mrs. Bums' enquiry. It would also mean that

than approximately 20 per cent unemploy- the importance of the " social problem"

ment; from the end of I930 it rose to over group would tend to be exaggerated.

30 per cent, and for considerable periods it All these factors--economic conditions,

was over 40 per cent. In I930 two areas had selective migration, the rural character of

over 6o per cent and three over 40 per cent, the area, a high twinning rate and the

and by I933 14 areas registered more than absenc'e of any analysis of cause of death-

40 per cent unemployment. Over 70 per make it difficult to apply the lessons of the

cent of the unemployed men in Crook, Durham investigation to the country as a

according to the Pilgrim Trust Report, (7) whole.

had been without work for five years or more,
yet despite this the survey found a high standard of home conditions. In addition to
this level of unemployment the County (exclusive of the County Boroughs) in March I930 had over 50,000 persons in receipt of domiciliary poor relief, including
over 2o,ooo children. The rate per io,ooo population amounted to 523, which may be compared with 95 for Surrey and I95 for all counties of England and Wales. In view of this background of economic waste it seems a little unreasonable to state, in connection with the attention given by the social services to the large families, that " despite the care lavished on them they remain relatively poor stock-individuals likely to need constant care and attention throughout
life." And " an enormous amount is being done for these families, but can they be made more self-reliant ? "

The Influence of the Declining Birth Rate.
Mrs. Bums concludes that the improvement in mortality rates over the last few decades has been brought about mainly by the declining birth rate. Undoubtedly this factor has
been of some importance not only in produc-
ing better spacing of births'and in easing biological strains and stresses but in releasing more income for a smaller family. But few
conclusions can be drawn from her com-
parison of the Durham material with the
Registrar-General's i91i report (on child mortality by duration of marriage, maternal
age and size of family for the whole country). In the first place Durham during the I930's
was, as we have shown, quite unrepresentative of the whole country, and, secondly, the I9II . data were, as the Registrar-General
pointed out, unreliable owing to misstatement of age and omission of infant deaths.(9) Moreover, the Registrar-General's data con-

The fact that when the investigation was cerned legitimate and legitimized births

repeated in I936 (for a smaller group cover- where the husband was returned on the

ing 579 stillbirths and 845 infant deaths) no Census schedule, but in the Durham study

great improvement in mortality was recorded we do not know the basic composition of the

is not altogether surprising.

material. How closely the birth rate among.

Another factor which deserved greater the Durham population (about 6o per cent

emphasis is that of migration. It has been of those studied were mining families)

estimated that some 226,000 persons left corresponds with that of the whole mining

Durham (including the County Boroughs) community we do not know, but the report is

INFANT AND MATERNAL MORTALITY

89

incorrect in stating that family limitation has
not spread to the semi-skilled and unskilled classes. It is remarked that as these classes " do not postpone first births markedly family limitation must be brought about, as already suggested for miners, by a more adequate spacing of later births." But as Innes(10) has convincingly shown, unskilled
and semi-skilled miners reduced their fertility between I92I and I93I to a greater extent
than practically every other large occupational group in the community. During the
ten years the unskilled reduced their fertility by 50 per cent; the semi-skilled by 48 per cent; and mine owners and skilled men by 28
per cent. By I93I the fertility of the unskilled men was only slightly higher than that of the mine owners-a notoriously infertile group. If, however, Mrs. Burns is right, then Durham
must be even more unrepresentative than
we had imagined, and the lessons of the report can hardly be applied to other depressed communities such as South Wales and the North-West. In any case the report overlooks the fact that between I9II and 193I the gross reproduction rate of Durham (excluding the County Boroughs) fell by o.86, as compared with the reduction of 0.5I for England and Wales. Indeed, Durham registered the greatest fall of any county in England.
That a high infant death rate (before, during and after birth), functioning as a " weeding-out " process, need not accompany a relatively high birth rate is shown by the vital statistics of other countries and cities.
Holland before the war had by comparison with England an extremely low stillbirth rate, while neo-natal and post-natal mortality were also very low. By 1936 Amsterdam, for instance, had reduced neo-natal mortality to i6 per thousand live births. Yet the net reproduction rate of Holland was, during the I930's, far higher than that of Durham. Nor has -this low child mortality in Holland, which has existed for many years, led to an increased morbidity and mortality at higher ages. And despite their greater fertility, women of reproductive ages in Holland registered far lower death rates than those obtaining in England and Wales, Scotland,

Sweden, Norway and Denmark-all countries of lower fertility. Moreover, the fact that declining mortality cannot be entirely attributed to declining reproductivity has been demonstrated by Kermack, McKendrick and McKinlay(11) in their exposition of generation mortality.
The Factor of Nutrition. The report allots
only four pages to this subject, which is dismissed rather summarily with the remark: " Whether great improvements in the food and physical conditions of. the majority of the people would greatly decrease the numbers of the sick and unfit would seem to be rather a matter for experiment than speculation." There is no recognition of the established facts that sub-optimal growth, liability to infection, dental caries, bone defects, gastro-intestinal hypotonia, liability to hamorrhage and other deficiencies may be attributable to an inadequate intake of certain vitamins. Some authorities indeed now regard pregnancy as a diet-efficiency
test. Nutritional status can to-day be measured objectively by urinary saturation tests, blood tests, estimation of blood hemoglobin levels, glucose-pyruvate toler-
ance tests, and other methods. There have, too, been many conclusive experimentse.g. the Toronto(12) and Norwegian(13) experiments-on the relationship of diet to the health of mothers and infants. Had the Durham investigation studied the incidence of the diseases from which the children died, the need for greater emphasis on diet would
perhaps have been made clear. Furthermore, any discussion of maternal efficiency cannot be complete without some consideration of vitamin Bi deficiency and its relationship to increased irritability, lassitude and general deterioration in mental alertness. To sum
up, the inadequate references in the report to dietetic matters cannot be justified in the light of recent advances in the field of nutrition.
Medical Care. Mrs. Bums has much of
value to say about the association between
the availability of skilled care and attention and both infant and maternal mortality. In this she reinforces some recent conclusions by Baird and Wyper (14). " It may be noted,"

90 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

she writes, " that one of the outstanding (b) the more numerous aged, and (c) the

impressions received from studying the increasing number of the unfit." The last

records relating to some 50,000 women with named, he remarks, "are the misfits of

children was the very low standard of per- civilization who at present form about IO per

sonal health which the women tolerate un- cent of, our population and on whom most

complainingly. How far this tends to make of our social services concentrate. They will

them overlook many of the minor illnesses of form about 30 per cent of the next generation

children which may so readily become major and, if the present fertility rates of this

illnesses cannot be stated. But on general 'submerged tenth' are continued, in two

grounds it might be expected to do so." generations we will be flooded with unskilled

There are a number of blemishes in the labour that industry cannot absorb, unfit

report. The twice repeated statement that people to crowd our hospitals, misfits for our

" it is more dangerous to be a miner's wife asylums and prisons, and, worst of all, the

than to be a miner " is not true, as shown in great army of the ' just not well ' struggling

Columns i-6, Table 7, of the Registrar- on amid circumstances a little too hard for

General's Decennial Supplement (Part IIa, them."

I93I, Occupational Mortality). The assump- It is a pity that an otherwise valuable

tion in Appendix 8 that deaths from tuber- report, comprising much new material (on

culosis at ages 20-45 can be divided equally a great proportion of which we have not been

among the sexes is not warranted by the able to comment), should contain some

known age and sex distribution of the disease. blemishes; should erroneously attempt to

The statement that " the average marriage apply the experience of one abnormally

age of the women of the country as a whole circumstanced community to the whole

is between 2o and 25, but is approaching the country, and should end on a note more

latter figure," is not correct. In I930 the reminiscent of the nineteenth century than

average for all brides was 26.47, and for all of the potentialities of the twentieth.

spinster brides 25.50. Figure 3 on page 33 has a birth number missing and in Table B on page 238 the death rate given as I98 should

References:
(i) Miller, F. J. W. (I942), Lancet, 2. (2) Now available in Registrar-General's Annual

presumably be 98. Table LXIX and Review, 1938, Part II, Civil.

Appendices I0 and II are somewhat unsatisfactory for the reason that they do not

(3) Bums, C. M. (1942). Infant and Maternal Mortality in Relation to Size of Family and Rapidity of Breeding. Dept. of Physiology, King's College, Univer-

take account of the much higher accident rate among males, than females, and that the

sity of Durham. Pp. 247. 5s. (4) D'Arcy Hart, P., and Wright, G. Payling (I939).
Tuberculosis and Social Conditions in England.

age distribution of violent deaths has (5) Statistical Review, Text, I934.

changed markedly since the middle of the nineteenth century. Five of the references

(6) Stocks, P. (I934). Proc. Roy. Soc. Med., I145. (7) Men Without Work. 1938. (8) Minutes of Evidence (i8) of the Royal Com-

given in the text are not included in the list mission on the Geographical Distribution of the

at the end of the book and it is to be
regretted that there is no index. Summary. The report ends on a pessi-
mistic note. Professor David Burns in a strongly worded Conclusion states that the

Insured Population. 1938. 0 (9) Fertility of Marriage, Part II, I923 (page xlviii). (io) Innes, J. W. (194I), Millbank Memorial Fund
Quarterly, Vol. Ig, No. I. (II) Kermack, W. O., McKendrick, A. G., and
McKinlay, P. L. (1934), Lancet, 1. (I2) Ebbs, J. H., Tisdall, F. F., and Scott, W. A.

population trend will mean that " the earners (I941), Nutrition, 22, 5I5.

will have to be taxed or otherwise contribute
towards the upkeep of (a) the fewer young,

(13) Utheim-Toverud, K. (I939), Acta paediatr., 24,
iI6.
(I4) Baird, D., and Wyper, J. F. B. (I94I), Lancet, 8.

Eugenics Rew, Vol. N1V,No. 8.

