ROFESSOR MCDOUGALL'S LAMARCKIAN EXPERIMENT
By M. S. PEASE

T HE third instalment of Professor an increase in the number of errors observed

McDougall's Lanarckian experiment from generation to generation. No ch

on rats is of quite unusual interest by effect was found; the adversely selected

reason of the new data on adverse selection controls, like the unselected experimentals,

now published. It will be remembered that continued to improve. The figures published

in this experimentt, which has now been in (Table IV, p. 224) do not show a steady

progress nce 1920, Wistar rats are dropped improvement-it is inregular from generation

into a tank of water from which there are two to generation. But taking the table as a

exits, one brightly, the other dimly, illumi- whole, undoubtedly improved facility is

nated; the bright platform is so wired that indicated.

a rat emerging on to it from the water gets The authors have no doubt that we are

an electric shock-the dim platform is the here witnessing at work a Lamarckian pro-

safe exit. Professor McDougall and Mr. cess. But of this Professor McDougall and

Rhine have trained and bred these rats, Mr. Rhine are in a far better position to judge

generation by generation, to avoid the than are the readers of the published results,

electrified platform; the figures given for by reason of the persistent omission to give

the average number of errors made per rat the relevant breeding-data on which a gene-

has clearly diminished from over 120per rat ticist would base his judgment. Through-

in the control stocks (p. 222, Table III) to 33 out we are given only figures of average

per rat of the trained stock from the twenty- errors for each generation of rats. It is true

fourth to the thirty-fourth generation (p. 219, that the best and the worst rats of each

Table II). If we compare the figures for the generation are usually noted; but even this

thirteenth to the twenty-third generation of figure would appear to be not an individual

rats with those for the twenty-fourth to the perfornance, but only a batch average

thirty-fourth generation, it is clear that they (comment on top of p. 226). But from a

show an increase in the facility to escape by breeder's point of view, what makes judg-

the safe passage; it is by no means clear, ment difficult, if not impossible, is the

however, that any substantial progress has absence of any pedigree tables. The authors

been made in the last part of the experiment, must surely realize that the issue which this

that is to say from the twenty-fourth to the experiment raises is a fundamental one; for

thirty-fourth generation.

the spectators it is tantalizing to have

By far the most interesting new data withheld just the detailed breeding data

published concerns adverse selection. Thir- which might enable a critical judgment to

teen generations of Wistar control rats were be made. Unless we are given the per-

bred from the parents in each generation formances individually of parents and off-

which had shown the worst performance. If spring at each stage, it is futile to speculate

the increased facility observed in the experi- on the process at work.

mental animals had been due to unintentional The absence of the breeding details is all

selection of cleverer rats, then the inten- the more to be regretted, as the authors seem

tional selection of stupider rats should show to be well on their guard against the pitfalls

of such experimentation. Now and again,

* J. B. Rhine and WilLiam McDougall: British
Joun" of Psycholog (Genral Section), Vol. XXIV,
p. 213. 1933.

however, they betray unexpected lack of critical caution. In 1932 new tanks were

253

254 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

used-they were practically imilar to the McDougall and Mr. Rhine comment that

original tanks; yet we are told that the rats the fiues go to illustate the compartive

found the old tanks 54 per cent. more small inluence of such selection. Surely they

difficult than the new ones. (This figure is equally illustrate the comparative small

arrived at by comparing the average per- influence of such training?

formances of fifty-eight and Sxty-three Fortunately Professor McDougall's ex-

" equivalent " rats in the two baths.) This periments do not stand alone. We are able

is surely a most disturbing figure. For it to compare them with results obtained by

shows that performance is extremely " highly Professor Crew in a repetition of the experi-

geared" to environment, or at any rate to ment.- It is true that Professor Crew's tank

tank environment. If apparently quite is not identical with Professor McDougall's;

tnrvial differences between the two tanks and from what has gone before, it is obvious

" cause " a 54 per cent. shift in the per- that we should avoid making a direct com-

formance results, what significance should parison between the perfornance of the rats

we attach to observed performance differ- in Professor Crew's tank with that of the

ences of 20 per cent. or 30 per cent. or even rats in Profesor McDougall's tank. But

50 per cent.? May not the changes observed Professor Crew's contraption is so silmilar to

in the number of errorsmade be dueto changes Professor McDougall's that milar effects

in the environment unnoticed over ten of training should become clear in the new

years of experimentation? Are we not face experiment, especially since both used Wistar

to face with the basic question as to whether rats. But in fact no such improvement in

the design of the experiment is not too coarse performance was recorded after six genera-

to register differences in the aptitude of rats tions of training; there was no significt

to learn ? To some extent these questions difference between the generations of trained

could be answered if we had before us the rats or between these and the control rats.

individual records of the rats and their Extraordinarily wide differences were found

pedigrees; we could then form some judg- between the individual performances of the

ment of the variability of the material and rats: but selective breeding showed per-

of the degree of inheritance. Professor formance to be to some extent an inherited

McDougall and Mr. Rhine are content to characteristic. Professor Crew tentatively

add 54 per cent. to the errors in the new tank, suggests that what is in question is not so

in order to make comparison with the old much different aptitudes to learn, but rather

tank results.

different types of behaviour.

Mention should be made of Table VI on Be that as it may, the fact remains that

p. 232. The numbers here given are indeed an attempt to repeat Professor McDougall's

small, as the authors point out; but as far experiment has failed. Until a successful

as the figures go, they are entirely subver- repetition is carried out, it would be wise to

sive. We have already drawn attention to suspend judgment. In the meantime Pro-

the adversely selected rats: in Table VI fessor McDougall and Mr. Rhine would be

are set out figures showing the converse well advised to publish in full the pedigree

experiment, intentionally favourable selec- tables and, as far as they can, the individual

tion. For seven generations ratswere trained, performances of the rats; or better still,

each succeeding generation being bred only to invite the collaboration of a trained

from the most successful trainees. The geneticist.

average number of errors made per rat in

the first three generations was sixty-five: in the last three generations ioi. Professor

* Proceedings of the sixth international Congress of Genetics, p. I21, and British Asociation Report, 1933.

Nugemla Oiw VoL xIv!No.4

