INCENTIVES TO PARENTHOOD
Some Data from the Pioneer Health Centre, Peckham By MARY GOWING

SIR WILLIAM BEVERIDGE defines mate, but to find a suitable mate. For to-

the limitations of his scheme more day it is only out of good marriage relation-

clearly than his severest critics. In his ships that larger families can be expected to

Galton Lecture* to the Eugenics Society on issue. In our generation only the happily

February i6th, and in an article in the married couple will have the vitality,

Observer on April iitht, he himself explains courage, stability and faith that are neces-

that his- scheme is supplementary and sary to sustain them through the adventure

secondary. In so doing he has possibly of rearing three, four or more children. Such

proved himself a greater man than the man people, and only such people, can hope to

who has been acclaimed for planning the arrive at true values; for only they will

Beveridge Report. If the Beveridge scheme know that there is deeper and more basic

touches the greatest social problem of our happiness to be found in the mutual interest

time, it only touches it obliquely. As he and enjoyment of rearing a family, even at

says, "Nobody is going to have children in the cost of sacrifice, than in acquiring wireless

these days as a profit-making business," and sets and motor-cars and furniture that makes

again, " People will not have children for them seem richer than the people who-live

pay. next door. It is useless to attack people for

In the Observer Sir William gave some of the reasons why we must not deceive ourselves into thinking that the RegistrarGeneral's latest figures are any indication that the tendency towards a dwindling birth rate has been reversed. He also pointed out
that the recent rise in the marriage rate
cannot be maintained, and in this connection

their selfishness. Selfishness brings its owu punishment as surely as unselfishless brings its own reward, but the punishments come too late to teach their lesson, and when they
come they hit not only at the happiness of the individuals who make a nation, but at the purpose, prestige and power for good of the nation itself.

he used one sentence of particular significance. Sir William, echoing and appreciating the

Women, he said, " have had more than the Prime Minister, has said that a great nation

usual opportunity for marrying, through the needs a large population to safeguard the

filling of Britain with armed forces and peace, not only of its own people, but the

through the war boom in employment." peace of all the smaller peoples. Though this

War, then, provides our people with oppor- statement is true, it is not a good argument

tunities for meeting and mating which are with which to persuade either a man or a

denied to them in peace-time. This state- woman to build a bigger family. For a

ment, which is simple and unchallengeable, woman in particular, it is in fact a very bad

should serve to swing attention from argument, for she thinks, and very rightly,

secondary to primary causes, for no one can of immediate matters, and in terms not of

deny that those who do not meet and mate, nations, but of her own family circle. Out

do not bring children into the world.

of her family and all the other families the

A way must-be found to supply them with nation is born, and so it follows that if the

such meeting-places, for giving our men and family is at rights with itself, the nation will

women an opportunity, not only to find a be at rights with itself too.

$ "Eugenic Aspects of Children's Allowances." t "The Problem of the Birth Rate."

The problem, then, is to provide not so much a peace-time equivalent of the oppor-

39

40, THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tunities for meeting and marrying, which are
now occurring under the shadow of war, as to provide an environment in which natural
selectivity can operate wholesomely. Those who look at the matter basically,
unsentimentally and objectively, will admit that the process of courtship and mating is
still the natural process of hunting a quarry,
where the quarry is willing to be hunted, and
does in fact display herself discreetly to that
end. What qualities should the young woman
-honestly recognising that marriage is
desirable, and sensing it not as an end but as a beginning-display, if she frankly wishes to attract, not a mate, but the mate ? She
can display nothing that is not innate, for pretence of any kind can only lead to disaster.
A marriage based on the fact that a man has been temporarily attracted by artifice cannot produce that slowly and satisfactorily
integrating relationship which creates the
unity that is parenthood. So the truly marriageable woman will intuitively display her true nature, aware that it will not attract
all men, confident that it will attract one man, and profoundly concerned that he shall be the right man, the man a scientist might call her specific mate.
The qualities of her true nature, in which
she is so right to have faith, may not shine out in any of the meeting-places which were open to her before the war. For what and where were those places ? Some local dancehall, a tennis club, a cocktail party, a publichouse, or day in day out in an office; and in any case, was the circle wide enough, were the interests sufficiently diverse, or was the society suitably integrated for real selectivity?
The subject, of course, is not a new one, but it is rather a young one in terms of social research. Psychopathologists have looked at it. Co-educationalists are aware of it. The
youth movements, no doubt, have had it in mind. In one social experiment, the Peckham Experiment, it was the central theme.
Here there were conditions in which the marriage rate could rise. Here, young people of both sexes had a natural opportunity to display any or all of their various qualities. Here the quality of marriage relationships was deepening, and this change brought with

it a desire for children where hitherto there had been none. Those who had married on the tacit understanding that there should be no children, began to have babies. Those who had openly said " Never again," after the birth of one child, were now as frankly planning a larger family. Second children had been born, third children were on the way. Within this experiment the tendency towards a falling birth rate had been reversed when war came and caused the "Centre" to be suspended.
When war was declared, the second stage of the Experiment, the large-scale Pioneer Health Centre at Peckham, was four and a half years old. Figures of conceptions which took place within Centre membership cannot therefore be regarded as statistics though they are evidence of an unmistakable trend:
" Fifty-nine out of ninety-one babies born within Centre membership were conceived after their parents had joined. Of these fifty-nine conceptions:
6 were actively resented; 23 were accidental but more or less
readily accepted; 30 were deliberate.
Of these thirty " wished for " babies: IO were born of parents who had previously determined to have no, or no more, children, or not to have children until after some looked-for but uncertain improvement in their financial position; 3 were born of parents whose marriages at the time they joined had not been consummated; 6 were born of parents who were previously infertile and who responded
to treatment.
The birth of nineteen children can therefore be said to be directly attributable to the Centre. Of these nineteen, one was a fourth child, one a third, and two, second children, the rest being first children."*
In considering these figures it must be appreciated that the environmental influence of a Centre, which provides an integrated
* Pearse, Innes, and Crocker, Lucy. The Peckham Experiment. Allen & Unwin.

INCENTIVES TO PARENTHOOD

4x

society for babies, little children, schoolchildren, adolescents, courting and engaged couples and young marrieds, would take at least a generation to mature.
The process of vitalization which took place at Peckham, not through propaganda, not through the treatment of sickness, not
through the prevention of disease, but by the promotion of health in every one of its
meamngs, was very largely due to this pro-

vision of a new kind of epvironmehit. This
was one experiment, there may be others. It is by studying such experiments, where new social factors have been introduced and certain results have been achieved, that we can begin to look for the solution of the problem which is exercising all the seriousminded people who believe that the future of this country must influence the future of the
world.

C,. B}.C.
CONSTRUCTIVE BIRTH CONTROL
SoaTY AND CLINIC FOUNDED BY DR. MARIE STOPES IN I92I
The oldest Birth Control Clinic, the first to establish Birth Control Case Sheets and collect scientific data; C.B.C. Clinics are still the only free clinics: the only birth control clinics dealing from the first with all aspects of birth control, i.e. prevention of detrimental births, spacing of healthy births and inducing potentially desirable pregnancy in sterile women, and general marital help.
THE PIONEERS OF THE CLINIC MOVEMENT
Library, Museum and Clinics open daily, io-6 (except Sats.)
Books and Racial supplies may be obtained direct. TEcHNIcAL DEMONSTRATIONS for MEMBERS of the MEDICAL PRoESSION
First Thursday each month Applications to The Hon. Secretary, Headquarters Clinic,
io6 Whitfield Street, W.I

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLION

"For the promotion of knowledge of the coure of legilation in different countries, more partirly in the
several parts of His Majesty's Dominions, and in the United States."

President: The Rt. Hon. S. M. BRUCE, C.H., M.C.
airman of the Executive Committee t The Rt. Hon. Lord MAAN, G.C.V.O. Honorary Secretaries: C. E. A. BEDWELL, Esq.
Profesor H. C. GUTTERIDGE, K.C.

Annual Subscription.

One Guinea

Address: 28 E Street, London, W.C.2

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXV, No. 2-

