REVIEWS OF BOOKS

aspects of this handbook will be as an answer to those biologists and doctors who are over cautious in the large-scale use of oral contraceptives. At the same time Dr. Mears does not overstate her case and is careful to underline those areas where doubts remain. It is interesting that in certain physiological fields knowledge of the action of "the pill" has outstripped our basic knowledge of the normal.
Under the clinical usage of oral contraceptives the Handbook surveys their use, effectiveness, possible side effects and their action on lactation and the menopause. The least satisfactory part of the book is a chapter of practical advice to doctors which is clumsily set out as a series of questions and answers.
Not all reviews of the Handbook have been as eulogistic as the above. It has been described as "hastily put together" and over enthusiastic in its advocacy of oral contraception, that socalled "violent incursion into the endocrine physiology of the woman". For my part, I find it a most valuable book on an exceedingly important topic.
MALCOLM POTTS
SCIENCE AND RELIGION
Thorpe, W. H. Science, Man and Morals.
London, 1965. Methuen. Pp. 155. Price 25s.
THIS BOOK IS the outcome of a course of endowed lectures delivered by Dr. Thorpe at Balliol College in 1963. When it is known that the purpose of the lectures is to discuss the relation of science to Christianity with particular reference to the "sympathetic explanation of differences . . ." the general trend will be apparent. Indeed, it would not be unfair-if perhaps a little unkind-to say that it is an heroic endeavour to get Paley's watch going again after its century-long retirement. But the emphasis is shifted from the design of the actual parts ofthe watch to the materials from which the parts were fashioned-the shape and purpose of the parts having been inherent in the materials from Creation. Such a bald statement as this, however, does less than justice to the full and learned argument and Dr. Thorpe is clearly as highly qualified in philosophical as he is in scientific matters; moreover he is a noted
ER-H

authority on animal behaviour and many original and fascinating examples are given,
accompanied by enlightened interpretations and inferences.
Eugenics receives measured approval, more
particularly "when it comes to be based, as we
hope it will, on foundations of knowledge
incomparably greater than at present" (p. 123).
Several possible future techniques-such as AID
with preserved semen, or perfecting a method by which, to implant "nuclei of somatic cells into
enucleated eggs, and then force them to develop
parthogenetically" (p. 123) are mentioned. But some will demur at the author's disagreement with the example quoted (p. 123) of the laboratory rat becoming decadent in the absence of natural selection; Dr. Thorpe argues that such
absence does not produce decadence because the rat becomes admirably adapted to the protected
environment of the laboratory. But surely this is to confuse the "decadence" within an environment where natural selection is operating and "decadence" outside such a society. Carried to the human parallel we have the words of the late Sir Charles Darwin, while President of The Eugenics Society: "The most efficient way for a man to survive in Britain is to be almost halfwitted, completely irresponsible and spending a lot of time in prison, where his health is far better looked after than outside; on coming out with restored health he is ready to beget many further children quite promiscuously, and these 'problem children' are then beautifully cared for ... until such time as they have grown old enough to carry on the good work",* which well describes an admirable adaptation to Welfare State conditions yet still deserves the appellation "decadent".
Differing interpretations by individual physicists of the physical (author's italics) universe receives attention and mention is made of the
fact that as more and more physical considerations are taken into account, fewer features of the universe remain accidental (p. 134). But such thoughts could only be written in the absence of a valid definition of an accident itself. To a Determinist the mention of the word "accident" can only bring a wan smile.

* The Next Million Years, p. 94.

105

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

As may be suspected, we are brought finally subjects: Changing Sex Standards; The Woman

towards "this view of love as the individual Problem (sic!); and Birth Control. It includes

expression of the unity of all things in God" within a comparatively small compass a repre-

(p. 138) and the scientific ideal of "integrity". In sentative cross-section of (Western) public

this aspect Teilhard de Chardin naturally opinion and can be recommended to those who

receives full recognition: "Convergent Integra- still have an open mind on controversial subjects

tion" is the subject of the last eight pages of the of this sort and would like to have further

book and we are told "The Bible may still be information on which to form an opinion.

pregnant with unsuspected lessons". Teilhard, There is no index but otherwise the book is

with his vision of the future of man, is restating well presented.

the theology of St. Paul. Continuing evolution is The author of The Ability to Love is a psycho-

the expression of God's will.

logist and marriage counsellor and no doubt one

Dr. Matthews, Dean of St. Paul's, recently of his reasons for writing this book was a desire

wrote * ". . . the sceptics allege that, when to make help available for those who need it. It

thought out, religious doctrines are not mysteri- is a pity that while his motives are of the highest

ous but nonsensical" but whether this observa- he has adopted rather a breathless approach to

tion is to be considered apposite or irrelevant the subject and unfortunately no definition of

must be left to the individual taste of the reader. love is given. Perhaps he feels that a definition

C. W. USHER would literally define it. The preface consists of thirty-one lines and the word "love", one of its

SEX derivatives, or a pronoun referring to it occur no

Schur, Edwin (Editor). The Family and the Sexual Revolution. London, 1966. Allen and Unwin. Pp. xv +427. Price 40s.
Fromme, Allan. The Ability to Love. London, 1966. Allan and Unwin. Pp. x+366. Price 30s.

less than fifteen times in contexts that make it
clear that Dr. Fromme does not limit its meaning. A whole chapter is devoted to "What is love ?" without anywhere specifying what love is, although it includes a long diversion about
the use of hypnosis.

THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION seems to be However, one must not be too critical about

proceeding well but usually any review of the this since the author has drawn on his obviously

situation is written either strongly for or wide professional experience to describe the

strongly against its continued success-as if the various forms of love, to enable those who seek

pundits could affect the result. However, a book advice to clarify their own feelings and require-

which is able to juxtapose, as two of its con- ments, and thus benefit from the advice offered.

tributors, Bertrand Russell and Pius XI is rather These two books can usefully be read in

unusual.

conjunction and can be recommended as

The aim of the sociologist editor of The prescribing tolerance and understanding of

Family and the Sexual Revolution is not to be others-which one could suppose to be as useful

didactic but to present opposing views with an a basis of love as can be found.

emphasis on unconventional ones since, as he Unfortunately again there is no index. The

rightly states, conventional views are fully absence of an index even in the presence of

publicized already.

copious references diminishes the value of a

This book consists of twenty-nine extracts book, and it is to be hoped that, as time goes on,

from contemporary writers on three main fewer books will be presented without one.

* Daily Telegraph, 26th March 1966.

D. R.-R.

106

