THE INHERITANCE OF ACQUIRED CHARACTERS*

By A. F. DUFTON, M.A., D.I.C.

"TfhaTmlars have eaten a sour grapc and the the purpose of our wager it was decided to

children's teeth4 are set on edge."-Jer. XXX, 29. adopt as a standard of comparion the

LAST summer, during a Sunday evenig
walk, I chanced to remark to my wife how noteworthy it was that so many eminent men were begotten by fathers of

population comp the one hundred thousand children under one year reed in this table. Scottish statistics were pre-
ferred to English as the English tables are
not for each age of parent but only for age

npe age, citing in particular John Herschel and Robert Boyle (Table I), and ventured to

groups-and they cost 30s. 6d instead of 48. As the comparison was primarily for the

express the opinion that capability is in no edification of my wife, it would have been

small degree an acquired character and that futile to express it in the cryptic manner of

the older the father the greater the c e the orthodox statistician and I decided to

of it being acquired. Thereupon I was compare the paternal ages graphically by

roundly taxed with heresy and, being put plotting the frequency distribution both for

upon my defence, boldly wagered that the the eminent thousand and for the normal

patemal ages of the persons noticed in the

Encyc1podia Britannica would be found to
be abnormally high.

FIG. I

TABLE I. AGE OF FATHER

JOHN HUNTER....

ROBERT BOYLE

..

JOHN HERSCHEL

..

~ ~CHARLESPARSONS ..

.. 65
.. .. 54
.. 54

014

Iw

IfI

I/

1

SAMUEL JOHNSON .. .. 53

FRANCIS BACON

.. .. 52

WILLIAM PITT ..

.. .. 51

JOHN MLTON .. .. .. 46

Reference to the Encyclopedia yielded the
name of one thousand persons (ecxclusive of those mentioned on account of inherited titles) for whom the date of the father's
birth is given: the difficulty was to deter-
mine the paternal age for a normal population. Now in the thirteenth census of Scot-
land (VoL IV, 1924) there is published a
table givig some information which was not obtained in previous enumerations, naly the number of dependent children of married men, of each age, for each age of parent. For

AN
Ai

/- I_ -'N
-M
ff

Read before the British ociaton. Section H, on
September 8th. 1933.

*- N

X_

*- -

* -W --"

245

c

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

I

population. The ogive curve, proposed by to find that for the eminent population the

Francis Galton, might perhaps be thought proportion with paternal age more thaun

suitable for such a representation but forty-five years is twice the normal, more

actually it is not well adapted for the purpose than sixty years ten times, and more than

as it is flat in the middle and excessively seventy years fifty times the normaL

steep at the extremities.

A similar type of curve, however, can THE QUESTION AT ISSUE

advantageously be drawn upon special coordinate paper-the permille paper which I put forward in 1930 and which Mr. Hazen had used some years before for the deter-
mination of probabilities.t The comparison
of paternal ages is shown in Fig. i and you will see that I won my wager handsomely. The difference between the two curves in the figure is manifest and exceeded my expectations-I confess that I was surpried

This by way of prologue I Now what is all this pother about the inhtance of acquired characters ? The occurrence of progressive adaptation by t siion of the effects of use had seemed so natural to the early evolutionists that no proof of the phsyiological reality of the phenomenon wasthought necessary. The Comte de Buffon, Dr. Eras. mus Darwin and the Chevalier de Lamarck all firmly believed in it. Furthermore, in the

FIG. 2

Origin of Species Mr. Charles Darwin did not
hesitate to write, " I think there can be little

doubt that use in our domestic animals

strengthens and enlarges certain parts, and

disuse diminishes them; and that such

modifications are inherited."

0'0 All the trouble seems to have been caused

by Professor Weismann, who asked for

___

-

S,

definite proof and insisted that the evidence available was slender. Further evidence has

01 since been proffered which seems to me to be

cogent but which has not been sufficient to

turn the scales. Can the explanation be

found, I wonder, in Professor Bateson's

remark that " Weismann's contribution,

though negative, has greatly simplified the

=4---
====X

practical investigation of genetic problems " ?

The reception of Mendel's hypothesis has,

of course, revolutionLsed things. And a

Oropos of Mendelian inheritance and the

simplicity of modern genetics, I cannot

refrain from digressing mildly to refer to a

recent paper by Dr. Hurst on A Genetical

"V l Formula for the Inheritanct of InteUigence in

Man.t After adverting to the fact that the

data of Galton and Woods show that general

l__

1/

intelligence in adults grades continuously

from high to low, he postulates ten discrete

grades of intelligence and from these develops

* A. F. Dufton: " Graphic Stisc: Permille Pape." Phil. Ma.. 1930, I0, 566.
t A. Hazen: " Storage to be provided inmpudn reservoirs for municipal supply." Tras. A".Sc i Emgixcrs. 1914, 77, t539.

* W. Bateson: Me,de's Principles of Heredity.
Cambridge Univ. Press, I909, p. 5.
tantc C.ofC.IrHdlulrisgte:nceAinGeMnatni.calPrFooc.rmRuolya.fSoor.t,heB,Ie1A93n2-,
112, 8o.

THE INHERITANCE OF ACQUIRED CHARACTERS

a hexagenic basic genetical formula. That I decided upon this course and, not without

such a hypothesis can be seriously received considerable misgig, sent out a circular

suggests to me that the apparent simplicity letter and questionnaire to all the Fellows

of modern genetics may be a snare and a of the Royal Society. Wishing to have some

delusion.

comparative data, I sent out a similar

The problem " Are Acquired Characters mquiry to all the Members of the House of

Inherited? " seems to be now merely one of Commons and, later, at the suggtion of my

academic interest and I regard this as singu- father, to the exceedgly select population

larly unfortunate for, however trivial the comprising the headlmistresses of English

problem may appear in the case of plants and Public Secondary Schools for Girls (recog-

animals, I am convinced that so far as Man nized as efficient by the Board of Education).

is concerned it is one of paramount import- It is of interest to record that the required

ance. I shall return to this point later. information was supplied by 75 per cent. of

SOURCES OF EVIDENCE

the Fellows of the Royal Society, by 40 per cent. of the Members of Parliament and by

Now with reference to the evidence which 58 per cent. of the Headmistresses.

I have to place before you, it may well be

asked how it comes about that an attempt SIGNIFICANCE OF PATERNAL AGE

to show the inheritance of a development of Table 2 shows for the various populations

the brain (for that is what it amounts to), the proportion with paternal age exceeding

should succeed when attempts to show the certain limits. It is clear that a larger pro-

inheritance of the well-developed arm of a portion of the more eminent populations

blacksmith, for exple, have failed. I were begotten by fathers of ripe age. In

think the reason was well expressed by arranging the populations in the order

Charles Darwin,* when he wrote:

indicated by paternal age, I am tempted to

When a part has been developed in an extra- iquire whether this order may not be

ordinary manner in any one species, compared with the other species of the same genus, we may conclude that this part has undergone an extraordinary amount of modification since the period when the species branched off from the common

regarded in some measure as one of ability. The relative position of M.P.s and F.R.S.s is perhaps unexpected. When I told one Fellow of the Royal Society of my intention to

progenitor of the genus. This period will seldom rcularize these two groups of eminent men,

be remote in any extreme degree, as species very rarely endure for more than one geological period .. . as the variability of the extraordinarily developed part or organ has been so great and long

he was inclined to sniff at the M.P.s but, after a little thought, conceded that they might be eminent in their own way. Another Fellow

continued within a period not excessively remote, of the Royal Society, who diined to fill up

we might, as a general rule, expect to find more variability in such parts than in other parts of the organization which have remained for a much longer period nearly constant. And this, I am convinced, is the case"

my questionnaire, wrote anonymously to inform me that it was a most idle schedule, remarking that " The F.R.S. standard is a very low one; many are the dullest men I

It can scarcely be denied, I think, that the development of the human b has been comparatively recent and not only extraordinarily great but phenomenaL
The problem before me was how to obtain further statistics, statistics which would be less defective than those culled from the Encycopadia Britannica. The simplest

know and are far inferior to th brothers who may be successful business or profes sional men, whom the m might rate lower, but would be in error.-t
The information shown in Table 2 confirms
in no uncertain manner my original com-
parison between the persons noticed in the Encyclopadia and the data from the Scottish

method seemed to be to write to eminent men and ask them for details of their parentage.

SInsus.
Professor Fisher has pointed out* that,

* C. Darwin: Origin of Species.

* R. A. Fisher: Natxra. 1932, 130, 579.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

1

TABIE 2

sof the

Heerrhtenhevi

mental factor caot be ignoed as the necew

Population

Pata Ae:miePover t per

sary university ang is not easiy obtained by a woman unls her father surviv.

Table 3, which shows, for the various popula.

45 50 55 6o 65 70 75 tions ondeed, the proportios with pater.

nal age between 20 and 30 and between 4o

Eminent: men

and 5o, enabl this factor to be discounted.

tioned in E
pdi Br i 68 103 47 26 13 7 4
Member of the House of Comr

It is clear that the tentative order of ability was isleadng so far as the hemistresses are concened. When the environmental

mons ...

x44... 62 29 I6 4 -

Fellowsof the Royal

Society ... ... 128 56 24 6 - - -

HeMist

o

factor is allowed for, they assume the leading place as the most highly selected population. That mistresses are selected from a wider

Second Sch'ls I 8S 51 Normal: Cess o
Scotland... ... 8s 26

9 3-8 2-2 74 '15

002

field than mastas nd are, in geneal, of a higher order of ability is apparently well

known to the inspectorate of the Board of

before drawing the infece that the Education.

superior ability of the children is due to the increased wisdom acquired by their parents

TABLE 3

during their experience of life, we must

Proportion permie nwith

remember that the upper and middle classes

patral age

marry on the average some few years later

Population

than the general population and that, if the

between

eminent persons came disproportionately

20 ad 30 4o and5o,

from these classes, this alone would explain

the greater age of paterity. In my immedi- H

of Secon-

ate reply to this criticism I pointed out* that on this hypothesis the frequency curve would surely be displaced so as to be substantially parallel to the normal curve, but
that this is not the observed fact. The significance of this is clearly seen in Fig. 2 which shows, in addition to the n al and
eminent curves, the curve for the children

dary Schools ... ... Eminent: mentioned im
Encyclopedia Britan-

"ica
Members

..o.f

...
House

of

Commons

...

Fellows of the Royal

Society ...

...

Normal: Census of Scot-

land ... ... ... Normal: Census of Eng-

224
246
263
263 344

236
214
210
399
I81

of professional workers,t a curve which is lnd and Wales ... 358

165

substantially parallel to the normal one.

THE ENVIRONMENTAL FACTOR

EUGENIC IMPLICATIONS

To the suggestion that the difference may be due to environmental modifications, my reply is that a father seventy years of age is

As I have pointed out in Naturc,* if my thesis is true it is important eugenically. I think that the possibility now emerges of

not likely either to survive to influence his child during the critical years of adolescence

materially improving a stock in one generation. In this connection the tradition that

or to provide a substantially better environ- Isaac was bom when Abraham was an

ment than a father fifty years of age. I think that this argument derives material

hundred years old and Sarah ninety is interesting, seeing that from him sprang the

support from a further study of the patemal

whole of the Jewish race. The story in Genesis is very circumstantial and emphasizes

*A. F. Dufton: Nature, 1932, 130, 813.

t Census of England and Wals. z92x.

Loc. cis.

THE INHERITANCE OF ACQUIRED CHARACTERS

that both parents were old and well stricken chilren until he had ched the age of

in age. And Isaac might well have sad, in thirty and his pupil Aristotle thought that

the words which Mr. Shaw has put into the it was fitting that a man should marry at

mouth of Bhtley Summezhays,* "By the thirty-seven.t Is it lized, I wonder, that

time I was bom the old couple knew some- m this country 75 per cent. of the children

thing. So I

out all brains.

are begotten by fathers who have not reached

Summerhays differentiated himself from the mature age of thirty-seven ? . . . Or

" the regular thing that you always get in that Plato would have stigmatized 40 per

the first batch from young parents: quite pleant ordinary, dothe-gular-thing sort:

cent. as mrra &. Jjcpsra& ycyov4, bom of a dreadful itemperance?

allbody and no brains."

It was not only the Greeks who held these

The general idea that good children ought views. That shrewd philosopher Montaignet

to be generated of persons i their prime is, commended Aristotle's opinion and observed

of course, by no means new. That wise old that in a certain country of the Spanish

eugenist, Plato, for example, who held that Indies the men were not allowed to marry

a man was in his prime both of body and until after they were forty.

mind between the ages of thirty and fifty-

five, maintained that a man should not beget
0 G. B. Shaw: Misal iac, I9IO.

* Plato: Tim R Nblc, Bk. V. -

Aristotle: Politics. Montaigne: Essays,
ter Children.

Of

the

Affecion

of

Fathers

for

3ugin RevIew, VoL XX!, No. 4.

