FAMILY ENDOWMENT

I.-The Development of the French and Belgian Systems
By HUGH H. R. VIBART, M.A.
(An Address given to the Eugenics Society, January 17th, 1933.)

T H3E history of the growth of the other railways: their schtanes differed in

Family Allowance system in France detail but were alile in basing the allowance

and Belgium gains exceptional on the number of children, the amount of

interest from the clearness with which the basic rate of pay, and the size of the

five phases of development are distinguish- station where the father was employed.

able, indicating as they do the stages During the first decade of this century

through which most new ideas and institu- various other Government departments and

tions have to pass. Thus at first the family regional and municipal authorities followed

allowance is regarded as a curiosity (I86o- the example of the Admiralty.

1913), secondly it is spoken of as a tempo- The outbreak of War in 1914 brought

rary device to meet an emergency (1916- Stage I to an end, and it was the rapid

i8), next it becomes an " interesting and persistent rise of all prices in the

development " (1919-21); then it proceeds to War years that presented the problem for

gather weight and to gain sufficient in- which the family allowance provided a con-

fluence to become worthy of opposition venient solution. Everyone was hard hit by

(1922-3-4), and finally, overcoming the the mounting prices, but obviously the

opposition, it becomes something taken for extra burden fell especially heavily on the

granted as part of the ordinary framework man who was married and who had a family

of the national life (1925- ).

to support. Direct wage increases led to

The family allowance may be defined further price advances, and it was felt that

(uncontroversially) as a device to enable the introduction of a family allowance had

income to be distributed more nearly in the result of putting the family man in a

accordance with individual family needs relatively more favourable position in regard

than is possible under the existing economic to purchasing power. At the same time the

system in this country.

inflationary effect on prices was minimized.

The State was the first to take action, but

THE FRENCH SYSTEM

it was soon followed by Departmental autho-

Now the family allowance in France is no rities and municipalities and by increased

new thing, but apart from isolated cases, allowances for railway employees. It was

such as that of Monsieur Harmel, it was in at this period that the Allowance system in

the government and municipal services that the mining industry developed so rapidly in

the principle of family endowment first importance, encouraged as it was by the

became of substantial importance.

strong approval of the joint committees of

It is rather interesting to note that the employers and employed set up in 19I8 by

French Admiralty was the first department the Ministry of Munitions.

to introduce the principle-i.e., in I862 Brief reference must be made to the part

(giving io centimes a day for each child played by the Rfiche de San Bruno at

under io years to seamen up to the rank of Grenoble. This society for mutual help and

Quartermaster). Next came the railways, the study of social problems-a body ana-

beginning with the Nord and Orleans in logous in some features to Toc H-was

x8qo and followed at intervals by all the founded in I906 and included as members

27

28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

manufacturers, merchants, workmen, and members to a particular trade or industry.

priests, who met together periodically, on a Evidently it is easier to combine with firms

basis of equality, for discussion. Then in in your own trade, even if geographically

October I916 came the suggestion that cur- some way off, than with firms in different

rent wages were really entirely inadequate trades within the same area. It is clear,

in the case of a family man. A careful however, that the Regional Fund is the

inquiry was decided on, and carried out. more advanced and more satisfactory form,

Armed with the evidence so obtained, as it represents a higher degree of social

Monsieur Romanet was able to convince his co-operation. It serves to impress on every-

employer-the head of the Joya Foundry- one the real mutual interdependence of the.

that some action was necessary; and a scale heavy, male-employing industry and the

of family allowances was at once introduced. light or textile type of industry employing

The practice soon spread to other firms chiefly girls and youths. It is only right

in Grenoble, but before long they came up that the textile type of industry should help

against an important difficulty-the obvious to pay for the allowances to the families of

one-that if an employer has to pay more those belonging to the heavy industries to

for men with families than for single men, whose proximity, in many cases, they owe

he will tend to give preference in employ- their supply of relatively cheap labour.

ment to the single men, who will be cheaper Interesting confirmation of this is to be

or appear so.

found in the fact that often this textile type

To meet this was evolved a simple but of industry will employ a much larger pro-

highly effective device, the Compensation portion of adult men when it happens to be

Fund. This meant that employers within situated in an area that is rather isolated

an industry or within a given district joined from other industries.

together in an Association, and each of

them paid into this Association or Fund RECONCILING EMPLOYERS

so much per person employed or so much per cent. of their wage bills. Out of that sum allowances on an agreed scale were paid by the Fund to the workers, in accordance with the size of their families and without regard to the firms to which they belonged.

At first there is a natural tendency for protest from those who pay in more than they pay out; and hence various methods were adopted for " tempering the wind " e.g., lower rates of contribution in respect of women than men; a limit to the extent

This meant, of course, that it did not matter to which payments out may exceed payto the individual employer whether he ments in; a number of sectional funds employed more married men than his neigh- within the one original fund; and so on.

bour or not.

The assistance given by the Compensa-

This simple arrangement, capable of tion Funds was in three forms, of which by

infinite minor modifications, met with far the most important was the monthly

immediate and sustained success. There allowance given in respect of each child,

are various claims for priority, in the sometimes the same amount for each of a

North-Roubaix; in the West-Lorient; in family and sometimes on an ascending scale

the East-Grenoble: the fact is that simi- so as to give extra assistance to the large

lar circumstances simultaneously brought family. A similar effect is obtained in some

about the introduction of similar devices in cases by giving no allowance in respect of

different parts of the country.

the first child-on the whole an undesirable

The four Funds founded in I919 increased practice. The amount of the allowances has

to i6 in March 1920, to 5i by the end of varied a good deal and has been fixed either

that year, to 200 by 1925, and to about 250 by adopting the scale of a neighbouring

at the present time.

Fund or by choosing a scale high enough to

The earlier form of the fund was the help the employees and yet not so high as to

Industrial-i.e., the Fund restricted its frighten the prospective employer members.

FAMILY ENDOWMENT-FRANCE AND BELGIUM

29

For the first child 20-30 francs a month is a must not overlook the rising sense of social

comsmon figure, sing to 5o-60 francs for responsibility (the reaction against laissez-

the third or fourth. The allowance per child faire), coupled with appreciation of the

represents round about 2-3 per cent. of a family as the basic unit in the State. This

skilled worker's earnings, so that a skilled line of thought is, of course, exemplified in

metal worker with a family of four might the Papal Encyclicals, especially the famous

find his earnings increased by to to 12 per De Rerum Novarum of I89I, which main-

cent. by his family allowances. Assistance tained that the State is based on the family

has also been given by the Funds in two and must protect it; and that the wage

other ways, by a lump sum payment at the received by a father ought, in common

time of confinement (Prime de Naissance) justice, to be sufficient to enable him to

and by a special Prime d'Allaitement to provide adequately for his family. This line

encourage mothers to nurse their own chil- of thought has urdoubtedly exercised much

dren. influence, and it may be remembered that

in the recent Papal Encyclical of 193r

SOCIAL WELFARE WORK

reference was made to the value of the

This leads us naturally to a brief consideration of the social welfare work achieved by the Funds. In the matter of infant welfare, education in methods of hygiene, etc., the Funds have met with

Family Allowance principle. Not long ago Professor Gilbert Murray said, " If the family. as an institution is to continue, then
the wage system must be modified to suit that institution."

much substantial and undisputed success. In this connection, it is interesting to recall

THE FEAR OF DEPOPULATION

the warm tribute paid not very long ago by We come now to the third great thought-

no less an authority than the late M. Albert stream, and that may be described briefly

Thomas of the Internatioual Labour Office, as the fear of depopulation. As is well

after inspecting the work done by the Lyons known, the Family Allowance system has

Fund. In many Funds it is the custom to been regarded in France as a very

pay the allowances direct to the mother, so important part of a ' politique de Natalitef,'

as to emphasize the purpose for which the one of a group of measures designed to

money is intended.

arrest the declining birth rate. How far the

The Funds in France are administered by family allowance either can be or need be

the employer, or rather by a permanent effective in increasing the birth rate is at

secretary or director of the Fund, who is present uncertain, but the important point

appointed, in effect, by the employers. This here is that these three lines of thought

is the consequence of the way in which the would probably take root and grow, each

Funds have originated in France, but there in diflferent spheres of French social life,

is no inherent reason why a system of joint so that there would remain but few who

administration by Employers and Trade would not be brought in contact with one or

Union representatives should not be evolved. other of them.

In some cases this has been done in The rapid expansion of the allowance

Holland.

system naturally brought opposition in its

Many interesting aspects of the Compen- train. The Christian or Reformist Trade

sation Fund have to be left undiscussed; Union movement in France, Belgium, Hol-

and we must now try to measure the forces land, and Germany has always been favour-

which have combined to achieve its remark- able to the family allowance, but the larger

able success. As already explained, the body, Social-Democratic and more radical,

family allowance was introduced as a satis- at first opposed its introduction on the

factory way of mitigating the economic Wounds that (i) it would enable the

hardship of the family men arising out of employer to economize in his wage bill, and,

the War price advances. In addition we as a result, Labour's share of the total pro-

30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

duct of industry might be diminished and of the race was essntially one for State

the basic wage lowered; that (2) the action.

solidarity of Labour might be affected by a The State has, on various occasions, made

cleavage of interest as between the married definite provision for very large families-

men and the single; and (3) that the Unions e.g., in 1923 (JUIY 22nd). But leaving aside

would be deprived in wage negotiations of the abortive Brenier scheme for giving

the argument that the wage must be made allowances to all workers, whether employed

sufficient to enable a man to support his or not, the first serious attempt to use the

family-i.e., that it would mean the loss of powers of the State to enforce the payment

" the family " as an economic battering of allowances throughout industry by

ram. industry was in 1920, when M. Bokanowski

At first these arguments were to some introduced a Bill to make membership of a

extent effective in persuading men to refuse Compensation Fund compulsory for all

proposed allowances, and to press rather for employers: the cost to the employer was to

standard wage increases. It is, however, be 5 per cent. of his wages bill. But opposi-

interesting to watch the change of attitude tion to the Bill was so strong that it was

as expressed in the C.G.T. Labour move- shelved on the ground that the elasticity

ment papers in the course of 1922-3. The and essential spark and elan of voluntary

workmen, it was found, liked the system; effort would be replaced by the cold rigidity

and, opposition to a fait accompli being of State action.

clearly unsound, approval was given to the It was not until 1930 that another effort

principle and criticism directed to the was made to invoke the power of the State.

manner of administration and the undue This time an agreed measure, a combina-

influence obtained by the employer.

tion of three separate projects, was put for-

Doubtless some employers did economize ward and passed through all its stages with

in their wage bills when they introduced relatively little opposition-though it was

family allowances, but that proves nothing; not finally ratified by the Senate until

others again were liberal in adding allowances to wages. This again is not conclu-

January 21St, 1932. It provides that every employer must join a Fund paying allow-

sive; the important point is that there is ances at not less than minimum scales to

no necessary connection between family be fixed by the Ministry of Labour in

allowances and Labour's share of the product of industry-that is really a separate question. The Family Allowance system is essentially a matter of redistribution of

accordance, where possible, with existing scales of allowances. The law is to come into operation sectionally-i.e., by industries or localities, as the Minister shall

Labour's share more nearly in accordance with the needs of individual workers.

decide. It is not at present applicable to agriculture, though it can be made so by a

special administrative order. It does, how-

THE STATE SYSTEMS

ever, include commercial and administrative employees (other than Civil Servants).

The success of the family allowance The attitude of the organized Compensa-

naturally soon led to a desire to generalize tion Funds was that of resigned acceptance,

its benefits by means of the powers of the coupled with some slight apprehension

State. Employers pointed to the unfair regarding State influence. The employer,

competition which followed when some it was said, was the father of the family

employers paid allowances whilst others allowances system; might not the State

refrained from joining a Fund: it penalized become its stepmother ? Contracting-out

the generous. Then it was urged that the by individuals and firms is discouraged.

administration of a Compensation Fund Foreigners are included, provided their

gave the employer undue influence, and that children reside in France. Allowances

a measure of this kind for the preservation extend to an age of 13 (school-leaving age),

FAMILY ENDOWMENT-FRANCE AND BELGIUM

31

or i6 in the case of apprenticeship. Allow- popular and regarded as almost in the

ances are paid monthly and are not to be, nature of a penalty. The employer is to

reduced on account of days of absence from pay 65 centimes in respect of every male

work through sickness.

and 35 centimes in rpect of every female

employee; and thfe scale of monthly allow-

ALLOWANCES IN BELGIUM Turning now to Bdgium, we seem to
meet with an application of the hare and tortoise fable; for excepting Civil Servants,
municipal employ-ces, and workers of
individual coal mines, but little was done up to 1923, when the first really striking and important development in France had already taken place-and yet the Belgian law for generalization of the allowances was the first to come into operation !
Going back a moment, the Verviers Fund was started in 1920; but at the beginning of 1923 there were still only five Funds, increasing to 15 in 1925, 30 in 1928, and 42 in 19o--coverng nearly a million workers. In April 1928 a Bill was passed making the payment of family allowances compulsory for those executing public contracts. A Bill for enforcing payment of allowances by all employers was introduced in December 1929, was discussed the following spring, finally passed into law in July 1930, and came into operation in January 1931 in stages-beginning with the large employers.
The law provides that every employer must either join an existing Compensation Fund, form a new Fund with others, or join a State Fund: this last alternative is un-

ances varies from IS francs for the first child, 20 for the second, 40 for the third, 70 for the 4th, and zoo for the fifth.
One interesting feature of the Belgian law is the establishment of a sort of superFund to effect compensation between the Funds themseves: it will use a part of any surpluses arising to assist Funds which have to pay out more than they receive. This super-Fund has met with a good deal of adverse criticism, but it is too early yet to determine definitely whether it will operate successfully. This central Fund will also deal with allowances to certain
special classes, such as workers who have brothers and sisters dependent on them, and workers who are unemployed owing to industrial accident or disease. As regards
administration, a National Committee has been appointed which includes representatives of the workers. It is estimated that about two and a half million persons are
brought within the scope of the law which, in addition to industrial workers, covers commerce and agriculture.
Thus in Belgium, as in France, the
family allowance has taken its place as an essential element in the national social structure. These really very astonishing developments have taken place in little more than a decade.

Eugenics Review, VoL XXV, No. 1.

