HAN SUYIN
(Dr. Elizabeth Comber)
Birth Control in China-
Recent Aspects

I HAVE VISITED China every year since 1956.
October-November 1959 was the time of my fourth trip there; I spent some of this time in the communes and the factories, inquiring about developments in the status of women, their work, and the social safeguards instituted for pregnancy, maternity and child welfare. Family planning, or as it is called in China, limitation of conception, was every time one of the subjects discussed. The question of birth control did not arise in China until 1956, when it was broached for the first time at the National Assembly in May of

Policy, when many suggestions and ideas were being aired, and birth control was one of them. For a time it even looked as if birth control would become government and state policy. There was no religious barrier to be invoked
against it, as in other Asian countries. It was "scientific", and to the Chinese intellectual, logical, a religious and certainly the most pragmatic people in Asia, it did not feel wrong,
immoral or in any way opposed to nature. It appealed to the strong sense, among the intellectual set, of a blueprint society which can be planned down to the last detail.

that year (see my previous article).* Until then the Chinese government had been too preoccupied putting things in order in the huge territories after half a century of civil and external wars. A census of the total population was taken, not only of the Chinese or "Han" nationality, but of the various national minorities, such as Mongols, Uighurs, Tibetans, inhabiting remote areas of the Chinese territory and comprising altogether about thirty-five million people. The figure of six hundred million (re-
ported now to be nearer six hundred and ninety million) now came to light. But it was not this enormous figure which prompted some members of the government to mention publicly birth control, its advantages and its methods; it was the fact that birth control, or family planning, was considered in line with modern, scientific ideas; that therefore, like all scientific, modern gadgets which render life more efficient, it seemed to certain sections of the Chinese population (chiefly in the cities) a useful way of planning the future communist society of China.
1956 was also the time of the Hundred Flowers

Official Approval in 1956 Birth control was granted official approval in 1956, though it never became what is called in
China "a campaign". By "a campaign" on a
subject is meant a colossal, nation-wide, unremitting emphasis by all means at the State's disposal: pamphlets, posters, loudspeakers, radio, television, films, processions, marches, lectures in schools, universities, workers' fac-
tories, villages, and all newspapers, to press a point of policy home to the total population, until it is impossible, even in the smallest village,
to find one person who has not heard of the subject. This was not done in the case of birth control, but an "education movement" was undertaken, which means that in big cities, and even in small ones, large window spaces with exhibits, in the most accurate detail, of the human anatomy and the processes for preven-
tion of fertilization, blossomed in the main streets; late marriages (late for Asia, that is, above the age of twenty rather than under twenty) were extolled in the newspapers, in all high schools and universities, where sex biology

* T1 EUGENICS REvIEw, 1957, 49, 81.

is taught in a scientific, matter of fact way.

I9
EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1960, 52, 1.

THE E UGENICS REVIEW

Contraceptives were made freely available to trying to achieve. "It was too early," said one

married persons only (free love is regarded as official to me, "they could not understand it".

license); they began to be manufactured in large This obsession about food cannot be under-

quantities in China (chiefly rubber sheaths) in stood any longer in the west, which has lost the

1957, and one hundred and twenty million of atavistic memory of starvation. But in China

these were sold in one year.

hunger is far too near the bone: it is only in the

In 1957 exhibitions for birth control practices, very recent seven or eight years that nobody has

with no details spared, toured the country; in died of hunger in China. In some regions there

the cities married people queued up to receive are still many shortages, because the land is

free contraceptives. An aunt of mine was en- poor and it takes a long time to make it pro-

rolled in her street committee to go from house ductive.

to house in her street suggesting contraception, Now famines as such have disappeared, as

or sterilization (which is legal, both male and have epidemics; the organization of the com-

female) to those women who had too many munes, where the basic needs (grain, medicine,

children: this was not judged by number, though education and housing) are freely supplied to all

five was vaguely mentioned, so much as by members, is slowly withering this haunting fear

economic status and health of the mother; of hunger, though shortages occur and rationing,

finally, through the health clinics in the co- similar to that in England during the war years,

operatives, birth control was taken to the pea- is applied to the whole country.

sants on the farms in the form of pamphlets, The second aspect of the question is this:

contraceptives and advice from nurses and During these ten years the Chinese have had to

doctors.

pull themselves out of poverty and want by

their own bootstraps (except that they had no

A Change of Policy

boots). All that is done elsewhere by mech-

Round about early 1958, however, a change anized power: digging canals, building dams,

occurred. The change was based on two things: hydro-electric works, even, as is being done,

(1) Psychological factors. (2) Practical assess- removing mountains to cut a canal across one

ment of total and nation-wide needs.

thousand kilometres of arid land to irrigate four

To begin with psychological factors: There million new acres: all these things are done

are, in China, over five hundred million pea- nearly entirely by manual labour, by millions

sants, only a hundred and ninety million or so of people working together, human hands and

city and factory workers. For the peasant the bodies removing, basket by basket, hundreds of

struggle for existence for the past century has thousands of tons of earth, or acting like con-

been a constant, recurring nightmare of floods, veyor belts, or pumping with their feet by means

drought, famine and war. To him security, of primitive water wheels water out of flooded

wealth, automatically means food and children, fields, or strengthening dams along a stretch of

because children would look after parents in eight hundred miles of river (this needed in 1954

their old age. When, therefore, birth control twenty million people, and twenty million were

began to be talked about, it produced a kind of organized to do it and thus prevented a calami-

silent panic among the hard-headed, conserva- tous flood and saved the city of Wuhan from

tive peasants, still haunted by memories of being flooded).

starvation. Surely, they reasoned, this was proof

that the future was insecure, that a famine was China's Wealth is Her Manpower

impending, since the government asked them to "Man is capital, capital is man," is the way

have fewer children! That meant the government China looks at the only wealth she has-man-

was frightened there would not be enough food to power. Capital accumulation of wealth, in the

go round. Panic of this kind in China is enough way of building permanent assets such as wells,

to paralyze the countryside, to set off extra- waterways, houses, factories, roads, forests

ordinary reactions and to sap the foundations of (afforestation is proceeding at an incredible

the order which the Chinese government was pace), heavy industrial projects, depends on the

2o

BIRTH CONTROL IN CHINA-RECENT ASPECTS

labour of man's hands since machinery is not
available. In this kind of thinking, it is labourpotential, rather than financial aid, which con-
ditions the doing or non-doing of a project. In
other words, instead of first acquiring monetary aid with which to buy the machinery to undertake the necessary construction, China depends on direct help in the tangible shape of some machinery for heavy industry from Soviet Russia, technical experts also mainly from Russia, and her own human labour. Thus, for instance, very early on, tractors for agriculture were spoken of; but a tractor is still a rarity in Chinese fields to-day, though at last it is making its appearance, here and there. The reason is that it is hopeless (as other Asian countries have found to their cost) to introduce machinery among a
conservative peasantry totally ignorant of how
to run, manoeuvre or repair tractors; in six months nothing works, and the money and the machinery is a complete waste. It is only now in China, with the communes, that the accumulated capital owing to collective effort is suffi-
cient to establish community centres and to lay down the basic education for the necessary technical knowledge to maintain and run machinery.
But the process of basic technical and scientific education of the peasant is long. Meanwhile the urgency of remodelling the land to make it more productive, the plans laid down for this total effort to attain a high industrial and agricultural production are ambitious-and for
any other country but China would be deemed impossible. But in China the acceleration of
change, and the immediate benefits derived thereby, have caught the imagination of the whole population to an extent I have never seen before. As a result so many things are being done together, at the same time, that there is shortage of manpower in all fields of activity: it is impossible to get servants; waiters in hotels prefer to go into factories; at railway stations there is no one to carry luggage, only a very occasional woman, pushing a tyre-wheeled luggage cart, much as in America or in England during the war.
In the communes there has been an increase in labour available by the release of women from housework. This in some quarters of the world

has been interpreted as the "break-up of the family" and as "destroying the sanctity of the home". I am afraid these are figments of indignation rather than facts. Women in China, just as everywhere else, are divided into the homebodies and those who would rather do a job and assert their own personalities. Most of those I saw in the communes (and I saw hundreds)
were the active type who prefer to be paid for their work rather than to remain unpaid, shut up at home, coping with three meals a day and the children. The community canteens provide meals for those who want them, just as factories do in England; most peasants eat one or two meals a day at the canteen in time of ploughing; in time of harvest, when the work becomes strenuous and all the women turn out to help, all meals are eaten at the canteen, or brought out by the canteen staff to the fields so the peasants don't have to walk back and forth. On rainy days, holidays, and when winter settles in and there are only household tasks, they eat at home.
There is, therefore, no incentive to limit families as a necessity; but there remains the incentive to limit the family as a convenience.
This is where it is not correct to speak of China as having reversed its policy of birth control. Nor is it correct to say that China wishes to stimulate a large population for aggressive purposes. What can be said is that the government is suspending judgement. With a higher standard of living, and since a large family is an inconvenience, the majority of China's people may demand family planning as a convenience, but at present this is still a minority.
Birth Control and Female Labour
Birth control is available and is produced without demur in the clinics and hospitals attached to the factories. I personally saw a legal abortion being performed in a hospital. It was "on demand"; the mother already had six children, and wished no more. If both father and mother wish it, abortion is performed, although it is not encouraged. The demand for contraceptives continues in the cities and factories, but there is little of it in the communes; although now, with a rising standard of living, with women going

21

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

out to work and in tact demanding to work their combined earning power and therefore to

outside the home because they can get equal pay the well-being of the family. Since there is no

with the men for it and thus increase the financial income-tax in China, there are no means whereby

potential of the home, the communes are finding a large family can "cash in" directly or indirectly

that many peasant women "do not wish to on their children.

become pregnant every year, they say it is The Chinese government seems to believe that

troublesome".

adjustment will come of itself: with a higher

Each commune has two heads, one of standard of education, with the removal of the

them always a woman. This is done so that the women of the commune can bring their prob-

fear of hunger, with adaptation to modem community life, with the demand of women to

lems to her without having to talk to the man become independent wage earners, and, finally, about it; there is still a lot of "bashfulness" with the removal of the emotional tie-up between

among Chinese women in the villages of China many children and security for old age. "The

to-day. I spoke to several female commune heads. They talked to me of the problems of

government looks after us, we don't need children to look after us when we become old," is what

work for women: "The women want to work, of course. What peasant woman ever did not
work ?" In the old days they did not get paid for it, now they do. They like the nurseries, and the canteens relieve them of a considerable amount of drudgery. Each woman is entitled to take
two or three days off during her menstrual periods, and has six weeks off for each pregnancy; she gets her basic needs, and free maternity care in the hospital; but she does not get her full financial income for time off, only half-pay; she gets time off every day to feed the baby (breast feeding is still the rule). But even so
many women are beginning to tell their husbands that they feel four or five children is enough. They don't want any more. And, unlike France, there are no financial benefits to stimulate more children.

the peasants are beginning to say. All this, I am afraid, sounds rather nalve and
down-to-earth. It happens to be real. China is a
land of peasants. It is, therefore, wrong to say that there has
been a reversal; but it is correct to say that at
the moment China is not bothered by unemployment, or by too little food for too many people, and suffers from manpower shortage; its government feels that it can feed, house, accommodate and raise the standard of living of many more millions in its enormous, unpeopled hinterland. Birth control is therefore not being pushed. At the moment the Chinese say it is a "negative" way of coping with social and economic ills. This is the situation in 1959, and the future will bear watching. There are no such things as inflexible policies in China, at any time.
At the moment of writing, there are still voices

The Future

in China raised for birth control as government policy, notably that of Professor Y. C. Ma of

With the advent of mechanization in agriculture Peking University. Although he has been

and the completion of big projects, the demand criticized, yet he goes on pushing his point of

for manpower may become less; with a rising view, and gets his "opposition views" published

standard of living, a big family will become a in government newspapers, a most encouraging

handicap. Since a man's and his wife's earnings sign of democracy. It may mean rethinking of

are determined by the amount of work they do, the problem, depending how soon mechaniza-

repeated pregnancies become a handicap to tion, replacing human labour, comes to China.

22

