VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION

Report of the Conference at the Caxton Hall on May 23rd, 1932

IR ALLAN POWELL, lately Chief and as a medical procedure it was safe,

Officer of Public Assistance of the effective, and harmless.

London County Council and now a It was not necessary, however, for medi-

member of the Tariff Advisory Committee, cal opinion to maintain that by it defective-

took the chair at the morning session of this ness could be completely eliminated in a

Conference, which was arranged by the short time. If this measure could be shown,

Eugenics Society.

when properly applied, to reduce to some

In the early days of the depression after degree this grave evil, it was justifiable to

the post-War boom, he said, it was put for- ask that the legal ambiguities and obstacles

ward by one of the leading industrialists should be removed, and that safeguarded

that this country was over-populated, and voluntary sterilization, interwoven with

could never again maintain a population on other measures, should be made available.

the then-existing basis, at least not on the It could be claimed that medical opinion

standard that the post-War population expec- was almost unanimous:

ted to be maintained. If that were true, then how much more was it the case to-day! It was doubtful if we should ever again be able
to spend freely those vast sums on the care of the unfit to which we had been accustomed. Any decrease of popula-

i.-That certain cases of mental deficiency might be prevented by the means described.
2.-That there were no other means that could reduce the heritable type of mental deficiency.

tion should be sought in the weakest of the

stock, the medically and physically unfit. Quite apart from the transmission of

Unfortunately, it was the reverse which was defect, it was undesirable that children

happening to-day. Our social and economic should have parents who were mentally defi-

conditions demanded imperatively that cient, and consequently that mental defec-

whatever steps could properly be taken tives should conceive or beget children.

to bring about a decrease in the army of Sir Thomas Horder said that sterilization

defectives should be taken. It seemed to be did not differ from birth control in prin-

agreed on all sides that mental defectives ciple, but only in efficiency. Cutting of the

should not have children, but there was, in human body might be regarded as mutila-

addition, the " social problem group " to be tion, although where an operation was

considered.

undertaken on behalf of the health of the

The outlook of future generations to- patient, the offence was presumably theo-

wards the problems under discussion would retical, provided reasonable skill and care

probably be very different from that of the were shown. Sterilization was frequently

moment, and it was most desirable that in undertaken for women in whom child-bear-

our day and generation some contribution ing involved a danger to life. It was not

should be made, even if by tentative and often that a doctor would undertake steriliz-

limited steps, towards the progress which ing operations for reasons other than

was inevitable.

health while the legal cover remained so

Dr. R. Langdon-Down followed with an slender. The hospitals, moreover, refused

address on the medical aspects of steriliza- to sterilize patients on eugenic grounds, and

tion, distinguishing it, in the first place, it was undesirable that there should be a

from castration. The only change it pro- discrepancy between hospital practice and

duced was to render procreation impossible, private practice.

133

134 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

PARLIAMENTARY PROGRESS

The argument that sterilization was

Wing-Commander A. W. H. James said directed against the working classes made

that owing to the fact that in the present little impression on those with knowledge of

Parliament all private members' time had criminal courts and of the immense gulf

so far been taken by the Government, the separating the respectable workman from small and very keen non-party Committee the vagrant, criminal class.

of private members which had been formed in the present House of Commons to for- FOREIGN EXPERIENCE

ward the idea of sterilization, had not, in Mrs. C. B. S. Hodson, dealing with Steri-

these circumstances, actually discussed lization in Other Countries, said that in their Permissive Sterilization Bill, for it I928-9 she inspected the case records of the would have been a waste of time. The Com- American survey of sterilization in practice. mittee had simply endeavoured to focus the The principal points which emerged were: attention of other members of both Houses

on the general question of voluntary sterilization.
During the short time he had been in the present Parliament he had tried to obtain
the views of other members in what might be termed a cross-section of opinion. The results were:

i.-That the operation did not detrimen-
tally affect health, mentality, or sex-life, but only prevented procreation.
2.-The higher grades of the feebleminded, who were suited for life in the community after training in institutions, could readily be taught to co-operate voluntarily, and to regard the operation as a benefit.

Out of 42 members approached (of all parties)
I6 expressed unqualified support. i6 expressed personal agreement, without necessarily binding themselves to support the measure. 5 were entirely non-committal. 5 expressed unqualified non-acceptance of the idea.

3.-Relations of these cases were not deterred from committing them to institutions where sterilization was usual before release on licence. On the contrary, they sought admission for their charges with the object of securing the operation.
4.-Subsequent and infertile marriages were frequent and were particularly successful among the feeble-minded.
5.-There was a diminished tendency to

promiscuity after the operation, four-fifths In the present House of Commons, when being promiscuous before sterilization, and private members' time was available, it was only one-twelfth afterwards.

confidently hoped that if a Bill was intro-

duced it would secure something like a two She also said that the general care for the

to one majority.

feeble-minded, epileptics, and the insane

Mr. Cecil Binney said that the law as to had improved during the sterilization era;

sterilization was not simple, since a steriliz- that there was an awakened sense of

ing operation had clearly to be distinguished responsibility in the community in regard to

from a surgical operation for the benefit of sex-life and parenthood; and that economies

the patient.

were early felt from the reduction in the

The legality of sterilization was doubtful number of children to be brought up at the

in the case of a normal adult, and there was public charge.

little doubt that it was unlawful to sterilize Miss Pocock's contribution to this aspect

a defective.

was in substance the same as her article on

The sterilization of sane persons was page 127 of this REVIEW.

already done, and there had as yet been no Professor R. Ruggles Gates took the chair

prosecution. The fact that it might be at the afternoon discussion on the Social and

illegal made sterilization a luxury of the Moral Aspects of Sterilization. One of the

rich, since State, municipal, or charitable rights, he said, of every individual, was to

institutions could not venture to do it.

be born with a reasonably healthy body and

VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION

I35

mind. The feeble-minded and seriously un- There were persons certain or likely to

fit, if they propagated their kind, were have children seriously defective in those

obviously increasing, directly and inexcus- mental qualities which were the indispens-

ably, the misery and unhappiness of the able basis of a full and useful life; and it

world. Voluntary sterilizatiotL would effec- was a moral obligation not to bring such

tively check the multiplication of defectives, children into the world. Thus, provided

and so help to raise the standard of fitness that it was not otherwise objectionable, steri-

and happiness of the race as a whole.

lization might be approved.

For countless ages Nature had subjected Sterilization was not proposed as an alter-

her species to the pruning-hook of natural native to segregation, but as an adjunct to

selection, with the result that in the vast it-for those who did not need to live perma-

majority of animal species the individuals nently in institutions. Prohibition upon

which survived to adulthood were all rela- marriage, the other alternative to steriliza-

tively perfect specimens of their kind. tion, would be ineffective, and, passing this

Those having grave defects rarely survived over, there were serious objections to it. It

long enough to pass them on to later genera- was humiliating, and again, since marriage

tions. This was also true of man in his and home life formed for most people the

aboriginal state, but in civilized mankind best basis whence to develop what was in

this selective process had often been sus- them, prohibition upon marriage would

pended or even reversed.

render the position of the penalized hard.

The time had come when man must con- There was little reason, unfortunately, to

sciously take a hand in his own evolution. think that sterilization would decrease pro-

Races improved or degenerated according to miscuity and venereal disease, but there was

the selective forces which were acting upon no reason to suppose that it would aggravate

mating and the production of offspring in them, while the prohibition of marriage

each generation. It was therefore essential most certainly would do so. The chance of

that if the race was not to deteriorate, those genius arising in a mentally defective

who became the parents of the next genera- strain was infinitely less than of it arising

tion should represent at least an average in a strain of super-normal intellectual capa-

sample of the present generation.

city. The chance, therefore, of losing genius

Just as medicine was the application of when defectives did not produce offspring

biological sciences to the health of the indi- was remote, whereas under these circum-

vidual, so eugenics was the application of stances it was certain that much deficiency

the principles of biology to racial welfare. would never occur.

In this sense it was the most fundamental Mr. C. J. Bond explained the movement

and important of all applied sciences, be- now going on under the auspices of a

cause it dealt with the raw material of the provincial Health Insurance Committee

race itself.

(Leicester) to spread a knowledge of

Professor Carr-Saunders said that we had heredity and the necessity for eugenic mar-

long ago generally agreed that we had a riage among the insured workers in that

moral obligation to make human surround- area. By the spread of biological know-

ings the most favourable possible to secure ledge, including the principles of heredity,

full development of the innate potentialities; among school teachers and adolescent citi-

it was now beginning to be realized that we zens, it was hoped that something might be

had an equal obligation to secure good done to prevent marriage and procreation

innate potentialities.

among persons who exhibited in their own

We found that there was no objection to persons, or who carried in their germ cells,

sterilization when performed in the interests the seeds of serious mental and bodily defect

of health, and there could be none, therefore, of an inherited kind. The question of volun-

to the operation in itself, but only to the tary sterilization was dealt with, its nature

object of it.

explained, and the absence of injurious

i36 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

effects on individual health and the sex-life thing to be provided for in itself, and not

pointed out.

only in connection with the procreation of

Mr. Bond quoted cases of blind persons children. The discovery by medical science

and individuals suffering from other forms of a mechanical aid to an arrangement in-

of transmissible defect, who had undergone culcated by civilization was clearly a boon

voluntary sterilization with satisfactory not to be neglected or suppressed, but to be

results. If carriers of mental defect could put at the disposal of all those to whose

also be induced to accept sterilization, he adjustment to life it was a help.

added, then we might hope for an appre- At times the tribe or State might have

ciable reduction in the incidence of mental wanted more people for its purposes; at

deficiency in the population even in the near times the family might have wanted more

future. He mentioned instances which gave hands. But to-day the situation was clari-

ground for hoping that there would be in- fied on this island, and the fundamental

creasing numbers of such carrier cases. social and moral principle involved could be

Mr. Bond also said there were two ways in applied unhampered by these requirements,

which citizens might approach the moral in view of our enormous over-population.

aspect of sterilization-the way of authority, Wing-Commander James and Dr. C. P.

after the manner of the Roman Catholic Blacker wound up the session with an out-

Church, or by endeavouring to form a sound line of the Practical Proposals of this

judgment for themselves on the subject. If Society, the latter saying that the reduction

this second way were followed there was in the incidence of mental deficiency attain-

every hope that a sounder mental attitude able by legalizing the sterilization of mental

towards voluntary sterilization and other defectives would be small. This end could

means of preventing racial deterioration only be adequately realized by making it

would gradually spread among our people. possible for all sufferers from hereditary

Mr. J. C. Pringle said that voluntary diseases, disabilities, and defects to be

sterilization might be supposed to be a voluntarily sterilized. It was especially im-

novelty, but it would be found that the prin- portant that facilities for voluntary steri-

ciple involved-and that was what mattered lization be made available for the assemblage

socially and morally-extended throughout of socially burdensome and parasitic persons

the last three civilizations. During 400 described by the recent Mental Deficiency

years the formulae employed at nearly all Committee as the " Social Problem Group."

marriages in the English-speaking world Whether the best way to do this was by Act

had strongly emphasized the principle, and of Parliament or by trying to popularize the

the evidence went to show that it had been operation in the right quarters, disregarding

emphasized during the preceding 500 years. in the process the uncertainties in the

Couples were bound together in marriage present state of the Law, was an arguable

for three reasons:

point.

i.-Because they required an outlet for

the sexual impulse which would not lead to

social chaos.

The foregoing account is only a highly

2.-For the procreation of children whose condensed summary of the points made by

adequate nurture was provided for.

the principal speakers at the Conference. A

3.-For " mutual society, help, and comfort. "

full report has now been issued, as a separate publication, by the Sterilization Sub-Com-

As children were never produced without mittee of this Society, and it includes the

satisfaction of the sexual impulse, it was informal discussion on all the aspects of

clear that our civilization had throughout its sterilization which took place in the evening.

course regarded the sexual impulse as some- The price is is.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 2.

