66 EUGENICS REVIEW.
an unexpected readiness on the part of Parliament to deal with the question.
The essential feature of that Bill was that it endeavoured to set out the absolute minimum requirements with the least possible interference with existing machinery, and it had the great merit of leading to the prompt production of the Government Bill. The little Bill was framed on these lines in order to rouse attention and because it was hopeless for any private measure on any broad lines to have gone very far.
It is only fair to say that there are some independent authorities who still think it would have formed the basis of a very useful Act.
It seems altogether premature to speak of the defects of lunacy administration in a new and distinctive branch of work, and many well acquainted with lunacy administration are by no means so lacking in confidence in it as the authors appear to be.
The Mental Defect Bill introduced by Mr. Hills on behalf of the Charity Organisation Society's Committee was never read a second time and was too big a measure for either the Government or a Private Bill.
These remarks on this historical point seem called for here owing to the active share taken by the Eugenics Education Society in this matter, and it would be a pity to allow the mistake to pass unnoticed.
The book is very readable and interesting. One may express the hope that the authors will take the earliest opportunity of removing the last syllable of the word " stigmatum " on page 94. In general the work is one which should be extremely useful to members of local authorities at the present moment and to all interested or engaged in the matter.
R. LANGDON-DOWN.
Montessori, MARIA. Pedagogical Anthropology. Translation by F. r. Cooper. London. Heinemann; I913; price 14s.; pp. xiv., 506.
THIS is not an easy book to review. Considered from the standpoint of biology, of physiology, and of anthropometry, it contains a considerable amount of information. There are chapters on mendelism, craniology, pigmentation, statistical methods, biographic charts, and other similar topics. The matter is compiled from the works of Broca, Qu6t6let, Sergi, Lombroso, and numerous Italian anthropologists. No claim is made that it embodies more than a modicum of original research, and the abovementioned chapters contain no more and no less than is to be found on these topics in current handbooks. Still the compilation is a useful one as bringing together into one volume a good deal of heterogeneous matter, although the presentation is so uncritical as to make some of it dangerous reading for the novice.
It is evident, however, that to write a mere compilation of anthropometric methods was not Dr. Montessori's chief aim. As readers of her previous work on education will realise, she takes herself very seriously as an educator, and in this book is at pains to show how a knowledge of all the facts that anthropometry can give about the young child are of value to those responsible for his education. Here the book fails, because, though it is evident that all knowledge about the physical development of our pupils is to the good, Dr. Montessori does not bring out in detail what its precise value is, or what may be expected from it in the near future. It is true that she points out, and the statement is suggestive, that cerebral exercise develops the brain, that while blind children and deaf mutes up to the age of seven or eight have normal craniums, by the age of fourteen or fifteen the volume is subnormal, and that this inferiority remains; thus showing the effect of education on brain development. But when she proceeds to discuss the difference between the cranial measurements of clever and of stupid children and to ask " In school can we be sure that the child whom we judge the most intelligent is really so?" (p. 252) it is clear that she is wholly ignorant of a great deal of contemporary work and thought that bears on her question. She says " We

REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

67

have not yet learned the ways of judging intelligence." Possibly we have not; but the observations of Spearman, Burt, Meumann, !'Iuensterberg,
and numerous other people whose papers have for years been appearing
in the German, English, and American journals of psychology and education have got much further in this direction than has Dr. Montessori, and had she the slightest acquaintance with this literature she could scarcely have avoided making some reference to it.
We have the same feeling of disappointment when we read the chapter on Mendelism and heredity. A brief but lucid description of Mendel's positions is given, but no reference whatever is made to the fact which in respect of heredity is of paramount interest to the educator, namely, that
as the results of education are largely acquired characteristics, it seems at first sight reasonable to assume that they will not directly affect
posterity. Indeed, modern biologists almost without exception are at
pains to maintain that "education cannot affect the development of the race." The statement is one that the educationist cannot possibly accept.
There are arguments by which it can be invalidated, and to make these
good must be the first business of writers on education who deal with heredity. But from Dr. Montessori we get nothing but the unproven state-
ment, " popular education means the betterment of the race " (p. 245). It is regrettable that Dr. Mfontessori, both here and in her other
publications, should show herself ignorant of what is being done and thought in matters of education outside Italy, since the condition ot schools and scholars in that country is notoriously bad. The book in question resembles some of the works on " educational psychology " which were current as recently as ten years ago, in which to a summary of current psychological doctrine was tacked on some aphorisms about the education of the young. So, too, Dr. Montessori sprinkles her statements about anthropometry with remarks and aspirations which always are flowery and sometimes are nonsense. A few examples must suffice:
" In this way (i.e., by collecting anthropometrical data) we may rise from the arid and fatiguing gathering of analytical data towards conceptions of noble grandeur, toward a positive philosophy of life, and unveil certain secrets of existence that will teach us the moral norms of life"

(p. 27). " The teacher prepares for greater utilisation the physiological and

intellectual forces of the new man, like a Greek deity scattering broadcast

his prolific riches. But above all he prepares the souls for the sublime

sentiment which awaits the humanity of the future, glorying in the attain-

ment of peace, and then indeed he becomes almost a redeemer of man-

kind " (p. 360).

" The germinal potentialities that contain beauty and strength seem

predestined to that predominance which will achieve the triumph of life

in the individual. To learn the laws of the union in one individual and

definitive unity of the infinite dominant and recessive potentialities that

must encounter one another in the mysterious labyrinth in which life is

prepared-therein lies the greatest problem of the present day. It is that

which should constitute our guiding purpose " (p. 67).

Educational theory is slowly emerging from the phase in which

phraseology of this kind was considered to help matters forward. It is to

be regretted that Dr. Montessori, who seems to have caught the ear of a

certain section of the public, should not realise that high-sounding phrases

are not argument, and will discredit whatever element of good her work

may contain.

M. W. KEATINGE.

Hartley, C. GASQUOINE (Mrs. Walter H. Gallichan). The Truth about Women. London. Eveleigh Nash; I913; price 7s. 6d.; pp. 396.
THE titile of this book has not been well chosen; in the first place it suggests a dogmatic tone that is not to be found in the book; in the second place it is the kind of title that might attract the reader with

