SOME RECENT LITERATURE ON POPULATION PROBLEMS
By DAVID V. GLASS

T HESE works, selected from the primary intention is to survey the known

highly interesting literature on various techniques of analyzing population growth,

aspects of population which has been and it focuses the author's wide statistical

published within the past few months, experience on the subject. The work includes

have been grouped together in a general an interesting history of the science of demo-

review, not merely for convenience but graphy, and does not forget that extremely

because they are in a real sense comple- important question, the accuracy of the

mentary to each other. Dr. Kuczynski's statistics with which we have to deal.

book* covers the widest ground, but still Having evolved a number of appropriate

omits any study of vital statistics other methods of determining the reproductive

than those provided by the governments of capacity of a population, we are still faced

Western nations, or of differential fertility, by the problem of obtaining reasonably

while it does not attenwpt, except in a few para- adequate and accurate data. So far as the

graphs in the concluding chapter, to apply first point is concerned, most countries have

the results of the methods with which it is not yet included the age of the mother in

concerned to estimating future populations. their birth-registration forms, and appear to

The first gap is filled by Professor Krzy- prefer the application of highly ingenious,

wicki's bookt on Primitive Societies, the though imperfect, techniques necessitated

second by the new and extended study of by such an omission to the simple task of

Edin and Hutchinson,+ while three estimates adding a question to the birth certificate.

of the future population of England and The second deficiency is to be found no less

Wales have been computed by Dr. Charles.§ frequently in the various systems of regis-

When Dr. Kuczynski produces a new book, tration. In Eastern countries this is, of

the task of the reviewer is not to criticize course, to be expected, since it is extremely

but to find terms of praise which are ade- difficult to deal with populations which

quate without offending against the code of contain a large proportion of illiterates, but

academic decorum. Dr. Kuczynski's latest among Western nations, where governments

book is, perhaps even more than his others, have been collecting such data for many

a magnificent piece of work. As is to be years, it is time that these defects were

expected, it contains a number of important remedied. They still exist, however, for

modifications in statistical method, but its apparently in the United States there is

hardly a State in which birth registration is

*Kuczynski, R. R.: The Measurement of Population not inadequate. In Oklahoma and Tennessee,

Growth (Textbooks of Social Biology). London, 1935. to cite Dr. Kuczynski, 40,930 and 5I,88i

Sidgwick and Jackson. Pp. 255. Price 12S. 6d. t Krzywicki, L.: Primitive Society and its Vital Statis-
tics (Publications of the Polish Sociological Institute).

births respectively were registered in I929-30, while the census of April ist, I930, gave the

London, 1935. Macmillan. Pp. 589. Price 20S.

numbers of children under one year of age

t Edin, K. A., and Hutchinson, E. P.: Studies of Differential Fertility in Sweden (Stockholm Economic

at 5I,634 and 56,335 for the two States. In

Studies). London, I935. P. S. King. Pp. iI6. Price New York State, on the other hand, 2I7,628

7s. 6d. § Charles, E.: The Effect of Present Trends in
Fertility and Mortality upon the Future Population of England and Wales, and upon its Age Composition. London and Cambridge Economic Service (Special Memorandum No. 40). London, I935. Pp. I9. Price 5s.

children were born in I929-30, while the census only reported I85,734 children under one year of age. Part of this difference may have been accounted for by internal migration, but this does not cover the whole

297

2Q8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

gap, and in fact it is evident that both the ages of o and 50 years were completely

collection of vital statistics and of census suppressed! For England to-day, no amount

data are incomplete and show a significant of reduction in mortality would be sufficient

margin of error. If this is the case with by itself to restore equilibrium.

modern statistics, how much less accurate The Net rate is, of course, affected by

must be the estimates made for past times changes in the marriage habits of a popula-

and for countries where the official mechan- tion. In France, where fertility in each age

ism is less effective. It would have been very group is lower than in this country, the Net

valuable to have had Dr. Kuczynski's rate is probably higher, because of the

opinion on the population estimates made greater amount of marriage. This is not

by various statisticians.

shown in the Net rate, but it can be detected

This section, however, forms only a small by Dr. Kuczynski's Nuptio-Reproduction

part of the book; the major part consists of rate, which was first explained, I believe, in

an examination of the methods which have an article in Economica in I935.* It involves

been and are still used for estimating the the addition to the Net rate of a Table of

vitality of a population.

Female Marriage Probability, such as that

By this time it should be fairly obvious computed for Germany in I9II, and the

that the Net Reproduction rate is the best omission of illegitimate births to unmarried

available method of measuring a country's women.

ability to maintain its numbers. Stan- There are only two points on which I

dardized birth- and death-rates, though they should like to offer some criticism. First,

are still frequently used, give no indication the Net Reproduction rate measures the

of changes in reproductive capacity, and are replacement of the potentially fertile section

very often more distorted and inaccurate of the population, not of the whole popula-

than the crude rates themselves. Dr. tion. This is not to its disadvantage, but it is

Kuczynski shows this by a number of a fact that needs emphasizing and is not

illustrations. Moreover, although Dr. Kuc- mentioned by Dr. Kuczynski himself. It

zynski has not made the particular applica- requires emphasis because, in a population

tion himself, it is easy to work back from which is still showing the effects of past high

the net reproduction and, if it is below fertility, stabilizing the number of potentially

unity, calculate the increase in fertility or fertile women means'reaching a total popu-

decrease in mortality necessary to restore lation considerably higher than that in

equilibrium.

existence at the time. In Germany, for

M. Sauvy, in an article in the Journal of example, there were i6 ii12 million women

the Statistical Society of Paris,* explains this aged I5 to 45 years, in a total population of

very simply. It involves either multiplying 65-579 millions. Given the mortality rates

the fertility rates of the population by the of I933, maintaining i6-II2 miRion poten-

reciprocal of the Kuczynski rate, or decreas- tially fertile women would require a station-

ing mortality by the coefficient fi, where ary population of about 78 7 millions, while

T=ITt T being the Gross Reproduction

a stationary population of 65 579 millions would contain only I3-44 million women

rate of the population, and t the Net rate. aged I5 to 45 years. The annual number of

This formula shows clearly how small the births required to maintain the two popula-

result of decreasing mortality would be at tions would be very different. The Net

the present time, for with a Gross rate of Reproduction rate can, of course, be adjusted

i .o (the rate for England and Wales in I933 to meet both cases, but in its original form

was below i o), the Net rate could only be it is important to remember its implication.

raised to unity if mortality between the Secondly, I should have liked to see some

* Sauvy, M.: " Sur les taux de stabilisation d'une * Kuczynski, R. R.: "The Decrease of Fertility,"

population," February 1934.

Eco-nomica, May 1935.

SOME RECENT LITERATURE ON POPULATION PROBLEMS 299

mention of Dr. Burgd6rfer's index* in The was reduced, though by how much is not

Measurement of Population Growth. Although known, nor, since the first reasonably

it is not so refined as Dr. Kuczynski's rate, accurate native census was not carried out

and gives no indication of changes in specific until I9I6, is it known whether the apparent

fertility, it is often more easily applied. It decline in the native population between

is based on the true death-rate, derived from I850 and I896 was a real decline.* What is

the Life Table in the same way as Dr. perhaps the most important aspect of

Kuczynski's true death-rate, and has the primitive statistics, the question whether or

great advantage of simplicity in the calcula- not the number of primitives have fallen

tion of either the true-replacement quota since the early nineteenth century, therefore

(that is, of the potentially fertile female remains vague and uninformed.

population) or of the replacement quota of the Nor is the question of general fertility

whole population; while it can be applied in more clearly illuminated, as is shown by

cases where the statistics do not permit the Professor Krzywicki's data on the age at

computation of a Net Reproduction rate. which Australian aboriginal women have

The latter rate requires the use of specific their first child. Twenty-four references are

fertility data as well as of a Life Table, but given in the Appendix, the age reported by

Dr. Burgd6rfer's index needs as its basic observers varying from under twelve to

data only the Life Table, the number of about twenty years. On the basis of these

potentially fertile women, and the size of facts Professor Krzywicki says, " in other

the total population. But the omission of words, an Australian woman, on an average,

this index is only a very minor defect in a becomes a mother at about the age of four-

book which, though it purports to be a text- teen." The conclusion hardly seems justified,

book, merits the title " A Handbook for for as Professor Krzywicki himself writes

Registrars-General."

later in the book, " every one of these

The vital statistics of primitive societies figures (of vital statistics for primitive com-

still remain largely unknown quantities. munities), taken apart from the others, is

This, however, is the fault of the subject open to serious doubt." His general con-

itself, not of Professor Krzywicki, who, in clusion about the various estimates, is,

his new book, has presented some very however, " that in spite of their originating

valuable work. The author has spent over in different regions and from different

thirty years in making a complete survey of observers, they mutually confirm each other

the literature of primitive communities, and by the uniformity of their purport; all

here presents the results.

unanimously indicate that, at the lower

With the anthropological aspects of the stages of culture, the number of living

problem I am not qualified to deal, but it is children is smaller than that to which pre-

obvious that our knowledge of the popula- War European conditions have accustomed

tion questions concerned is, to say the least, us." This seems probable in view of the

highly inexact. To give an example: in a extent to which the sexual intercourse of

footnote on page 76, Dr. Krzywicki quotes married couples is limited by various pro-

Thomson's estimates of the Maori popula- hibitions. In spite of the unsatisfactory

tion in the 'fifties of the last century, the nature of the data at his disposal, Professor

total amounting to not very much more than Krzywicki's book has great value, for it deals

50,000. Now between I835 and I853 there with the subject in the fullest possible detail

were thirteen estimates of the Maori popula- and presents sociologists with a wealth of

tion, and since these vary between 6o,ooo interesting suggestions.

and i6o,ooo, it is scarcely possible to arrive Docent Edin is best known to English

at a reasonable average estimate. In i86o, readers by his studies of differential fertility

the Maori war broke out and the population in Sweden. In his recent book, written in

* See Burgdorfer: Der Geburtenrikckgang und seine * See Now Zealand Census, I926, Vol. XIV, " Maoi

Bekampfung (I929) for a detailed explanation.

and Half-caste Population.''

C

300 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

collaboration with Dr. Hutchinson, of Har- of the births during the period examined

vard University, he presents the results of were illegitimate (page 65), and add, "While

three investigations into that question. The it is not possible to make a social classifica-

first deals with the difference between urban tion of illegitimate children . . . it may be

and rural fertility in the Milar Counties and assumed the social differential would be

shows the balance to be heavily in favour of considerably changed if computed in terms

the more rural areas, due to the large pro- of total rather than intramarital fertility."

portion of agricultural workers present But that is really the point at issue, and

there, the latter showing the highest occu- unless allowance is made for illegitimacy the

pational fertility in all communities. The results are not acceptable.

second two studies are, however, the most In the final study, an attempt is made to

interesting and deal with fertility in discount the factor of illegitimacy, in full

Stockholm itself.

realization of the fact that not only would it

Docent Edin's article on the same subject, give undue weight to the fertility of families

published in the EUGENICS REVIEW, January in higher economic classes, by excluding a

I929 (page 258), gave rise to a good deal of considerable proportion of the children born

discussion, for it showed a situation differing to wives in the lower income groups, but

markedly from that generally found in also because the birth of illegitimate children

other countries. Stockholm appeared to may seriously reduce the fertility of a

show a positive correlation between economic succeeding marriage. But the adjustment

status and fertility, whereas, apart from the made does not seem adequate, for it consists

examples quoted by Lorimer and Osborn,* in analyzing the fertility of families in which

the correlation is found to be negative. The the wife was not known to have had children

controversy which arose has caused Docent before the observed marriage. Apart from

Edin to re-examine his data, and he comes the fact that the investigators are not

to the conclusion that not only is there a certain that no children were born previous

positive correlation between income and to the marriage, it is obvious that this

fertility in Stockholm, but also one between procedure, by eliminating I,590 of the 6,629

education and fertility.

wives whose fertility was analyzed, has

How far can this result be accepted? omitted what may be the decisive section in

It is true that a number of investigations affecting the social differential. It appears

has shown that the very rich have larger to me that the only method of obtaining

families than the less rich, and there is also comparable figures for the different economic

some presumption that, with the more and social classes in Stockholm would be to

widespread application of contraceptive recognize apparently permanent but still

knowledge, the differentials between econo- unlegalized unions as marriages, for they are

mic and social classes are closing up. But such from the sociological point of view, and

when Docent Edin's results were first pub- include the number of children they produce

lished, Professor R. A. Fisher pointed out in the totals examined. Unless this is done,

that they referred only to married fertility no conclusions can be drawn from the

and that while this might not be impor- investigation.

tant in most Western countries, de facto One other point appears to me to be

marriages had long been customary in important. On page 63 it is explained that

Scandinavia, and illegitimacy was very high. the purpose of the studies was to make

In the studies of the MUdar Counties, and of comparisons of specific fertility rather than

Stockholm families for the period I919 to of total reproductivity. But surely it is

I922, births to unmarried women have been scarcely possible to make class comparisons

entirely excluded, although the authors without computing total reproductivity rates,

admit that in Stockholm nearly 28 per cent. and the most suitable way to do this might

* Lorimer and Osborn: The Dyrnamics of Population,
chi. xii.

be to apply the Net Reproduction rate to the material collected. The difficulty is, of

SOME RECENT LITERATURE ON POPULATION PROBLEMS

301

course, to compute Life Tables for the differ- an analysis of population changes for twenty

ent social and economic strata, but even the years into the future has a real value for

use of Gross Reproduction rates would yield industrial and governmental enterprise.

a more interesting result than customary All these merits are to be found in the

fertility data. The addition of Female estimates of the future population of England

Nuptiality Tables would greatly increase the and Wales, which have recently been com-

value of the inquiry, but here again there are puted by Dr. E. Charles. Three hypotheses

very considerable difficulties. The obvious have been used. The first assumes that fer-

solution, and one that may well come about tility and mortality will continue at the same

with the growing public interest in population level as in I933, the second that fertility and

questions, would be to include differential mortality will continue to fall in the manner

Nuptiality and Life Tables in the census as suggested by recent experience, fertility

part of the general data to be collected.

becoming stabilized by i985, and the third

In I932, M. Bunle published an article in that fertility will rise to the I93I level

the Journal of the Statistical Society of while mortality will continue to fall.

Paris* in which he pointed out that estimates The second estimate seems nearest to

of future population were of relatively small what may probably happen, and on that

value because actual population growth basis the population will reach a maximum

always deviated from the estimates, no of 40 -655 millions in I940, and then decline,

matter how carefully they were made. He falling to about 28-857 millions by ig80.

quoted Professor Savorgnan as saying, in By the latter date the age composition of

support of this contention: " Ces calculs the population will have undergone a radical

. . . constituent un travail de Sisyphe change, the proportion of children aged o to

qui n'est admirable que par l'effort t6nace I4 years being 6 o5 per cent. of the total,

avec lequel on tente de fixer le regard dans compared with 23*25 per cent. in I935, and

l'immensit6 t6n6breuse de l'avenir." M. persons aged 6o years and over forming

Bunle's remarks are perfectly correct so far 32-63 per cent. of the population, compared

as the relation between estimates and the with only I2 45 per cent. in I935. The

actual course of population growth is con- difficulties caused by a fall in numbers would

cerned, but there are a number of other thus be accentuated by a decline in the

factors which, in spite of that defect, still proportion of active men and women. On

make population estimates extremely valu- the second hypothesis, for example, the

able. In the first place, the general public composition of the population in 2035 would

still tends to believe that the population will show only 39*28 per cent. aged I5 to 59

continue to grow indefinitely, and fairly years, compared with 57-75 per cent. aged

detailed estimates provide the best means for 6o years and over, and Dr. Burgd6rfer had

correcting their opinion. Secondly, it is already pointed out, some years ago,* the

important to discover what would happen if dangers of such a situation.

certain trends in fertility and mortality The only point in Dr. Charles's estimates

persisted, and how long it takes for a popula- which can be criticized is that the specific

tion to arrive at the margin of decline, once fertility rates for England and Wales in I933

the Net Reproduction rate has fallen below have been calculated on the assumption that

unity, though this, of course, depends upon the distribution of births among women of

the extent to which the effects of past different ages was the same as that for

fertility are making themselves felt. Finally, Sweden in I93I. The actual difference may

with a series of hypotheses it is possible to be serious, but the fault lies not with Dr.

reduce the margin of error in the estimates, Charles but with the inadequacy of our own particularly for relatively short periods, and system of birth registration which makes

such assumptions necessary.

* Bunle, H.: " Previsions D6mographiques." Soci6t6

Statistique de Paris, November 1932.

* Burgdorfer, F.: Volk ohne Jugend, ist edn., I932.

Eugenic. Review, Vol. XXVH, No. 4

