RACE MIXTURE: A SOCIAL OR A BIOLOGICAL PROBLEM ?

By A. DICKINSON, B.A.

T HE ideas of the layman on race are
curiously distorted. Race is commonly
identified with a given language or
culture, with a group living in a common habitat or possessing a single characteristic feature such as pigmentation. Men stubbornly cling to concepts of racial purity and elaborate these into theories of racial
superiority or inferiority. Needless to say, this human weakness is often attended by dire results in a world in which people of differing physical traits are being herded ever more closely together as the barriers of
distance are gradually broken down.

astute. He is shown to possess an astonishingly fertile imagination, which enables him to rise substantially above the material plane on which many so-called civilized beings eke out their miserable existence. In short the basic differences between the intelligent minority and the unthinking masses may be drawn in practically any society in the world. Intelligence and mental agility are by no means peculiar to twentieth-century Euro-
peans. We speak in general terms. It is impossible
to do more by way of an introduction to a study of race mixture, but it is clear from the foregoing generalizations that concepts of

Prevalence of Hybridization

racial purity are largely invalid and that the

Yet objective investigation on scientific psychic homogeneity of the human species is lines clearly shows that only the broadest much greater than is commonly supposed. classification is possible in respect of physical It is also evident that differences in language traits, a classification which reduces the and culture are by no means coincident with teeming millions of the world, and the multi- differences in physical traits. A rational tude of self-styled races into which they approach to the question is needed-one divide themselves, into perhaps no more than which dispenses with what can only be the five main groups. Likewise empirical proof dead-weight of national ideologies and which has been given that intra-racial variability acknowledges that an excessive degree af often exceeds inter-racial variability in miscegenation must have taken place over respect of measurable physical traits. Then thousands of years to account for the presentthe historian comes to the aid of the anthro- day distribution of physical traits and the pologist with evidence of the continuous variability about a norm which obtains in migrations of peoples throughout the his- even the most race-conscious of societies. torical era; and, we may also assume, before Given the psychological abhorrence of race the dawn of history. The philologist steps in mixture which persists as a corollary of to show that language possesses a mobility of untenable theories of racial purity, we must its own, that it may become seriously modi- endeavour to assess in quantitative and fied by the co-existence of groups in adjoining qualitative terms the indisputable fact of localities; to which the anthropologist will race mixture as it exists in the world to-day. reply that the same is basically true of the It must be said at once that the biological material culture of a people. Finally the approach to race mixture cannot be isolated, racial psychologist makes his valuable con- that the biological results of miscegenation tribution by exploding preconceived theories must of necessity be modified to a greater or of innate racial superiority in intellectual lesser extent by uncontrollable and imqualities. Primitive man is shown to be measurable social factors, that the interplay commonly deeply religious, aesthetically of biological and social factors is so intricate minded, an adept at invention, politically that the two aspects scarcely admit of

8i

82 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

separate treatment. It is therefore proposed growth of separate organs are identical with

to work from the biological angle and those controlling the growth of the body

examine the theories of disharmony and of itself, and so the possibility of disharmony is

hybrid vigour; and finally, in connection eliminated. Mj0en, transferring his experi-

with alleged increased variability, to examine ments to the human sphere, studied Lapp-

the position of the anthropologist in relation Norwegian crossings and again found a

to that of the geneticist-all the while " lack of balance " among the hybrids. But

bearing in mind the social factors involved again Castle urged the social factors which

and endeavouring to see how far they may must be taken into account. Thus, these

modify or even outweigh biological con- hybrids are subjected to considerable dis-

siderations.

abilities in the cultural and social spheres, as

is so often the case with mixed populations

Alleged Disharmony in Hybrids

living in close contact with the relatively

First, then, as to the theory of disharmony pure parent groups, and it becomes imposs-

which is advanced in opposition to mis- ible to isolate the biological factor which

cegenation. Its principal exponents are could be held to contribute to an indisputable

Davenport and Steggerda, who postulate an hybrid lack of mental balance. Further,

inheritance, following race crossing, of con- before condemning miscegenation on the

flicting characteristics of the two parent grounds of physical deterioration in the sub-

groups, which may result in the birth of jects studied, and before comparisons are

organic misfits in the second generation after made between the hybrid and the parent

crossing or later. The possibility is envisaged populations, the characters of the individuals

of offspring with, say, a large frame and small mating must be investigated. Were they

viscera, or long legs and short arms, and con- typical of the stocks from which they were

versely in each case. Again, it has been drawn ? Did the mating take place from

alleged that the mixture of two groups, one choice or otherwise ? Was it clandestine or

with large teeth and jaws and the other with open ? The union of two poor specimens of

small teeth and jaws may result in offspring their respective races will usually result in

combining, say, large teeth in small jaws. offspring inferior to the average of the

Mj0en has given evidence of what he con- parent populations. All of which merely goes

siders to be hybrid physical degeneration in to show that biological considerations are by

his experiments in rabbit crossing. This no means all in all, that social factors, diffi-

includes increased size in the Fi generation cult to measure though they may be, must

(a strange criterion of degeneration), de- be taken into account when comparing

creases in size of some specimens in F4 (again parent populations and hybrids in respect of

an odd criterion having regard to his first physical and mental qualities.

point), diminished fertility and increased

infant mortality in F4, which may well, as Hybrid Vigour

Castle points out, be due to an unhealthy Turning now to the concept of " hybrid

environment or an inadequate diet, and vigour," we find evidence both for and

finally asymmetrical ear-carriage in F4, a against such a phenomenon. In support

defect which, as has been proved, is by no Jennings argues that the form of excessive

means confined to crossbreeds.

outbreeding which is represented by mis-

Castle indeed justifiably attacks the whole cegenation decreases the chances of a union

hypothesis of hybrid deterioration and of corresponding defective genes, present in

organic misfits. His experiments on rabbits both parents, with the consequent produc-

showed no sign of skeletal misfits in Fi or tion of a physical monstrosity such as might

F2, nor did his animals evince diminution emerge from excessive inbreeding. And as a

in fertility or vigour when properly cared for. corollary he argues that race mixture is a

He therefore reaches the plausible conclu- form of insurance that defective genes in

sion that the genetic agencies controlling the each parent are more likely to remain, in the

RACE MIXTURE: A SOCIAL OR A BIOLOGICAL PROBLEM ? 83

Mendelian sense of the word, " recessive " in as Trevor points out, is certainly in favour

the offspring. Logically, of course, he is of unincreased hybrid variability. Thus, the

correct, but the so-called races of to-day are Rehobother Bastaards display a particularly

already so grossly hybridized that racial in- low variability, as do the Norfolk Islanders.

breeding is much safer, and inter-racial mix- The " Browns " of Jamaica and the Negro-

ture more hazardous, than might at first be White hybrids of the United States are more

supposed. Clearly there is little to choose variable than this though no more than their

either way, the races of the world being parent groups. The hybrid Sioux are more

already so inextricably interwoven, and only variable than their European forebears, but

the closest inbreeding within a family is no more so than the full-blood Indians,

certain to result sooner or later in defective whereas in the large numbers of Spanish-

offspring. In support of hybrid vigour we Maya hybrids measured in Yucatan by

also have the evidence of Boas, who reports Williams, the variability is less than that of

the half-breed Plains Indians to be taller the parent whites but greater than that of

and more fertile than the parent races; and the parent natives. A similar conclusion is

of Fischer, who shows fairly conclusively no reached in respect of the Mestizos of Kisar.

lack of fertility in respect of the Rehobother All this weight of evidence, as both

Bastaards-the Hottentot-Boer cross-there Trevor and Herskovits have pointed out,

being an average of 7-7 children per mating should be accepted with certain qualifica-

in F5, and alleges them to be surprisingly tions, for the methods used by investigators

virile from both the physical and the mental are by no means all that might be desired.

standpoints. Finally Shapiro's evidence in Nor are some of the assumptions made in

respect of the Norfolk Islandersc-descen- respect of the characteristics of the European

dants of the Bounty mutineers-indicates parent stocks completely justified. Thus in

that their general health, longevity, fertility the case of the Rehobother Bastaards and

and social structure all bear favourable com- the Jamaican " Browns," only small num-

parison with the standards of the parent bers of subjects were measured, while mea-

races. Yet at variance with the hypothesis surement of a triad has often been made by

of hybrid vigour Dunn's investigation in independent investigators, which might well

respect of Chinese-Hawaiian crossing in preclude standardized measurements being

Hawaii, and that of Herskovits in respect of taken. More open to question still is the

the hybrid American Negroes, reveal race assumption, which must unfortunately be

mixture to be neither noticeably harmful nor made, that the variability of the parent

advantageous, the hybrids in each case being types has not changed since the original

intermediate between the parent populations crossing, though this may have taken place

in respect of most of the traits measured. many generations ago; and that (to take a

cogent example) measurements taken of a

"Variability " in Hybrids

group of present-day Oxfordshire villagers

This brings us to the question of the correspond by and large to those of the

increased variability alleged to result from Bounty mutineers. Again, if the hybrids

race crossing, and which, in accordance with were derived from small parent groups, these

strict Mendelian theory, should result from latter might not have been typical of the race

it. In this respect the geneticist and the from which they were drawn. Finally, it is

anthropologist are at loggerheads in that difficult to make due allowance for the

anthropological evidence tends to show that amount of back-crossing towards the parent

hybrids form a mean between the extremes races which may have taken place since the

of the parent groups, whereas a strict Men- original cross.

delian analysis of individual crosses un- Bearing in mind all these methodological

doubtedly posits in the offspring an increased qualifications the evidence would seem to be

variability about a norm in respect of in- as conclusive as it could possibly be in the

herited traits. The anthropological evidence, circumstances, and to indicate that, as the

84 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

differences between the mean values of physical characteristics of the parent stocks
become greater, the more frequently are the corresponding hybrid means found to be intermediate. The Norfolk Islanders are
perhaps the finest subjects for investigation.
They can at least claim to possess a more or
less equally divided racial inheritance, and
their geographical isolation successfully eliminates complexities which arise elsewhere
from back-crossing to the parent groups.
Further, and more important still, the biological factor can be conveniently isolated from the social in this one case and the innate capacity of a hybrid group assessed
with no small measure of objectivity. The investigation of the islanders is certainly the
nearest possible approach to the controlled
experiment in race-crossing and the results obtained should be regarded as of greater
value than those obtained elsewhere under less satisfactory conditions. As has been stated these results seem fairly conclusive. The islanders now form a markedly homo-
geneous group-more so than the parent populations; their health is good, their fertility high, they live long and, of vital im-
portance, their social structure, showing much originality and inventiveness, is superior to that of their native forebears, and
even to that endorsed by Fletcher Christian and his compatriots. Thus we must conclude
with Herskovits that the relative homo-
geneity of a group is by no means a reliable index of racial purity. Race crossing followed by inbreeding among the hybrid offspring would seem to result in an " intensification of hybrid traits" to form a new and relatively homogeneous type.
It is undeniable, however, that anthropological evidence in respect of unincreased hybrid variability is contrary to genetical theory. Muller, it would appear, has gone to some pains to modify pure Mendelian theory to cover unincreased variability by positing a recession of the parental intraracial differences in the hybrids, whose new intra-racial variability is now identified with the inter-racial variability of the parent groups. This theory, though admittedly ingenious, is nevertheless, as Trevor points

out, quite unnecessary if it is remembered that whereas the anthropologist is dealing in terms of group intermixture, and often moreover with hybrid groups some temporal distance from the original crossing-a situation which leaves scope in the interim for inbreeding, back-crossing or the intrusion of further new blood-the geneticist is dealing solely with individual mating. The results of group investigations of this type may well conflict with genetic theories without invalidating them in the slightest in respect of an individual cross.
Summary of Biological Evidence
At this point we may briefly summarize the biological evidence adduced and the results obtained, before concluding with a final word on the social aspects of race mixture. The " disharmony" theory would appear to be ill-founded. The evidence certainly seems to prove Herskovits's dictum that " no human crossings carry inherently lethal determinants for the offspring." There may on the other hand be something in the theory of hybrid vigour, but the evidence is so contradictory as to preclude any final decision on the matter, save for the widely observed phenomenon of heterosis in Fi and possibly F2, which may well decline in succeeding generations. Finally, a group of hybrids descended from parent groups significantly different from one another will almost invariably constitute a mean between these extremes, and, as may be expected, in respect of any one physical trait, the hybrid mean will approach more closely the mean of the parent group which has made the greater contribution to the racial mixture.
It is thus clear that the undesirability of race mixture cannot be substantiated by objective proof, and that from the purely biological standpoint, bearing in mind the controlled experiments in Pitcairn and Norfolk Islands, miscegenation is not inherently bad but may even have its advantages.
Social Aspects of Hybridization
This of course throws into high relief the psychological and social aspects of the

RACE MIXTURE: A SOCIAL OR A BIOLOGICAL PROBLEM ? 85

question. A strong psychological prejudice against race mixture will inevitably result
in the concept of hybrid inferiority. This in
turn will often prevent hybrids from revealing their true potentialities. Widely regarded as social outcasts they will find it
well-nigh impossible to rise to the position in society which might well be their due. As a consequence their minds will become warped and their personalities stunted. It is not
surprising that hybrids, particularly those living alongside their progenitors, commonly
reveal a minimum of ability, marked indolence and an astonishing proclivity towards
moral laxity. Yet the condition of such people can hardly be attributed to biological
factors. Rather is it due to their lack of opportunity in a society which is at once prejudiced and highly irrational in outlook. In the words of Young, " the social behaviour of hybrids is best considered as a reflection of their cultural milieu than as resulting from biological sources." Castle, too, makes the same point by contrasting the crossbreeding of black and white and red and white in the United States. The blacks and the mulattoes are visited with strong social disapprobation, their opportunities for advancement are limited, their numbers decrease and, if the mulatto compares favourably with his black progenitors, it is only because in the past the
whites, his blood relations, have shown at least a modicum of compassion for their unfortunate offspring, whereas the lot of the pure-blooded Negro has always been an unfortunate one in the land of his enslavement. That the mulattoes will not stand comparison with the whites goes without saying. But their plight should be contrasted with that of the Indian hybrids in whose case there is no strong social prejudice. It should be borne

in mind how well they thrive, how they are assimilated back into the white population, how they frequently attain positions of considerable authority and responsibility to which they are fully equal. Here the difference in the results between the aforementioned crossings are not referable to any biological harmony or disharmony, but wholly to the social attitude adopted by the whites, favourable in one case, unfavourable in the other.
It is difficult to escape the conclusion that the seemingly insoluble problem of race mixture is far less biological in character than it is social and psychological; but it is hardly less difficult for that.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
i. Davenport, G. B., and Steggerda, M. (I929), Publ. Carneg. Inst., No. 395.
2. Mj0en, J. A. (192I), " Harmonic and Disharmonic Race Crossings," in Eugenics in Race and State, 2 4I, Baltimore.
3. Castle, W. E. (1926), Amer. J. phys. Anthrop., 9.
I45.
4. Castle, W. E. (I923), Genetics and Eugenics, Cambridge, Mass.
5. Jennings, H. S. (1930), The Biological Basis of Human Nature, New York.
6. Boas, F. (I894), Pop. Sci. Mon., 45. 76I. 7. Fischer, E. (I913), Die Rehobother Bastards und das Bastardierungsprobkem beim Menschen, Jena. 8. Shapiro, H. L. (I921), Mem. Bishop Mus., 11. 9. Dunn, L. G. (I921), "Some Results of Race Mixture in Hawaii," in Eugenics in Race and State, 2. I09, Baltimore. io. Herskovits, M. J. (1923), The American Negro, New York. iI. Trevor, J. C. (I938), Eugen. Rev., 80. 21. 12. Sullivan, L. R. (I9I9), Anthrop. Pap. Amer. Mus., 23.. 13. Williams, G. D. (I931), Pap. Peabody Mus., 13. I4. Rodenwaldt, E. (I927), Die Mestizen auf Kisar, Batavia.
I5. Herskovits, M. J. (1934), " Race Mixture " in Encyclopawdia of the Social Sciences, 13.
i6. Muller, H. J. (1936), Amer. Nat., 70. I7. Young, D. R. (1932), American Minority Peoples, New York.

ugni Review, Vol. XTI1 No. 2

