THE GRAZ STERILIZATION TRIAL

By FELIX TIETZE, LL.D., M.D.(VIENNA)

D URING the latter months of 1932 prosecuted for having helped in or had some

the police of Graz in Steiermark, other connection with the operations-

Austria, discovered that a relatively especially an author who by lectures and

largenumberofmenofthistownandof Vienna printed material had advocated this method

had been sterilized by phycians and medical of sterilization and even helped his listeners

students who had either carried out on them and readers to get into touch with the

a double vasectomy or had ligated both their operating surgeons and "half-surgeons."

vasa deferentia. In view of the fact that ,According to the Austrian Criminal Law

similar operations have been proposed as a (dating from I852, but really only a revised

means of securing sterilization in men, and edition of a former criminal law of I803),

are indeed adapted for this purpose in certain an individual is guilty of causi severe

of the United States and elsewhere, the case bodily damage (schwere k6rperliche Be-

has some interest for the readers of this schddigung) who, not with the intention of

REVIEW.

Ikilling but with other hostile (feindsolig)

In actual fact eugenic aims had no part in intention, has acted against a person in such

the Graz sterilizations. The operating phy- a way as to produce a disturbance of health

sicians took not the least interest in the or incapacity for work lasting at least twenty

genetical constitution of their patients- days, or a mental disorder, or severe njury

they were interested in hardly anything but to that person (§ 152). The punishment is

the operation fee; nor were the patients impnsonment for a period of six months to

themselves interested in eugenics. Some of one year, or under aggravating circumstances

these were married men with small incomes up to five years (§ 154). If the crime has

who already had one or -two children and brought about loss of procreative faculty in

were desperate at the prospect of having to the injured individual the punishment is

bring up more; some had no children, and hard labour for five to ten years (§ I56).

wanted none; and some were unmarried. The law does not state what a severe injury

The idea that they might be carriers of is, but in the case under survey the court

transmissible defects did not even occur to took it for granted that the sterilizing opera-

them. It may be recalled that Lenz, dis- tions, while being severe injuries in the legal

cussing a similar case, expressed the view sense, had not the special character specified

that men who askled to be sterilized were in section i56, in which the reference was

hardly worthy to continue their race, and to permanent loss of procreative capacity.

that it was quite proper to sterilize them. This was not mentioned specifically, for

The sentiment of an important part of the when the law was created sterilization by

Austrian population and Government, how- vasectomy or vaso-ligation, was not yet

ever, determined by their adherence to the known and the only operation thought of in

doctrines of the Roman Catholic Church, is this connection was castration, in other words

strongly against eugenic or (except for very complete destrction or removal of the

strictly therapeutic purposes) any other genital glands and thereby of procreative

sterilization; and it was for this reason that capacity. After the modern operation steri-

action was taken against one physician and lity is not permanent; a reverse operation

two medical students who had carried out on is possible and as a matter of fact was

a number of men (at least ioo) operations successfully carried out in one of the Graz

that had the effect of making them sterile. aeses.

Besides these. certain other individuals were Moreover, the judges concluded that

2 rA

260

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

I

hostile intention, which would have to be law (§ 343) to unqualified persons, whereas proved to make the operations punishable those operated on in the presnt case were under the above-mentioned law, was lacking. not sick. The prosecutor had expressed the view that The court was thus obliged to acquit the a hostile intention was present in the mere defendants, basing its verdict on the fact intention to attack the bodily integrity of an that the Austrian Criminal Law contains no
individual; but the court found that the sedion forbidding the operation of sterilization.
law undoubtedly meant the intention of In other countries such legal prescriptions do damaging the body, this interpretation being exist, for instance in Germany, where the borne out by the wording of the analogous Criminal Law was augmented by a sectionsection (§ 136) of the older criminal law of 266a of May 26th, 1933-stating that an 1803 which runs: Who with the intention of individual who injures anyone with his owri damaging an individual injures him severely consent acts against the law only if the conmmits a crime. A hostik intention is thus action, in spite of the consent of the injured
an intention to injure physically; a dolus individual, violates custom. In the new
diredcus is necessary, at least an intended German Sterilization Law which came into assault. But in the present case the defen- force on January ist, 1934, section 14 reads dants had carried out surgical operations thus: Sterilization, not camried out according with the intention of producing an effect to the terms of this law, as well as removal of
desired by the subjects themselves, who the genital glands, are only permissible if
presumably were entitled to dispose of their performed by a physician according to the bodies and had indeed themselves solicited rules of medical science, to avoid serious the operation; and it was therefore impos- danger to the life or the health of the person sible to argue that the surgeons had acted on whom the operation is undertaken, and with intent to assault, let alone with a still with his consent. severer hostile intention. The question as to The judgment of the Graz court is not what were the defendants' real motives (i.e. final. An appeal against it has been lodged whether their purpose was to help their in the Supreme Court, but it is very unlikely patients, or the human race, or just their that it will be changed in any fundamental bank balances) is entirely irrelevant. Even sense. There exist in Austria people who the fact that two of them had not graduated want a Sterilization Bill more for the purpose and were therefore not entitled to operate of forbidding sterilization for other than makes no difference, for only the treatment eugenic reasons than for facilitating steriof sick persons is forbidden by the criminal lization having this purpose.

UEogi Rbyiw, VoL XXV, No. .

