AMERICAN EUGENICS SOCIETY
Statement of the Eugenic Position

By the Special Committee of the Board of Directors*

TTHE AMERICAN EUGENICS SOCIETY is composed largely of scientists from a number of different disciplines. Their
common interest is to promote the advancement, discussion and dissemination of scientific knowledge of human genetics, as it relates to the welfare and improvement of individuals and populations.
The Present State of Knowledge Recent advances in the field of genetics make the times particularly appropriate for the activities of such a society. In the past decade or two, human genetics has made notable advances as a field of study. It has contributed new insights into the past and present evolution of man. Great strides have been made in analyzing the causes and inheritance of constitutional diseases. We have come to realize that genes which cause defects are not limited to the afflicted families, but that many such genes are spread widely throughout the population. We have learned that the genetic consequences of artificial radiation, of life-saving influences in medicine, and of new migration and marriage patterns are reflected in an accumulation of deleterious genes over and above the subtle equilibrium previously established by natural forces. Methods are being devised to detect the individuals who are carriers of genes that cause defects as well as to treat some of the defects at an early age. Increasing medical knowledge and increasing public interest have led to the establishment of heredity counselling centres, and to a new recognition of the importance of heredity in human affairs.
The genetic mechanisms related to intelligence and personality are as yet little understood.
* Gordon Allen, Dudley Kirk, J. P. Scott, Harry L.
Shapiro, Bruce Wallace. Reprinted from Eugenics Quarterly, December 1961. 8, 4.

It seems certain that there are many genes involved, but the number and the method of transmission are not known. Much further research is needed to find out in what way and to what extent differences in intelligence and personality are determined by variations in genetic factors. Their outward (phenotypic) manifestation is the combined result of the interaction of a specific heredity with a specific environment.
Studies over the past thirty-five years have contributed convincing evidence that variations in genetic factors do have a part in determining individual variations in intelligence and personality. Studies have been made on identical twins reared at home or reared apart, on siblings, on adopted children reared in homes and in institutions, and on random pairs. When the environment is closely similar, there are still large individual differences, which are best explained by heredity. On the other hand, when heredity is held constant and the environment varied, there are still large differences, which must be accounted for by differences in the environments. Psychological and sociological studies hold an important place in advancing knowledge of the part played by genetic factors, of the distribution of these factors in the population, of the regularity of their expression in diverse environments, and of their significance to human societies.
The Role of the American Eugenics Society The function of the American Eugenics Society is to contribute to the advancement and dissemination of knowledge about human genetics particularly in relation to similar scientific
knowledge from the social and biological
sciences, including knowledge of the social and psychological factors which determine size of family among different kinds of couples. The

79 THE EUGENICS REVEEW, July 1962, 54,2.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Society's function is therefore to a great extent Matters of eugenic policy will be increasingly

interdisciplinary.

discussed as more knowledge is developed in

The Society has a special part to play i these fields. It will be the function of the Society

enlarging the interests of various professional to provide opportunities for such discussion

groups, especially in fields where there is an through publication and conferences. Sound

awakening scientific interest. When, after the eugenic policies will not develop in a vacuum.

Second World War, the medical profession They must grow out of existing knowledge

began to be interested in genetics, the Eugenics applied to the conditions and mores in particular

Society's most successful work was in that field. countries.

The Eugenics Quarterly provided opportunities

for publication of articles dealing with human Changing Social Patterns and Eugenic Policies

populations in the broadest sense, at a time when Habits, culture patterns and institutions which

other journals were not looking for papers of affect reproduction and survival are changing

this sort. The Society's five fellowships in rapidly in the United States. Eugenic policies, if

medical genetics were among the first to result in they are to be effective, must anticipate and

assignments to full-time teaching and research recognize these changes.

in genetics at major medical schools. Several The most basic change is the reduction of

conferences on medical genetic subjects and on deaths prior to the age of reproduction. In the

the teaching of medical genetics were directly United States over 95 per cent of all children

sponsored or primarily stimulated by the Society. born alive now survive to their thirtieth year.

The Society's publications and conferences on Early death is no longer so great a factor in

heredity counselling have received extensive reducing the survival of the physically or

notice in both professional and lay circles. mentally unfit. Eugenic policies will try to find an

The importance ofmedical genetics is now widely acceptable substitute for death selection.

recognized and is getting support from the medi- Accompanying the reduction in deaths,

cal schools, from foundations, and from the there is an equally marked trend towards

government through the National Institutes of limiting size of family. A study made in 1955

Health. The Society feels satisfaction in having indicates that over 90 per cent of all fecund

played some part in this important advance in American couples use some form of family

the field of eugenics.

limitation at some period of their married lives.

Psychologists, sociologists and demographers If, as may soon be expected, simpler, cheaper

are now showing interest in the study of the and more acceptable means of family limitation

economic, social, institutional and psychological become available, we may approach a society in

factors which, in the United States, influence which all children are quite specifically "wanted"

size of family. Such studies are essential to children. This would not of itself make for

finding out how social conditions might be eugenic trends in births, but it would at least

modified, not only to bring about voluntary make possible policies for eugenic birth selection

changes in the general birth rate, but also to based on voluntary controls.

bring about discriminating differentials in In the United States to-day there is a trend

births as between individual couples of different towards equalizing educational opportunities;

genetic constitutions. It should be the function of there is also a trend towards fitting education

the Eugenics Society to stimulate work in this to the abilities of the individual. There are trends

field by holding conferences, by publication, towards an increased social mobility, greater job

and by such other means as may be at its dis- mobility, and the elimination of fixed hereditary

posal. Such studies, together with psychological classes. These are all changes which would make

studies on the part played by genetic variations, it more likely for each individual to find the kind

and on the means of measuring psychological and level of work most appropriate to his genetic

traits, constitute probably the most important potential.

fields to which the Society should now give its The trend towards more employment of

attention.

women outside the home offers alternatives

80

STATEMENT OF THE EUGENIC POSITION

to childbearing which eugenics programmes Much further research is needed to determine

will have to take into account.

the potential effectiveness of such a selective

The circle within which one can choose one's process, or of alternative eugenic programmes

mate is constantly widening in the United States consistent with our laws and institutions. It can

to-day, with a greater possibility of assortative probably be assumed that couples with a better

mating. Assortative mating can increase the than average genetic inheritance, will, more

number of people with particular qualities by often than not, provide a better than average

changing the distribution of genes. In associa- home environment, by whatever criteria quality

tion with selection it can rapidly change gene is to be judged. If this is indeed the case, eugenic

frequencies.

policies would work hand in hand with an

With such changes going on, one course improved environment to raise the level of

open to eugenics is to find, and to further, those human qualities. There is no conflict between

institutional arrangements, those social, econo- those desiring to raise the level of our genetic

mic and psychological pressures, which would inheritance and those desiring to raise the level

result in a tendency for individuals to have of our social inheritance.

more or fewer children in proportion to their

success or achievement in their particular Conclusion

environment. Eugenic policies of this sort The Eugenics Society has a definite and import-

would reach into each social, economic and ant role to play in the development of popula-

occupational group, and improve the quality of tion policies within the United States. Where

each. The result would be, not a segregation information is lacking, the Society will exert its

into superior and inferior classes, but a genetic influence to gain knowledge. Where dissemina-

diversification in the process of adapting to the tion of information is poor, the Society will

diverse elements of our society. One could then sponsor conferences and encourage publication.

expect a greater variety of talents, and, hope- And where there is failure to utilize available

fully, a constantly higher level in those qualities information, the Society will seek to promote

which have a common tendency towards success a better understanding of what might be accom-

in all environments.

plished by the application of existing knowledge.

8I

