THE SEX RATIO AND EMIGRATION.

By C. S. STOCK, B.A.

IN the article on " Emigration " in the April number of the REVIEW a

brief reference was made to the excess of male population overseas and

of female population here; but the matter deserves more attention and

the details are given in, the Blue Books of the Dc5minions Royal Com-

mission. A Statisti-cal Sub-committee found that in i91I at all ages the

excess of females in England and Wales was I,179,000. Analysing this

into particular age-groups, the excess of unmarried females over un-

married males between I5 and 35 was 7,100, and between I5 and 45 was

56,900. These are crude figures and require several corrections, but they

are quoted as an illustration of the fact that the surplus is mainly in the

older age-groups. From a eugenic point of view the fertile age-groups

alone count, and taking 35 as an upper limit the corrected figures are as

follows :-The number of unmarried persons between 15 and 35 in 191I

in England and Wales who will be alive and unmarried on attaining the

35-45 group is-

Wo'aen

Men

1,187,000

985,000

This gives an unmarried female excess of about 200,000, but as Ireland, owing to excessive emigration of women, acts in the opposite direction to Great Britain the figure for the whole United Kingdom is 143,000. That this is far too small a number to help much in solving the overseas population problem can be seen from the following table of sex distribution within the Empire
ExcEsS OF WOMEN (+) AND EXCESS OF MEN (-) IN VARIOUS COUNTRIES OF BRITISH. EMPIRE (WHITES ONLY).

England and Wales ...

Scotland ... ... ...

Ireland ...

...

Australia ... ..

New Zealand ... ...

Canada ... ...

Newfoundlani ... ..
U.nion of South Africa

Total population, l9I I.
... 36,070,500 ...
... 4,760,900 ...
... 4,390,200 ...
... 4,45 ,000 ... ... I,oo8,500 ... 7,206,600 ... ... 242,600 ...
... 1,273,300 ...

Excess.
+ 1,179,300 + 143,200
+ 6,Ioo I71,100 - 55,400
-437,3oo
- 6,000
- 92,400

The excess oif women in the United Kingdom at all ages adds up to 'about I,300,000; the excess of men in the rest of the Empire at a.ll ages adds up to about 770,ooo. The excess of males in the Dominions in 191I
was about 6 per cent. of total population, and the excess of female population in the United Kingdom was about 3 per cent. Both female surplus here and male surplus overseas are mainly among the middle-aged and old. Under war conditions our surplus is increasing but that overseas is decreasing. Male age, however, is eugenically less important than

I64 EUGENICS REVIEW.

fema.le. io,ooo wome.n emigrated at 15-19 will contribute twice as much to the next generation (much more ultimately) as an equal number emigrated at 25-29, and five times as much as IO,OOO emigrated at 30-34, while at the saime time they will give to, the community the same number of years' service while unmarried as the 25-29 group. A woman under 20 stands twice as great a chance of marrying within a year in Australia as one of the same age in England and Wales, and the chance is higher in other age-groups.

In what section of the community is the bulk of the female surplus
to be found? With few 'exceptions the proportion of unoccupied women
is generally far lower in working class areas than in middle and upper
class ones. The exceptions are Glamorganshire, Durham, and towns on the N.E. coast, probably due to absence of opportunity for employment of women, and in the case of mining districts to the greater chance of marriage. The determining factor in the social distribution of unoccupied women in England and Wales is the opportunity for getting non-domestic
employment. Next to upper class areas the proportion of unmarried women is. highest in the \textile districts of Lancashire and the West Riding of Yorkshire, and the tow fertility rate here competes with that of the upper and middle class, but unlike other low fertility groups textiles show a high infant mortality. " It does not appear," say the Commissioners, "that there is in England and Wales any appreciable surplus of women who are both of the type desired by the Dominions and can at the samne time be readily spared by ourselves, since it is only in the localities of higher social status-the better parts of London and the suburbts and the seaside and health resorts-that the surplus exists." The small surplus of unmarried women domestic servants can hardly be spared.

The lack of women in the sparsely-settled portions of Greater Britain is mainly due to circumstances common to the whole Empire. Although in the United Kingdom as a whole there is an excess of females, and in Australia, New Zealand, Canada, and South Africa, as a whole, an excess of males, yet all over the Empire the proportion of women in. the towns is much higher than in rural areas. In Australia the proportion of women in the chief towns is much the same as in England. Between 25 and 45 the number of women unmarried in Metropolitan Australia is higher even than in London. Ii the rest of the Continent the proportion of unmarried women of marriageable age is very low, -s also in Canada and South Africa. Considering in each case I,OOO males, the number of females is as follows

England and Wales-

Urban

... ... ... ... ... ... 1,024

Rural .. ..... Australia-

... ...

... 9Ig

Urban

... ... ... ... ... ... 1,082

Rural

... ... ... ... ... ...

842

Melbourne ...

...

...

...

W. Australia, outside Perth ...

...x1,119
... ... 6x8

THE SEX RATIO AND EMIGRATION.

New Zealand-

Urban

1,026... ... ... ... ... ...

Rural

... ... ... ... ... ...

799

Canada-

Urban

... ...

...

...

...

...

948

Rural

... ... ... ... ... ...

866

British Columbia-

Rural

....51I...

...

...

In the United Kingdom young women migrate to the towns as domestic servants. In the Dominions many married women live in the towns and their husbands work in the country.
Uneven distribution between town and country is at the root of the problem and this distribution is not likely to be affected materially or permanently by conditions arising out of the War. The following figures
suggest the need of young female emigrants who must of course be prepared to settle outside tbe towns and be able to satisfy the requirements there.
AUSTRALIAN CENSUS, 19II.

Persons of less than four yearsrresidence.

Males.

Females.

1,000

320 15-24

1,000

403 25-44

A marked change in the destination of emigrants has taken place. From I891-I900 28 per cent. went to British Dominions and the rest to foreign countries, mainly United States of America. From igoI-12 63 per cent. went to places within the Empire, and 19I3 gave a higher percentage.
The Government has certain powers in regard to emigration, but these do not enable any effective control of it.
i. The Colonial Office supervises the Emigrants' Information Office, which, however, has no executive authority. ,
2. The Board of Trade has charge of emigrant ships and some ineffec-
tive supervision of passage brokers and their agents. It is not in touch with movements of emigration inland.

3. The Local Government Board is responsible for the emigration of Poor Law children and the President acts as spokesman in the House on emigration.
4. The Home Office is responsible for the emigration of children from industrial schools.
But the vast bulk is handled by independent societies, which often overlap, and by the uncontrolled and often unscrupulous activities of transport companies' agents.
The Commissioners recommend that certificates of elementary teachers in the self-governing Dominions should be recognised in the United Kingdom and vice versa in order to promote by exchanges closer mutual understanding. The same arguments apply to secondary and other schools.
The Emigration Bill is still sub judice. The most widely-read portion of the Press has been hostile. Anyone unfamiliar with its mental atmo-

i66 EUGENICS REVIEW.
sphere would haive supposed it impossible to suggest that the reward of the fighting man was to take the form of banishment from his country, in face of the obvious fact that the working of suoch reconstruction schemes must depend upon the willing co-operation of those for whon they are intended.
If European figures are any guide very high birth-rates involve very high death-rates and point to bad conditions of life, e.g., Russia-birth-
rate about 44; death-rate, 29; difference, I5. New Zealand-birth-rate
about 26; death-rate, 9; difference, 17. We can hardly doubt that the larger figure (17) in New Zealand is far less expensive physically and
morally, and in every way more desirable, than the smaller (I5) of
Russia. Perhaps all civilised communities will eventually be drawn towards the choice which France seems already to have made for herself, namely, an equilibrium between births and deaths as providing those conditions under which individuals and communities can live together so as to make life best worth living. But we must never forget that the existence of our Dominions beyond the seas falsifies any reasoning about population which limits itself to these islands alone, and the example of France is not one that we, with our flag flying over so much fertile unsettled land, can afford to follow for some time.

