CORRESePOflENC-E t7.

Sex and Culture

To the Editor, gsics Review.

To the Editor, Eugenics Review
SIR,-Mr. Fyson's reply to my letter in your last issue calls for some comment. He still -supports Dr. Unwin in the assumption that so-called" laws " discovered in the observation of primitive tribes can be expected to operate in the case of modern civilizations. He says that discoveries made with regard to plants in the laboratory hold good in the field and hedgerow. It seems to me that a truer analogy is to ask whether, because, many of the lower organisms flourish in captivity, we can argue that this " law" must necessarily apply to higher organisms like the primates ?
For it is moral captivity that Dr. Unwin recommends for civilized men and women. He makes it
perfectly clear all the time that what he is talkin;
about is coercive sexual restraint. In his letter Mr.
Fyson claims that it is self-control he is advocating.
Then Sex and Culture is irrelevant to his thesis; and I am prepared to agree with him. But is he prepared to recognize that there is no reason' to suppose that self-control and responsibility, coexistent with freedom from external coercion, will result in an acceptance of the narrow choice between celibacy and life-long monogamy which

SIR,-Taking Mr. Craig's pargraphs seriatij.:

I. He fails, it seems to me, to distinguish

Unwin's facts, which appear incontrovertible, fro

hi psychological explanation which we are free to
reject.

2. I don't agree. If he will read p. 432 of Sex a°n

msCiuunelrvateonultsrvheeardtaegqcIauoeigmsnrmtaiehsonepnd,twehibdelultcfuoslseelorecsfiitavghrenaiatmfseiDcaIarsn.ducoreUemsonf.ywtiahInneasmbrwanyetrhnenoiort

"dNo,, why should I?"

3. Mr. Craig referring- (and

misrepresents what I wrote. I submit my words were

I was
cIeat

enough) not to Dr. Unwin's anthropological thesis

but to Mr. Craig's suggestion that both control and

ccsuaalumtseueriaanlhnerdrisieetfafwbeelcter.eurSdgueu,reetlthyoeyitfhwbeooustlahdmwegerruoerwgedi,nuesatnrtednogtitjohte

together and among the people of highest culture
we should expect the greatest desire for contro

On Mr. Craig's own (and others') showing this is nkt

the case. And who are the people Mr. Craig waxes

0so warm know of

against in the second-sentence'? any such proposals. Certainly Dr.

I don't Unwv

made none.

organized Christianity has tried (never entirely To return to Dr. Unw.in's -psychological explana.
successfully) to rivet on European civilization ? tion. In spite of the joie de vivre which we have1 I

Why the fact that those who think with me, have suppose, all experienced after a union (or because

an " intense animosity" against " any idea of of it), we may concede that continence makes foi
control" proves Dr. Unwin's anthropological increased social energy. It is significant that somne

thesis, I am at a loss to understand. It is true that of the greatest thinkers and most resolute leaden

we have an " intense animosity " against the sexual of men have eschewed sex. But I for one find it

control of the young, the poor, and the vigorous by difficult to follow Dr. Unwin in his belief that suc

the old, the rich, and the impotent-a control that is in its nature primitive and uncivilized. Near this

social energy is communicated by the mother to her
young children, and may accumulate down the

house on Hampstead Heath, any fine night, a little drama (or comedy) is enacted. Lovers seek

generations. For their improved mentality (Un.
win's " cultural nrse ") we must I believe look to

the solitude of the darkness and the stars. They are better brain material, and for this to the selection,

watched by policemen, usually healthy young men in penods of continence, of sperms carrying the

with no taste of the job. The policemen in their more valuable genes. But this is theory. Th

turn are watched by the emissaries of the Public immediate need is a recognition of the fact, estab

Morality Council, while here and there a prowling lished by Dr. Unwin, that sexual restraint among

blackmailer seeks his prey. Such a scene must have the more influential members of a society has

been re-enacted in essence down the ages from the always preceded social and cultural progress, ands

time when Dr. Unwin's deistic civilizations and lessening of it has preceded national decay.

virginity tests represented the general level of Mr. Craig's penultimate sentence soiunds hopefuL

culture. I have maintained that the one hope for But he will find, I think, that men and women, n~

the race is to take sexual conduct out of this- longer 'subject to priestly authority, will need

atmosphere of tribal taboo, and by education and
the inculcation of a sense of social responsibility to

reason; and where will he find it except in Dr
Unwin's book ?

place it under the control of the enlightened conscience. This theme Mr. Fyson will find developed

- ~~~P.F. FYSON.

in my Sex and Revolution which also contains my
views on the two other points raised in his original

Nature and Nurture

letter.

To the Editor, Eugenics Review

London, N.W.3.

VArEc CRAIG.

SIR,-Ta 1tlY to assume the truth of a lie is often

more deceptive than to tell the lie outright. I

310

CORRESPONDENCE

311

each scent UtS~tUr0 the wiew impicit that food p,dpsitori*itnotth-pxsi*ersiro'ttlfapaecflsitcat~Ymsnklssbeotl.fhfOeoisfouatdimi-a4edtn4o*;ctnrdnXioo,cwmttaaebawtuiQiiie"tnsmrAhtaaahtrsneaoedstftuatohromnembedeseeoprlabedloddtrkieoanentcnetokcarew,e.t
aweather and yet for one to develop

weIhemrahpolahntvaghesiialrsyzeetfaehtnrehdreeitdmihpmtelphioocartatthtaiehnorencrneeiodntoi.fttyhheIeitrsleiidsstiuewtrpyarrt;oeumnrbeegulttytooiuwsohnivitiecmarhs-

24 Regent Road,
Jersey, CI.

Guy PORTER.

THE GALTON ANNIVERSARY DINNER,--19391

will be held at

THEN WALDORF HOTEL

ALDWYCH, 'W.C.2
On Thursday, February 16th, at 7.30 p.m. (for 7.45)

The.Galton Lecture

"POSITIVE EUGENIC POLICY"
will be given by
Dr. C. 0. DARWIN, M.C., M.A., Sc.D)., F.R.S.
Chairman: The Lord Horder, G.C.V.O., M.D., F.R.C.P.

A vote of thanks to the Lecturer will be proposed by
The Lord Treut, J.P.

and seconded by Noel Hall, M.A-., AM.

Tickets,
London,

7/6, may
S.W.i.

Pbleeaosbetapiunerdchfr.oematshaeerarBraulnsygineaedssfspoorSsesacitrbeltteha,erylaa,sstTitmhoemmaeEynutgne.onticbseSoecaiseytyt,o

69 ecleston
increase the

Square,
number

|

