' Eugenics is the science which deals with all influences that improve the inborn qualities Of a race; also
with those that develop them to the utmost advantage.'-S IR FRANCIS GALTON ( 1904)
The Eugenics Review
EDITORIAL OFFICES: THE EUGENICS SOCIETY * 69 ECCLESTON SQUARE * LONDON * SWI * VICTORIA 209I
Editorfor the Society: Mrs. K. Hodson

NOTES OF THE

association is true within families (and withinfamily data are lacking at present) as well as

QUARTER

within the broader grouping of social class, it could not be a social one and must be biological.

If biological, then is it a genetic association-

does a genotype that makes for high intelligence

THE GALTON LECTURE 1966

also make for tallness? Or is it due to some

THE SUBJECT OF the Galton lecture for 1966, printed in this issue of the REVIEW, is the relationship between stature and intelligence; it is certainly one that would have greatly interested Galton himself. With great thoroughness Dr. James Tanner establishes that the association is a real one and discusses the various theories that might account for it.
The association is apparent in school children, but it is also to be seen in adults. Early physically maturing children are bright, but this cannot account for the association in adults, since early maturerers do not end up tall. Size of family,

environmental effect, perhaps some inadequacy of intra-uterine environment producing a permanent stunting of both body and mind? Probably both hypotheses are true and there is much interesting work to be done to elucidate this point.
It is interesting to speculate whether the association between intelligence and stature holds between, as well as within, poplations. Are the shorter ethnic groups duller than the taller ?-probably not. It would also be interesting to know if the association is with the linear dimension, stature, or with body size.

that is number of sibs, affects intelligence

(particularly verbal) test score in both children and adults. Number of sibs also affects height in

VARIATION IN PTC TASTING

children (in all but Social Class I and the IT HAS BEEN true for thirty years and more that

agricultural groups), but probably not height far more is known about geographical and racial

in adults; number of sibs could, therefore, variations in the frequencies of the ADO genes

account for an association in children, but would than is known about similar variations in any

not explain one in adults. Both intelligence and other species, plant or animal. This, of course,

height of children is associated with the social is because vast numbers of blood donors and

class of the parents. There are indications others are grouped for practical reasons, so

however that, within social classes, the brighter making available an enormous fund of ready-

children tend to be taller: boys who get to made data. Some of the other blood group

University are taller than those in the same systems have also made a big contribution, and

social class who do not; the girls who marry for the same reason. The contributions to

upwards in social class tend to be taller than anthropology, in the widest sense, are very great.

those who do not. Dr. Tanner notes that if the It is now becoming clear that the number of

ER-I

117

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

human polymorphisms having a simple genetic provokes considerable discussion during the

basis is likely to become very large indeed in meetings and means that controversial aspects

the not remote future. All these polymorphisms are well and truly thrashed out.

which show regional and other differences in Bearing this in mind the report on the oral

gene frequency-and most do-are potentially gestogens which, because of the nature of the

as valuable as the ABO blood groups. The preparations under review includes both oestro-

difficulty is that routine testing of large numbers gens and progestogens, can only be reassuring.

for practical purposes is seldom needed. The It is pointed out in the introduction that these

observer has to set out to make ad hoc surveys, orally active steroids taken in a certain manner

and, of course, the numbers needed for useful provide the most effective means of controlling

results are nearly always very large. Yet it is fertility currently available and that their use

greatly to be hoped that such studies will be has increased enormously during the past five

increasingly undertaken. For this reason a or six years. It is estimated that in 1965 at least

special welcome is due to Dr. Sunderland's 5 million women were taking "the Pill"-and

paper, printed in this issue. He has produced now there must be many more.

excellent evidence of geographical and probably The effect of these steroids on the body as a

racial variation in relation to the frequency of whole and on the endocrine and generative

tasting of PTC in North-eastern England. organs in particular is considered in the light of

These variations complement and supplement available evidence. There was in fact very

the previously known variations of ABO. It is to considerable discussion on many points and a

be hoped that many more such studies will be certain amount of conflicting evidence emerged,

undertaken, both on PTC and on many another particularly from the animal experimental work;

human polymorphism.

yet the final concensus of opinion was that there

is no material evidence that these preparations

ORAL CONTRACEPTION

are immediately harmful to the takers. The evidence on long-term effects cannot be regarded

DR. M. C. N. JACKSON writes: As readers as complete but as far as it goes (ten years) it is

doubtless know, it was decided some two years negative. Absolute contra-indications were con-

ago that the WHO should look into the problem sidered in detail and very few seem to exist-

of the control of fertility, and a number of certain rare hereditary liver defects and recurrent

expert committees have been convened which idiopathic jaundice of pregnancy being the only

hav-e examined the scientific background. Their conditions listed. A recent hepatitis or catarrhal

findings and conclusions have already been jaundice are only temporary contra-indications.

published in the Technical Report Series (nos. Varicose veins, veinous and arterial thrombo-

280, 300, 303, 304, 305, 313, 326, 332) and much embolic episodes in the past, on the available

valuable information will be found therein. The evidence (mainly statistical), need not be regarded

Report on Clinical Aspects of Oral Gestogens* as definite contra-indications. A tendency to put

is the first on the strictly practical side of the on weight is a warning to beware of overeating;

matter.

when there is cardiovascular renal disease the

Dr. R. T. Hill, on whose energy and great possibility of water retention and its adverse

insight-not only into the scientific and medical effect must be borne in mind. It is also noted

aspects but also into the human side-the success that there are some women who feel vaguely

of the whole project depends, chooses his teams unwell while on orals, and are best taken off.

with considerable care so that there is a nice The effects on lactation are considered at some

balance between those who think one way and length and it is concluded that high dose products

those who think another-what he calls his should certainly be avoided but that the whole

"yes men" and his "no men". This inevitably subject needs further investigation. The possible

influence of malnutrition or deficiency diseases

* WHO. Clinical Aspects of Oral Gestogens. Technical Report Series No. 326, Geneva, 1966. WHO. Pp. 24.
Price 3s. 6d. Obtainable from HMSO.

on the effects of long-term use of oral contraception also needs much further study and the

118

NOTES OF THE QUARTER

extreme importance of both these subjects for the underdeveloped countries is stressed-as is the need for more basic knowledge and more field work in general.
WHO AND POPULATION CONTROL
THE RESOLUTION TO increase aid in family planning training and programmes in developing countries, which was adopted at the World Health Assembly at Geneva recently, has not been accepted by the World Health Organization.
In June of this year Great Britain put forward a draft resolution which would have empowered WHO to extend such services as "expert advice on programme-planning and execution, training of personnel, and programme evaluation" on request from the countries desiring such help. This proposal, which was supported by a number of countries including the United States, India and Pakistan, was defeated by a combination of Communist and Roman Catholic states, who were joined by some of the thinly populated countries such as Canada and Australia, and who voted for an earlier resolution which leaves the existing mandate basically unchanged. This states thatWHO is to give "technical advice, upon request, in the development of activities in family planning, as part of an organized health service, without impairing its normal preventive and curative functions".
The Vatican's special commission on birth control and related population problems has now completed its reports and the summaries have been handed to the Pope, who has made it clear that he reserves the final decision to himself; this decision may indeed have been published by the time these words are read. On it may depend the chances of a resolution, on similar lines to that adopted by the Assembly, meeting with a lesser weight of opposition if it is put to the World Health Organization at some later date.
THIE SIMON POPULATION TRUST
THE SIMON POPULATION Trust, which was founded in 1961 under the Will of Lord Simon
of Wythenshawe, has as its aims the promotion of a better understanding of the problems of

world population and resources, and the encouragement of such research, education or
other actions in any part of the world as may
contribute to the adjustment of population to resources.
In April 1966 the Trust put forward a proposal for voluntary sterilization for family welfare.
This proposal took the form of a statement
published in the Lancet* under the names of
Dr. C. P. Blacker, Chairman of the Trust, and
of Dr. L. N. Jackson, Director of the sterilization project. It was the subject of a leading article in
the same issue and was followed, two weeks later, by a letter from Dr. Blacker in which he
stressed the legality of the operation-primary vasectomy was unheard of until thirty years after
the Offences against the Person Act was passed in 1861-provided that the valid consent of
both husband and wife had been obtained and that the operation was carried out in good faith.
Dr. Blacker's survey of voluntary sterilization
in this REVIEWt will be remembered, as will the article by the legal correspondent of the British Medical Journal which we reprinted.:: This quoted Lord Justice Devlin's opinion that, although the traditional view was that sterilization was forbidden by the law of criminal assault, an assault should not be treated as criminal if it was done either to avert danger to life or grave danger to health; or with the
consent of the other party and for a purpose not otherwise criminal. Now, five years later, the Medical Defence Union's booklet Consent to Operation includes for the first time a form of consent to voluntary sterilization.
The stated aim of the Sterilization Project for Family Welfare is to make known how voluntary sterilization can help to solve some family problems and can facilitate, under simple safeguards, the practice of family limitation in the United Kingdom. It offers practical advice to patients and doctors and seeks to encourage research on how fertility may be restored after sterilizing operations.
The Lancet article reports follow-up inquiries on sterilized persons in the USA, Canada, India and Japan but the project appears to be confined

* 1966, i, 971. t 1961-62, 53, 145; 54, 9, 143. 1 1961, 53, 33.

119

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to the United Kingdom at present. It may be Those parts of the Lecture which deal with the

supposed that, in view of the Trust's aims quoted history of the Family Planning Association are

in the first paragraph of this Note, there is an to a large extent a record of Margaret Pyke's

ultimate intention to support sterilization for professional life for, as we have seen, she started

population control as well as for family welfare. work as secretary to the NBCC thirty-six years

ago and became Honorary Secretary of the

OBITUARY
Margaret Vf2ke, :JB%E
IT IS WITH great regret that we record the death on 19th June 1966 of Mrs. Margaret Pyke. Mrs. Pyke's links with the Eugenics Society go back to 1930 when she became secretary to the National Birth Control Council and Dr. C. P. Blacker, at that time General Secretary of this

National Birth Control Association in 1937, two years before its name was changed to the Family Planning Association. During these thirty-six years the number of clinics increased from under twenty to more than 540. She was
elected Chairman of the Executive Committee of the FPA in 1955, and was still in this office when she died. Her interests naturally extended to the International Planned Parenthood Federa-

Society, was a member of the NBCC Executive tion where she succeeded Dr. C. P. Blacker as

Committee.

Administrative Chairman in May 1960 and was

Mrs. Pyke was elected Honorary Life Fellow a member of the Governing Body and Chairman

of the Eugenics Society in March 1953 and was of the Management and Planning Committee.

elected to the Council in 1954; she served as a Councillor until 1963 and was appointed VicePresident for her last three years of this term of office. She was again elected to the Council in 1964 and served until her death; she was also a member of the Executive Committee from 1959 to 1963. She served on the Marie Stopes Committee, which was appointed in 1959 by the

The extent of the debt which family planning owes to Margaret Pyke will be set out more fully in the journals linked with the movement; here we can but record on behalf of the Council of the Eugenics Society its deep sense of loss which will be shared by many Fellows and Members of the Society.

Eugenics Society's Council to act on its behalf in carrying out the terms of Dr. Stopes's bequest to the Society. In 1960 she became a member of the Company-The Marie Stopes Memorial Foundation Limited-which was formed by the decision of this Committee and was appointed a Board member and Convenor of the Clinic
Committee. In December 1957 the Eugenics Society's
Jubilee Dinner was held. Margaret Pyke, who was to have responded to the toast of The Eugenics Society, was unfortunately prevented from being present but she had prepared her speech which was read for her.* In October of that year she had taken part in a debate, held at a Members' Meeting of the Society, "That the Population of the United Kingdom should be Stabilized at Forty Million".t Mrs. Pyke was the Society's Galton Lecturer for 1963; she
spoke on "Family Planning: An Assessment"J.

PROFESSOR A. S. PARKES writes: The death
of Margaret Pyke came as a sad blow to
her countless friends and admirers through-
out the world. Death is inevitable and comes
to all sooner or later, but it is difficult to realize that so vigorous and dynamic a personality is no longer with us. The story of her life's work is indeed a remarkable one. An outline is recorded above, but this gives little idea of the outstanding personality and remarkable qualities of the woman who played so great a part in the foundation and development of the Family Planning Association and the International Planned Parenthood Federation, and who was so valued a colleague in the councils of the Eugenics Society. Her interests were many and varied, but above all must be reckoned her devotion to the idea of family planning as the means of freeing woman from the burden of unwanted pregnancies. During her various

* The Eugenics Reriew, 1958-59, 50, 15-17. t Ibid., 1957-58, 49, 178-9. 4 Ibid., 1953-54, 55, 71-9.

periods of office with the FPA, family planning emerged from the back streets into the full light of public discussion and wide acceptance, and

120

NOTES OF THE QUARTER

it did so in the teeth of social, legal and religious taboos, and in the face of crass ignorance. It was due in no small measure to Margaret Pyke's devoted work with the FPA, which has done so much for so many people, that even if official support is still less than might be hoped for, active opposition other than that based on religious dogma has fallen away to little more
than a facade. Margaret Pyke's great achievements rest on
two characteristics-her skill in handling people, committees and organizations and her extraordinary tenacity ofpurpose. I tried to summarize these qualities in my introduction to her Galton Lecture, and what I said then remained true up to the end. I said "First, she has a way with her. It is almost impossible to say 'no' when Mrs. Pyke asks one to do something. If one does manage to say 'no' one feels little short of a scoundrel later. Second, Mrs. Pyke never gives up-I have often been amazed at her resilience and stamina in the face of strain and stress". I have had personal experience of both these qualities. Of the former I need say only that on many occasions I have been a happy

victim of her persuasiveness. Of the latter I need
only recall that on her way out to the 1959 IPPF Congress in New Delhi she was overtaken by a debilitating malady which kept her confined to bed during most of the conference but did not prevent her by sheer willpower from attending the meetings of the Governing Body which were held during the Conference and at which she was instrumental in the setting up of the
Research Committee of the Federation. I concluded my introduction to her Galton
Lecture with these words: "There is no one in the world for whom I would more willingly take the Chair than Margaret Pyke and no one I could introduce to an audience with greater pleasure". I like to recall that I had this opportunity of paying tribute to her, face to face in public, while she was alive.
Her death has caused an extraordinary sense of loss among us. Things will never be quite the same again, but at leastwe have the satisfaction of knowing that during her long and tremendously active life this very gallant woman, with a few others like her, changed the course of human history.

121

