J. F. DANIELLI
Ph.D., F.R.S., Professor of Zoology at King's College, London
New Life in Old Bodies

IN THIS LECTURE I shall be concerned with how man may be changed, either socially or genetically, to advantage. I ought to make it
clear I do not think I have any qualifications whatever for speaking on this subject. If I may paraphrase a remark of the Chairman, I think I can undertake to produce some entirely new prejudices which may or may not be regarded as throwing light on this subject.
Social changes to date have always been a triumph for prejudice, no matter how admirable the social attitudes of the people concerned, and this is so because all such changes have been brought about largely as a result of a process of introspection, of contemplation of what man should be like. This inevitably leads us into trouble, the sort of trouble we encounter nowadays in looking at the prevalence of crime, and which is reflected in our ambivalent attitude towards such things as gambling. The reason it leads us into trouble is that we do not take into account what man is actually like when we propose a social change.
This does not mean I despise introspection and idealism, or suggest they should be discarded; I point out that they are not enough. We need to know about man; in modern terms, to take a long cool look at man and see what he is actually like, in addition to thinking on what he should be like. For this I suggest we might reasonably employ the scientific method, and treat man as a species of animal who should be observed as objectively as possible. Use of the most elementary techniques produces rather surprising results, or does in my hands at any rate.
As an example, one of the simplest techniques we use is just to contemplate the distribution of a particular phenomenon in nature. Like many others of the Church of England, I have been much concerned about the extraordinary out-
* A paper read at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics Society on March 23rd, 1960.

break of anti-Semitism that has developed in the last few months, and being stimulated to think along slightly novel lines because I had to give this lecture I wondered about the distribution of this phenomenon. Leaving out the Arab world, where there are some reasons why anti-Semitism should be rather prevalent, you find antiSemitism in Christian countries. Why should this be so? When one thinks back one can remember (some of us at any rate) that as we were brought up we associated the Jews with the massacre of the innocents, the persecution of Christ, the harrying of the early Christians, and that sort of thing. I do not think in those circumstances, when you think of it objectively, it is too surprising that the psychopathic elements in society should fall back on this early indoctrination when under some sort of stress. Most of us have adopted a more realistic attitude; we are not so much taken in by this early indoctrination, but the relatively troubled minds of people who are subject to violent stress tend to revert to these patterns.
I would not suggest we should stop studying the Scriptures, but I do think we might teach our children a little more about the crimes of Christians to put the matter into perspective; if, for example, when we were dealing with these matters we pointed out how relatively recently the black Tasmanians were hounded down with dogs and exterminated, or if we pointed out it is not so long ago we were burning witches alive, and only fifteen years ago that the whole population of Hiroshima was exterminated by people who profess to be Christians. If we brought our children up with a more balanced attitude towards social crime we might find a more balanced attitude towards the people responsible for social crimes.
Man as a Population of Animals Approaching the problems in the way I have suggested, let us ask ourselves what are some of

'39 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1960, 52, 3.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the general characteristics of a population of attention to the fact that we are by no means

animals. I have drawn up a list of seven points necessarily prevented from changing the nature

which seem to me to have some interest, though of man by directed mutation. I think it is true

of course there are many others we might that until comparatively recently we have tended

consider.

to think directed mutation is impossible, but I

First of all, we regard behaviour as a function of doubt whether we are near proving it is possible

genetic structure and environmental action.

or impossible at the moment. I am trying to get

Secondly, any population arises as a result of selection for fitness in a particular environment.
Thirdly, selection is continuously at work in all environments.

a little more experimental information on this
subject now. Insufficient attention in society is paid to the

Fourthly, populations vary with respect to all genetic factor, even in such things as apprecia-

measurable characters; i.e. the individuals in the tion in food and wines, or such matters as homo-

population differ. Fifthly, it is rare for adaptation to compensate
completely for genetic defect. Sixthly, where physiological or behavioural

sexuality. At King's College we regularly run experiments in our classes, asking students to taste a solution containing phenylthiourea. To

adaptation enables a population to survive a sharp some members of the population this is an un-

change of environment, for example by change of phenotype, the novel characters eventually become part of the genotype.
Seventhly, populations are composed of in-

commonly bitter substance, but other people cannot taste it at all. This ability to taste a substance is a very clear cut case; there must be

dividuals having largely similar life spans.

many other such substances the ability to taste

I do not expect you to have digested what I which is inherited. If ability to taste a substance,

have said; I shall take these points one by one or the incidence of Mongolian idiocy, are con-

and consider some of their specific implications. trolled by genetic factors, it is reasonable to

First of all, that behaviour is a function of think much else is affected in this way.

genetic structure and environmental action. We are in difficulties here because we do not know Populations Arise by Selection

what the range of influence of genetic action is, The second point I mentioned is that populations

or of environmental action, in dealing with arise by selection for a particular environment.

human beings. The easiest approach is through On balance, I think it would be fair to say man

the study of identical twins, but nothing like evolved by selection for living in small food-

enough work has been done on that.

gathering communities. It is uncertain whether he

I have not read the most recent work in this can survive in his present environment. If we were

field, but in what I have read there was a strong taken back to the conditions of 20,000 years ago,

suggestion that the genetic factor in human although many of us would die, the species would

behaviour is vastly stronger than is implicit in survive. Recently our environment has been

the way we think at the moment. I am not sure changing too rapidly for compensating selection

whether this work is a little misleading. The to take place. The genetic nature of man has not

experimental material consisted of twins who been given sufficient opportunity to change as the

were separated at birth and brought up in environment has been changing, and this is

ostensibly different environments, and yet were exposing us to a great many stresses and some

found to behave in a remarkably similar way. concrete dangers. There are three particular

What is ignored is that human beings of similar menaces at the moment. First of all the very

genetic structure naturally tend to seek a similar considerable danger of the general dissemination

type of environment, so the experiences of life of radioactive substances; secondly, quite an

expected by these identical twins are not as appreciable danger that medical science may be

dissimilar as we are led to believe. So I am not so successful in primitive communities that we

sure that we can accept these studies in the way shall be overwhelmed by the increase in the

they are put forward.

population of the world. (This would not result

As much of this lecture will deal with changing in the eradication of the whole population.) The

man by changing his environment, I want to draw third menace is something relatively new-we

I40

NEW LIFE IN OLD BODIES

may be subjected to the invasion of alternative hesitate to spend a tremendous amount of money

forms of life from space, e.g. by viruses or on keeping unfit young people alive.

bacteria brought back by rockets. This is more

likely to arise than the other two. An element of Variability of Populations

commonsense may well penetrate into the first
two, but whether it will into space travel is
difficult to say. Thirdly, selection is continuously at work, for
example by road accidents. Is it or is it not a good thing to cut off the selective factors in the population? At the moment we do not know who are the people who are killed in the population by accidents. It is quite arguable that if it is the fools and incompetents who are killed, from the point of view of the population it is a good thing and part of the adaptation to changing environment. This is rather a harsh way of dealing with incompetents, but there is a limit to which one can go in dealing with people's reactions to change in environment. Either we have to say we shall slow down the rate of progress, or else face the fact that sooner or later the elimination of quantities of unfit people is inevitable because the cost of keeping them alive would become too high.
Natural selection is operating continuously in any environment we have been able to contrive up to now, but natural selection left to its own ends cannot do all the things which are desirable to have done. Natural selection cannot work in respect of characters which are displayed mainly

Fourthly, populations vary with respect to all measurable characters. This variability of the individuals in the population is partly genetical
and partly due to the exposure of people to different environments. If we recognize this inevitable biological fact it becomes clear that it is useless to legislate for uniformity of behaviour. If we do attempt to bring in social legislation
which requires uniformity of behaviour, we inevitably create new criminal classes with each new type of legislation, because there will be a minority of people who will not fall in with anything that requires absolute uniformity. Furthermore, any form of imposed uniformity is
almost certain to involve suffering to minorities. That might, in a sense, be a good and acceptable thing, because it brings a selection pressure to bear. The pressure to impose uniformity naturally arises where the emotional factor concerned is strong; for example, in dealing with the colour problem or sexual matters, with criminality, or
membership of trade unions, or what sort of schools shall exist, the emotional factor tends to overpower the factor of reason, and we tend to make decisions for reasons which are largely
emotionally biased.

after the breeding period has passed; for example, It is a fascinating thing that most people either

selection involving a reduction of the incidence wish to join a trade union, or do not mind

of cancer, or concerned with rheumatism or joining a trade union, so that pressure to join

addiction to many drugs, can hardly be affected does not affect them adversely at all. A small by any process going on in the present popula- minority of people object to this degree of social

tion, because we have our children long before conformity, and although the actions of this

these things become so serious as to stop us small minority can hardly ever do any harm to

having children.

the majority, this objection raises the absolute

Looked at in this way, humanitarian social devil in the minds of the conforming majority.

legislation which is effective before and during Viewing sexuality or criminality as a biologist,

the breeding age in humans is likely to be harm- it appears absurd to expect uniformity. I say at a

ful to the population by increasing the pro- guess it is a disadvantage to be a homosexual,

portion of unfit people. On the other hand, the and therefore different from the average in a

same type of legislation after the breeding period group, and it is irrational for us to add to this

does not do any harm at all, which is a somewhat disadvantage by persecution. Equally I think the

paradoxical situation. It suggests we should criminal behaviour of some people arises from

reverse the way in which we are treating people environmental reasons, and criminal behaviour

at the moment. We spend the absolute minimum in other people for genetic reasons; and although

of money we can on old people, and do not the crimes they commit may be the same, it is

I4'

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

inadvisable to treat in the same way the two whelming social pressure at the moment is to

different types of people.

decrease and make more uniform the education

If criminality in an individual is environmental we give our children. Another point which I

in origin, the endeavour, apart from^the necessity think is grossly neglected by all educational

for protecting the community, should be to authorities is the desirability of letting children

reverse the initial psychological process. The have some voice in the educational process to

usual procedure is to shut up criminals with a which they are subjected. I see no reason why

bunch of other criminals so that they may learn children should not be allowed to leave school,

to be more successful criminals, rather than an by consent, at a relatively early age, provided

endeavour to change the initial psychological the community provides facilities for them to go

defect. It is possible that imprisonment and beat- back to school up to the age of twenty-five or

ing have some effect on some people, since many thirty, or even forty or fifty, should they wish.

young criminals do not repeat their offences, but There is no particular reason why education has

on the whole this way of treating criminals is not to be crammed into these early years of life,

likely to have a therapeutic effect. More probably when often it is not acceptable. Why not let

it is much the same type of behaviour displayed children go out and do a job, and go back if they

by Russian peasants some years ago in beating wish and become better educated when they see

broken-down tractors. It is an emotionally the advantages of it. We waste large sums of

satisfying activity, but not designed in such a way money on children who do not wish to be

as to produce any other useful effect. Many educated, and are damn well determined they

older criminals, on the other hand, repeat the will not be educated.

same offence in such a compulsive manner as to

lead us to suppose there may even be some genetic Compensation by Adaptation

basis for that particular type of behaviour. It My fifth point: adaptation rarely compensates

seems quite certain we shall not make much completely for genetic defect. By this I mean that

progress in dealing with criminality unless we an individual who does not have the best genetic

do attempt a much more effective study of the equipment for coping with a situation will very

environmental and genetic factors than has been often attempt to compensate either by some

attempted so far.

physiological adaptation which occasions a cer-

I want to emphasize that biological variability tain amount of stress, or some adaptation of

of a population is a most valuable asset. It is behaviour which also causes a certain amount of

always the atypical members of a population who stress: one cannot expect this to go very far.

permit survival after any disastrous environ- In many cases it will not go far enough. People

mental change. For example, the ravages of with low intelligence quotients cannot become

penicillin in the bacterial world are being over- adequate to deal with the modem environment.

come, not by the average bacteria but by those Social legislation, such as that of the modem

which happen to be penicillin-resistant mutants. welfare state, which is adequate for 95 per cent

To turn to some more complex animal, one might of the population, is likely to result in acute

note that exceptional individuals such as suffering of a minority of 1 per cent or less. With

Churchill, Beaverbrook and Monty, who would the inevitable variation we have in the popula-

not find it easy to achieve political power in tion, there are people who are not competent

times of peace, were necessary to pull us through and cannot deal with the present type of

the difficulties of war.

impersonal approach to social welfare.

It seems obvious that we should endeavour to To turn to another field, defective renal

preserve variability in the population, and that function can only be compensated for by the

measures designed to produce uniformity are provision of new kidneys. Turning this observa-

undesirable from the point of view of the tion into something of practical consequence: if

development of the species. For example, we medical care is to be continuously extended for

ought to increase rather than to decrease the the chronic sick, it is going to be much cheaper

variety of schools. On the other hand the over- to find out how to replace defective organs than

I42

NEW LIFE IN OLD BODIES

to provide continuous medical service to those suppose that the life span of man is close to what

with defective organs.

is optimal for present-day society, and at pre-

Point six. Novel adaptations become part of sent there are quite a number of sound reasons

the genotype. What this means roughly is that if for thinking increased longevity would be a good

one makes a sufficiently successful physiological thing. Increase of knowledge is going on at such

adaptation to be able to cope with a change in a rate that it cannot in fact be assimilated by

the environment, then, as a number of genera- people in the present population. There is too

tions pass, the genetic structure of the popula- much information about to gather in and to

tion will change so that it becomes normally act upon effectively, and the result is we get an

adapted and fitted to the environment, and every ever increasing degree of over-specialization, not

individual does not need to make a fresh only in education but throughout life. Some of

adaptation.

the squabbles going on in the medical world

We might take this a little more seriously and nowadays as to what extent there should be

consider how it can be used in human popula- general exhaustive education in biological and

tions, e.g. try to analyse how far we are making medical knowledge, preceding actual clinical

adaptations of this sort by the use of artificial experience, are ridiculous. So long as people

agents to produce better adaptation. Why not continue to have their present life span, and

use chemical agents to offset radiation and to knowledge accumulates at the present rate, the

increase longevity, and if we are to space travel, quantity of information available in twenty-five

consider hibernation as a useful adaptation pro- years time will make it impossible for medical

duced by the combined action of drugs and cool- students to have such an education. All sorts of

ing ? It is important to note the drugs we changes are being pressed on us due to the

habitually use, such as caffeine, tobacco and accumulation of knowledge. This could be

alcohol, are such chemical agents, which reduce handled much better if we could increase our

the adverse effect of the environment upon us. life span. I think we probably could do so,

We suffer stress in this environment in which we although this is only an opinion.

live, and we resort to these drugs to enable us to There are a great many unknowns in this

reduce the stress. Equally the services of field, and I would go for guidance to the field of

psychiatrists are used to reduce our unfitness for radiation hazard. The median lethal dose of

the environment in which we find ourselves. radiation for mammalian cells is about 50 or

There is a lot of scope for enabling us to make 100 rontgens, whereas there are some bacteria

better physiological and behavioural adaptations for which a lethal dose is of the order of

to our environment, since after all the rate at 5,000,000. There is no single or indeed any

which any genetic change could be produced is complex of chemical or biological factors which

slow. can be adduced to account for this difference.

This difference is one of the astronomically large

Life Span

numbers which cannot be accounted for. The

We come to the last point I mentioned, which effect of radiation is to damage the genetic

might be taken as an example of one of the system directly or indirectly, and so long as we

previous points. Populations are composed of cannot explain this large number in the radiation

individuals having similar life spans. There is hazard we are unable to place any assessment to

selection against life spans which are short com- what extent life spans could, in fact, be changed.

pared with the breeding age, but there cannot Present life spans arise by accident, and we do

be natural selection for longevity past the not know to what extent the accident is limited.

effective breeding age. This means the life span We have no way of assessing the situation. We

we have is largely an accident resulting from could approach a study of this possibly by using

selection for other properties and represents no chemical agents and possibly by mutation.

adequate adjustment to life in the environment

in which we live at the moment.

Conclusion

There is no reason that I am aware of to To sum up what all this amounts to: in nature

I43

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

organisms become fitted for their environment by, initially, physiological adaptation and behavioural adaptation, and subsequently by changes in their genetic systems. At present man is imperfectly adjusted to his environment because of the enormous pace of man-made changes in the environment. Some degree of compensation is nowadays achieved by taking drugs and by psychiatric treatment, but if the present pace continues we shall have to consider
additional ways of coping with the situation by additional drugs, replacement of organs, extension of the life span, legislation aimed at

producing non-uniform populations, use of directed mutation and extra-terrestrial investigation to study forms of extra-terrestrial life.
The introspective attitude towards man must be supplemented by objective studies. Man must be regarded as an organism and not only as a thinking creature. If man's environment continues to change, man also must change, and we can do this in two stages. Desirable transient changes may be brought about by deliberate changes in the social, psychological and physical state of man, but permanent change can only be effected by changing his genetic structure.

144

