THE REPORT OF THE POOR LAW
COMMISSION.
By SIR EDWARD BRABROOK, C.B.
THE I,238 folio pages of this important document contain much matter of great interest to the student of Eugenics. The
Poor Law is itself testimony to the need of that study; and the
painstaking inquiry which the Commissioners have conducted for three long years has afforded abundant detailed evidence of this and has resulted in some recommendations which are distinctly eugenic in character and, if adopted by the Legislature, will be the first steps in that direction.
The Commissioners throw a strong light upon the ineffectiveness of existing measures when they show that the great and growing expenditure upon education and upon the public health has had no result in reducing pauperism, which has, on the contrary, of late years, deplorably increased; and that the advance in the rate of wages, and the diminution in the cost of living, have been equally ineffectual. It is obvious, therefore, that these remedies, valuable as they are, have not gone to the root of the evil.
In the words of the great Poor Law Commission of i832, unsound methods of poor relief are " destructive to the morals of the most numerous class, and to the welfare of all." The old administration of the Poor Law encouraged early and improvident marriages. Men who prudently deferred the period of marriage were punished either by being refused employment, or by receiving wages estimated on the basis of their not having a family to support. No man's principles can be corrupted without injury to society in general.
There was thus created a system of hereditary pauperism. The ties of affection between parent and child were weakened.

48 Sir E. Brabrook :
It is not necessary to state in detail the remedies which were recommended by that Commission and carried into effect by the Act of I834. Under that Act, during a great number of years, pauperism was diminished, not only with reference to the population of the country, but in actual amount. In more recent years that good effect has not been produced, and an increase has taken place instead.
The evidence taken before the Commission on the subject of out-relief shows that it is sometimes so applied as to subsidise the birth and bringing up of children under conditions which are inconsistent with their becoming good citizens. An old woman living in a dirty insanitary room gets out-relief, and ekes it out by taking in two mill-girls, one having a child, as lodgers. A widow has Ios. per week out-relief with which to maintain seven children in a dirty, even filthy, home. A man suffering from phthisis, aged 56, is allowed out-relief: he has five children, of whom the youngest is only 8 months old, and another is expected. Another man also suffering from phthisis, aged 40, lives with wife, son aged I9, and two children, in one filthy room. The boy is delicate already, and will, without doubt, follow his father. Other cases equally striking are mentioned in the Report; but these are sufficient to show that Poor Relief has been administered in such a way as to encourage and promote those evils which the science of eugenics seeks completely to eradicate. In the words of the Commissioners, children who are brought up in such conditions, surrounded by disease and immorality and drunkenness, are almost doomed to pauperism. If relief be given it should be used to check the creation of another generation of paupers. They recommend that relief should not be given to persons under such conditions in the case of families of children and young persons. Some Boards of Guardians already act upon this principle.
Much that is very instructive is contained in the report on the subject of children who come by one means or another to be under the control of the Guardians of the Poor, and important suggestions are made for reforms in the manner of training and educating such children. These, however, we need not discuss,
as the spread of eugenic principles would tend to reduce their

THE REPORT OF THE POOR LAW COMMISSION

49

number, until the time should come when the children dependent on public care should be few and exceptibnal.
With regard to that opprobrium of civilisation-the " able-
bodied pauper," whom the Commissioners prefer to classify as " able to work," their recommendations are distinctly eugenic.
They are the following:
" Stronger methods, 'Particularly detention, should be taken
in dealing with 'ins-and-outs.' Public assistance authorities should have power to retain the children of such under their care, and to take proceedings to secure the detention and training of the parents in a suitable institution or colony, until they are prepared to maintain themselves and their families outside.
" Feebleminded ins-and-outs should be detained in suitable
institutions. " For able-bodied ins-and-outs who are incapable of main-
taining themselves permanently owing to want of discipline, application, or skill, provision should be made by which they would labour according to their strength, and support themselves as far as possible: more varied work might be furnished, and their labour made more productive in supplying the needs of the
institution to which they are admitted. "For those frequenting public assistance institutions who
are confirmed drunkards and persons leading immoral lives, there should be a power of detention after their incapacity to lead a decent life has been proved.
" Paupers well able to work, i.e., cases of persistent idleness, should be.referred to a detention colony under the Home Office."
In their discussion of the causes of pauperism, the Commissioners quote a statement from a relieving officer at Leeds that one of the most important causes is the early marriage of persons dependent upon casual labour. Large families are the rule. Owing to the low wages earned, no provision can be made to meet such contingencies as unemployment, sickness, or im prisonment for non-compliance with a county court judge's order for payment of a few shillings of debt. Cases are not wanting to show that pauperism is hereditary-third generations occasionally occur. The report of the Minority bears testimony to the fact that a large proportion of the out-relief children are
4

50 Sir E. Brabrook :
suffering in health and character from the circumstances of their lives.
In a valuable work which has been published with wonderful promptitude by Mrs. Bosanquet, one of the members of the Commission, entitled " The Poor Law Report of I909: A summary explaining the defects of the present system and the principal recommendations of the Commission, so far as relates to England and Wales " (Macmillan & Co., I909) it is observed that " the changes which the Commission recommend in dealing with these children would really revolutionise this department of work. It would certainly involve for the time being a large increase of expenditure, but it is an increase which would more than repay itself if it resulted in the children becoming efficient men and women. It cannot be doubted that under the present system many of the children are growing up anemic, diseased, undisciplined, and unskilled, and likely, therefore, to add to the pauperism of the country in the future." An incidental recommendation is that the policy and terms of the Education (Provision of Meals) Act, I906, should be reconsidered. When a child comes to school ill-nourished there is need for careful and sympathetic enquiry at its home as to the causes of the difficulty. The education authority has no machinery for making that enquiry, or for applying a suitable remedy.
Mrs. Bosanquet concludes that our success or failure in stemming the stream of pauperism in the future depends very largely upon the granting of the powers of detention asked for by the Commission. " Unless we can cut off some ofthe sources from which that stream is being fed, the attempt to do more constructive work, whether by public assistance or by voluntary charity, will continue to be swamped by hopeless cases-men and women ruined by bad habits, or diseased from infancy, who propagate their own misery and hand on another generation of helpless cases to the future. A great evil justifies strong measures to remedy it."
This is true eugenic doctrine.

