LABORATORY RESEARCH IN CHEMICAL CONTRACEPTION*
By JOHN R. BAKER, M.A., D.Phil.

M Y work on chemical contraception, value, because as soon as the investigator has

which has been going on for seven handed out the suppositories which he wants

years, was undertaken at the sugges- tested to women who are prepared to test

tion of Dr. C. P. Blacker, and I wish at once them, he loses all touch with the experiment,

to acknowledge the debt of gratitude which I and can only record how many babies the

owe him for the constant encouragement and women have in a given time. He has handed

generous advice he has given so liberally the experiment over to unscientific people to

duiing this long period. All my work on this perform during the most uncritical periods

subject has been done under the auspices of of their lives! He does not know how often

the Birth Control Investigation Committee, copulation takes place; how long before

to which I am greatly indebted. My friend ejaculation the suppository is inserted on

Mr. Ranson, who has been working with me each occasion, or even whether it is inserted

during the last three years, will demonstrate on each occasion; whether any other contra-

some of our results during the lecture. I find ceptive or abortifacient method is used;

it difficult-almost impossible.-to talk in- whether the woman or man is temporarily or

telligently about seven years' work because permanently sterile; at what period in the

in the short time at our disposal we must cestrous cycle the copulations take place;

either devote our attention to a few of the how much vaginal fluid is present on each

subjects which we have tackled, or else just occasion, or whether it is acid or alkaline; or

skim over the whole research, without time whether the amount of semen is normal. The

for details anywhere. But before we can experiment is entirely uncontrolled, and the

begin at all one question must be answered: investigator really knows nothing. Clinical

" What is the use of laboratory research on tests would only have great value if they

chemical contraception? "

could be performed with a vast number of

women, so that chance could be excluded.

CLINICAL AND LABORATORY TESTS COMPARED
There are many who say that the only useful tests of contraceptives are clinical ones: that tests in glass tubes are useless. Of course contraceptives must work in practice; that is obvious. Nevertheless I contend that clinical tests have little scientific

Laboratory tests are fully controlled, and the investigator knows exactly what is
happening throughout. Unfortunately there is little encouragement for the poor laboratory worker. As I have been saying, some doctors suggest that the laboratory tests are no good. Further, there is not any great
keenness to give laboratory space for this
kind of work. We have worked for seven

years in one laboratory, but we are now under

* A lecture delivered before the Eugenics Society on orders to quit. We have never had facilities

April i6th, 1935. Dr. Baker spoke from short notes and there has been no attempt to recast the stenographic record into "literary" form. During the lecture Mr. R. M. Ranson gave a practical demonstration of experi-

for keeping enough animals. Our tests of harmfulness are carried out on bitches, and we are never allowed to keep more than two

ments which had been specially designed for showing to an audience. The sperms whose reactions were being studied were projected upon a screen, so that those

at one time in the laboratory. Manufacturers, again, are far from en-

present could see for themselves the efficacy of the couraging. When we find their products use-

substances under test. In this way Mr. Ranson demonstrated not only the killing of sperms but also their stimulation by chemical means.

less they are extremely rude; when we find them fairly useful it is worse still, for then

127

I2 8

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

they put my name in advertisements. Two is normally used in aeroplane design to

Gernan firms have been particular sinners in guard against death. To guard against life,

this respect. One of them has even gone so an equal factor of safety should be required.

far as to print my name on a leaflet enclosed One manufacturer boasted to me that his

with its product. Luckily things have turned product always worked at a concentration

out well for me, and I am able to score off which worked out at a factor of safety of

these two firms. Their products came out one-third. What would we think of an aero-

well in my early tests, but in my later plane designer who made the parts of his

improved tests they came out badly; so that aeroplane only strong enough to support

I am able to say that if anyone sees my name one-third of the stresses occurring in normal

on an advertisement, he may take it that the flight ? If one had two different supposi-

product is unreliable!

tories, both harmless and costing the same,

and if one were more spermicidal than the

AIMS OF THE INVESTIGATION

other, which would one choose? The answer

Now what have our objects been ? First, is obvious.

to devise tests for pure substances; this has What are the advantages of chemical

been achieved. Secondly, to devise tests for contraception? The ideal contraceptive

suppositories and ointments; this has been would require no previous preparation, and

achieved. Thirdly, to invent improved, a perfect chemical contraceptive would fulfil

harmless contraceptives. This has not yet this requirement. But chemical contracep-

been achieved, but we are hopeful of ulti- tion is also very important as a secondary

mate success.

means of preventing conception, when occlu-

The details of our tests have been pub- sive pessaries are used. There can be no

lished in full; there is no uinnecessary com- doubt that occlusive pessaries used alone are

plication in them, but we have tried in unreliable. A slit only TB of an inch wide

devising them to meet every possible objec- between the rubber and the living tissue

tion, and it has been found necessary to would be sufficient to allow innumerable

make the tests rather complicated. Thus, our sperms to pass through without the slightest

test for ointments is described in fifty-one hindrance. (This was demonstrated by a

clauses. A manufacturer who did not like the model.) This shows the necessity of using

result of my test of his ointment told me that chemical methods in addition to the occlu-

his method of testing was better than mine. sive ones. But it is hoped that when the

His method was to mix one drop of ointment perfect chemical contraceptive is invented,

with one drop of semen, and look at the mixture with a microscope. It will be immediately obvious that this test provides no way at all of comparing different pro-
ducts, and is in every way completely useless. A great number of quite useless supposi-
tories are put on the market. One of them
consists of lactic acid with a fatty vehicle.
The lactic acid is supposed to be the spermicide. Actually it reacts with the vehicle to make a neutral and perfectly non-spermicidal product. (This was demonstrated to
the audience by Mr. Ranson.)

occlusive pessaries will be unnecessary. Most of our work has been done with the
sperms of the cavy. It is an extremely
fortunate fact that the sperm of the cavy behaves, with the most diverse chemicals, in almost the same way as the human sperm.
The first year of my research was mostly taken up with inventing suitable fluids for sperm suspensions. For the study of pure substances a fluid called buffered glucose-saline was elaborated. This contains no protein, and is used for the study of the direct effect of

How strong should suppositories be? I substances on sperms. For practical pur-

suggest a " factor of safety " of eight; that poses one wants to know how the various

is, that all products should be at least eight substances will behave in the presence of

times as spermicidal as is theoretically proteins, and for this purpose a fluid called

necessary. That is the factor of safety that albumen-saline was elaborated. In this fluid

LABORATORY RESEARCH IN CHEMICAL CONTRACEPTION I29

sperns behave to the most diverse chemi- presence of OH and CHO in the ortho-

cals exactly as they do when suspended in position to one another (as in salicylalde-

semen. Another fluid that we have used, hyde) confers high spermicidal powers. With

called phosphate-albumen, was designed for the assistance of Dr. J. M. Gulland, a specially

the testing of acids. It has exactly the same detailed study was made of the phenols and

alkaline reserve as semen.

quinones. In the phenols the para-position

of the two OH groups confers high spermi-

SPERMICIDAL POWER OF PURE

cidal power. Alkyl side-chains increase spermicidal power up to a certain length.

SUBSTANCES

The most spermicidal substance known is

We shall discuss first the test of pure sub- toluquinone, which immobilizes every time

stances. The object of the standard tech- at the extreme dilution of Th per cent. Mr.

nique is to provide a figure for every sub- R. C. Burbank has recently been counting

stance proportional to its spermicidal power. the number of sperms in our standard sus-

Every substance is tested at various concen- pensions, and from his results we are able to

trations in the series 2 per cent., i per cent., say that it takes two thousand million mole-

I per cent., i per cent., etc., and its killing cules of the most spermicidal substance in the

concentration is found; that is, the lowest world to kill one cavy sperm in half an hour.

concentration in that series that suffices to I found one of the saponines to be highly

kill all sperms in half an hour at the tem- spermicidal, but I doubt its having practical

perature of the body in four consecutive value on account of the probability of its

experiments. Other workers have used the being harmful. One manufacturer put a

time method instead of the concentration non-toxic saponine in his product as a result

method. That is, they have standardized a of this discovery, but unfortunately his non-

certain concentration, and have noticed how toxic saponine was also non-spermicidal!

long the sperms take to die. The disadvant- No alkaloid tested has proved to be a strong

age of this method is that very spermicidal spermicide; and sperms cannot be killed by

substances kill so quickly that one cannot strychnine hydrochloride.

separate them in spermicidal power unless Our work has been very much criticized

one uses a very low concentration, in which on the ground that most of it has been done

case the weakly spermicidal substances can- with cavy sperms, not with human sperms.

not be graded because they take such a long However, as I indicated before, we carried

time to kill that the sperms would anyhow out quite an extensive series with human

be beginning to die by that time. In all our sperms and found them almost identical with

recent tests we have insisted on the actual cavy sperms in their reactions. I was inter-

killing of sperms instead of on their immo- ested at one time (some time ago now) to

bilization.

see whether the sperms of some quite un-

It is impossible in the course of an hour's related animal would behave at all similarly.

lecture to do more than skate over the sur- So I went to Plymouth, and made a study of

face of what we have been finding out. But I the sperms of the sea-urchin. For this in-

must mention a few of the groups we have vestigation I chose three closely allied sub-

studied.

stances-resorcinol, catechol and hydro-

First of all, acids. These are weak spermi- quinone. These three substances have the

cides; dibasic acids are not more spermi- same chemical composition except that the

cidal than monobasic acids, nor tribasic than atoms are arranged in a different way in

dibasic. No inorganic salt that we have the molecule. Now with cavy sperms, hydro-

tested is a strong spermicide except mercuric quinone is much more spermicidal than cate-

chloride. Soap is equal in spermicidal power chol; and catechol is slightly more spermi-

to chinosol and quinine, which are respec- cidal than resorcinol. With the sea-urchin I

tively thirty-seven and twenty-seven times found exactly the same thing; hydroquinone

as expensive. In the benzaldehydes, the is much more spermicidal than catechol,

130 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

which, once again, is slightly more spermi- globules of fat in a sperm suspension knows

cidal than resorcinol. This result is most sur- that this is an impossibility, for surface

prising, but helps to show how irl-founded tension prevents the globules of fat from

were the criticisms levelled against us for applying themselves to the sperms. A sperm

choosing the cavy for the greater part of our could no more be clogged by melted fat than

research.

a man could be clogged by a wall. Neverthe-

It has often been supposed that substances less it is possible that the melted fat forms an

which are strongly germicidal must neces- actual barrier to the progress of sperms into

sarily be spermicidal, but this is not so. the uterus.

Some substances which are strongly germi- The fact that commercial suppositories are

cidal are scarcely spermicidal, and strong being tested is, I think, encouraging manu-

spermicides are sometimes scarcely germi- facturers to make certain that they contain

cidal. (A lantern slide was exhibited com- some spermicide, and it is to be hoped that

paring the spermicidal and germicidal powers further improvement will take place as more

of certain substances.)

and more of their products are tested and

The presence of proteins greatly reduces reported upon.

the spermicidal power of many substances,

especially mercuric chloride and soaps. Acidity also affects some substances. For

"HERBAL " CONTRACEPTIVES

instance, quinine is slightly less active in I have recently returned from the New

acid solution. Methylhydroquinone is six- Hebrides, in the Pacific Ocean, where I was

teen times as spermicidal in alkaline as in the leader of the Oxford University expedi-

acid solution. This may be of great signific- tion. In some parts of the New Hebrides

ance if the contents of the vagina are ever there are savages quite uninfluenced by the

slightly acid after coition.

presence of a few whites scattered round their

coasts. These people are extremely primi-

TESTS OF COMMERCIAL SUPPOSITORIES

tive, but they have methods of controlling their population. My wife, who was a

Suppositories are tested first at the member of the expedition, made a special

standard concentration, in the proportion of study of this subject. She made friends with

one suppository to 5 c.c of semen and 2 * 5 c.c. the savages, and for the first four months of

of vaginal fluid. If all sperms are killed, the her friendship with them she gave them no

suppository is tried again at S/2, and then, if hint that she was interested in this matter.

necessary, at S/4, and so on in this series Any such hint, given too early, would have

until sperms are no longer killed. Five made it impossible for her later to have

minutes are allowed for the killing to take obtained information. A woman has a great

place. This short time has been decided advantage as an investigator of these matters

upon, as prompt killing is so essential in because it is probable that in no circum-

practice. The details of the test have been stances would the women disclose their

modified from time to time in response to secrets to a male investigator. It appears

criticism, but we are confident that we have probable that the men can give little in-

now got a very reliable test. The results of formation on the subject, simply because they

the test are rather depressing, for none of the know little or nothing about it. My wife was

commercial products tested comes near what able to obtain a great deal of information,

we would desire; that is, none of them kills and the women claimed to use certain plants

at S/8.

as contraceptives, others as temporary

Fats are often used as vehicles for sup- sterilizers, others as permanent sterilizers,

positories, and there is some possibility that and others as abortifacients. The various

the fats in themselves prevent conception. plant products are taken by the mouth. We

It is often said that fat clogs sperms, but brought back with us the seeds of some of

anyone who has looked down a microscope at these plants, and they are being grown under

LABORATORY RESEARCH IN CHEMICAL CONTRACEPTION I3I

suitable conditions in England. We hope SPERM STIMULATION

later on this year to make a study of their During the course of our studies of the

effects upon mice.

spermicidal powers of substances, I noticed

Although it is perfectly possible that there that some substances actually stimulate

is nothing at all in the natives' story, yet the sperms to very active movement. Chief

matter seems worth investigation, especially among these is strychnine hydrochloride. The

when one considers that nearly all plant allied drug, brucine hydrochloride, has

drugs were discovered in the first place by similar, but slightly less marked, effects.

simple people.

Chloral hydrate has also some slight powers

of stimulating sperms. I am hopeful that

DANGER OF CHEMICAL CONTRACEPTIVES

practical use may be made of this knowledge in those cases where infertility is thought to be due to sluggish action of the sperms. (The

My friend, Dr. Carleton, has for many stimulation of sperms by strychnine hydro-

years been making a study of the harmful chloride was demonstrated to the audience by

effects of chemical contraceptives. For this Mr. Ranson.)

purpose he prefers the bitch, because the It might be thought that stimulation

histology of the vagina of the bitch closely would be harmful to the sperms, but this is

resembles that of the human female. Rodents not so. Mr. Ranson and I carried out a

are unfortunately unsuitable, as the vagina series of artificial inseminations of cavies

has not got a squamous epithelium. Dr. with sperms which had been stimulated by

Carleton finds that most of the contraceptives strychnine, and we obtained perfectly normal

on the market are harmless, but there is one young ones.

harmful one, namely the quinine urea hydro-

chloride tablet, which causes necrosis and CONCLUSION

sloughing of the epithelium. The discovery It is to be hoped that one day there will be

of a new, harmless spermicide is greatly some form of Laboratory of Practical

retarded by our only being able to keep, at Eugenics where all commercial products can

the most, two bitches in the laboratory at the be tested for spermicidal powers and for

same time. In Dr. Carleton's standard tech- harmfulness, and where research for new

nique one suppository is placed in the vagina methods of contraception can be carried out

every day for twenty-eight days. Thus less without any of the restrictions which are put

than twenty-five different suppositories can upon one when the work is performed in a

be tested in a year.

university.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVIJNo. 2 D

