POPULATION IN AUSTRALIA
By JOHN STILL

LORD HARTINGTON, Parliamentary Under-Secretary for the Dominions, made a speech at an official luncheon
at Canberra on November 27th, I936, and two of his statements were reported by cable. The first was that: " The defence of Australia was linked with the need for a larger population," the second that: " Within two or three generations the Empire should be so large, prosperous, and powerful that the risk of war would be for ever removed. This would follow the inevitable growth of the population of the Dominions."
One heard much the same in the middle of the Great War; and in I934 Mr. Malcolm MacDonald, then Secretary of State for the Dominions, said that Australia's population would within a reasonably short period reach 40 or 50 millions. But let us examine Lord Hartington's two statements more objectively.
Population Density in Australia and Japan
First, the need of a larger population to defend Australia. With recent history in mind, and therefore without apology, we may assume that one of the dangers in the Under-Secretary's mind was Japan. On June 30th, I935, Australia's population was estimated to be 6,784,305, but this included
more than 8o,ooo aboriginals and 29,000
others, as well as white Australians. The population from which a defence force can be formed is about 6I67 millions. In I933 Japan's population was 67-5 millions, and is growing so fast that by I950 it is expected to reach 78 millions. In Australia, the density of population is 2 * 2 persons per square mile, or if one allows for the deserts, it is 3-8 persons per habitable square mile. In Japan, the density is 439 per square mile, habitable or not, and much of Japan is mountainous. Of these two virile peoples, one is ten times as numerous as the other, and at the same time is II5 times as closely
crowded.

It would be almost impossible to conceive a situation where Lord Hartington's first statement could be more evidently true.
Present Reproductive Trends
It is the very truth of the first statement that makes the second so appallingly misleading, but let us examine it carefully and dispassionately. From what source is Australia to draw the population she so evidently requires? There are three possibilities: the population might be bred in Australia; it might be provided by immigrants from Great Britain; or it might come from outside countries other than Great Britain. There are also the permutations of these, but they do not add a fourth possibility. We will look into them. First, will Australia breed the men ? At present, Australia's net reproduc-
tion rate is 0 97, which means that if this
rate remains constant, the trend of population will be downwards, each thousand women of child-bearing age being replaced after a generation by 970 such women. At this rate, after the three generations the statesman contemplated, Australia's white population (apart from immigrants) would have sunk to 6 2 millions. But the fertility rate might alter, it might rise, or it might fall. In I920, Australia's rate was Ix 3i9, and if that rate were recovered she would have,
in A.D. 2025 over I5 millon white inhabitants, say a quarter of Japan's present number. But I-3I9 is not the highest rate possible; Australia might go better. The highest net reproduction rate recorded of any European nation in the last 65 years is i*88, in Bulgaria, at the beginning of this century. If Australia equalled that rate, jumped to the full rate at once, and held it until 2025, she would have nearly 43 millions of white people, and could be accounted safe. What, then, is the probability of this sudden, vital rise? Let me answer by quoting some figures. Between I870 and I89o. Australia's birth-rate was above 35

C 285

286 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

per I,000; between I900 and I920, it ranged is academic. The second base is the assump-

between 28 and 26; by I930 it was 2I; tion that fertility and mortality both will

since then it has not been above I9, and now return to the I933 level and stay there;

it is a little below i6. A change from a this too is little more than an exercise, but

steady fall to a sudden and startling rise it shows a loss in three generations of ii

seems utterly improbable, so one cannot millions. The third assumes that the present

justly suppose that the Under-Secretary had trend downwards will not be arrested wholly

this possibility in view, for statesmen do not for another fifty years, and then the loss by

bet on miracles.

2025, the three generations of the speech,

Immigration from Great Britain

will be 33i millions.

Turn to possibility number two, immi- Immigration from Non-British Sources

grants from Great Britain. But Great These figures are too well known for

Britain is already less fertile even than neglect, and we are driven to the third of

Australia. Her swarming period seems the original three possibilities. Immigration

definitely over, and not from her surplus is to come from elsewhere than Great Britain.

millions will her Dominions be filled. It is Obviously not from the other nations who

more likely that England herself will grow are in like plight, or from the other Dominions

empty, for her net reproduction rate is now who also share the decline. No, it must be

0 73. The fall of England's birth-rate has the nations with redundant populations

been even steeper than the fall in Australia. that the Under-Secretary had in mind. We

In the 'nineties it was 30, in the 'seventies it will look at this more closely.

was 35, and now it is I4 and a fraction, and A list before me shows certain European

still falling. Briefly, the situation is this: nations as still in possession of net reproduc-

fifty years ago the north-western Europeans tion rates that increase their numbers. They

were doubling their populations every two have fallen recently, but are still above

generations, with net reproduction rates unity. The nations are: Bulgaria, Italy,

between I .4 and I .5; now, with rates of Poland, Portugal, and the Soviet Republics,

0 *7 and thereabouts, all those nations called Russia and Ukraine. Italy actively dis-

Nordic, Germanic, and such like proud courages emigration except under her own

names, are in reverse gear, and every two flag. The Soviets firmly prevent it. There

generations their populations will decrease remain in Europe only Bulgaria, Poland and

by at least half unless a complete and rapid Portugal. Portugal, with a population of

change comes in a process that has slowly some 7 millions, has her own immense tern-

gathered momentum for fifty years past, tories in Africa to fill before she can help

and is now rushing forward. The white man Australia; so Poland and Bulgaria are left.

is becoming sterile.

There are also left Asia and Africa, still

So this possibility too must be eliminated, fecund. And in addition there are the un-

for the Dominions Office could never have fortunate people to whom their native land

neglected to read the evidence. There are has grown unhappy, Jews in Germany and

three well-known calculations which concern in Poland, Assyrians in Iraq, and either the

the future population of England and Wales. gentry of Spain or its anarchists, according

Each is founded upon a different surmise to the fortunes of the war now raging. If

and then logically worked out. One assumes these be rejected, then we must suppose one

for its base that we wull go back to the I93I of two things: either Lord Hartington has

level of fertility, and yet keep on reducing some knowledge of a fount of population

mortality as at present; if this were done, that is invisible to the expert statisticians

England and Wales would only lose 7 who write books on demography, or his

millions of population in the next three brief is fifty years out of date.

generations; no one expects the clock to If this is really so, if the mouthpiece Qf

run backwards like this, and the calculation the British Government, speaking in a great

POPULATION IN AUSTRALIA

287

Dominion, has been so deplorably ill-served anyhow; but they are of a nature the by his department, then the case is bad people of Australia will not brook, will not indeed. It is better to turn and face a danger permit to be discussed even, until they are than to be an ostrich. Even now there are told the truth, the whole truth, and nothing things that can be done-can be tried but the truth.

THE GALTON ANNIVERSARY DINNER, 1937
will be held at
THE WALDORF HOTEL
ALDWYCH, W.C.2
On Tuesday, February 16th, at 7.30 (for 7.45)
The Galton Lecture
SOME ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF A DECLINING POPULATION "
will be given by
JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES, M.A., C.B.
Chairman: The Lord Horder, K.C.V.O., M.D., F.R.C.P. A vote of thanks to the Lecturer will be proposed by Sir Walter Layton, M.A., C.B.E., C.H., LL.D. and seconded by H. D. Henderson, M.A.
Tickets, 7/6, may be obtained from the Business Secretary, The Eu,enics Society, 69 Eccleston Square, London. S.W.1. Please purchase as early as possible, as it may not be easy to increase the number
arranged for at the last moment.
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVX, No. 4.

