'Eugenics is the science which deals with all influences that improve the inborn qualities of a race; also
with those that develop them to the utmost advantage.'-S IR FRANCIS GALTON ( I904)
The Eugenics Review

NOTES OF THE QUARTER

TOP PEOPLE HAVE LARGER FAMILIES
TWO CONTRIBUTIONS IN this issue of the REVIEW throw an encouraging light on the aims and activities of the Society. First on pages 46-48, it is shown that scholars at Winchester College are not only replacing themselves, in the most recent generations, but are also increasing their kind. In the process they are doing better than the population at large. Secondly, pages 70-72 give a first look at the 1961 Census fertility data for England and Wales, with special reference to the differentials between socio-economic groups; they indicate that, among white-collar workers, people with the most intellectually-demanding jobs are now having the largest families. Moreover, in their fertility, unskilled manual workers now differ less from other types of wage-earner than they did.
These trends are beneficial to the nation as a whole; in a competitive world the best possible quality of thought and action is needed, and in a technology of ever-growing 'complexity there is a need for an increasing supply of capable people so that progress can be maintained.

EUROPEAN POPULATION CONFERENCE

THE FIRST DEMOGRAPHIC Conference devoted specifically to European population problems was organized by the Council of Europe in Strasbourg during the first week of
September 1966. It was attended by experts nominated by member governments, by individually invited demographers, as well as by a number of parliamentarians and civil servants. Some members of the Conference came from countries which were not member states of
the Council. Mr. John Boreham, Chief Statistician to the General Register Office, served as one of the Vice-Presidents of the Conference.
Five general topics were discussed: (1) developments in fertility, their causes and consequences; (2) developments in mortality, their causes and consequences; (3) population movements; (4) trends in population structure; and (5) demographic teaching and research in Europe.
It would be difficult to draw general conclusions from the papers presented, most of which dealt with specific geographical areas, rather than giving an overview of European problems as a whole. It would seem that fertility differences between different social groups may be becoming less important than formerly, although in countries of mixed religion,

EPR A

1

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
Roman Catholics still have significantly larger families. Roman Catholic attitudes towards birth control and family limitation were discussed during the Conference. In the field of mortality, too, differences in mortality appear to be lessening.
One of the most useful aspects of the Conference was the opportunity that it provided for a dialogue between parliamentarians, civil servants and demographers, though these three categories should not necessarily be regarded as mutually exclusive.
The Conference made a number of recommendations to the Council of Europe, which will presumably be forwarded to the governments of the member countries. These related inter alia to the encouragement of comparable sample research studies on fertility in different European countries, the adoption of measures designed to reduce infant mortality, the standardization of statistical definitions and the furthering of training and research in demography.
HAEMOGLOBINOPATHIES
A GROUP OF research workers interested in haemoglobinopathies and in particular also in the anaemias arising from glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency of the red cells met in Geneva from 14th to 20th December 1965, and a recently published Report is the outcome of their deliberations.*
The Chairman was Dr. H. Lehmann of the Abnormal Haemoglobin Research Unit of the Medical Research Council, which is part of the Department of Biochemistry in Cambridge University. The Vice-Chairman was Professor K. Choremis of St. Sophie's Children's Hospital, Athens, and other members were Dr. R. Cabannes from Toulouse, France; Dr. T. Arends from Caracas, Venezuela; Dr. E. Beutler of the City of Hope Medical Center, Duarte, California; Professor N. Taleb from Beirut; Dr. Soodsarkorn Tuchinda of Siriraj Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand; and Professor J. M. Vandepitte now of the Department of Bacteriology, St. Raphael Clinic, Louvain, Belgium, previously of Leopoldville, Congo Republic. The Secretaries were Dr. R. L. Kirk, who is Chief of the Human Genetics Unit, World Health Organization, Geneva, and Dr. A. B. Raper now of the Bristol Royal Infirmary, but previously for many years Senior Pathologist in Uganda. The names of all these people are mentioned to indicate that there was a wide coverage of the various problems arising over haemoglobinopathies and allied disorders.
The main purpose of this group was to explore the present position of these disorders in the world, how they are being recognized, what facilities are available for their diagnosis and how much they affect populations in various parts of the world. An additional purpose was to show how much is known of their distribution in detail and how great is the number of people all over the world affected by them. This, of course, enabled the group to point out where surveys had been adequately done and also that in many parts of the world knowledge is sadly missing. It is perhaps a sobering thought that about three in every 100,000 children born in this country are likely to die of lymphoblastic leukaemia of childhood and an enormous amount of work is done on the treatment of this disease. In Nigeria, for example, of every 100,000 children born, 1,000 are expected to have sickle-cell anaemia, and most of them are likely to succumb to it before they are grown up.
One section of the report describes the role of malaria in the haemoglobinopathies, particularly in sickle-cell anaemia, and in G6PD deficiency. It is clear that sickle-cell anaemia is the only disease where there seems to be evidence of a protective effect in malaria at present and that even that evidence is in many ways suggestive rather than definite. For all other abnormal haemoglobins such as Haemoglobin C and Haemoglobin E, no
* World Health Organization. Haemoglobinopathies and Allied Disorders. Technical Report Series
No. 338. 1966. Pp. 40. Price 5s. Obtainable from HMSO.
2

NOTES OF THE QUARTER
such evidence has yet been satisfactory and there are also no data available for a- and fithalassaemia, nor are there any conclusive data available yet on the role of G6PD deficiency in malaria. The report also sums up the various known types of this deficiency and the relationship between them and favism. All patients with favism have a deficiency of this enzyme but not all people with G6PD deficiency, even in the areas where favism is found, suffer from the disorder. Another subject of interest was the relation between G6PD deficiency and neonatal jaundice (hyperbilirubinaemai). There is a definite association of the two in Mediterranean cases of enzyme deficiency, but none as such has been found in Africa, and even in the Mediterranean area this relationship has not been demonstrated in Israel.
Of particular concern for the Director General of the World Health Organization, and for any other reader of this report, should be the section on the need for further urgent research on the distribution, the clinical manifestations, and the treatment of these diseases. There is indeed, a formidable list and much work lies ahead. There is also a section on the diagnostic facilities and the requirements for staff and training of personnel.
A NEW POPULATION JOURNAL
THE SOCIETY HAS received, from the Institute of Population Problems in Korea, No. 2 of a Journal of Population Studies, dated 1966. The initial issue was briefly noticed in our September number (58, 157). Both are substantial volumes, No. 2 consisting of 187 pages, of which twenty are in English and thirty give Korean, and world, population statistics in tables with headings in both Korean and English. The Organization Chart, List of Personnel and Diary show evidence of very lively activity and the Institute is to be warmly congratulated on its initiative. The President's Foreword, with its confession of insufficiency and request for "advice and constructive criticism" is indeed too modest.
The eight articles of which summaries in English are provided deal with migration (3); labour force (2); agricultural overpopulation; the island of Jeju; and the analysis of birthintervals and their effect on fertility. An average birth-interval in rural areas of twenty-nine months has already been increased, in only a year or two, to one of thirty-two months, by the practice of family limitation on the part of one married woman in four. It is hoped to cause it to grow to thirty-six months by 1971; if this happens the crude birth rate should fall to twenty-four per thousand.
The volume also gives details of the Bill for protecting the health of children and mothers and improving the quality of the nation. The following are a fewparticulars, verbatim:
Article 9 (Limit to Permissible Induced Abortions)
1. Specialists in gynecology or those who have been designated by the Minister of Public Health and Social Affairs may perform clinical service for induced abortions with consent of the spouse on the women whose status are falling under any one of the following categories:
(a) Those who or whose spouse are suffering from psychosis, mental deficiency, psychopathic personality, inherited physical disease, or inherited deformity.
(b) Those who or whose spouse have any next of kins (within the fourth degree of kinship) suffering from inherited psychosis, inherited mental deficiency, inherited psychopathic personality, inherited physical disease, or inherited deformity.
(c) Those who are in danger that pregnancy or delivery might hurt her health seriously because of physical or economic reasons.
3

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
(d) Those who have been pregnant after being raped in violence, or under unresistable or unavoidable conditions.
Article 11 (Limit to Permissible Sterilization Operations) lays down similar conditions.
Article 14 (Notification)
In case that those who have had sterilization operations want to marry, they should
notify the fact of having been sterilized to the mate to be married before their marriage.
OBITUARIES
Alexander Carr-Saunders
BY THE DEATH of Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders, K.B.E., M.A., LL.D., Honorary Past President, the Eugenics Society has lost one of its earliest and most active participants; he became a member in 1912. Two years later he was secretary of the Research Committee. In 1923 he joined the newly formed Committee Directing Research which was particularly concerned with problem families, supporting the field work of E. J. Lidbetter which culminated in the publication, in 1933, of Heredity and the Social Problem Group.
Carr-Saunders was elected to the Council of the Eugenics Society in 1920 and, except for the war years when the Council was suspended, served on it until 1953, acting as VicePresident from 1936 to 1939 and 1945 to 1948, and as President from 1949 to 1953.
He was awarded the first Galton Medal in 1944 "in recognition of the invaluable services which he had rendered in the past and continued to render both to the Society and to the cause of eugenics".
One of his contributions to the Society's work was his editorship of The Eugenics Review from 1922 until 1927. In the early 1930s, when propaganda was one of the main activities, he was an occasional lecturer on eugenics at meetings organized by the then Propaganda Secretary. He gave the Galton Lecture in 1935, taking as his subject "Eugenics in the Light of Population Trends".*
He was a member of the Committee to Investigate Population Problems, set up in 1935, which in the following year became the Population Investigation Committee, an autonomous body which in the first instance worked on a grant from the Eugenics Society; Carr-Saunders was its Chairman from 1936 to 1958 and continued as a member until his death. He was one of the representatives of the Eugenics Society on the joint Population Policies Committee, controlled by the Eugenics Society and PEP, which was set up in 1938; suspended at the outbreak of war, it was revived in 1943 with Carr-Saunders as Chairman until 1944, when he relinquished the Chairmanship on his appointment to the Royal Commission on Population.
His work in other spheres is well known. In 1937 he succeeded Beveridge as Director of the London School of Economics. In 1943 he joined the Asquith Commission on Higher Education in the Colonies. He served as Chairman on the Statistics Committee of the Royal Commission on Population from 1944 to 1949. Largely because of his work and that of the Population Investigation Committee, demography became established as a University discipline in Britain.
DR. C. P. BLACKER writes: I first met Carr-Saunders in 1920, forty-six years ago, and the occasion remains memorable.
I was then reading zoology at Oxford and was a pupil of Julian Huxley's. I was leaving Julian's study one morning when in walked Carr-Saunders. The two were old friends. Carr-Saunders was well known to me as an authority on population, and I took the oppor-
* THE EUGENICS REVIEW, 1935-36, 27, 11.
4

NOTES OF THE QUARTER
tunity of asking him a naive question which was then exercising me: "Do you think it possible," I asked, "to define an optimum population for a given country?" He smiled and replied cautiously. The gist was: only within the broadest limits and for a restricted period. Your guess would be easier for a country whose economy was mainly based on a stable agriculture-though stability could be precarious, witness the Irish potato famine. For an industrialized country in competition with other such countries many unpredictable and rapidly changing factors make even tentative assessments hazardous. I think he mentioned, as examples of the hazards, underpopulated Australia which encouraged immigration, and France which was being outbred by its populous and menacing though then prostrate neighbour.
A very good answer, I thought. After I had become a member of the Eugenics Society in 1928, I saw much of CarrSaunders. Contacts were regular after the Birth Control Investigation Committee was formed in the late 'twenties, and they continued after the Population Investigation Committee was founded in 1936. Outstanding from the Society's standpoint was the presentation of the first Galton medal in February 1946-twenty years ago. The occasion was in every respect memorable. Lord Keynes gave him the medal; Sir Godfrey Thomson delivered a noteworthy Galton lecture; and finally a most felicitously phrased vote of thanks was moved by Dr. J. A. Fraser Roberts. Lord Keynes began with a tribute to Galton whom he described as "the founder of the most important, significant and, I would add, genuine branch of sociology which exists, namely eugenics".
Which leads me (Lord Keynes continued) by a natural transition, from Galton to his worthy and distinguished disciple Carr-Saunders, who is in common estimation to-day the most distinguished sociologist in the country.
He and I were, I believe, at school together not far short of fifty years ago. But I was just that much senior, which prevented my knowing him then. Anyway, CarrSaunders was a slow beginner. He did not know what he wanted. Almost by chance, I gather, he got started on zoology, so far as his head was concerned, whilst his heart was set from the beginning on social and political affairs; a combination which led, not by chance, but inevitably, to precisely that mixed training which is so essential for a mixed scientist. Charles Darwin, incidentally, repaid a debt. Whilst Darwin was first led to his theories by reading Malthus, Carr-Saunders was led to Malthus through Darwin. Problems of population became his main concern, but essentially approached through the biological background of man and his habits and customs and not primarily through the economic approach.
Although it has all ended up by Carr-Saunders becoming the head of one of the leading faculties in the country, it was through this "other" approach that the peculiar value of his various contributions has largely arisen. In addition, in the true Galtonian spirit, he has cast his net wide, and a book such as Carr-Saunders's on The Professions would, I am sure, have appealed to his forerunner not less than his signal contributions to the problems of population and eugenics.
I doubt if any member of the Society was in closer touch with Carr-Saunders than myself between the years 1928 and 1960. With no one did I find it more profitable to discuss problems of policy. He was readily accessible and a perfect listener-extraordinarily easy to communicate with. He instantly grasped the essential features of every problem, which he would often helpfully re-state in its broadest context. He shrewdly assessed the personalities involved and could discern implications which were not at first sight obvious. His powers as adviser and pilot were utilized in many spheres of public life, as will be seen from the
5

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
Editor's biographical sketch. In his relaxed moods he was a delightful companion, humorous and perceptive, witty and humane, an excellent host and a discerning commentator on current events including the contemporary political scene. When amused he had a deep laugh which bubbled up and a most engaging smile. His laugh and his smile made him lovable. Few people can have been more respected by friends and colleagues and few people can have better merited this respect.
If wide knowledge tolerance and imaginativeness combined with foresight, restraint, equanimity and invariable courtesy are compounds of wisdom, then Carr-Saunders was one of the wisest of our contemporaries.
The Eugenics Society has been fortunate indeed in having two such personalities as Leonard Darwin and Alexander Carr-Saunders-so similar in some ways, yet so different in others-to guide it during the first fifty years of its life.
MR. D. CARADOG JONES writes: My first introduction to Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders came soon after he was invited, in 1923, to occupy the newly endowed Charles Booth Chair of Social Science in the University of Liverpool. Booth, as is well known, had broken new ground in an attempt to measure poverty and to make a statistical analysis of the social and industrial life of the people of London. The intensely human picture he drew can still excite and inspire any young social worker who will take the trouble to read about it, and it says much for those responsible for filling the new Chair that they looked for someone of like intellectual stature. Such a one they found in Carr-Saunders.
Money was available from the same source for two other appointments. Miss Ellinor I. Black came from the London School of Economics to teach the students and to be responsible for arranging their practical work. Although Carr-Saunders had lectured in the Zoology Department at Oxford for a short time after the war, he had had no academic experience of the social sciences. Consequently he depended very much upon Miss Black and his study of the syllabuses in use in kindred schools in designing the courses to be followed in his department. But he did not slavishly copy any other university, for he had a very independent mind and inevitably, in course of time, he became a leader rather than a follower in the discovery of more effective ways of training social workers.
I had the good fortune to be associated with him throughout the fourteen formative years he spent at Liverpool, where his inspirational power as a teacher and his skill as an administrator quickly became evident. Halfmy time was spent in teaching statistical method and half in social research. I was pleased therefore to find that Carr-Saunders was prepared to include, as a special feature of our library, all the latest Government Reports which had a bearing on social studies. Incidentally, his interest in Italian art was revealed in the fine reproductions which he hung on our walls.
Although I was privileged to collaborate with him in some of his writings, I had a free hand in my own studies. At the same time he was most approachable if one wished to discuss any subject with him. One subject in which he was keenly interested was the assessment of the relative influence of heredity and environment on man. He had a high opinion of Galton and this led him to join the Eugenics Society as early as 1912. He contributed much to the solid reputation the Society has earned for promoting social research which has in some cases led to Government action.
My impression is that he got on best with younger men to whom with their wives he and Lady Carr-Saunders were conspicuously kind. Some of the happiest years of his life were, I am sure, spent in Liverpool and, when the invitation came to him to succeed Sir William Beveridge-as he then was-at the London School of Economics, he realized that if he accepted he would be taking on a very difficult task. But he had no doubt where his duty lay; as one who knew him well said, his one thought always was: "Is it the right thing
6

NOTES OF THE QUARTER
to do?" Personal gain did not come into his consideration. That is what enabled him to pursue a course above all intrigue and pettiness and made his tenure of the directorship the success it was. It was from there too that he was able to exercise his great gift for serving young and expanding universities overseas. He was well known as a scholar and writer in many parts of the world. Had he been willing to make a greater use of television he would have been also far better known than he was, and deserved to be, to the general public of his own country.*
LADY SIMEY writes: Sir Alex Carr-Saunders came to Liverpool in 1923 as the first Professor to fill the Chair of Social Science recently endowed by the family and friends of Charles Booth. The appointment was important because it marked the achievement of full University status by a Department and a subject which had up till then hovered on the fringes of academic life. As evidence of this fact, it was shortly afterwards announced that a degree course in social science was about to be set up.
Carr-Saunders was visibly taken aback by the promptitude with which I presented myself for consideration as the first student for the new course, but agreed to admit me. It has been a source of great regret to me ever since that I proved so inadequate to the situation: to be plunged from the decorum of a girls' school into individual tuition by so young a man, based on the manuscript of a book on eugenics was inevitably a demanding experience. Nevertheless, however much I failed to respond to his teaching, I shared with all the certificate students a genuine appreciation of the efforts he made to add a new dimension to our lives. As the times required, we were dedicated to the fight against poverty, earnest to the nth degree, puritanical in our ways of life and thought, and it was a startling experience to encounter in our professor a love of music and the arts as fundamental to human existence. He was generous in sharing these other interests with his students; no doubt he regarded it as part of his obligation as a teacher to do so. I recollect student parties in the flat where the Charles Reilly murals astounded us, walks in the rain on the Welsh hifls, concerts by Marco Pallis and his recorder group, the appearance of Medici prints on the walls of our lecture rooms, his happy laughter over his own gaucherie as a folk-dancer. We had come to the University seeking no more than the means to an end. Carr-Saunders demonstrated to us that man lives by much more than bread, and for that reason many of us remember him with deep gratitude.
To speak of him in this way, and of his claim to our affections, is not to understimate the importance of his influence as an academic teacher. The care he took to present a balanced presentation of topics liable to provoke acrimony, the standards he set in searching out information before drawing conclusions, the breadth of his reading, added up to a demonstration of scholarship which was indeed a benefaction for those fortunate enough to be his students.
Cecil Binney
MR. CECIL BINNEY, M.A., Barrister-at-Law, who died in October 1966, served the Eugenics Society for many years. He was a member of the Council of the Society from 1933 to 1939, and in 1940 was appointed to the Emergency Committee which carried on in place of the Council during the war years. He continued to serve as a Councillor and as a VicePresident, with short intermissions, until 1962, during which time his legal advice was of very great value to the Society.
On the death of Miss Edith Corry in 1947 he undertook the duties of Honorary Librarian and continued in this office until 1960.
* Extrats from the appreciation published in the Journal ofthe Royal Statistical Society, 1967, 130, Pt. 2. Reprinted by kind permission of the Editor and of Mr. Caradog Jones.
7

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
In 1934 his "Note on the Legal Aspects of Sterilization" was published in the REVIEW (26, 27) and he subsequently spoke at Members' Meetings and made other contributions
to the REVIEW: "Eugenic Aspects of the English Criminal Law" in 1945 (37, 105) and
"Legal and Social Implications of Artificial Insemination" in 1948 (40, 199). He contributed to an appreciation of the reprint, sponsored by the Eugenics Society, of Galton's Hereditary Genius (42, 212) and in October 1956 he took part in a Symposium at a Members' Meeting with Dr. M. H. Jackson, Dr. Philip Bloom, Professor A. S. Parkes and Dr. C. P. Blacker on "Artificial Insemination (Donor)" (48, 20).
DR. C. P. BLACKER writes: Cecil Binney, for many years our Honorary Librarian, first made contact with the Eugenics Society in 1929 when we convened our Committee for Legalizing Eugenic Sterilization. A project had earlier been discussed for endowing beds in a hospital on the condition that priority be given to candidates for voluntary sterilization. But this initiative was successfully opposed by Dr. R. A. Gibbons (then an influential member of the Society's Council who carried weight) on the grounds that the legal position was uncertain. Hence the above-named committee was formed.
An obviously necessary task was to produce a statement of the legal issues, and for this we turned to Cecil Binney. He took much trouble and put in several month's reading. The result was an erudite and well-written pamphlet, The Law as to Sterilization, of twenty-four pages with, appended, a list of sixty-three references. A second edition was produced in 1931. Cecil was thereafter much in demand as a speaker and lecturer on this controversial topic. He also became an active supporter of the Society and regularly attended its Members' Meetings. He could be counted upon either to bridge those awkward moments of silence which intervene between the conclusion of a lecture or paper and the beginning of the ensuing discussion, or, at the shortest possible notice, to produce a well-turned vote of thanks. Many were the occasions when we had cause to be grateful to him for these timely services.
The following notice, published in The Times on 10th October 1966, well describes the man and the range of his activities:
Although ill health had cut him off from his friends for the last years of his life, the death of Cecil Binney will come as a shock to those who had known him at Eton, at Balliol, at the Bar or in Cambridgeshire. At Oxford he took a leading part in the "Dr. Busch" hoax. As a very conscientious young barrister he still found time for successful forays into lighter literature, and after the war came three admirable little books explaining aspects of the law to laymen. At Pampisford Hall, with his wealth of interests from the Duodecimos to conifers, he was always accessible and always helpful, a considerate landlord and a tireless worker on local councils. He was the most unpretentious of men; and his unfailing kindliness and his absolute integrity are qualities too precious to be easily forgotten.
All his friends in the Society will endorse what is said about his integrity and kindness, and will extend their sympathy to his wife.
Hilda Lewis
LADY LEWIS, whose sudden death in October 1966 came as a sad shock to all who knew her, had been interested in the Eugenics Society since 1930, when Sir Aubrey Lewis became a Fellow. She herself became a Member of the Society in 1955, was elected to Fellowship in February 1957 and to the Council in June of the same year.
In 1955 she spoke at a Members' Meeting on "Unsatisfactory Parents and Psycho-
8

NOTES OF THE QUARTER
logical Disorder in their Children"* and from 1953 to 1956 she served on the Society's Promising Families Committee; in 1957 she became the Eugenics Society's representative on the British Committee of the International Union of Family Organizations, reading papers at its conferences in many European cities and reporting the proceedings in the
REVIEW.
She served on the Marie Stopes Committee and became a member of the Marie Stopes Memorial Foundation when it was formed in 1960.
Apart from the IUFO reports already mentioned, our readers will remember her as a regular reviewer of books on child care for many years before she joined the Editorial Board in 1964. Indeed, two of her reviews were printed in our issue for September 1966. Dr. Kellmer Pringle worked against time to review for our December number Medical Aspects of Child Adoption edited by Hilda Lewis,* and it is sad that she did not live to read this appreciation of her work, for she had of recent years been deeply concerned in the welfare of adopted children in this country, had worked as a psychiatrist to the Children's Society and was Chairman of the Standing Conference of Societies Registered for Adoption. She was elected Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1966.

DR. C. P. BLACKER writes: Hilda Lewis's premature death will be mourned abroad no less than in this country. Much the same qualities were admired by her French, Italian and Swiss friends of the International Union of Family Organizations as were appreciated here -her acumen, her balance and fairness of judgement, her warmth. At these polyglot and sometimes excitable assemblies this country could not have had a more effective spokesman.
But what could only be understood by those who worked closely with her were the
extraordinary thoroughness and conscientiousness which she brought to bear on whatever project she undertook. An example with which I was closely concerned was the preparation of her report entitled Deprived Children published in 1953 by the Oxford University Press for the Nuffield Foundation. Whatever the project in hand, she showed powers of comprehensive grasp coupled with a scrupulous respect for detail. Towards the people she worked for-the children needing adoption and the families proposed as foster-parents-she was gentle, understanding and modest. Also wise and shrewd. These were the qualities, rare in such combination, which brought her into prominence as a guide and authority on adoption.
Hilda Lewis's sudden illness and unexpected death are a grievous loss to many close
friends who held her in deep affection and to a wider circle of colleagues and collaborators who were in a position to appreciate the fine quality of her public work.
All who came in contact with her in the Society will mourn her loss and will extend their
deep sympathy to her husband, Sir Aubrey Lewis.

MISS LEILA RENDEL writes: Lady Lewis became consultant psychiatrist to a pioneer
Reception Centre launched by the help of the Nuffield Foundation at the Caldecott Community-for the reception and assessment of deprived children: for whom the Local Authorities Welfare Services were responsible.
The experiment was for a period of four years, and was established in order that it
might become a future guide to those Authorities who would be required to set up some form of reception homes of their own under the Children's Act of 1948.
The Community owes a very great deal to Dr. Lewis. The success of the project was
largely due to her wise, humane judgement given with detachment and sense of proportion
at the weekly conferences held at the Centre on the children up for assessment.

* THE EUGENICS REVIEW, 1955, 47, 153. t Ibid., 1966, 58, 218.

9

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
This, combined with her constant help given to our team of workers, made the whole experiment worth while. She will also long be remembered by all the outside social workers who joined us in conference.
Her interim report on her work at the Centre, and her final report on the "follow up" of 600 children, will remain a standard for all Local Authorities engaged in the care of deprived children.
The field of psychological diagnosis and subsequent treatment is still at a somewhat empirical stage, and often a matter of controversy.
But we shall always be indebted to Dr. Lewis's insight, forbearance, and objectivity in this field of the insecure child.
***
WE DEEPLY REGRET to record, as we go to press, the death on 29th December 1966 of Lord Brain, a member of the Consultative Council of the Eugenics Society, and on 4th January 1967 of Mr. G. Aird Whyte who for many years served the Society as Chairman of Council and as Honorary Treasurer.
10

