RACEeCROSSING AND GLANDS V
Some H an Hybrids and their Parent Stocks
(Paper read at the ninth meeting, 1g30, of the International Federation of Eugenic
Organizations.)
By JON ALFRED MJOEN

T HE earlier displacements of popula- in process of changing. Clean, open racial

tion, the migrations of which history features are becoming more and more rare

relates, usually took place during in these masses in the slums, which in the

long epochs of time. Amongst the greatest real sense of the word are amorphous. All

were the migrations of the Arabs, the unity of form is dissolved, and a hideous

Semites, and the Mongols. These whole- confusion of all possible colours and shapes

sale movements of population were of quite from all the races of the earth has taken

a different character from the Viking raids its place.

to the Mediterranean lands and Northern The picture which we see before our eyes

France, the Gothic invasion of Italy and every day, so to speak, on journeys in

Spain, the Normans' conquenng expedi- Europe, North Africa, and America, raises

tions to England, the expulsion of the a question of importance: What will be the

Huguenots, or the e.mgration of the effect, the final result of this gigantic

Puritans to the United States, and of the blood-mixing? The picture gives an im-

Walloons to Sweden.

pression of lack of guiding-instinct, lack of

But even the most stupendous invasions stability and balance. But is this lack of

that history records, hardly assumed such balance a result of social or biological

dimensions as the movements of population causes; and have we any reason to believe

we have witnessed in our own days. The that crossing with foreign races will have a

system of control that is called inspection deleterious effect upon the native stock?

of passports shows, for example, that the In order to find a reliable answer to this

racial elements of alien origin which in a question and reach a firm basis, we can go

three-year period after the War have crossed different ways. We can make experiments

the frontier into Centrl Europe from the on plants and animals in order to find out

East, number no less than 6oo,ooo. The the somatic changes following race-crossings

emigrants from the East settled in Berlin, in general. We can also make observations

Paris, and other large cities (according as on human material. What we can not do

the rate of exchange varied 1), and to-day is to experiment with human material.

they form a constantly increasig contin- But fortunately humans sometimes make

gent of Asiatics, Russians, Poles, Galicians, the experiments for us. Not all of these

Greeks, and various others. New York experiments, though, are of equal value for

alone was invaded, in the course of a three- such observations.

year period, by a similar contingent of We find quite a considerable literature

foreign racia elements amounting to about on human race-crossing; but most of it

one and a half million.

consists of 'observations' made by travelers

Nobody-who with open eyes has observed and explorers, and very few of these rest on

the masses in the great modern cities, Paris, Scientific ground, on measurements, for

Berlin, New York, Chicago, will have instance, of single traits, whose quality can

failed to be struck by the manner in which be expressed numerically. If the measure-

rtheacial physiognomy of the population is ments of such qfalities are to be of any

31

32 TEUIRTGEMCS REVIW

value, we must choose a plac where the

two or more parent races are reasonably The results of teItions are

distinct in such characters as body-size, that althouh we found a larger gp of

colour of hair, skin, and eyes, or size and hIybrids wit har

faces,

function of the inner organs, lungs, muscu- good looks, decent ture, hght, and

lar strength, and so on, and, of course, 'm strength, as wel as a good cation be-

such psychic qualities as intelligence. If, twe volume of lungs and body-size d

for instance, the stature of a family muscular strength and body-size, yt we

group of one race is 1.74 m. (males) or a
little above, and the stature of a family group of another race is I.6o m. or

found more dishamoes, both physical and mental, than in the two parent races. The most surprising discovery was that of

a little less, it would be of immense interest a low mental ability combid with a com-

to see whether the hybrids took after the paratively good gener*il appearance.

taller race or the shorter, whether they fell A further result of our observations is

between the two, as would be expected, or whether there was such a disturbance of the

that the Lapp-Nordic hybrid displays a long series of disharmonious qualities, more

growth factor or factors as to give a wider or less perceptible, more or less imprtant

range of figures for stature than in either for life.

of the parent races.

We found: Relatively large or small

CROSSING THE NORDIC AND MONGOL Such a place is the northern part of
Norway and Sweden, where widely differ-

ears, disproportionate extremities, unusual length of body in the F1 gnratIon,
abnormal range of variation with regard to such characteristics as lung-volume and

ent races are to be found in easily distinguishable groups, and where the conditions are favourable for the study of

muscular strength (compare Fig. ia), greater prevalence of diabetes (compare Fig. 2), loss of balance, and dimihed re

race-crossings. Moreover, the social conditions are clear and perspicuous. Here the two races, the Mongoloid Lapps and the Nordics have more or less adapted them-

to tuberculosis (compare the chart, "Mortality from taberculosis in Norway," Journal of Heredity, Vol. XVII, No. 5,
May I926).

selves to the same environment. This is

of much importance, as it excludes the EXPERIMENIS WITH ANIMALS

social factor and leaves only the biological. Both races have gone through the same process of selection during several thousand years.
On account of these considerations we
decided to choose Northern Norway (R6ros, Nordland, Finmarken) for our observations and measurements, and we made in the course of twenty years several visits from our laboratory to the Lapp camps. on these expeditions we measured about 6oo Nordics, 6oo Lapps and more than 300 hybrids. The result for muscular strength and volume of lungs is given in Figs. ia and ib on pages 34 and 35.
Later on we continued the measu ets in other parts of the country-and found
somewhat smaller variation-curves than
those given m Fig. la and Fig. ib.

Observations made on animal crossngs
at our laboratory have cfirmed our conclusions from human material. We found the followmg disharmonies in hybrid rabbits: Unsymmetrical arragemt of
ears, greater range of variation in length of ears, abnormal g th and of body in the F generation, derangeent of correla.
tive weight of intenal orgas, as well as reduced fecundity in later ati.
It may perhaps be objected that it is a
matter of indifference whether a rabbit has two upright, two pendent, or one upright and one pendent ear. But it is not the lack
Of symmetry of the ears in itself that is of interest for us. But as a symptoom it
intrests us in the ver highest degree d
arouses our suspicon. Thee is reason to suppoe that similar disha e manifest

ROSSING AND GLANDS

33

themasdv alo in other and more important

traits nd to assume

functions. There that the eas form

is no reason an excepton

in this r
measnremeiit

and

muding weghing of the internal

orgas of the two parent races and of the

hybrids seem to confirm this. The work

has not hitherto

yet been attsined

cosmhpolwetetdha,tbutthethreatrieosublet-s

tween the weights of the various organs is

subject to dengement this rpect the hybrid

in the hybrid. In
shows a far greater

variation-crve than the pure-bred animal.

It has sometimes been asserted that most

inherited charactrs i animals and humans

are of a blending' nature, and that when

parents differ in a trait, the offspring com-

monly possess an intermediate degree of it.

It has been asserted that this is true of

stature, weight, and of general mental

wicoipftifahmtpcdgcefnnnashhaoaeohreourhtrreuneeOesonnimoeeeeniptmavsemutrunrfnaedtihiiohi'rtptrbisanaccneuetstr-cbettacarss'erhlislneoiateueoccpbdnceoqmpitnhneashedfuaenqeah.drbeesartuntr'eaelrr.lfaaeathd'fnnieivilscrhaotettcnaisitpetrsiiaiBmtdotcenrds.ean-iieureegeoslncceloitttfnneasoalsnehofo.lo't-tsdeobswltfiabsbefhpemiTcnellmdryssinahaIeeeotibtgsetsirfntnhhnroiuvehfhsddagdeminanpaeemeovoiadttesd'rcwelileyeiia'yoihertsncerqlpnbnbxmotmeohu)srlrpeeoabtinotioeattrdlgetrcfsainohhaeiiuttuedfneebrmttsast,wgndiehslitr''geeoiaeieaegteasbeftninoanhhfspwolontgndcadtfstfpseiehthip-d;anntargsmootord(hrtfiuaefomubheitoatinhtrnierobannhcgsnheahodme.ttgd-e-teseate-

powers. In a cross between individuals of different races-i.e. individuals whose idiotypica (genotypes) diverge from each other beyond a certain degree of variation
-we can imagie several possible combina-
tions of the hereditary qualities in the next and suLceeding generations:

i.-The offspring may display all the essential characteristics of one of the two races, that race being ' pre-potent ' over the other.

2.-The offspring
chaactristics of both

may races,

display all the from the colour

of the eyes to the highest mental functions,

passyachhiocmcoognesnteitouutsiobnloefndbootfhthpearpehnytssicoarlbaontdh

parent-races.

3.-The offsprng may display certain

characteristics from each of the two races,

the large race, the

lungs, small

for instance, of the Nordic heart of the Lapp.-" Size

and function to a certain extent independent

of each other."

4.-The
ch e

offspring c of both

ma races,

display each in such a way

that every cell,
mosaic composed

every organ becomes a
of heterogeneos here-

ditary qiis.

Interediate figures,A which might be

LesvbhgcnFwHldmhBariervpoeaeuoaoeusuteseleetcrnOnsmsnnmesttocr,eeienoutrsisduatsdstdamgeg,eri:shihnhatsapeenateauoso,tttdngryrfdaduihbioeey,onfegfeHo"opniadfhiinDt.teusnrtiVrtnhaoa.rttsdogoeRnsvheaeBtolicsmuoderseabiofh.r.nImtgnlah"yethsneoIgtepecnsXhafdfnloraDt,eiVvcrtmdeordrotaaheaIosus-othctiwEonsmInis'eesebbofe.gn,tsnlGresjedtcetlaeouisdFehondtsnfNntidbixencRdfuehsogesnof-osrsect.ectpepmioesbruhha(wcrpfluuiseeesrfehti5yts,prnrerereian,iapeed,tnogonvoonohiatlnencmMritnesdLDJsentd'rwnaaaoiesetlhrsvatuvmyechalqaisiiraeeldseeuistevmtnotna,iasoewefo1avlpsalns9leinhouatob,c2sttagrarhnato6ierintsevelnnh)eooesn,-d.ey-tya.esf-ft-
rrqeIpaisnieubanvuasasirtIsecrelultirpnhilirtsoetttooodiciaywwensurkothsaocfh.wseentseosidndshefetpsensheeesatcrieAamothiicseaohnem"iswlospdpeshadoarntceiieforcoeicsndeoymrdnhufdbimaschistatreehnwhhhmro"aieaewuoitwtrnitndpihmoafdiaiaoofnaecsrnfnocdvrhessieneo"paneclursrtosryriwefcmeanshnroiabgotoshinns'lnoseeceiscesherhckyieIsrbniaod",erndfigschiatiauoadpavttslfsvmrtehhto.e-ys-eaesr
two parent races.

FIG. IA. Volume ofLu ng.
.4. (Spirometer B)arns
34

Wan'&powe.MS Zrpf-~ W.

r.

J1anom.r

-1 ImAk -,

36 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

THEjALANDULAR BASS OF GROWTH types than amongst flies jfrer race.

Assuming that the functioning of the Also, the resistance to IL

asems

various endocrine glands is dependent on different genes, it may well be that the

to be diminished in the offspring of cro. That diabetes must first and formost be

glands in the offspring of parents of dis- ascribed to glandular deficency is now a

similar race are, owing to the new combina- known fact; and that disease resistanLe i

tion of genes, more or less inharmoniously lessened by glandular anomalies is prob

adapted to each other. There arises a able. (See Fig. 2.)

derangement of the normal correlation,

which may have more or less serious, or HYBRIDS' TEMPERAMENTAL INABILTY

even disastrous, results for the individual In full agreement with this suggestion of

concerned.

glandular disturbance is the general opin-

As we know, the growth of the body ion of biologists that the han hybrid

stands in close relation to the function of shows a typical instability i mental and

the glands. In the case of functional moral es a want of balance. His

anomalies of the hypophysis, the thyroid, motives and actions are incalculable, his

the sexual glands, and probably also of the impulses stronger than his self-control. I

thymus gland there arise a number of feel more and more convinced that the

physical abnormalities. It is highly prob- inmates of our prisons and asylums are to

able that the frequently observed exag- a large extent recruited from these types of

gerated growth of the hybrid and his mixed race, whose numbers are constantly

disproportionately large extremities are due rising on account of the increasing inter-

to a glandular disturbance of genetic course between populations from all parts

origin.

of the world.

A further argument in support of the A special group of individuals which is

view that the glands are disturbed in the causing a great deal of trouble in our

hybrid lies in the fact that we found a northern countries, Norway and Sweden, is

larger number of diabetics amongst hybrid the Gipsy (tater) group. We know ver

FIG. 2.

Vrndren Laborato,um

Race-Crossing4Disturbance of theEndocrineGlands.

0 Nordic
®SLapp
* Diabetes
O Cretinism

odcLp

We now amongst the
race-crossing

kno that diabetes is a glduar lesion.
half-breeds in Finmark points in the same causes glandular disturbnce.

The frequent appearance of direction as the other facts,

this malady namely, tha

Of

The diagrammatic
mixe racde d

pirnesheynbtiadtsiosn owpp.th3a4t

and the

3S of
rn

lungolume
of

and for

mu

greater in the hybrid than in the ma f rela pre race.

ar S
two ca

th
ct

pern is far

ROSSING AND GLANDS

little about their gin, expt that they are badly rac-mied and have all the characteiScs of blaed hybrids. They are vagabonds, bgrs, lofers, and criminas. Whole families of this hybrid population are filling up our prisons and
asylums. One hears, of course, of prominent
hybrids-Booker Waington, the American teacher and rfm er, was a Mulatto,
and Porfirio Dias, President of Mexico, was a Mestizo. But they are exceptions to the rule, and they are few compared with the enormous number of human hybrids all
over the world. We find it very often stated that the famous Swedish writer,
August Strindberg, was of very "mixed ascendency." I do not know how far this
assertion is to be relied upon. But what

goAopwntgnuBlefsaiiaronounsaholpnerlmieotzllsewaopdeimanrzyhycueomltpslliyksagiawweey3eoosnrr2hnhmr.rn-ts3o7ea;heo)aAbttntolentranchloppluante4dtdebipeedWmnxl.ogtubrrhethybe"thte.nbda,nihpece.eocgceteeryeeeanaonrten,aTanetfhmtasobee.hec.fvlorbserateoTweeoanuntepfhvxrohhlrttgeettefa.oeorrwtgfItsahaeeWtotiuwVhoieBshwfhthneenm5ileeeitrysplWtarthai(ferhhcBpeezatoBmegecikelesiphmsreotsrra.pBaunsBtolenocnerihdyrwssmkgcreoodino.esiaiantwln,eswrnlteytfenInlds.fhnedsnyisewtaeithcdhOhttwhmataacitgdeihanihnnvahliosrtevveddoeenade,teroee

would be likely to be the result if we advocated race-crossing on such premisses? If

As Lenz

regards certain remarks:

anomalies

of

the

eyes,

by deliberate experimental breeding of men we could produce xo,ooo ' Strindbtg
blends,' we should obtain no small contin-
gent with Strindberg's brutality, his melancholy, his capriciousness, his violent temper, his pessimism, his cynicism
towards women (though he married four

ottiafxnuhirr"serco,eouIfontgrrfjheauisctnsutrhcliaetttocoinevoi-innbcisernisowolsntiais,htsgiehhsnmtguea.amysyeeh,gdsoArrewtmtah-chtaseeaeiyrtnrgthaaalotilnceensocndoumgncrateuarlhsrriisviLe.aso."s-egf

times), and all his lack of self-ontrol-and yet we might be cheated of the expected types with Strindberg's creative genius.

The Halfdan follows:

Norwegian Bryn, sums

anthropologist, Dr. up his experiences as

Davenport and Steggerda have come to similar conclusions as regards the variability and disharmony of psychic qualities in the Mulatto:
" Disharmonies in the mental sphere
are socially more significant, perhaps,
than those in the physical sphere, and
such disharmonies are apparently com-
mon in the adult Brown. Such disharmonies and confusion apparently appear in visualization and reproduction, as in putting together the parts of the mani-
kin [an ' intelligence test ']. The proportion of failures of the Browns is 9.6 per cent., as opposed to 3.1 per cent. in Blacks and 2.1 per cent. in Whites.
In copying of geometric figures 5 per cent. of Browns fail completely as compared with 3 per cent. of the Blacks and

tcoeigioqnnronuceg"ngaeaeltIibnlinieynhnttFatuwabivsmeaenetbdmrnaeaeamrarfotLfokiniaro.srgfpemsbptdocsIiatrtmshatpaehwhrsnapenesdasorsarfhtiNteiytooepblesnerurn.awxitttaedihetgoadinitlopIayotncpocrhbsuooaetlxsvehasaiene--s

demonstrated with many

that times

this illness occurs greater frequency

wtluaaholeuimnlrmtomyi)htnit,hgsxeeudsenwgtadhgfrtieahrhlcrsyoeetatbwcsreasti.timhdhtaaisstltpehTl-ltefjhhtoehaptsieenhnalatemvtaxoeimfpsstfloohtsanicoipnskgfmraesietmttntiagihopyne(nehahoecbaLnpreesalaittetapduibipurounnse-f-g-

the Norwegians' (caput femoris),

large which

thigh-bone head accordingly has

not room But this

enough in the small is, of course, only a

acetabulum. suggestion.

38 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

I have hithert not been able to advance se to be lost in c n f ,

any proof of the cortness of the sup- oawng in a pbili to disturbed

position. But that rae-c ing dten functiong of the glans.

leads to disharmony is a point on which STERILITY. Oncrossingxthree races

I entertain no doubt." (Compare of rabbits at V er a

Fig. 3.)

experienced a red fecudit after

FIG. 3.
Luxatio coxae congenita.

six or seven generations. In one of the experiments we got no ofsp at all in the eighth generation. These experimts

need to be confirmed before we can draw

definite conclusions. We are aware of the

fact that this sterility may have other

causes.

The probability of hereditary dishar-

monies increases with increasng differenocs

in th parental idiotypes.

Thigh-baone hed
(CapOt femoria)

On account of the above-mentioned facts,

which indicate that the hybrid in psychic

and physical

may be exposed to the

The offspring (hybrid) has inherited the small
pelvis of the Lapps with narrow hip-joint soket
(acetabulum), while at the same time inheriting the Norwegians' large thigh-bone head (caput femoris), which accordingly has not room enough in the smal acetabulum. (BEry.)

most disastrou disturbances, it must be admitted that the question of hybridization is a problem of the very greatest importance. A problem which not only concerns sentists, but in incrasing degree all social

SUMMARY

workers-especially statesmen. In the interest of the individual, as wel

VOLUME oF LUNGS. Measurements of as of mankind as a whole, crossing betwee

more than 6oo Nordics, 6oo Lapps, and widely differing races ought as far as pos-

more than 300 hybrids (Lapps with Nordic sible to be avoided. At least we risk noth-

blood, mostly F1 generation) prove without ing by acting for the preset on the

doubt that these organs do not ' blend ' in assumption that crossing between widely

the hybrid.

divergent races is disstros from a genetic

MUSCULAR STRENGTH. Measurements of standpoint.

muscular strength among the Lapp-Nordic mixed population have proved that this

PRACTICAL CONCLUSIONS

trait does not ' blend' in the hybrid.

The glands play, as we know, a great and

BODY-LENGTH AND HETumosIs. Growth decisive role in the formation of man's

is dependent on gland-functions. The dis- physical and mental charactr. The whole

turbance in the hybrid is a proof that one or ontogeny of the body do to the minutest

more glands are more or less out of normal details-formation of teeth, nails, hair,

function.

skin, bones, the secondary sexual charc-

DIBETES. We now know that diabetes is teristics, as well as the psychic develop-

due to a glandular anomaly. The frequent ment in tellectl and moral respects-all

appearance of this malady amongst the these are connected with, governed by, and

half-breeds points in the same direction- ionized from the glands. And this glandnamely, that race-crossing causes glandular determined entity reappears in the off-

disturbances.

spring; its constituton and bi ity

R*SISTANCZ To DiszAs. Resisance to are based upon heredity. All intellectaRl

certain diseas is a racial acteristic, and emotInal manifestations of the human

stegthened in all probability through long periods of slection. ThisLesisce

mind are diretly or indirectly in contact
with the glands of internal eetio. We

RACS-CRBIG AND GLANDS

39

haveaset nlyafaintideaoftheige

stocks can enter into harmonious combina-

d extremy dicay adjuted mechan- tion with other-that is to say, that

ISUi that dss its actity nm the the groWth-tendencies which meet in the

endocrine glands, but perhaps acme day in new individualdsll form a uniform whole,

the future we shall have recourse to these without itrnal antitheses and dis-

organs in order to find the foundation for, turbances. The most perfectly attuned

and the explanation of, the deepest
mysteries of the soul. We are beginning to underand that love, hatred, perversity,

functioning of the glands we find within the homogeneous parent stocks, within the pure
race. Perhaps in the future a " race " will

a-social tendencies, creative force, energy
and wkness of will, and all other forms

be defined as a group of mankind possessing in common all physical and psychic funda-

of psychic impulses, are incited, regulated, released, and brought to disappear, all

mentals and whose glandular functions are faultlessly harmonized. The more dissi-

according to whether the biochemical labora-
tories called glands are working normally or
are subjected to more or less disturbances. In the historic moment when the sperm-
cell of the male penetrates the female ovum and unites its generative substance with

milar the two parent stocks which are brought together through fecundation, the less perfect will be the harmony, the unity in the new individual's physical and mental formative tendencies (laws of growth). On this foundation serious objections may be

that of the ovum the fate of the individual
is determined. All physical and psychic
qualities, all that combination which we name the character of the human being, are in the instant of fecundation established once for all. What takes place later, development in the mother's uterus and

raised on the part of endocrinologists against the crossing of widely dissimilar
races, and a careful scrutiny of all cases of race-crossing may be demanded-a question which is of practical importance in, for example, my native land, owing to the Nordic-Lapp alliances.

development and life in autonomous human existence, are merely growth and forms of expression of the primary characteristics. Two germ-cells which thus unite to form a new independent living entity are not merely conveyors of the individual qualities possessed by the male and female parents, but rather of the qualities of the two stocks from which the father and mother are descended. These general considerations,

Of course, we must be on our guard
against all exaggeration. Race-biology and its daughter-science, race-hygiene, must
not be mis-used in the service of racial hatred. We shall not persecute other races, but only safeguard our own. We shall love our own race; just as a man loves his father and mother, not because it is better
than other races, but because it is our race.

with which we are all acquainted, acquire

new importance in the light of what we are now beginning to learn regarding the

BIBLIOGRAPHY

glands and their activity.

Halfdan Bryn: Die Bastarden des ndrdlichen

The object of race hygiene is to investigate the conditio necessary for the de-
velopment and propagaton of human
material of high value, and to point out

Norwegens. NYTT MAGASIN FOR NATURVIDINSKAP, 1931.

C. B. Crossing

Davenport and Morris in Janmaca. Carnegie

Steggerda: Race
Inst., Washington,

X928.

practical means of achieving these conditions. Here the study of the glandular functions is coming to occupy a constantly
more extensive and important place. To ensure the development of well-balned and

unFgisspcrhoebrl,en;Rubgeeinm:MeZnsucmhenI.nzSuicthztusn-gusnbd.
Gesell in Wien.

Bastardlerd. anthrop.

Isidor
schiede

Flodstr6m: Zur Frage der
innerhalb d4e schwedischen

Rassenunter-
Bevd5ikerng.

Ymer, S915.

vigorous offspring it is requisite that the
glandular constitution of the two parent

R. R. Gates: Heredity
Rxvxw3,13 x.
Loon, CDonstable, 8278

and Eugenics.
Heredity and
pp.

EuGxNICs Eugenis.

40 THE EUGENICS RBVI W

Hanneson, G.: KdsrIernasse usid KUr

-

tioe d4er Isi5nder. Reykjavik.

S5ren Hansen: Uber KdCrergewicht ustd K5rOev-

grsse. Ober den Index der Sch54elbreite bed d4n

Dtlen.

Kaarlo Hildtn: Some AnthroOological Data on

the Inhabitants of Swedish and Finnish Extrctio

in Finland. Stockholm, izXi.

J. Vilh. Hultkrantz: O2ber die K%pervl5nge 4ef

Schweden. Ymer, x896.

Herman Lnndborg: Svensha Folktyper. Stock.

holm, A. B. Hasse, W. Tullberg, 1919.

H. Lr.ndborg og J. Rnnstr6m: TE SwwEDIs

NATION IN WORD AND PICTuRI. A. B. Hasse, W.

Tullberg. Stockholm, 1921.

Jon Alfred Mj6en: Race hygiene. Jacob Dybwads

Forlag. Oslo, 19x5.

Mj6en, J. A.: Biological Consequences o0 Race-

crossing. TH JOURNAL 0o HEREDITY (Organ of the

American Genetic Association), Washington, D.C.

Vol. XVII, No. S, May x926.

MiGen, J. A. R"aseshvuasg b.M
Vo.i oD RAS. Heft 2. L F. m

Verl.,

Ktinchen, igag.

H. Nilamii-Bthle: Die modevm BrbMchetabvs

u#d ibre Bfdg. di P1

hi. Stock-

holm, 1915. Kv.asg- utrs

ao Hdfr

#ud Weixs. I,

II, rgio. Js

m

U141Vt3S2;T, Lund Roaf Nodetreng: Emropas Mnsclhevrese
"F8"Xd1iaBg,Doikerunf.". P. A. N et and SMaws
I1. R : BemSungzur As&hr.

hoims. ODD.Om DAtRS AmN. I, xg-u.

Otto Rosenberg: Geieffc Cytologfe X Ssed".

TH SWxDIS NATION I WoRD aD PIcTuRE.

Stokholm, 1921.

Ilarald Wtergsard: Untersuchungens tber KRtergwdsse f. D5,semark. MD . ox DAN S

AwTRau¶. 1, 19o71x. P. W. W terlund: Studien iber die Antroptologie
Finlands. nopio, 1go9, x9o4. Helsingfors, 1912,

1913.

JOURNAL OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION AND INTERNATIONAL LAW

THIRD SBRIBS.

VOL. XII. PART I.

PBRUARY x93x.

1. ARTICLES:-

CONTIhNTS:

Tbe Nature of a Crim. By Professor Carleton Kemp Alin.

The Imperial Conference of 1930. By Profesor Berriedale Keith, D.C.L. The Buddh;st Law of Succesion in Burma. By A. E. Rigg, Esq.

Liability in Damages under French Administrative Law, Ill. By Profesor Louis Trotabas.

The New Company Law of Holand. By Dr. S. Gargas.

Commercial Trusts iu Private International Law. By Dr. Maz Rheinstein.

Recent Developments af Binet.

Diplomatic Privileges and Immunities. By Monsieur Henri T. P.

Bibliography of English Property Law.

Notes on Imperial Constitutional Law. By Profesor Berrieda1e Keith, D.C.L

2. NOTES.

3. NOTICES OF BOOKS.

Annual Subscription, On G

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION, I Elm Court, Templet LCA.

AU commuinlcatio,s rcsectding Adv*rtsenseuts to be sent to

MiSSRS. McMu.4 & CO., LTD., St. Mtins Stt

, W.C.

Eugenic Review, VOL XXIII, me. 1.

