SEX EDUCATION AIMS, POSSIBILITIES AND PLANS*
By CYRIL BIBBY, M.A., M.Sc., F.L.S.

I COUNT it a pleasure and a privilege to Tle total attendance at these meetings

have been invited to address you to-day during I943-4 was 68,7I2 (the figures for

-a pleasure because it is always a stimu- I944-5 are not yet available) while, if the

lating experience to lecture to an audience audiences at meetings and film shows on

such as this; a privilege because your venereal diseases are included, the total

Society has many members who were pioneers attendance during the year was some 300,000.

in the field of sex education.

To these figures, moreover, must be added

It is sometimes forgotten, I think, by many the people reached by the distribution of

educationists to-day how much is owed to nearly half a million pamphlets on sex educa-

these pioneers. Whatever differences of tion during the same year.

opinion there may be about the desirability Quantitatively, then, the present position

of the specific measures they recommended, is fairly satisfactory. The number of people

it is clear that the great advance in sex educa- who have received some sort of sex education

tion which is taking place to-day could not during the last five years ic considerable. It

have occurred if they had not prepared the is clear that there has been of recent years a

ground. As a result of their work, viewa that radical and widespread change of public

were novel and unorthodox are now almost opinion on the question of sex education.

commonplace, and acceptable even in the The time has passed when it was necessary to

Ministries of Health and Education.

state with some vehemence the case against

Results of Official Support

Perhaps the greatest turning-point on this

path towards official recognition was the

transference in I942 of the major part of the

work of the British Social Hygiene Council to the Central Council for Health Education. What this official support has meant to the

cause of sex education is perhaps best illus-

trated by one or two figures.

Since some of the bodies carrying out this work publish no statistical report, it is

impossible to give figures that would be all-

inclusive. The bulk of the work, however,

was carried out by the British Social Hygiene Council until April ist, I942, and by the Central Council for Health Education since

that date. The sex education lectures given

by these two bodies during the past five yearc

are as follows:

Audience
Teachers

1940-I 1941 1942 1943-4 1944-5
7 95 83 86 231

sheer obscurantism. Probably there will remain with us for many years a few frightened adults who wiU continue to foster the cult of ignorance, but an increasingly large section of the population is allowing the myths of the gooseberry bush and the stork to fade into oblivion. The blank wall of opposition has been breached. The general public, educational and medical adminis-
trators, churches and social organizations, teachers and youth leaders, parents and
pupils-all are ready to go ahead. It seems likely that the pioneer battle
against obscurantism is now over. It is no
longer necessary to press the claims of sex
education in language more vigorous than profound. The need now is for careful study of the many educational issues involved.
Only after such study is it likely that sex education will be satisfactory in quality as well as quantity.

Youth Leaders 17 35 33 59 117

Parents

21 39 37 75 132 Aims in Sex Education

Young People 257 6I2 580 1,348 1,469
Schoolchildren 71 87 IO0 208 189
A paper read before the Eugenics Society on May 29th, 1945.

The first iscue for study is that of objective. What are the aims of sex education, and what are its possibilities ? To serve as a basis

I57

I58 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

for useful action an objective must be desir- this subject may feel that some good has

able, attainable and sufficient-and this been done. But a study of ancient or con-

cannot be said of some aims that have been temporary history, or even a superficial

propounded.

knowledge of the lives of one's acquaintances,

There are, for example, those who use " sex will rapidly dispel any illusion that there is

education" as a euphemism for dilation on necessarily a close correlation between the

the horrors of venereal disease, and hopelto extent of an individual's knowledge and the

frighten young people into " goodness." But excellence of his actions. Something more is

sex education is not mere anti-venereal needed.

propaganda; it -is preparation to live a The teaching of the obvious biological facts

joyouF, well-balanced and fruitful life. There will make it clear to our children that the

are others -whose aim is to produce human sex organs are essentially similar to

" morality " by threats of fire and brim- those of other mammals, such as the rabbit.

stone. But with such " goodness " and such And if sex education were to stop there, it

" morality " the educationist can have no would be logical for a child to deduce that the

truck. A morality that is worthy of the sexual behaviour of a healthy young human

name is not to be based merely on fear, should not be very different from that of a

whether it be fear of disease in this world or healthy young rabbit. But since presumably

of damnation in the next. Such aims fail on we do not wish to adopt the rabbit as the

the test of desirability.

model for our sexual behaviour, sex education

Other aims, perhaps desirable enough in must break these narrow bounds. It must,

themselves, fail on the score of feasibility. at the appropriate stages, deal also with

To expect by sex education alone to wipe out those respects in which humans differ from

prostitution and casual promiscuity, to make the other mammals, and in particular with

all marriages successful and all divorces the consequences of the unique development

disappear, to abolish adultery and prevent of our nervous system and of our peculiar

all fornication, is to be hopelessly unrealistic. sociaility.

The sexual ills of society are many and deep- -But still something else is needed. Even

seated, and education unaided will not thorough intellectual understanding of these

eradicate them. Economic and political factors is not enough. Our children must be

changes and a new social and spiritual vision inspired with a feeling of the excellence of

are needed, too.

sex and of its immense potentialities. Our

Now what of the criterion of sufficiency? young people, if they are to deny themselves

A great many people seem to imagine that the immediate sensual pleasures with which

sex education consists merely of imparting their bodies can so richly provide them, must

the so-called "facts of life," although one see some reason for such a sacrifice. If they

would have thought that the inadequacy of are to be asked to wait, they must feel that

this conception were abundantly clear. they have a future, and a future that is

Admittedly, the most obvious task is that of worth waiting for. If society is to make

imparting information. Here is the very demands, it must see to it that its members

foundation stone of sex education. It is think sufficiently highly of it to be willing to

part of the inalienable intellectual heritage accede to them. Behaviour is dependent

of our people that they be told the truth. upon ideals and inspiration as well as upon

With it, they may not in all cases act wisely; factual knowledge and intellectual under-

but without it they have no basis for judg- standing.

ment.

It is, however, easy enough to criticize

Yet sex education is more than mere im- aims expounded or implied by others. Much

parting of information. Knowledge of the more difficult is the task of formulating a

truth is very rarely harmful and is u3ually statement to take their place. I do not feel

beneficial, so that any person who helps to sufficiently confident to do so at all dog-

clear away the vast mountain of ignorance on matically, but at any rate a tentative effort

SEX EDUCATION AIMS, POSSIBILITIES AND PLANS

I59

should be made. I would, theretore, define that the penis is placed in the vagina during

the aims of sex education something along mating.

these lines: " That our people should grow These apparently dogmatic statements

up learning the appropriate facts in the best about the order in which information should

possible way; that their general attitude to be imparted are not made without reason.

sex should be a completely healthy one; that The suggested order is that indicated by

they should draw up for themselves a code of analysis of the questions typically asked by

conduct after careful consideration of all the children of various ages. It is interesting to

issues involved and should endeavour to observe that whereas courtship, mating,

behave according to this rationally deter- fertilization, pregnancy and birth occur in

mined code; and that they should react to that temporal order, children usually display

the behaviour of others. with sympathy, an interest in thece processes in the reverse

tolerance and charity-but without spineless order. Questions about birth and pregnancy

acquiescence in a code inferior to their own." tend to be asked first of all. It is usually only

No doubt this statement of aims could be later that the child inquires about the r6le

much improved, but it will serve as a working of the father, and thus elicits explanations of

basis for the time being. Let us therefore fertilization and copulation. My belief is

look at it a little more closely.

that, in general, the right time for enlighten-

ment is when the child seeks it, not when

Imparting Factual Knowledge

some adult thinks that an appropriate age

First, what constitutes " appropriate" has been reached.

knowledge and at what age should it be There are some things, however, in which

imparted ? This latter question is clearly one the adult must act as pacemaker, because the

to which there is no simple answer. No one adult knows what sort of ground lies ahead

age can be prescribed for sex education, any and the child does not. Some time from about

more than it can for any other aspect of the age of twelve onwards a girl will begin

health education or character training. Sex her menses, and she needs to be prepared in

education should surely be a continuous pro- advance by a simple biological explanation

cess from early years to later life, and the at the age of about eleven. And since men-

question should really be re-phrased to read: struation can scarcely fail to be an incon-

" What aspects of sex education are par- venience, girls should be encouraged to

ticularly appropriate to different ages? " understand its value and 'its significance

This is obviously difficult to answer in general from the point of view of child-birth. An

terms, for no one human is exactly like inconvenience is more gladly borne when

another. But if we call to our aid that there seems to be some point in bearing it.

mythical creature the " average " person a Boys also, I believe, should have an idea of

reply may be attempted.

the significance of menstruation, so that they

I would suggest that by about the age of do not build up on a basis of ignorance an

two or three years children should be atmosphere of mystery about their sister's

learning the polite terminology for the sex periods.

organs, just as they learn the-words " arm," But more important for boys is a prepara-

" leg " and " head." By the time they go to 'tion for the changes which wil occur in

school at about five, they should in most themselves during adolescence. As their

cases know that the baby grows inside the testes become active from about the age of

mother and is born via an opening between fourteen onwards, they will probably have

her legs; and should understand something occasional night losses of semen, the so-called

of the similarities between birth in humans " seminal emissions." These, accompanied

and birth in the domestic mammals. During as they often are by erotic dreams, cause

the next two or three years the child should adolescent lads a good deal of worry, and it is

learn that the father contributes the sperm our duty to tell them what to expect and

cell which fertilizes the mother's egg, and explain to themn the naturalness and harm-

i6o THE EUGENICS REVIEW

lessness of these emissions. Minds worried early adult life, general sex education

and terrified by the outrageous allegations merges into specific marriage preparation and

which still circulate, about the alleged ill- guidance-a topic too large to consider in

effects of masturbation (ranging from in- any detail now. It may be suggested, how-

sanity to venereal disease and from consump- ever, that apart from a knowledge of the

tion to impotence) need also to be set at rest actual technique of intercourse, sex education

-or better still, so fortified by the truth that during the courtship stage should emphasize

the worries and tears never materialize.

the importance of each partner understand,

So far no mention has been made of any ing well the emotional peculiarities of the

other than the reproductive aspect of sex, other, and exercising delicacy and restraint

and there is, I believe, good reason for this. in whatever degree of lovemaking may be

It is clear from their whole attitude that most mutually agreed upon. It is necessary, too,

children of under about twelve years (or even to make clear that, as the saying goes,

older) think of sex as a purely reproductive "There is more in marriage than four bare

matter, and have no conception of its amatory legs and a bed." Couples contemplating

aspect. This attitude was summed up in the marriage should be encouraged to learn some-

question of the eleven-year-old, who was thing of each other's physical and mental

aware that sometimes children are undesired health; to understand the economic implica-

and asked in all simplicity: " If people don't tions of marriage and parenthood; to reach

want a baby, why do they do it ? " The idea agreement on how their future home is to

of a couple having sexual relations except be run; and they should be informed of the

with the fixed intention of producing a child sources to which they can turn for further

was clearly beyond his emotional under- information and guidance.

standing.

Sex education, however, should not end

Within the three or four succeeding years, with marriage. Apart from any continuing

however, the endocrine changes of adoles- guidance in the technique of intercourse, I

cence begin to produce deeper sexual feel- believe that all married couples should have

ings; an understanding of the love aspect of some training in child care and parentcraft

sex begins to dawn, and with it an interest in and-of particular relevance here-should be

the morals and social con3ventions of sexual given some understanding of the normal

behaviour. This interest is particularly sexual development of children and of how

marked in girls, who are at this period con- to cope with the problems arising from it.

siderably more mature emotionally than Here, however, the sex education of one

boys of a similar age. It is noticeable that generation merges into that of the next,

many of the questions that are asked by and perhaps we had better leave the matter

members of youth clubs show an increaced for the time being.

awareness of the emotional aspects of sex as

compared with that of the younger child; Encouraging Healthy Attitudes

*and sometimes seem to betray some personal The next problem is that of the encourage-

experience, if not of actual intercourse, at any ment of a healthy attitude to sex, and this is

rate of preliminary love-making. This, a difficult matter, partly because there is by

therefore, I suggest, is the period when a no means unanimity about what in fact

point should be made of explaining something constitutes a healthy attitude. I can do no

more of the influence of the endocrine secre- more, therefore, than register my own

tions on the body. and the emotions. This, personal credo.

too, is probably the -best time for discussing It-seems clear that the first few years of

questions such as courtship and marriage, home life are of fundamental importance

"' necking and petting," promiscuity and in emotional development. On impressions

prostitution, and for stressing the elemen- gained and attitudes formed in the first five

tary facts about the venereal diseases.

years of life depend to a considerable extent

Towards the end of adolescence and in the emotional balance and happiness of the

SEX EDUCATION AIMS, POSSIBILITIES AND PLANS

i6i

adult. Let us therefore examine some of the do so, for it is a commonplace that attitudes

factors influencing these impressions and to sex are often associated with similar

attitudes.

attitudes towards nudity. Thus, if a child

Because of the close physical proximity from the first learns to regard nudity as in no

and nervous connection between the voiding way an indecent phenomenon, it is reasonable

and the genital organs, attitudes developed to hope that it will be helped in the develop-

with reference. to the former are likely ment of a healthy attitude to sex. Naturally,

to be transferred to the latter. Any feeling however, children must, to save both them-

,of distaste for the process or the products selves and others from embarrassment, learn

of voiding may therefore have a decidedly as they grow up that there are occasions and

unfortunate influence on later feelings about places, including most public occasions and

sex. Thus it is patently important not to public places, in which nudity is frowned

encourage such feelings but, on the contrary, upon.

to convey the impression that voiding, like A great opportunity for encouraging a

eating, is a perfectly normal and proper proper attitude to sex occurs when another

process.

child is expected in the family. There is not

Then there is the question of the so-called time to go into any detailed suggestions as to

"infantile masturbation." It is .unfortu- how a sense of pleasurable anticipation may

nately the case that many parents, mistaking be aroused and crowned with a feeling of

the exploratory path of innocence for the family solidarity when the baby arrives; but

broad highway of incipient vice, either tell it is perhaps worth while to quote from a

the child not to be " nasty " or " rude " or correspondent-who would, I am sure,

by some action show their disapproval. describe herself as a fairly ordinary wife and

What is the poor infant to think-that it mother-to show what a delightfully natural

may safely pull its nose and may twiddle its attitude can be induced towards this event.

toes with impunity but if it does the same in She writes:

a region halfway between it incurs dis- As the months passed and my figure

pleasure? Clearly there is nothing better changed, John and Elizabeth took more

calculated to encourage the feeling from the and more interest in the baby's coming,

earliest days that there is something quite and I realized that I need not have felt

isolated from the rest of life, something un- embarrassed about telling them; it was a

clean, about the sexuial organs and hence, at matter of delight and wonder to them, and

a later date, by association, about the sexual they enjoyed taking care of me. " Can we

functions. This too, therefore, must be feel the baby? " they would ask, or if I

avoided.

started doing anything speciaUy strenuous,

Now, what of the question of nudity? In " Mummy, do be careful, you'll hurt the

ancient Sparta, youths and maidens would baby." Their altruism even went so far as

play and wrestle with each other quite naked, to suggest that I should eat the last

and this was in no way regarded as indecent. helpings of their favourite puddings "'for

During the Christian epoch, however, " the the baby." It became not merely a family

flesh" has to a considerable extent been secret but a co-operative preparation on

regarded as shameful, so that by the time the part of the whole family....

Queen Victoria came to the throne the That, surely, is the goal to aim at.

movement against nudity had achieved During these early years, moreover, ti4ere

victory, and missionaries all over the world are certain attitudes not specifically sexual in

seemed to regard it as one of their major nature, which are nevertheless, I believe, of

tasks to clothe naked tropical converts. fundamental importance in laying the foun-

I dare, however, express the hope and dations for a successful family life in later

belief that this excessive zeal for bodily years. I have in mind the development of

concealment is disappearing rather rapidly. habitual friendliness to the other members of

It is important for our purpose that it should the family, of affection and consideration for

162 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

others, of wiUingness to share possessions and education is to be widened, as I believe it

to co-operate amicably in activities with should be, into aoconception of education for

playmates. I have in mind also the growth family life, that those contemplating mar-

of interest in and of a sense of wonder at the riage should be encouraged to discuss,

workings of nature, the growth of an reasonably and in a friendly spirit, such

esthetic sense, of a desire for personal health matters as the economic running of the

and cleanliness, of admiration for vigour and home, the division of domestic duties, family

smartness, of distaste for furtiveness and dis- planning and so on; and that we should

honesty. Sex education, indeed, interpene- endeavour to ensuire that married persons

trates indissolubly with general character should be considerate in all things towards

training.

each other, should not regard the %wedding

With the onset of adolescence, however, ceremony as terminating the period of court-

other Imore specifically sexual attitudes ship, should have a proper attitude to the

become important. One should endeavour, upbringing of their offspring. But once

I believe, to arouse a sense of pride in again we have made the circle, and have

approaching maturity-and this involves reached to the next generation.

particular care that topics such as menstrua-

tion and seminal emission are so dealt with Sex Education and Sex Behaviour

as to instil no sense of repugnance, as is too We come now to what many people will

often the case at present. It is important regard as the crux of the matter-when the

also that each sex should develop an attitude appropriate facts have been imparted and

of sympathetic consideration for the other, healthy attitudes have been encouraged,

regarding friendships as perfectly natural what may we expect to be the outcome in

and quite desirable, but as needing the terms of sexual behaviour ? What, indeed, do

exercise of discretion and restraint.

we wish to be the outcome ?

This is the period too, I suggest, when one We have to recognize that in Great Britain

should particularly endeavour to encourage to-day there is a wide divergence of opinion

an attitude of distaste for obscenity and on questions of sex morality and, in particu-

pornogra phy--without, however, going to the lar, on the question of pre-marital inter-

other extreme of prudery or priggishness. course. For those of our fellows who accept

There are those, I know, who believe that sex the Church's teaching in its entirety no

is so sacred that it should never be the object queries wiU arise about the validity of the

of humour. For my part, I do feel that cer- marriage institution. But young people are

tain aspects of sex and sex behaviour are increasingly demanding some other justifica-

sometimes rather ludicrous, that sex may tion for it, and those concerned with sex

sometimes quite properly be the occasion of education must either find the justification

humour; and in consequence I xwoul(d there- or honestly admit that they know of none. I

fore emphasize the importance of avoiding believe, however, that the search is not a

the sin of hypocrisy. 'I he- dlistinction to make very difficult one.

is surely that between hearty, unashamed Those who see no intrinsic evil in sex may

lauighter and nasty, shamefaced sniggering; well feel that in a new Utopia the institution

between something which is funny and of marriage would have no place, that sex

incidentally sexual and something which is relations would be so governed by universal

merely filthy in nature. I subscribe to the harmony that any contractual basis for living

comment once madle to me in conversation by the late Dr. Temple: " It is all right

,together would be
we aire not living

quite unnecessary. But in a Utopia of perfect

making jokes involving sex; what one must beings; we are part of a world made up of

not do is to make sex into a joke."

imperfect people. We are not starting out to

By the time adult life is reached basic plan a new society from scratch; we are

attitudes are already largely determined. It faced with the much more difficult task of

is important, however, if the idea of sex* adapting one already in existence, with all

SEX EDUCATION AIMS, POSSIBILITIES AND PLANS

I63

its faults and failings. And whatever may authority, as voluntary workers in a club,

be our differences of opinion about the they cannot completely divest themselves of

institutions o1 Utopia, most of us, I imtiagine, their corporate status and speak purely as

feel that in our present society the married private people. Some compromise, therefore,

state has a good deal to be said for it.

is essential, for it is necessary to respect other

I believe, however, that a disservice is people's convictions without surrendering

done to the cause of sexual morality by those one's own. That this can be done is well

wllo fail to recognize any gradation in shown by the fact that in sex education to-

standards of behaviour, and lump together day there collaborate in this country Protes-

all types of pre-marital intercourse under the tants, Roman Catholics, Jews and-Agnostics.

omnibus title of " fornication." It seems to In a different society such compromise might

me that the relationship between an un- not be so necessary-and might indeed

married couple, living in love together, can- scarcely be possible. But in drawing up

not reasonably be placed in the same moral plans for sex education in our particular

category as that between a prostitute and society at this particular period of history

the man who has bought the temporary usage it is, I feel, necessary to compromise on some.

of her body.

points in order not to jeopardize the whole

I feel some impatience, moreover, with work.

those of our eminent fellow citizens, both Let us not delude ourselves, however, that

cleric and lay, who seek by their statements even with the most reasoned arguments in

to convey the impression that young people the world all pre-marital sex relations would

to-day, in contrast with the virtuous youth disappear. No amount of mere talk will of

of their own generation, are sunk in sexual itself dam up the sexual urge of lusty youth.

vice. It might restore them to a sense of Far-reaching social changes are needed too,

perspective were they to read the words of and among them is the removal of the all-too-

Alcuin of York, written before ever William many barriers to early marriage. Equally

of Normandy set foot on these shores. important is the need to give young people

" Since the time of King Aelfwold," he wrote, the feeling that they have some future and

" the land has been absolutely submerged that there is something for which it is worth

under a flood of fornication,, adultery and while to postpone their sexual satisfaction;

incest, so that the very semblance of modesty that there is something that they can give to

is entirely absent." Substitute the name of society, and which will give them an honoured

any recent monarch, and there is the gist place in it; some burning sense ot purpose

of many a modern lamentation.

such as, in the years between the wars,

Fulmination, I feel, is a good deal less inspired the young builders of the Soviet

effective with young people than reasoned Union--or such as, in earlier davs, inspired

argument. It is my experience that the the first Christians. Such self-dedication

much-maligned youth of to-day will pay would, I believe, be immensely more potent

some attention to the views of a. sympathetic than any appeaJ to fear or threat of punish-

adult who seeks to persuade them that not all ment.

conventions of sex behaviour are hypocritical One last word about my suggested defini-

and not all restraints puritanical.

tion of aims. I stated that sex behaviour

In discussions on sex morality, as in any shouild be according to a rationally deter-

other matter, it is clear that a democracy mined code, but I do not, you will notice,

must concede the right of any individual to prophesy what that code will be. This I

try to persuade others to his viewpoint, point out, lest it be thought that the lack of

whatever it may be. Normally, however, specification is the result of oversight. Such

except where parents are instructing their is not the case.

own children, sex educationists do not speak It would be possible, I imagine, for us so to

purelv as individuals. As officials of an condition each new generation that it almost

organization, as employees of a local automatically thought and felt as zt e desired,

i64 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

almost automatically fitted in with our code them with information beyond the bounds of

of behaviour. Experiment along these lines their curiosity, intellectual ability or emo-

has achieved sQme considerable degree of tional understanding. This tendency we

success during the last twelve years in Nazi must avoid like the plague. Sex education,

Germany. But, for me at any rate, no such like health education and character training

reflex subservience to an authoritarian moral generally, should permeate the whole of life.

code is included in the a.ims of sex education. The better it is, the less obvious it will be.

I am content to teach the facts as well as It will just fit in naturally and inconspicu-

may be, to encourage an open and healthy ously into the ordinary life of home, school

attitude to sex, to insist on the need for and community, and will be noticeable only

determining conduct rationally-and to have to the degree to which it is imperfect.

faith that a generation so educated will be But time is short, and I must proceed to

at least as capable of making -correct moral more definite suggestions. If -these sugges-

judgments as I am.

tions seem very obvious, that will only be a

very encouraging reflection of the recent rapid

Potential Dangers

change of attitude in this matter. They

When we leave the definition of aims and would not have seemed obvious ten years ago.

begin to draw up plans for action, there are,

it seems to me, several dangers that must be Short-Term Plans

avoided.

First I may mention the enlistment of

The first is that of Utopianism. There is a general community support. Never, I think,

great temptation in sex education, as indeed has the mental atmosphere of the country

in education generally, to draw up magnifi- been so favourable to sex education as now,

cent schemes that are totally irrelevant to the and now is the time to crystallize support.

particular social setting within which they Talks to public meetings, men's and women's

are to be put into practice. Let our plans, guilds, educational and other discussion

therefore, be impregnated through and groups, and so on, should be arranged in each

through by an appreciation of what is area. Radio talks, film shorts, posters, news-

possible and desirable here and now, not paper advertisements, etc., can be used to a

what might be in a brave new world.

similar end on a national scale. If this were

The second danger is that of wasting done with energy and determination, I

energy on barren argument about whose job believe that all opposition to sex education,

sex education is. For too long parents and except that of the confirmed obscurantists,

teachers and medical practitioners have been, could be overcome within a very short period.

to use an Americanism, " passing the bucks" There is another immediate problem that

to each other. Sterile disputation about the needs mentioning. While we are perfecting

precise allocation of degrees of responsibility our long-term plans and awaiting their

must give way to serious preparation for fruition, our schools-send out into the world

getting on with the job in hand and to close each year vast numbers of children who have

collaboration between all who have any part had no sort of reliable sex education. We

to play.

caiinot afford to be perfectionists and do

Another danger is that of over-emphasizing nothing because we cannot do the best. It

sex and isolating it from the rest of life. To must be recognized that onlv a second-best

this danger some of the early pioneers fell result can be achieved in their case, but that

prey. The perhaps inevitable result of their is better than nothing. Indeed, it is astonish-

determination to bring sex into its place in ing how much can be done to re-orientate the

the educational picture was that they attitudes of young people to sex by means of

painted a canvas on which it loomed over- a few friendly talks. As a temporary

large. In their rightful insistence that measure, therefore, talks on sex should be

children should not remain in black igno- arranged in youth clubs and the like and

rance, they tended sometimes to overload specially devised lessons given in the schools.

SEX EDUCATION AIMS, POSSIBILITIES AND PLANS

I65

Long-Term Plans

present parents. Many are well informed,

I am sure, however, that you will agree and many others anxious to inform them-

that the sooner we get rid of this patchwork selves. Many have a thoroughly healthy

procedure, the better.

attitude to sex and many others are eager to

We must surely concentrate a good deal of attain it. With such there are great possi-

attention on the education of the educators, bilities.

so that a continuous scheme of sex education Courses could be arranged for the parents

may be put into practice at the earliest of new entrants to the nursery or infant

possible moment. Long-term plans must school, and perhaps again when their children

include drastic alteration in school, univer- pass on to the secondary stage. More sys-

sity and training college curricula-but we tematic help and guidance could be given to

cannot wait for that. Side by side with these expectant and nursing mothers at the clinics

changes must go the organization of immedi- and welfare centres. The matter could be

ate help to present parents, teachers, youth dealt with at village institutes, community

leaders, dtcltors, nurses and religious and centres, co-operative guilds and the like.

social workers. What can be done to give Admittedly only a minority of parents would

such help?

attend courses of this nature, but it is a

valuable minority that should not be

Help for Parents

neglected.

I would agree with Charles Dickens when

he wrote: " We thought that, perhaps, it is Equipping the Teachers

right to begin with the obligations of home, So far as teachers are concerned, it is

sir; and that, perhaps, while those are reasonable to expect a much more thorough

overlooked and neglected, no other duties preparation. Most of what is needed to

can possibly be substituted for them," and provide the necessary background to sex

shall therefore consider parents first.

education for the non-biologist student

It is reasonable to hope that children who should indeed be part ot the normal profes-

have had their questions answered sensibly sional training course. All teachers need an

in the home; who have learned biology at understanding of the child's bodily, intel-

school, including the biology of human re- lectual and emotional development, and this

production; who have joined with other can only be based on a knowledge of funda-

lasses and lads in mixed swimming and games mental physiological and psychological prin-

and rambles and camps; who during court- ciples. It would also be very valuable for

ship have had adequate preparation for teachers to have an understanding of the

marriage-that these parents of to-morrow sexual behaviour and problems characteristic

will be able to play their part in the sex of children of various ages, and to study in

education of their own children. Such at more detail those of the age-range which they

least is the view of the thirteen-year-old are specially preparing. to teach. Moreover,

London schoolgirl who wrote: " If the since sex education in the school will be

children know about it now, when they grow effective in proportion as sex education in

up and have children they will not be the home is not neglected, teachers need also

frightened to tell their children."

to understand something of the problems of

But that lies in the future. What of the home life and infant training. All teachers

parents of to-day? Rosy optimism is worse should also be equipped with certain funda.-

than useless, and it must be recognized that mental data which will enable them to answer

many present parents are too ignorant to adequately questions which happen to arise

explain the facts of sex to their children, too in their school lessons. This implies that all

indolent to remedy their ignorance, and too teachers in training-whether they are going

tangled in their emotional attitudes to be to teach the functioning of living things or

able to do much were they very encyclo- the structure of dead languages-should take

pedias of sexual knowledge. But not all a course in human and social biology.

x66 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Some training is needed also in the tech- expression. Their courses will have covered

nique of sex education. The ways in which the workings of the endocrine glands and the

the various subjects of the school curriculum influence of their secretions upon bodily and

may be utilized as media of sex instruction, emotional development, and will have recog-

the value of various extra-curricular activities nized the interdependence of physiological

in the development of character, the effect and psychological factors. Thus equipped

of the general school routine and tone upon with specialist knowledge, in addition to the

the fixing of sex habits and attitudes-all general training which all teachers should

these should be studied.

receive, their special part in. sex education

If it be objected that there is no time to will present them with few difficulties.

study all this, so much the worse for the In the future we may have such teachers,

miserably inadequate period of training but there are few to-day. In the meantime,

which is still cons-idered sufficient for most of then, what can be done? A great deal.

our teachers.. In our schools is built our Most present teachers of biology have the

future, and those who are its architects should background which will enable them to pick

no longer be satisfied with an apprenticeship up the necessary extra factual knowledge

of a duration which would not qualify them quite quickly, and many of them have the

to mend a leaking lavatory.

requisite personality. What is most needed

Specialist teachers such as biologists natur- in such cases is courses of instruction by

ally need fuller preparation along these lines, specialists, dealing in part with those physio-

but at present they do not receive it. Bio- logical and psychological aspects of sex which

logical courses in the universities are in the are not normally covered in university and

main of a formalized nature, appropriate training college syllabuses, and in part with

only to the training of 'biological research the technique of sex instruction in the

workers-and the training colleges tend to school.

repeat the same lectures at second hand. The organization cf such courses is recog-

Alumni of these institutions are likely to be nized by progressive education authorities as

fairly familiar with the genetics of Primula being of prime importance, especially since

and Drosophila, but to krnow little or nothing the great majority of our teachers left college

about that of Homo ssafiens; to have more many years ago. It would obviously be

than a nodding acquaintance with the repro- desirable for certain members of school staffs

ductive peculiarities of the obscurer myxomy- to be released for a full term or year of con-

cetes and with the ecology of salt marshes, centrated study, but equally obviously this

but to be almost completely ignorant of the will for some time ahead be possible in very

sexual life of humans and of the functioning few cases. The next best alternative is the

of their society.

arrangement of vacation courses of perhaps

We may hope that biology teachers of the a fortnight's duration, in which a good deal

future will have taken courses of nature of. ground could be covered. But even this

study which have concentrated rather less will not be feasible for all teachers. Yet it

upon the details of leaf venation and rather must be very rarely that an authority would

more upon such themes as reproduction, be unable to organize for its school staff,

care of offspring, family life and social co- during the school term, a course of perhaps

operation over a wide range of living organ- six or eight lectures on the materials and

isms-not excluding humans. They may methods of sex education, and experience

have included in their studies a consideration has shown that even in this limited time it is

of the relationship (which is by no means one possible to do much good.

of identity) between sex and reproduction,

of sex dimorphism, of sexual emotions, of Youth Leaders and Welfare Workers

courtship and of mating, of the origins of Now what of youth leaders? It is en-

human society and its conventions of mar- couraging to note that the I944 McMair

riage and of the social control of sexual Report comments that: " There are three

SEX EDUCATION AIMS, POSSIBILITIES AND PLANS

I67

matters which are of great significance for union officials, should therefore be enlisted

young people-religion, politics and sex. in any balanced programme of sex education

They are certain to arise, sooner or later, in work.

any discussions with boys and girls on social

conditions or their own physical, mental or Medical Practitioners

spiritual problems. Leaders must therefore Now let us consider the medical profes-

be prepared to face them." When the sion. What part has it to play in sex educa-

county colleges envisaged in the new Educa- tion'? The quite common opinion that

tion Act become a reality, they will presu- doctors are peculiarly qualified to give sex

mably provide a useful channel for guidance instruction is, I suspect, a hangover of the

in these matters, and plans should, I believe, feeling that sex is in some way pathological,

be drawn up now for education in these and therefore to be handled only by medically

colleges for family life, so that when the bus qualified persons. It is also, in part, perhaps,

does come, albeit rather belatedly, we shall a result of the historical fact that doctors

not miss it.

played a pioneer part in sex education and

In the immediate future, we shall have to have therefore been responsible for a good

do the best we can under the present very deal of the literature on the subject. But in

difficult conditions of inadequately trained general, just as teachers (even those with a

youth leaders, miserable club accommoda- good knowledge of human physiology and

tion and so on. The difficulty is, moreover, pathology) have not the necessary clinical

accentuated by the fact that most of the club experience to qualify them as doctors,' so

members will have received little or no sex doctors (even those with a good knowledge

education in earlier years. Apart; therefore, of educational theory) have not the peda-

from definite lectures to the young people gogic experience to qualify them as educators.

themselves, such as were suggested earlier, If, therefore, doctors are to play their full

the main advance must, I think, be that of part in sex education, it is important that

giving a general background of knowledge to they should equip themselves with this

youth leaders, which will help them to deal experience.

more effectively with the problems of be- Any other than elementary instruction on

haviour which always arise in youth work the venereal diseases is the doctor's province,

and to give helpful personal guidance to their as are other problems of sexual pathology,

club members.

while a great deal of work in preparation for

We must recognize, however, that young marriage, concerning the technique of inter-

people spend only a few hours each week in course, the practice of contraception and so

their youth organization, and the major part on, is largely medical in nature. Medical

of their waking time at work. Parallel with practitioners also, particularly those specially

what is done in the club, therefore, it seems concerned with the young child, should be

essential to tackle also the environment in able to give much helpful advice to -parents.

factory, shop and office. The improvement of But those medical practitioners who aspire

conditions of work, the proper organization to be sex educators will need to give careful

of canteens and social and educational study to the psychological aspects of sex as

activities, the radical cleaning up of dirty well as to its physiology; and they will need

urinals and closets which simply invite sociological insight too. Sex relations and

obscene epigraphy, the arrangement of dis- marriage are not purely medical problems.

cussions with the adult workers to enlist Equally they are problems of politics and

their co-operation in guiding their judior col- economics, of passion and of friendship, of

leagues-all these are matters which may intellectual companionship and mutual re-

exert a powerful influence for good, and are spect. Is it too much to hope that medical

matters within the province of the industrial training might in the future pay more atten-

welfare worker. The co-operation of these tion to these and other related matters ? No

workers, and of shop stewards and trade doubt, as in the training of teachers, there-is

i68 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the difficulty of already overcrowded syl- with special force in sex education. Hypoc-

labuses. But would not some little study risy and narrow-mindedness are fatal.

along these lines be of more value to the Honesty and tolerance are essential. Imagi-

general practitioner and his patients than a nation is needed too-the ability to sym-

painfully acquired familiarity with the fine pathize with the feelings of a child and to

details of human anatomy? The answer understand the perplexity of the adolescent,

would appear to be such an unqualified 'while yet retaining the mature judgment and

affirmative that it is to be hoped that emotional stability of the adult.- One other

medical practitioners will follow the example quality I would add-that of a sense of

of the teachers who, up and down. the humour. I know no solvent of strain more

country, are attending special courses to)help effective than laughter, and the person who

to equip themselves to undertake sex educa- cannot throw in a joke now and then has no

tion. place in sex education.

It would, I think, be difficult to improve

Other Health Workers

on the words of Havelock Ellis, whp once

Other hearth workers, too, have a part to wrote that:

play. Particularly in rural areas, the district To fulfil his functions adequately, the

nurse and health visitors could do much to master in the art of sexual hygiene must

bring about a more enlightened attitude to answer three requirements . . . he must

sex among the parents with whom they come have a sufficing knowledge of the facts of

into contact. When a new baby is expected, sexual psychology, sexual physiology and

they can suggest that the other children be sexual pathology . . . he must have a wise

told the truth about it; and when it has and broad moral outlook, with a sane

arrived they can give enlightened advice on idealism which refrains from demanding

such matters as toilet training and infantile impossibilities ... finally, a genuine 'sym-

masturbation. But to be really helpful to pathy with the young, an insight into their

the mothers they meet, they will themselves sensitive shyness, a comprehension of their

in most cases need further preparation. personal difficulties, and the skill to speak

Having already a good background know- to them simply, frankly and humanely.

ledge, it should be fairly easy for them to If, indeed, it is a question of choice between,

extend their understanding. In the future on the one hand, an adult who is free from

this extra field should be part of their embarrassment, who understands children, is

training; for the present special short honest, sensitive, broadminded and tolerant,

courses should be arranged.

and yet has but the meagrest academic

knowledge; and on the other hand an expert

Personal Qualities in the Sex Educator

biologist, with a detailed knowledge of

The question now arises: Suppose that all psychology, pathology and sociology, able to

these different categories of people do attend write theses on educational technique, and

special courses of instruction-will that yet lacking in these warm human qualities,

guarantee their suitability to play a part in the former has the advantage every time.

sex education? The answer, I suggest, is This is both a warnmg and an -encourage-

quite clearly " No." He who would under- ment. It is a warning against judging

take sex education with success needs many people's suitability for sex education by their

qualities which may bear little or no relation paper qualifications, and an encouragement

to special training or academic attainment. to those thousands of good-hearted but

The first essential is personal sex adjustment modest folk in the street, who wish to help in

and an absence equally of any prudish dis- sex education but have been doubtful of

inclination to discuss sex and any prurient their ability to do so.

tendency to discuss it to excess. In all

education the teacher needs a sympathetic Co-operation and Research

understanding of the pupils, but this applies The major part of this lecturing, prepara-

SEX EDUCATION AIMS, POSSIBILITIES AND PLANS

I69

tion of literature, distribution of films and matter requiring close and critical considera-

so on, must, it seems to me, be carried out by tion by all the organizations concerned, but

the Central Council for Health Education. at any rate I commend the suggestion to

Whether one likes it or not-and I know that their attention.

there are some who do not like it-the vari- Among other matters which are simply

ous voluntary organizations in this field crying out for attention is that of research.

cannot hope to compete with a body having A very considerable volume of sex education

such considerable support, financial and work is being carried out-and, I venture to

otherwise, from central and local government think, with some success. But we cannot

bodies. But the word " compete " is perhaps close our eyes to the fact that it is all being

a somewhat unsavoury one to use in this done quite empirically. We have our ideas

context, and I will not pursue the idea of about the amount and degree of accuracy of

competition. Co-operation, however, is the sex knowledge of the people we are trying

another matter, and surely one of the most to educate-but we have no exact knowledge.

important jobs waiting to be done should be We have general impressions of what their

that of securing effective co-operation be- attitudes to sex and sex behaviour are-but

tween all bodies in any way concerned with we have no exact knowledge. We make

sex education. Apart from purely adminis- estimates of the relative efficacies of the

trative considerations, there is an educational various techniques of sex education-but

harvest to be reaped.

again we have no exact knowledge. The

It is generally agreed, I hope, that sex securing of this exact knowledge should, I

education should no longer be considered as feel, be high up on our list of priorities. just

an isolated subject, and its integration with how it should be carried out I am not com-

the rest of education, it seems to me, has two petent to say-that would need the com-

main aspects. One aspect is that of sex bined intelligence of educationists, medical

education as part of health education gener- practitioners, psychologists, social workers,

ally and, as I have already indicated, there is statisticians and experienced field research

already a central body making great efforts workers. But that the job must be done I

along these lines. The other aspect is that of am certain.

including sex education as part of a wider

education for family life, and here, surely, is The Social Setting

a worthwhile task in which many of the I should like to go on to say something

organizatiQns I have referred to could play about. the whole attitude of our society

an important part.

towards sex, about the shoddy back-street

What I should like to see in this country is bookshop which flaunts sex and the public

a body carrying out work similar to that of library which quite ignores it, about the

the American Institute of Family Relations. influence of cinema and radio, and so on. But

Probably some sort of federal structure to do this would take me on to a whole pro-

would be the most practicable in our case, gramme of social reconstruction, and even if

for British voluntary organizations are ex- time allowed for this my knowledge would

tremely loth to commit suicide. But could not. But I should like to close with the com-

not sex education grow into something much ment that people's attitudes to sex, like their

wider and richer if really close collaboration attitudes to any other aspect of human life,

and co-ordination were achieved between all do not crystallize in isolation, but are shaped

the bodies doing sex education work, the and impregnated by the views of their fellow

moral and social welfare organizations, those citizens and by the whole structure of the

concerned with marriage guidance and family society in which they live. That is why some

planning, organizations dealing with heredity, enthusiasts for sex education live in a fool's

eugenics and population problems, those paradise. Imagining that it is possible in a

working in the field of maternal and child few lectures to overcome the influence of

welfare, and so on? This is obviously a years of living in a society with distorted

170 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

views of sex, they are due for disillusion. The best results will follow from sex educa-
tion only when the whole of our society is
remodelled and our children grow up from
the earliest days surrounded by adults who
feel that sex is an excellent and joyous thing in which man and woman join as equal

partners, sharing benefits and responsibilities alike. Meanwhile, our scheme of sex educa-
tion must not be drawn up in vacuo, as if sex attitudes and sex behaviour were things fixed and immutable. If it is to be really potent, it must be sex education for our par-
ticular social setting.

GREGORY KING AND THE POPULATION OF ENGLAND AND WALES AT THE. END OF
THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY
By D. V. GLASS

G REGORY KING, that "curious This high regard persists to-day. Yet King's

computer," as Chalmers called him, only publication in the field of political arith-

affords one of the most intriguing metic was a broadsheet summarizing the

puzzles in the history of British demography.
He was described, on his monument in the

rates and duties payable under the Act of
6 and 7 William and Mary, c. 6 (levying

Church of St. Benet, Paul's Wharf, London, duties on marmrages, births, burials, bache-

as " a skilful herald, a good Accomptant, lors and childless widowers).* The Natural

Surveyor, and Mathematician, A curious and Politicall Observations, upon which .King's
Penman, And well versed in Political Arith- position now largely rests, though forming

metick... ."* In this last province, political the basis of much of Davenant's work-

arithmetic, he achieved marked contem- evidence that King was, as Chalmers says,

porary recognition, being widely quoted " of a very communicative disposition "-

by Davenant, who depended upon him for remained in manuscript until first published

calculations in fields as diverse as population by Chalmers in i802 as an appendix to his

and coinage. Chalmers, who resuscitated his own book, and the only modern reprint is

work and found both the.manuscript of the Natural and Politicall Observations and

that edited by Barnett.t
Moreover, the Natural and Politicall Obser-

Harley's comments upon it in the Harleian vations themselves, bold and even startling

collection, referred to him in the most en- as they are in their approach to the question

thusiastic terms: " He who surpassed Petty, of estimating the size and structure of the

as a political calculator, must be allowed to population of England and Wales-with

have been a master of moral arithmetick."t

which the present paper is concerned-raise more questions than they answer. In fact

* Dallaway, J. Inquiries into the Origin and Progress

of the Science of Heraldry in England, Gloucester and * B.M., 8i6.m. 6/80.

London, 193, Appendix II, p. xlviii.

t Barnett, G. E. Two Tracts by Gregory King,

t Chalmers, G. An Estimate of the Comparative Baltimore, 1936, which also'contains a facsimile of the

Strength of Great Britain, London, I804, Appendix, title page of the Observations, and a valuable intro-

p. 27. The I804 edition is referred to throughout this duction, to which I am greatly indebted for source

paper.

references.

