BIRTH CONTROL WINS*

By HANNAH M. STONE
Medical Director, Birth Control Clinical Research Bureau, New York

TWO events which occurred at the end prescription of contraceptive measures for

of I936 may signify a turning-point in the preservation of the health of the mother

the birth-control movement in and the family; and Mr. Ernst, in turn,

America. Together they denote the closing argued that in view of this testimony and in

of one era-the era of pioneering, of prepara- view of the fact that the confiscated materials

tion, of laying the foundation-and the be- had been sent to a physician and were in-

ginning of another-an era of extensive tended for lawful use, they did not come

research and clinical accomplishments.

under the ban contained in the Tariff Act and

The first event was the decision of the should therefore be released.

United States Circuit Court of Appeals in the Judge Moscowitz, in a very lucid decision,

case of the Japanese pessaries. In I933 a upheld the point of view that the Tariff Act

package containing some I20 pessaries was could not reasonably be construed so as to

sent to me from Japan for certain clinical and prevent the importation by physicians of

experimental tests. The package was seized artides for the prevention of conception when

at the Customs with a view to confiscation intended for lawful use. He ruled that the

and forfeiture on the grounds that it violated articles in question did not come within the

Section 305-a of the Tariff Act of I930, which, condemnation of the statute and directed

originating from the so-called Comstock Act their return. The federal government, not

of I873, provides that " all persons are pro- satisfied with this decision, appealed the case,

hibited from importing into the United States and in November I936 it came up for another

from any foreign country . . . any article hearing. This time the case was tried in the

whatever for the prevention of conception. United States Circuit Court of Appeals, the

." We felt that this action of the Customs bench consisting of Justices Augustus N.

officials offered a sufficiently clear-cut test Hand, Learned Hand, and Thomas W. Swan.

case for a legal determination as to whether In a historical statement which will un-

the blanket prohibition of the laws applied to doubtedly have very wide and important

contraceptive articles sent to physicians and influence upon the future progress of birth

intended for use in the legitimate practice of control in America, the United States Court

medicine.

of Appeals reaffirmed the decision of the

On the initiative of Margaret Sanger, and lower court. In speaking of the Comstock

with Morris L. Ernst and his associates acting Act generally, the court held that " its

in our behalf, the seizure of the articles was design, in our opinion, was not to prevent the

contested. On December ioth, I935, the case importation, sale, or carriage by mail of

came up for trial before Federal Judge things which might intelligently be employed

Grover M. Moscowitz of the United States by conscientious and competent physicians

District Court. At the trial Drs. Frederick C. for the purpose of saving life or promoting

Holden, Foster Kennedy, Robert L. Dickin- the well-being of their patients." It amplified

son, Ira S. Wile, Alfred M. Hellman, and this opinion with the statement that " it is

Louis I. Harris testified as distinguished going far beyond such a policy [of Congress]

medical authorities that there were many to hold that abortions, which destroy in-

medical conditions which necessitated the cipient life, may be allowed in proper cases,

and yet that no measures may be taken to

* This article originally appeared in the New York
Nation. We are indebted to the Editor for permission to republish it here.

prevent conception even though a likely result should be to require the termination of

II3

II4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

pregnancy by means of an operation. It laboratories, and birth-control centres in

seems unreasonable to suppose that the many parts of the country came together at

national scheme of legislation would involve the invitation of Margaret Sanger and the

such inconsistencies and should require the Birth Control Clinical Research Bureau of

complete suppression of articles the use of New York to discuss the scientific aspects of

which in many cases is advocated by such a contraception, to evaluate techniques and

weight of authority in the medical world." procedures, and to formulate plans and pro-

Unless the government appeals to the grammes for future clinical and laboratory

United States Supreme Court, the decision research.

of the United States Circuit Court of Appeals The first day of the conference was devoted

will remain as the final interpretation of the to the medical and biological investigations in

laws affecting the importation or distribution contraception. During the morning session

of contraceptive materials by the medical Dr. Bayard Carter of the Duke University

profession. Actually it means the passing of School of Medicine spoke of the relationship

the Comstock laws, at least as far as contra- of contraception to maternal health and

ception is concerned. These laws, enacted in outlined the various conditions which make

I873, long since became archaic and obsolete, contraceptive advice essential on medical

altogether out of tune with present-day con- grounds. Dr. J. Paul Pratt of the Henry

ditions and needs. Laws which define moral Ford Hospital of Detroit presented a survey

behaviour cannot remain static. They must of our present knowledge of the endocrine

be swept aside from time to time by the factors that influence and control human

newer currents of thoughts which spring fertility. Dr. Raphael Kurzrock of the Col-

from changing human needs.

lege of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia

For a number of years now the National University spoke of the prospects of rendering

Committee on Federal Legislation for Birth the woman temporarily sterile by means of

Control, under the leadership of Margaret hormones. He mentioned several types of

Sanger, has been endeavouring to procure an glandular products which may be used to

amendment to the birth-control laws which inhibit the ovulatory function, that is, the

would free the medical profession from the ripening and discharge of the egg cell from the

existing legal restrictions and prohibitions. ovary, and induce temporary sterility with-

The decision of the United States Circuit out changing the character of the menstrual

Court of Appeals accomplishes this very fact. cycle or permanently affecting the reproduc-

It once and for all establishes contraception tive functions. At the same session Dr.

as a recognized part of medical practice and Werner Henle of the University of Pennsyl-

removes the legal barriers to the dissemina- vania surveyed the possibilities of rendering

tion of contraceptive knowledge. From now the female immune to conception by injec-

on hospitals, clinics, and public-health centres tions of the spermatozoa of the male. While

will have to face frankly the responsibility the potentialities of hormonal sterilization or

and opportunity of including information on spermatoxic immunization have as yet been

contraception as a part of their health ser- superficially explored, they nevertheless offer

vices to the community, and we may well a wide field for future biological research.

expect that clinical contraception will make An entire session was given over to a dis-

rapid progress within the coming years. cussion of the " safe period "-a subject of

Quite rightly Margaret Sanger considers the intriguing interest. Carl G. Hartman of the

decision to be " the greatest victory in the Department of Embryology of the Carnegie

history of the birth-control movement." Institute of Baltimore, who has done pioneer

The second significant event to take place work in the reproductive physiology of apes,

last month was the Conference on Contracep- spoke on the Facts and Fallacies of the Safe

tive Research and Clinical Practice which Period. All present studies, in his opinion,

was held in New York on December 29th and point to the fact that a sterile period does

30th. Men and women froma universities, exist during the menstrual cycle of the

BIRTH CONTROL WINS

II5

woman, but our knowledge to-day does not
justify an unqualified indorsement of the
" safe-period " theory, or clinical reliance upon it when it is a question of the health or
life of the mother.
In the course of his address Dr. Hartman
mentioned the recent work of Allen, Burr, and Hill, who are able to determine the time
of ovulation in animals by means of an elec-
trical device. It should be possible in the
near future, he said, to find out the ovulation
time of a woman by attaching two electrodes to her, setting the machine going, and
" when the storm of electrical discharge that accompanies ovulation occurs, amplifying
this so as to light a lamp or ring a bell." This
statement, of course; caught the fancy of the newspapermen present and was recorded in
large type in the daily Press. The possibility of such a development, however, actually lies within the bounds of reality and may be attained within the near future. An exact
method of determining the ovulation time in the individual woman will greatly facilitate the study of reproductive physiology generally, and should help to place the " safe period" on a more concrete and practical
basis. The general opinion during the discussion
that followed Dr. Hartman's paper was that clinically, at least, we are in no position as yet to advise any woman to rely upon the computation of the sterile period for the prevention of conception. The very marked variations of the menstrual cycles in women, which we have found at the Birth Control Clinical Research Bureau from a special study of the recorded menstrual cycles of a large number of women, and the absence of a positive method for determining the fertile and sterile periods of the month render this method unsuitable for clinical use. More exact data and simpler methods of calculation have to be available before the " safe period" can become suitable for practical application.

The second day of the conference was devoted to a consideration of the technical aspects of contraceptive practice. Dr. Norman E. Himes of Colgate University, an authority on the medical history of contraception, Dr. Leo Shedlovsky, a biochemist at New York University, Dr. Eric M. Matsner of the American Birth Control League, Dr. Bessie Moses of the Johns Hopkins Clinic, Dr. Clarence Gamble of Philadelphia, and many other representatives of laboratories and clinics in different parts of the country participated in the discussion. Surveys of the present-day chemical and mechanical methods of contraception and the means of evaluating their suitability and efficacy were presented, and the importance of formulating standards and developing new methods and techniques were stressed. The urgent need for a simple, inexpensive, and safe contraceptive, one that would be especially suitable for the women in outlying rural districts and on farms who cannot avail themselves of modem clinical methods, was especially emphasized by Margaret Sanger, and she called for more intensive investigation in this field on the part of the scientists. Similarly,
Dr. Robert L. Dickinson, the doyen of medical
contraception in this country, stressed the need for more and more research. Eager and
active at seventy-six, Dr. Dickinson illuminated many of the conference discussions
with his rich and varied experiences and his
broad knowledge.
Altogether the conference marked a turn-
ing-point. The number of universities, hos-
pitals, and birth-control centres represented
and the calibre of the men and women who
participated in the proceedings marked the removal of birth-control from the field of con-
troversy to that of scientific consideration,
from the platform and the pulpit to the
laboratory and the clinic. It marked the
beginning of an era of extensive practical
service.

Eugenics Review, Vol. IXX No. 2.

