THE PHYSIOLOGY OF FERTILITY IN MAN AND MONKEY*

By S. ZUCKERMAN, M.A., D.Sc., M.R.C.S.
(Beit Memorial Research Fellow) From the Department of Human Anatomy, Oxford

H UMAN fertility has always been a I am guilty of little or no exaggeration in

subject of far greater moment to saying that, in general, human reproduction

politicians and vital statisticians and replacement are to-day taking place at

than to biologists. A reproductive machine as slow a rate as is compatible with survival,

that on almost all sides was presumed to and that in certain regions of the globe even

work too well, whose infinite capacities for this is not being achieved. The human repro-

multiplication could raise the spectre of the ductive machine no longer appears a danger-

complete exhaustion of the world's supply ously perfect mechanism.

of food, appeared too obvious in its manner It is not my function in this lecture to

of working to attract the strong interest of examine the modem trend in population

scientists; neither did it require their close growth, nor to discuss the sociological factors,

attention in order to discover means for pre- economic and psychological, that have

venting its free expression. Malthusian doc- brought it about. Neither is it my business

trine presented to the world the menace of to discuss the biological problems concerned

unbounded human fertility. Sterility, as with the deliberate limitation of fertility.

Enid Charles has written, became enthroned My task is to consider the physiological

as one of the cardinal virtues.t It is thus no events which are concemed in the full expres-

matter for surprise that the physiological sion of human fecundity. The basic facts,

problems of man's own fertility, unlike that which will be treated more closely later, can

of his domestic animals, were something to be be simply stated. A normal adult woman has

ignored rather than investigated. The last about thirty years of reproductive life. At

few years have seen the beginnings of a most thirteen, and frequently fewer, times a

complete change in point of view. Kuczyn- year she liberates at twenty-eight-day inter-

sld's new methods of population analy is vals what is almost always a single ovum.

have emphasized the fact that reproduction, Each ovum lives at most a day. Unless in-

both in North-West Europe and in other semination occurs frequently, the chances of

regions inhabited by Europeans, is pro- an ovum meeting a viable sperm are remark-

ceeding at so dangerously slow a rate that, ably few (for sperms have a correspondingly

unless a pronounced change in its trend short life). When pregnancy, and then lacta-

occurs, the populations concerned will soon tion, supervene, further ovulation and further

be greatly diminished in numbers, and pro- conception are inhibited for some twelve

foundly altered in age-group constitutions.+ months.

A similar trend has been diagnosed in coun- Thus assuming a woman to be reproducing

tries as recently industrialised as Japan, and at a theoretical maximum rate, and disre-

garding the possibility of multiple births, she

could produce some thirty offspring in her

* A lecture delivered before the Eugenics Society on January 2ISt, 1936.
t Charles, E. 1934. The Twilight of Parenthood. London. Watts.
t Charles, E. Ibid. 1935. Roy. Econ. Soc., Mem. 55.
Kuczynski, R. R. 1935. Economica, 2, (N.S.), I28.

lifetime. Whether or not any woman has achieved such fruitfulness I do not know.
When viewed against the picture of fertility in the rest of the animal world, such theoretically maximal fecundity would, however,

37

38 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

not be excessive. The replacement rates of GENERAL PHYSIOLOGICAL LIMITING

certain fish, even allowing for the incredible

FACTORS

mortality which prevents more than ten or Seasonal Variations in Birth-Rate

fewer in a million surviving to maturity, are enormously higher. Indeed, as low a limit of
fertility as that of Man finds its counterpart perhaps only among a few other mam-
mals.

Most vertebrates are incapable of reproduction except during one period of the year, different species having different breeding
seasons. Thus polar bears are born only during the middle of winter, while all

Even if a theoretical maximum output is regarded as its measure of efficiency, the human reproduction machine is thus clearly inferior to that of almost all other living things. The theoretical maximum output
in Man is however ridiculously in excess of the actual reproduction rate. I am not, as I have said, going to deal with the deliberate
measures, which, following on a fairly widespread acceptance of the relation between insemination and conception, are taken by Ma'n in order to prevent reproduction. There are, however, many limiting factors to reproduction which operate without any
general awareness of their existence, and which to a large extent are uncontrollable. For example there are those limitations to

Californian sea-lions see the world for the first time between June I5th and July 15th.
If a female polar bear fails to conceive, or does not mate, during the mating season which precedes the general " birthday " of -its species, it cannot again become pregnant until the succeeding mating period. This is
an obvious restriction to fertility, from which, however, Man does not suffer. For him birthdays are an event for the individual, not for the species. All the members of our
zoological order, the Primates, are not the same in this respect.* Thus most lemurs have a restricted breeding season, and the same may possibly be true of a few of the South American monkeys. On the other
hand the available evidence for Old World

more frequent sexual behaviour, and to a richer reproductive life which, as Hogben
has argued,* are an automatic outcome of
modem developments in social hygiene, and in the technique of living generally. With these limitations, also, we need not concern ourselves in this lecture. On the other hand,

monkeys and apes clearly suggests that these animals breed at all times. It also
shows that marked seasonal variation may occur in their birth-rates. For example, most Hamadryas baboons are born in November, while April to June are the favoured months for births among Rhesus

physiological and pathological processes monkeys. This fact either implies that some

which militate against a richer fertility months of the year are unfavourable for

need to be briefly considered before we ovulation and spermatogenesis, or that the

examine the phenomena of ovulation and particular physiological processes which act

fertilization, the two events which in the last as a spur to overt sexual behaviour slow

analysis, impose the conditions whose satis- down at those times. Two such mechanisms

faction is essential to fertility. The wider inhibiting reproduction could operate to-

limiting factors can be divided into two gether. Whatever is the correct explanation,

groups: first, the general physiological there can be no doubt, since monkeys always

factors (for example those which demarcate have the opportunity for mating, that

the total period of a woman's reproductive seasonal variations in their birth-rates are

life) that affect all women: second, those
special genetical and pathological factors which contribute to the production of differential fertility.

physiologically determined. Seasonal variations also occur in the
human birth-rates of certain countries.t They show themselves better, I understand,

* See Zuckerman, S. I932. Proc. Zool. Soc., London,

* Hogben, L. I93I. Genetic Principkcs in Medicine

p. 1059.
t See Marshall, F. H. A. 1922. The Physiology of

and Social Science. London. Williams and Norgate. Reproduction. London. Longmans, Green and Co.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF FERTILITY IN MAN AND MONKEY

39

in data relating to illegitimate than in data
regarding legitimate births. While most
observers ascribe all the variations that occur to social traditions and economic causes, some infer from such facts as the greater frequency of conceptions in parts of the Northern hemisphere during spring and mid-summer, an innate tendency to greater reproductive capacity at those times. The love feasts and related festivals of certain peoples are also regarded as evidence pointing to the same conclusion. Such data are obviously very unsatisfactory for drawing conclusions. At present, the strongest support for the view that Man's reproductive capacities may vary seasonally owing to uncontrollable physiological factors would seem to come from the fact that the reproductive capacities of monkeys do. This, however, is poor support. The question is a significant one, and if there are undiscovered physiological factors which tend to reduce human fertility at certain times of the year, they should be sought for.
Puberty and Menopause
The most obvious limitations to human fertility are set by puberty and the menopause, and my chief excuse for discussing -these topics to-day, is first, the not-remote possibility that both will become controllable events, and second, the growing recognition that puberty and reproductive capacity are
not synonymous terms. The physiological activity of the gonads is
dependent on the functioning of the anterior lobe of the pituitary. If this organ is removed from an experimental animal, the ovaries
or testes, and the accessory reproductive organs (which in turn are dependent on the testicular or ovarian secretions), all atrophy. If some other animal's pituitary is implanted into one whose pituitary gland has been Temoved, the reproductive organs again become functional. If the same experiment is done with immature animals-in particular females-the reproductive organs immediately mature and become active.
Moreover they can be maintained in that condition by adequate administration of the activating substances of the pituitary.

Puberty and the menopause are generally believed to be controlled by the anterior lobe of the pituitary. During infancy and childhood, the gland does not elaborate its gonadotropic secretions, for the reason, according to some, that it is then actively promoting growth. As the process of active growth slows up, the gland begins to pour
its reproductive hormones into the circulation, and these immediately affect the ovaries
or testes, as the case may be, both by promoting the secretion of their essential hormones
(which in turn act on the accessory reproductive organs), and by stimulating the maturation of sperms or ova. The number of separate gonadotropic hormones produced by the pituitary is still disputed. Some workers hold that a single factor is responsible not only for the growth of the ovarian follicles but also for their rupture (ovulation), and for the conversion of the ruptured follicles into corpora lutea, organs of internal secretion whose hormonal products are concerned in maternal processes. Other investigators believe that more than one gonadotropic factor exists.
Only the first phase of the full ovulation cycle is experienced for a long period after the process of reproductive maturation
(puberty) sets in both in Man and monkeys.
The anterior lobe of the pituitary presumably undergoes waves of activity during which it elaborates only a follicular-maturation hormone, or only enough of a general gonadotropic hormone, to cause development of the ovarian follicles. The hormone produced by the developing follicles causes growth of the uterine mucosa, and when the wave of pituitary activity comes to an end, the wave of follicular growth it stimulated also ceases, so that the uterus no longer comes under the influence of the follicular hormone. As a result, a retrogressive uterine phase sets in and menstruation occurs. The first menstrual cycles after puberty probably always follow this course, i.e., the first menstrual cycles experienced by women are usually unaccompanied by ovulation.* Hence it
* See Hartman, C. G. I931. Science, 74, 226. Mikulicz-Radecki, F. v., and Kausch, E. I935.
Zentralbi. f. Gyn., p. 2290.

40 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

was that the Trobriand Islanders studied by Malinowski never conceived in their early youth in spite of unrestricted sexual licence.* Hence, too, births rarely occur before the third year of effective marital relationship in Indian " child marriages."
Monkeys and apes show a similar latent period between the onset of puberty and the attainment of effective reproductivity. It seems likely that this latent period is a
physiological characteristic that applies
generally to all Old World Primates-allowing of course for the usual individual exceptions. If the present growth of knowledge of pituitary mechanisms is maintained, there can be little doubt that before long the process of puberty will be amenable-if such a thing is ever required-to deliberate control.
As maturation proceeds, the waves of pituitary gonadotropic activity become more effective, and determine complete cycles of follicular growth, including both ovulation and corpus luteum formation. Conception then becomes possible, and continues possible in almost every cycle until the menopause. I use the word "almost" deliberately, for it has been thoroughly estab-
lished on monkeys,t and the fact confirmed clinically on women,4 that ovulation may fail to occur during some menstrual cycles of
completely healthy individuals. The clinical evidence is derived from chance observations made during abdominal operations, and from observations of curettings of the uterine lining, which takes on characteristic and unmistakable appearances in respect to the occurrence or non-occurrence of ovulation. The failure of ovulation is na doubt often due to some aberration of pituitary function, the cause of which is at present unknown. Though it is said that some women can tell, by the appreciation of mammary gland changes, whether or not they have ovulated
* Malinowski, B. I932. The Sexual Life of Savages.
London. Routledge. t Corner, G. W. 1927. J. Amer. Med. Assoc., 89,
1838. t Allen, E., Pratt, J. P., Newell, Q. U., and Bland,
L. J. 1930. Contrib. Embryol., Carnegie Inst. Washington, 22, 45.
Novak, E. I930. J. Amer. Med. Assoc., 94, 833.

in any given cycle, there is no means of prophesying about the possible occurrence or non-occurrence of future ovulations. It is, of course, conceivable that some women are more prone to anovulatory cycles than are others, and that they are consequently less fertile.
The occurrence of anovulatory cycles raises the interesting question of their possible relation to the well-known fact, which has been established statistically, that fertility decreases progressively from almost the beginning of the child-bearing period. Figures which display this fact well are those relating to births in Sweden in I89I, data which, according to Charles,* are widely used as a standard of comparison by authorities on population in this country.
Birth-rates per I,000 wives in different age groups
I5-I9 ... 518
20-24 ... 45I
25-29. O.. 375
30-34 ... 3I2 35-39 ... 250 40-44 ... 142 45-49 ... 20
It has been suggested, so I understand, that these data indicate that the reproductive capacity of normal healthy women, as a result of specific and uncontroLlable physiological factors, decreases almost from the moment of its establishment. The fact, pointed out by Charles, that " the fertility of newly married women of a given age is greater than that of women of the same age who have been married longer" would, however, seem to argue against this view, except, of course, that it would still be possible to maintain that such a decine always begins only after the start of actual
reproduction. If physiological factors are
responsible for the progressive decrease in fertility, they must operate either by de-
creasing the incidence of ovulation, or by increasing the incidence of abortion. It is also possible that spernatotoxins are produced in the body of the female, which act
* Charles, E. I934. The Twilight of Parenthood.
London. Watts.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF FERTILITY IN MAN AND MONKEY

41

adversely on sperms.* It is, however, even of exercising some control over the meno-

more likely that both the practice of contra- pause, not only from the clinical but also

ception and a decreased incidence of coitus from the point of view of prolonging repro-

are also involved in the progressive decrease ductive life, it is obviously necessary that

m the relative frequency of births during the the phenonemon should be more closely

child-bearing period. The problem raises an studied in laboratory animals than it has

important issue in the consideration of been.

fertility, and the difficulty of separating The human male, as is well known, does

deliberately contrived influences from those not suffer so abrupt a menopause as do

that are physiologically determined (both of women. Some writers describe a correspond-

which may be operating in producing the ing but slower process in men, occurring as a

effect of a diminishing fertility in Man), rule at some time during the sixties. Excep-

makes it essential that the question be tions are nevertheless very frequent. Motile

examined on laboratory animals. Investiga- and possibly fertile sperms have been

tion of monkeys or apes would provide the recovered from a man of 95.*

most useful information, since they are most So far I have considered only general

akin to us zoologically, but to my knowledge physiological factors that limit fertility.

they have not been studied from this point of Before passing on to what can be- termed

view. In some other animals that have been differential limiting factors, there is one

investigated, for example micet, there does further normal physiological limiting factor

appear to be an inverse relation between the that I shall just mention-namely the

degree of parity and the number of young number of ova a woman liberates at a single

born per litter.

ovulation. Usually, of course, it is one, and

All ovarian activity comes to an end after twins are born only once in about eighty-

the menopause sets in, usually between the seven births. The single ovulation of Man is

ages of 45 and 50. The menopause is probably a characteristic inherited from, or perhaps

a more gradual and less abrupt event than better expressed as belonging to, the whole

it is popularly supposed to be. During its group of Old World Primates from which

establishment ovulation first becomes irregu- Man springs. Twin births among African

lar before ceasing altogether. It is to chance and Asiatic monkeys and apes appear to be

and unexpected ovulations occurring after at least as rare as they are in Man.t

the menopause is supposed to have taken

place that many late pregnancies are due. DIFFERENTIAL LIMITING FACTORS

It is not altogether certain that the post- It has been estimated that io peW cent. of

menopausal cessation of ovarian activity is marriages in which no contraceptive measures

due to a decline in the gonadotropic activity are taken prove sterile.+ Such sterility

of the pituitary. The urine of post-meno- depends on a variety of factors, whose con-

pausal and castrated women contains large sideration properly belongs to clinical dis-

quantities of that fraction of the gonado- cussions of sterility rather than to a lecture

tropic hormone which promotes growth of such as this. A brief outline of the factors

the ovarian follicles.+ It is conceivable that concerned would not, however, be out of

the initial menopausal change lies in the place.

ovaries themselves, and is such as to raise their threshold to the gonadotropic hormones Genetical Factors

of the pituitary. In view of the desirability I would first remind you of the widely

accepted belief that some otherwise normal

* See Pommerenke, W. T. I928. Physiol. Zool., I,
97.
t Parkes, A. S. I924. Brit. J. Exper. Biol., 2, 2!. See also Marshall, F. H. A. Loc. cit. p. 38. t See Frank, R. T. 1935. in Glandular Physiology
and Therapy. Chicago. Amer. Med. Assoc.

* See Forsdike, S. F. 1928. Sterility in Women.
London. Lewis.
t See Yerkes, R. M. 1934. Scince, 79, 430.
+ Meaker, S. R. 1934. Human Sterility. London. Bailli6re, Tindall, & Cox.

42 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

people may be poor breeders, and that a corresponding male factors in the ratio of

low fertility may thus have a genetic basis. two to one,* but there are estimates which

Numerous corresponding instances of low attach an even greater share of the blame to

and high fertility are known in animal hus- the male. Sometimes his incapacity is due

bandry. The Leghorn fowl, for example, to inefficient spermatogenesis, following on,

lays many more eggs per year than do other as is now believed, inefficient endocrine

breeds of fowl. The Dorset Horn sheep is functioning of the anterior lobe of the

outstandingly prolific. Hammond, again, pituitary. Sometimes it is due to some con-

has isolated two definite strains of rabbits, genital defect which prevents the proper

differing genetically, with widely different introduction of the sperm. More usually,

fertility rates.* The imediate factors however, male sterility is due to an inflam-

affecting biological differential fertility are matory disease-for example, venereal

varied, but may roughly be grouped as (a) diseases and mumps-having produced

those which influence the number of ovula- changes in the reproductive tract incom-

tions, (b) those which affect the number of patible with fertility. Corresponding abnor-

sperms liberated, and (c) those which deter- malities lead to sterility in women, in whom

mine the extent to which foetal atrophy congenital abnormalities of the reproductive

occurs.

tract are at least as common as in the male,

It has at times been suggested that basic and in whom inflammatory diseases, new

genetic factors lie behind the differential growths, and other disorders of the repro-

fertility of different ethnic stocks-for ductive tract-all conditions partly or

example behind the differences in crude wholly incompatible with fertility-are

birth-rates of negroes and whites in the probably commoner. Thus sterility in wonen

United States, but it is doubtful if this is is sometimes due to imperfect gametogenesis,

the true explanation. As a general rule sometimes to difficulties of fertilization,

differences in birth-rates can be explained sometimes to an inability to carry through

away by occupational differences and by with gestation-a not uncommon disability

differences in social customs. Pearl's figures which frequently passes unnoticed since

on the effects of contraception on the fertility miscarriages, it is generally believed, occur

of whites and negroes show not only a mostly in the earliest stages of pregnancy.

remarkable similarity in the innate natural fertility of the two groups, but also that the

Dietary Factors

same kind of relationships between contra- Before passing on to discuss the essential

ception and mean pregnancy rates exists in physiology of conception, there is one last

comparable economic classes taken from point which requires mention-namely the

both.t

effect of dietary deficiencies on fertility.

Pathological Factors

Experimental work on laboratory animalsin particular, rats-has shown that reproduc-

For obvious reasons a genetically-deter- tion is impossible if animals are maintained

mined low breeding capacity would be on inadequate diets.t Two factors which

difficult to recognize in any given individual. have been found to be indispensable are

Fortunately, however, most patients under Vitamin A and Vitamin E. The physical

treatment for sterility present some diag- changes which occur in the animal, and in

nosable pathological or congenital abnor- the reproductive organs particularly, follow-

mality. As a general rule, several contribu- ing deprivation of these two accessory

tory causes, both male and female, determine dietary factors are very constant. Vitamlin E

the sterility of any given marriage. Female has been shown to be a specifically sex

factors predisposing to sterility outnumber

Meaker, S. R. Loc. cit. p. 4I.

* Hammond, J. I934. Harper Adams Utility t See Evans, H. M. I932. J. Amer. Med. Assoc, 99,

Poultry Journal, I9.

469.

t Pearl, R. I934. Human Biology, 6, 355.

1932. Amer. J. Physiol., 99, 477.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF FERTILITY IN MAN AND MONKEY

43

vitamin, the main and almost only effects of ovulation may be the rule, the human female

its absence being resorption of fcetuses and sometimes ovulates at irregular times as a

degeneration of testicular epithelium. The result of the stimulus of coitus. A corre-

specific change in the reproductive organs sponding mechanism of ovulation is the

following deprivation of Vitamin A is also nonnal characteristic of ferrets and rabbits.

testicular degeneration. Vitamin E occurs To my knowledge, the hypothesis as it refers

in such foods as fresh lettuces and cereals to human beings has never been supported

and is probably never missing from any by any adequate data; on the other hand,

human diet.

as both Hartman and Knaus have argued,*

Man is notoriously capable of reproduction it is incompatible with a large number of

even in states of considerable inanition, for fully reliable facts. Two further considera-

example that which accompanies either tions make it an improbable hypothesis.

advanced cancer or tuberculosis. Neverthe- The first is the established conclusion, to

less Meaker, a leading expert in the treatment which I have already referred, that women,

of sterility, believes that many instances of like Old World monkeys, are far more prone

human infertility can be cured by making not to ovulate in any given menstrual cycle

corrections in the diets of the people con- than to ovulate too readily. The second is

cerned.

that ovulation is an event which can occur

only at the end of a phase of follicular

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF FERTILIZATION

maturation. All the acceptable histological
data, both from human beings and from sub-

Such then are the physiological factors human Primates, indicate that follicles

which set general limits to fertility, and the normally ripen to the point of bursting only

pathological conditions, largely uncontrolla- during a brief part of the middle period of

ble, which tend to reduce human fecundity the cycle. This fact clearly limits the

still further within these limits. We can applicability of the hypothesis we are dis-

now examine, against the background I cussing. Even assuming that coitus could

have roughly sketched, the mechanism of stimulate a ripe follicle to burst,; ovulation

fertilization itself. Recent research has brought about in this wax. would occur

shown that the conditions for effective only during the period w>K&k ovulation

fertilization are much more fixed and normally takes place independently of the

specific than is generally supposed; they stimulus of coitus.

must be properly understood if the most This period, as I have just indicated, is as

fundamental limiting factors to fertility are a rule confined to the middle of the cycle.

to be appreciated. Effective fertilization A great deal of evidence supports this con-

demands the meeting of a viable sperm and clusion. Some of it is derived from the study

a viable ovum, and it is therefore necessary of monkeys, and some has been obtained

to know the time of ovulation in the mens- from the study of clinical material and clinical

trual cycle, the length of life of the ovum, records. As several investigators have in

and the length of life of the sperm, in order recent years summarized the evidence in

to define the conditions necessary for detail,t it is unnecessary here to do more than

conception.

The Time of Ovulation

* Hartman, C. G. I932. in Sex and Internal Secre-
tions. Edited by Edgar Allen. Baltimore. Williams

Ovulation is a spontaneous event which occurs only once in each menstrual cycle.

and Wilkins.
Knaus, H., i934. Periodic Fertility and Sterility in
Women. Vienna. Maudrich.

This fact has been established by experimental work on isolated mature monkeys,

t See, for example, Hartman, C. G. 1932. In Sex and Internal Secretions.
1933. Amer. J. Obst. Gynec., 26, 6oo.

and it is not controverted by any sound Knaus, H., Loc. cit.

clinical data. The view is sometimes advanced that although spontaneous regular

Zuckerman, S. I930. Proc. Zool. Soc., London, p. 69I.
Shaw, W. I934. Brit. Med. J., i, 7.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

refer to the variety of observations on which the conclusion rests. Observations on monkeys, which have essentially the same kind of menstrual cycle as women, comprise: (a) direct inspection of the ovaries at different times of the cycle, (b) histological examination of ovaries removed at known times of the cycle, or recovered from animals which died on known menstrual dates, (c) rectal palpation of the ovaries throughout the cycle, (d) observation of the external sexualskin cycle (after preliminary establishment of its direct relation to the ovarian cycle) and (e) controlled matings. Observations on women mainly comprise (a) investigations of the endometrial changes that are correlated with the ovarian cycle. There are also (b) naked-eye observations of ovaries
during operations performed at known
times of the cycle, (c) histological studies of ovaries, (d) a few data on the recovery of ova from the uterine tubes, to which I shall refer again later, and (e) some indirect but very striking data provided by Knaus on the uterine responses to pituitrin. Knaus first ascertained that after ovulation the rabbit uterus becomes refractory to pituitrin, and by extirpation experiments he was able to show that its failure to respond to this stimulus is due to the presence of a corpus luteum. Uterine contractility thus provides an index of ovulation, and investigation of the motility of the healthy human uterus led to the conclusion that " in women with normal reproductive physiology ovulation always takes place on the fifteenth day before the onset of the period." A corresponding conclusion is also indicated by investigations of the urinary excretion of certain of the sex-hormones.*
There is no need for me to quote other, less precise, observations on human beings which also support the conclusion that ovulation is a spontaneous event occurring about the middle of the menstrual cycle. I am also doubtful of the value of attempting as yet to define the tine of ovulation with any great precision. Knaus' definite conclusion has, however, already been quoted.
* Kurzrok, R., Kirkman, I. J., and Creelman, M. I934. Amer. J. Obst. Gynec., p. 3I9.

Ogino supports him in defining the time of
ovulation with reference to a succeeding
menstruation (twelve to sixteen days before),* and both emphasize the view that the interval between ovulation and the onset of the next menstrual period is more or less fixed, however irregular the whole menstrual
cycle may be in total length. Consequently it is possible to define even for irregular cycles the period in which ovulation occurs.
Some purpose may be served by quoting Knaus in full on this point. " The ovulation date of an irregular cycle is that period of time which falls between the two ovulation
days of the shortest and the longest cycles respectively, the cycles being recorded for
at least twelve months." Ogino's definition
is not widely different, and both Knaus and Ogino declare that it is possible to make predictions as to conception on the basis of their estimates of ovulation. Their claim has
been both disputedt and supported,+ but on
the whole it must be admitted that surprisingly little has been done either to refute or substantiate a conclusion which is clearly of the utmost social importance.
The stand taken by both Knaus and
Ogino is that women can conceive only
during a brief period in the middle of the cycle, the period being limited by the short lives of the ovum and sperm, a question which I shall shortly discuss. Armed with
case-histories, both Knaus and Ogino claim
that sexual behaviour can be regulated according to their conclusions. The criticisms of their opinion are based on both clinical and scientific grounds. It is not uncommon, for example, to criticize the theory by opposing to it instances in which conception is believed to have resulted from isolated coitus occurring outside the so-called " safe period." Siegel's famous war-tiue studies§ and Dickinson's much-quoted conclusions¶ are weapons that have been often
* Ogino, K. I930. Zetstralbl. f. Gyn., 54, 464. 1932.
Ibid., 56, 721. t See, for example, Fetscher, R. I933. Deuts. med.
Wschr., 59, 8I2. t See, for example, Latz, L. J. 1935. J. Amer.
Med. Assoc. z05, 1,241. § Siegel, P. W. I915. Deuts. med. Wschr., 4I, 1,251. -I9I6. Mi4nch. med. Wschr., 6, 748. ¶ Dickinson, R. L. 1927. Amer. J. Obst. Gynec., r4, 718.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF FERTILITY IN MAN AND MONKEY

45

used for this purpose, and it would perhaps major irregularities of the total cycle.

be as well if the views of the last named Hartman contests this point. His data are

authoor were quoted here. " There is general derived from rectal palpation of the ovaries

agreement," writes Dickinson, "on five of Rhesus monkeys, and show that the luteal

matters: (i) Conception can occur at any phase in this species of Old-World Primate is

part of the month. (2) There is very marked much more variable in length than the

difference between favourable and unfavour- follicular phase. Hartman is of the opinion

able periods. (3) The week or ten days that his data should be regarded as more

following menstruation is the time of reliable, from the point of view of inferring

greatest likelihood of conception. (4) The the human condition, than the clinical data

week preceding menstruation presents the gathered by both Ogino and Knaus. There

least likely chance of conception,-averaging are however other data, derived from the

about 7 per cent. or in various lists 3, 6, 9, study of baboons, which do not support his

9, 3, io per cent. (5) Conception during view, but fall into line with the conclusions

menstruation is comparatively frequent, of those who have studied the human cycle.

about I3 per cent."

The female Hamadryas baboon is an

While I do not wish to be as sweeping as animal whose ovarian phases can be followed

Hartman in brushing aside as valueless the by observing the cycle of swelling of the skin

testimony of women regarding the times and and subcutaneous tissues of the genital

frequency of coitus, I must confess to the region. At the beginning of menstruation,

conviction that information obtained after which marks the beginning of a cycle, this

the event, as in the case of Dickinson's so-called " sexual skin" is inactive. About

study, can hardly be as reliable as that the second or third day it begins to swell,

secured from individuals whose attention is until a considerable tense protuberance is

focussed on Knaus' and Ogino's views on formed, which shortly after the mid-point of

conception, and whose behaviour is planned the cycle suddenly collapses, and is quickly

one way or the other in relation to them. resorbed. The sexual skin then remains

With this expression of personal opinion I quiescent until the onset of the next period

must couple the hope that before long, enough of menstrual bleeding. It was found that

properly collected clinical data will be the subsidence of swelling coincides with

available to give a definite answer to the ovulation,* and thus an easy method was

question at issue.

available for determining its occurrence.

There are only two criticisms of the views Using the phases of the sexual skin as a

of Knaus and Ogino which to my know- basis for estimation, the mean length of the

ledge have emanated from laboratory work- luteal phase in forty-eight cycles of Papio

ers. The first, by Evans and Swezy,* hamadryas, the sacred baboon, proved to be

attempts by indirect methods to prove that I51, P.E. o 24 days, the c- for the luteal

ovulation in Man can occur at any time of phase distribution being 2 47; the mean of

the cycle, but it is a criticism that does not the follicular phase was I7I, P.E. o 35,

survive close examination.t The second is a days, the I- for the distribution, 3 49.jt

physiologically important criticism made by I have recently had the opportunity of

Hartman., Both Knaus and Ogino regard repeating these observations on four Hama-

the post-ovulation or luteal phase of the dryas baboons kept under laboratory con-

menstrual cycle as being far more stable in ditions. The data for twenty-five cycles4

length than the pre-ovulation or follicular again show that the luteal phase in this

phase, to whose variations they ascribe the

* Zuckerman, S. I930. Proc. Zool. Soc., London,

p. 69I.

* Evans, H. M., and Swezy, 0. 1931. Amer. J. t Zuckerman, S., and Parkes, A. S. 1932. Ibid.,

Physiol., 96, 628.

p. 139.

t See Zuckerman, S. 1932. Bnt. Med. J., ii, I,093. 4 A single irregular cycle in which the changes in the

Hartman, C. G. 1933. Amer. J. Obst. Gynec., 26, sexual skin did not follow a normal course has been

6oo. left out of the calculations.

46 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

species of Primate is less variable than the the cycle, and that the shed ovum has an

follicular phase, as Knaus and Ogino believe extremely short life, perhaps only of some

it to be in the case of Man. The actual hours.

figures are: luteal phase mean, I4, P.E. This conclusion is amply supported by the

0* 256, days, a- for distribution, I *9: follicu- only laboratory experiment on the subject

lar phase mean, I9-84, P.E. o*66, days, a- which I need quote here.* The rabbit is an

for distribution, 4*9. In the circumstances animal that ovulates, not spontaneously,

it seems questionable whether Hartman is but approximately ten hours after coitus.

justified in the inference he draws.

Rabbits were made to ovulate by being

mated with vasectomized males, and then

Survival of the Ovum

by subsequent introduction of sperms, the

If the hypothesis that the human female life of the shed ova was -studied. The

is fertile only during a fixed and limited part experiment clearly showed that conception

of each cycle is sound, it is perfectly plain is impossible if insemination occurs more

that the ovum can have but a very short than six hours after the rupture of the

life. And it is equally obvious that even follicles. The result of this investigation

were the time of ovulation not fixed, which agrees well with the conclusions of several

is contrary to the bulk of present evidence, others on widely different mammals.

women would still be infertile during the It is generally believed that a liberated

greater part of each cycle if the mammalian ovum takes about three days to pass from

ovum were short-lived. The evidence, though the ovary, down the tube and into the

not abundant, is entirely in favour of this uterus. Consequently, since the life of the

latter proposition.

ovum appears to be so short, fertilization,

It is true that this evidence is derived when it occurs, must take place either at the

mainlly from observations on animals, but mouth of the tube or in its most distal part.

there is one important set of data which was If viable sperms were always present in that

obtained from study of clinical material.* region, fertilization would follow every

Some clinicians, who were desirous of ovulation, and it is therefore necessary to

securing shed human ova for investigation, enquire about the speed with which sperms

examined the ovaries and tubes of some ascend the female reproductive tract, about

ninety gynaecological patients who were the number of sperms that are necessary

operated on at known times of the cycle. to ensure the fertilization of any single ovum,

Only five definitely recognizable ova were and about the length of time sperms remain

collected, two coming from the same patient. viable.

These two ova, and a third, were collected on the fifteenth day of the cycle, the third

Physiology o/the Sperm

ovum being in a degenerated condition. Experimentalists have found no difficulty

The fourth ovum, collected on the fourteenth in answering the question about the speed

day, was quite degenerated, as was probably with which sperms ascend the female repro-

the fifth, collected on the sixteenth day. ductive tract, the simple expedient of exam-

Three other doubtful ova were also collected, ining the uterus and tubes of recently mated

one on the fifteenth and two on the sixteenth rats, rabbits, and other mammals, having

day of the cycle, which, if ova, were in an provided a definite answer. t In rats, sperms

advanced phase of degeneration. When it is reach the ovaries within sixty seconds of

remembered that some ninety patients were mating. In dogs and rabbits their passage

examined, and only these few ova obtained, through the reproductive tract may not be

it is perfectly plain that we are here provided so rapid, but it is certainly a matter of

with strong evidence that ovulation in

women usually occurs about the middle of * Hammond, J. 1925. Reproduction in the Rabbit.

Edinburgh. Oliver & Boyd.

* Allen, E., and co-workers. Loc. cit., p. 40.

t See Hartman, C. G. 1932. In Sex and Intenal
Secretions.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF FERTILITY IN MAN AND MONKEY

47

minutes, or at most an hour or two. There there has been an increasing waste of male

are no data on this question for either Man germ cells as the evolutionary pattern has

or monkeys, and in the absence of contrary unfolded itself. The ratio of sperms to ova

knowledge, one must assume that the trans- among fish in general cannot be nearly as

port of sperms takes relatively as short a disproportionate as it is in Man. In many

time in them-provided that the process viviparous species, for example, Xiphophorus

of insemination follows a perfectly normal helleni Regan, mature females, previously

course.

mated and then isolated, may give birth to

The second question, the number of sperms as many as seven litters of up to IOO young

required to ensure the fertilization of a single each over a period of a year, fertilization in

ovum, has received a fairly exact answer each case having been effected by sperms

both from clinical and from experimental stored from the previous insemination.*

work. A single normal ejaculate in Man Furthermore, insemination in many fish

varies between 3 and 6 c.c.s, and each cubic occurs during a definite breeding season,

centimetre contains between 75,ooo,ooo and when the chances of fertilization are high.

200,000,000 spermatozoa. These incredibly The young of frogs, again, are so numerous

high figures achieve some significance when that it is difficult to imagine so enormous a

one learns that the Meaker Clinic for Ster- disparity in the relation of male and female

ility, the most famed clinic for the treatment gametocytes as occurs in Man; moreover

of sterility in the world, knows of no instance fertilization is to some extent ensured, as

of human pregnancy occurring where the it is in the case of fish, by the occurrence

sperm count was below 6o,ooo,ooo.* This of breeding seasons. The same is true of

finding receives corroboration from experi- reptiles, even though the number of young

ments on the fertilizing powers of different they produce is not as great. Birds, too,

dilutions of semen on female rabbits pre- show the same general characteristics; in

viously mated with vasectomized males.t some, successive ova may be fertilized over

Full concentrations of semen give full a relatively long period by sperms deposited

fertility, lower concentrations give smaller at a previous insemination. In the domestic

litters, until a dilution is reached, in which the hen this period is as long as twenty days,

number of sperms is still high (Ioo,ooo per and in the domestic turkey a single insemi-

3 c.c.s), which is completely ineffective from nation serves for a whole laying season.t

the point of view of conception.

Compared with most, if not all, his fellow

Although it takes but a single sperm to mammals, Man again shows himself out-

fertilize a single ovum, it is not difficult to standing in regard to the waste of gameto-

understand why so many sperms have to be cytes. Most mammals can give birth to

ejaculated in order to secure fertilization. large litters after a single insemination, and

In their passage from the vagina to the even those that produce only a single young,

upper part of the uterine tubes, the sperms like those that are more fruitful, differ from

may become lost in innumerable glandular Man in usually breeding only during re-

crypts and folds of mucous membrane. It stricted mating seasons, and at oestrous

is even likely that many sperms are lost in periods when sperms are certain to meet

the peritoneal cavity. Consideration of the viable ova. And finally one sees that Man

amazing disproportion in the ratio of even differs from the majority of his fellow

liberated human sperms to liberated ova Old World Primates, which although they

leads to an interesting conclusion, which, mate and may breed at all times of the year,

unfortunately, has to be highly speculative nevertheless are so controlled physiologically

for want of data.

(for example, by means of a sexual skin)

It would seem, if Man is regarded as the

highest product of organic evolution, that * Van Oordt, G. J. I928. Tijdsc'r. Ned. Dierk. Ver.,

Holder, 3rd Ser., I, i.

* Meaker, S. R. Loc. cit., p. 41.

t Crew, F. A. E., I926. Proc. Roy. Soc., Edin., 46,

t Walton, A. 1927. Proc. Roy. Soc., B., IOx, 303. 230.

48 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

that mating during each menstrual cycle is Survival of the Sperm

most frequent when the chances of concep- My emphasis of the necessity for insemina-

tion are highest.* It is difficult to avoid tion to occur close to or at the time of ovula-

regarding breeding seasons and periods of tion is based on the view that the human

oestrus teleologically as adaptations which sperm, like the ovum, is very short-lived.

limit the waste of gametocytes in the animal The period of viability of the sperm is

kingdom. Nor is it difficult to realize that clearly of the greatest importance. If

compared with most other living things, the sperms could live in the female reproductive

behaviour of the human species is peculiarly tract for three weeks, as some earlier writers

badly directed physiologically with regard to claimed, there would be just reason for

optimum times of conception. In the cir- regarding women as dangerously fertile.

cumstances frequency of coitus can be Those sperms which had reached the distal

regarded as a necessary means of achieving end of the tubes would be always ready to

fertilization. Although their sexual be- fertilize any shed ova, while those that had

haviour is still to some extent under oestrous not, would presumably continue wandering

control, even subhuman Primates mate at round the female tract until they had. But

all times of the menstrual cycle.t

all the acceptable data about mammalian

Conception often, in the writings of sperms is completely against this view, and

novelists, results from an isolated sexual act, while it is perhaps impossible to define the

but in real life this is probably exceptional. period that the human sperm can live in the

Meaker, to whose clinical experience I have female body with any accuracy, it is safe to

already had occasion to refer, has written say that it cannot be longer than two or three

very clearly on this point. " Undoubtedly days at the most.

there are human matings in which a single I do not propose to discuss more than part

act of coitus, or at most coitus repeated at of the evidence on which this conclusion

intervals throughout one menstrual month, rests.* Before, however, considering this

would infallibly produce conception, but evidence, it is interesting to note that there

they are exceptions. Most couples who are animal species in which sperms are

succeed in reproducing do so in spite of undoubtedly long-lived. Bees are well-

certain imperfections in the conceptive known examples. Some viviparous fishes

mechanism . . . most people are relatively and certain birds, to which I have already

and not absolutely fertile."" It is not sur- referred, are others. The only two mammals

prising that many writers believe that a whose sperms, some claim, live for a long

general decreased incidence of coitus may be period in the body of the female are bats and

partly responsible for declining birth-rates. badgers. Both these animals are said to

mate in the autumn, and it is stated that the

* Zuckerman, S. 1930. Loc. cit., p. 45.

sperms remain dormant in the reproductive

Zuckerman, S. 1932. The Social Life of Monkeys tract of the female until the succeeding

and Apes. London. Kegan Paul. Ball, J., and Hartman, C. G. I935. Amer. J. Obst.

spring, when ovulation occurs. This view of

Gynec., 29, II7.

the process of fertilization in these two

t The opinion has been expressed by Yerkes, R. M., and Yerkes, A. W. (in A Handbook of Social Psychology,
edited by Carl Murchison, 1935, Worcester, Mass., Clark Univ. Press) that sexual behaviour among chimpanzees is less engrossing and frequent than I found it to be among baboons. Their opinion hardly applies to some observations that have been recorded in the

species is, however, not established.
Modem views on the viability of mammalian sperms in general, and of human sperms in particular, derive both from observations on the behaviour of sperms

literature. For example, Schultz, A. H., and Snyder, recovered from the female genital tract

F. F., in a recent publication (Bull. Johns Hopkins Hosp., 1935, 4, 193) tell of a pair of these apes, under investigation in their laboratory, that copulated " fairly

after coitus, and from observations on the behaviour of sperms collected directly from

regularly three and more times daily for approximately

six months "-and for several weeks after the beginning

of pregnancy.

* For further information see Knaus, H. Loc. cit.,

$ Meaker, S. R. Loc. cit., p. 4I.

p. 43. Hartman, C. G. In Sex and Internal Secretions.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF FERTILITY IN MAN AND MONKEY

49

-the male and kept in vitro. Hammond and Asdell found that sperms cannot live in the
genital tract of rabbits longer than thirty-two hours.* Huehner's studiest show that human
sperms, like those of Rhesus monkeys,* do
not as a rule live more than two hours in the unfavourable secretions of the vagina, and, moreover, only a few feebly motile spenns could be collected from the uterus seven days after coitus. The motility of a sperm does not, however, imply a power to
fertilize. Conclusive studies on guinea-pigs,
on rabbits and on men, have proved that sperms may be fully motile and yet completely infertile.§ Human sperms have remained motile for six days at room temperature when kept in their natural medium, and as many as twenty-one days when kept at room temperature in buffered solutions.¶ Numerous experiments, which are ably
summarized by Knaus,J1 have, however,
shown that at body temperature sperms rapidly lose their fertility, and the general conclusion is that the sperms of all mammals whose testes are enclosed in an external scrotum become infertile within forty-eight hours after they are exposed to the normal temperature of the female reproductive tract.
The Need for Work on Primates
I can briefly summarize the statements I have made about the time of ovulation, about the period of survival of the ovum, and about the period of survival of the sperm, by saying that the available information we have about all three problems satisfies the conditions demanded by the hypothesis that women are fertile only during a fixed and brief part of each menstrual cycle. It is necessary, however, to emphasize the fact that much of the experimental data we have on the physiology of the sperm and of the ovum is derived from studies of non-primate

mammals. Indeed, apart from reports on the motility of sperms recovered from the human female reproductive tract, the success which Ogino and Knaus claim for the practical application of their view on the " safe period" is the only evidence we have that the periods of viability of the human sperm
and ovum are approximately the same as those of the laboratory mammals that have
been studied.
Few can be so optimistic as to expect that
human beings will regulate their sexual and reproductive lives on the basis of an hypo-
thesis which, however convincing its founda-
tions may be to some, is nevertheless a matter that is still disputed. It is obvious that
irrefutable data about human beings will
accumulate only when some reliable and easy method is devised for determining the time of ovulation in the human female, and
it is to be hoped that the electrometer recently devised by Burr and Lane* will,
as they suggest, provide the necessary means for doing this. Until this has been done it is clearly desirable that the survival of the
sperm and ovum should be studied, in vivo, in some other Old World Primates. Such a
study has already been begun, with Hamadryas baboons as subjects.t This animal, as I have already stated, provides in the fluctuations of its sexual skin, an index of the ovanan phases, and by mating females
at varying times before and after the subsidence of swelling, an event which is correlated with ovulation, information should be obtained both about the viability of the gametocytes, and about the existence or non-existence of restricted periods of fertility. The few results so far obtained suggest that the Hamadryas baboon does not readily conceive from a single insemination, even when this is made within as few as twentyfour hours either before or after the estimated
time of ovulation.

* Hammond, J., and Asdell, S. A. I926. Brit. J. Exper. Biol., 4, 155.
t Huehner, M. I9I3. Sterility in the Male and Female,
and Its Treatment. New York. Rebman.
t Hartman, C. G., in Sex and Internal Secretions.
§ See Hartman, C. G. Ibid.
¶Meaker, S. R. Loc. cit., p. 41. 1j Knaus, H. Loc. cit., p. 43.

* Burr, H. S., and Lane, C. T. I935. Yale J. Biol. & Med., 8, 31.
t I am greatly indebted to the Council of the Eugenics Society for the opportunity of pursuing this investigation, and to Professor W. E. Le Gros Clark, F.R.S. for his kindness and generosity in allowing the study to be made in the Department of Human Anatomy,
Oxford.

D

50 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Conclusion
In concluding this lecture it is almost unnecessary to say that a sound knowledge of the conditions of human conception would be of value in planning sexual behaviour, not only from the point of view of limiting births, but also from the point of view of their encouragement. Were such issues as we have been discussing thoroughly established, the times of both normal and artificial insemination could be far better controlled than they can be at present, and it is not unlikely that the incidence of sterility, a problem with which gynaecologists in their practice frequently wrestle in vain, would be materially reduced. There is one last remark that I should like to make. The facts that I have brought before you about the specificity of the conditions that determine conception, may have combined with the

knowledge we all have about the dangerously slow rate of human replacement, to make a depressing picture of a hopelessly inefficient human reproductive machine. If they have, I think we can reassure ourselves. It need not be feared that the human potentialities
for reproduction are decreasing, for although the conditions for conception may be very specific, there is no evidence that they have become disorganized in the majority of people, or that any diminution has occurred in the inherent fertility of Mankind. Even if present reproduction and replacement rates presage the extinction of the human species, we can therefore expect that when the factors responsible for their trends are thoroughly understood and brought within the realm of control, the human reproductive
machine will be fully capable of supplying the living material of a progressive and
assured civilization.

ugenis lReview, Vol. m=, No. 1.

