Expanding Frontiers of Genetics

A REVIEW

G ENETICS IS BECOMING a subject which is tetramers such as certain abnormal haemo-

gradually pervading the conscious and the globins. Other unit-generated systems result in

subconscious ofmodern science. We see a fibres, and in sheets or membranes. There is only

repetition of the impact of chemistry sixty years a short step from membranes to tubes; double

ago when it changed from a separate discipline membranes named "didermic" (two-skinned)

to a part of virtually all scientific endeavours, can be arranged parallel to one another and from

so much so that it has almost lost a strict defini- these one can easily proceed to flattened vesicles.

tion of its own. Here are discussed three recently Midway in complexity between these simple

published books on genetics which each, in its forms and the cell are instruction-generated

own way, enters a wider field of thought.

forms where a number of units are assembled in

Professor Penrose' has written a book on the immediate neighbourhood of some pre-

human genetics for the average person. It is clear existing structure whose pattern, like a template,

that the mechanism of human inheritance is in- determines their orderly arrangement. These

volved in very many everyday problems. Pro- templates may act by coming into operation

fessor Penrose refers specifically to the effect of gradually and letting the final pattern build

ionising radiation on hereditary changes by itself up in stages or they may act with all their

mutation, but genetics equally enters South parts at once. The latter, the "synchronic" tem-

African politics, the public school problem, or plates, are the most important in biology.

malaria eradication in areas where genes such as Another type of instruction is not by templates

the sickle-cell trait afford some protection to the but from spatially distributed environmental in-

population. Technical terms which present "an fluences. Here is a book which combines mor-

unnecessarily forbidding aspect to the uninitia- phology, as one knew it in the 1920s, with

ted" are either not used or are explained when present-day chemical genetics.

their use is unavoidable. Professor Penrose Professor F. J. Kallmann has edited the pro-

states that it is inevitable that in the future, ceedings of a Symposium held at the New York

human genetics will more and more be reduced State Psychiatric Institute in 1961.3 There are

to problems of chemistry. Indeed, this year's excellent contributions on basic genetics and on

Nobel prizes in Medicine and in Chemistry have behavioural and psychiatric genetics, as well as

been awarded to workers on the chemical and genetic studies of mental deficiency and neuro-

physical structure of the material which trans- logical disorders. Of particular importance is the

fers genetical information and on the relation of break-through of medical genetics into the field

human proteins to these agents of inheritance. of mental health with contributions on the role

Professor C. H. Waddington's book2 attempts of genetics in a medical school curriculum, and

to turn the thought ofgeneticists back from poly- reports on trends in psychiatric genetics in

peptide chains and protein molecules to the form England, Scandinavia, South Africa and the

of living matter. He discusses the types of mor- United States. There is an extremely useful and

phogenetic process. There are the unit-generated exhaustive bibliography. Eliot Slater (who is

forms of which the prime example is a crystal of one of the contributors to this volume) recently

an inorganic compound. From these he proceeds remarked in THE EUGENICS REVIEW that one has

to particle systems to which the crystals of the feeling that a break-through is "just around

globular molecules belong. There are monomers the corner" in the combined research on

such as myoglobin, dimers such as insulin and chemistry and psychiatry. This volume leads one

III

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to expect this leap ahead where chemistry, 2. Waddington, C. H. New Patterns in Genetics and

psychiatry and genetics meet.

Development.NewYork and London, 1962. Columbia University Press. Pp. xv + 271. Price 80s.

H.LEHMANN

1. Penrose, L. S. Outline of Human Genetics. Second 3. Kaflmam, F. J. (Editor). Expanding Goals ofGenetics

Edition. London, Melbourne, Toronto 1963. Heine- in Psychiatry. New York and London, 1962. Grune

mann. Pp. xiv + 166. Price 15s.

and Stratton. Pp. x + 275. Price $6.75.

POPULATION STUDIES
A Journal of Demography
Edited by D. V. GLASS and E. GREBENIK

Vol. XVI. No. 3.

CONTENTS

March 1963

C. M. STEWART R. FREEDMAN, J. Y. PENG,
Y. TAKESHITA and T. H. SUN K. G. BASAVARAJAPPA J. MAYONE STYCOS J. W. LEASURE
L. T. BADENHORST Book Reviews

Family Allowance Statistics in Great Britain.
Fertility Trends in Taiwan: Tradition and Change.
Effect of Improvements in Mortality on the Birth Rate and Related Measures. Culture and Differential Fertility in Peru. Factors Involved in the Decline of Fertility in Spain. Family Limitation and Methods of Contraception in an Urban Population.

Subscription price per volume of 3 parts £2 I5S. net., post free (or American currency $8.50). Single parts XI 5s. each (American $4) post free.
Published by the POPULATION INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE, at the LONDON SCHOOL OF
ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE. HOUGHTON STREET, LONDON, W.C.2

112

