REVIEWS OF BOOKS

any more than they could have deduced the audience and to communicate to them some of

facts and principles of neo-Mendelian genetics the excitement and inspiration of the scientific

from those of the molecular structure of DNA endeavour". Judged within this context, the book

and RNA.

undoubtedly succeeds in that the material is

As a result, Muller is the only contributor interestingly presented, up-to-date and accurate,

who has anything important to say about and aims to convey to the non-specialist reader

eugenics. While acknowledging fully the scien- not only a synopsis of recent discovery, but a

tific importance of recent discoveries in mole- discussion of its implications for the future of

cular genetics, "genetic engineering" etc., he mankind.

stresses the present impossibility of applying One of the major difficulties of presenting

them to the genetic improvement of any higher genetics to a mixed audience is the varied amount

organism, and reiterates his view (which appears of basic knowledge they will have, and it is

to me to be completely unassailable) that negative inevitable that in such a book the better informed

eugenics is merely tinkering, and that positive readers will find themselves skipping some of

eugenics could perfectly well be begun on the the descriptive material of the earlier chapters,

basis of our present knowledge of genetics and but Dobzhansky's compromise in this situation

selection, through what he calls voluntary has been a good one, for three reasons: because

germinal choice-artificial insemination with the the material is throughout treated in its relation-

sperm ofa donor chosen by the couple concerned ship to man; because the author has (not without

for his qualities-whether of strength, intelli- some trepidation, one feels) been bold enough

gence, physical good looks, or moral qualities. to omit a great deal of elementary instruction

With the establishment of "sperm banks" of on Mendelian genetics; and because so much

deep-frozen sperm (and doubtless in the not too of this part of the book is written as an exciting

distant future of ova banks too) such eutele- history from Leeuwenhoek's discovery of

genesis, as Brewer has called it, could reverse the spermatozoa to the chemical structure of genes

apparent dysgenic trend of to-day and gradually and chromosomes. Dobzhansky's knowledge

but steadily raise the genetic potentialities of the of this history-not only of the chief highroads

population.

but also of some of the by-ways-is very

This is the way that evolution has made a impressive.

man out of a fish and a fish out of a protozoa, From this we come to Race, and to questions

but multiple voluntary germinal choice could of human diversity, to genetic load and radiation

enormously speed up the process, while ensuring hazard, each chapter discussing biological,

variety in the results.

political and moral implications as well as

To sum up, I would say that anyone who scientific knowledge, and finally a chapter on

wants to keep abreast of the exciting and indeed man's future in relation to cultural and biological

revolutionary discoveries ofrecent molecular and evolution and the control of environment.

cellular biology should read Parts I and II, but Dobzhansky presents anew the arguments for

that anyone who wants to keep abreast of chance or design in evolution and shows how

eugenic possibilities should read Part III.

the factors of chance in genetic recombination

JULIAN HUXLEY are counteracted by the constant operation of

the anti-chance agency of natural selection.

Dobzhansky, Theodosius. Heredity and the Nature ofMan. London, 1965. Allen and Unwin.
Pp. x+179. Price 25s.

None ofthis is new and the seeker for advanced knowledge must remember that the book was not written for him. Neither is it an elementary
textbook for beginners, but it is an interesting

THIS IS A book which arose from the Holiday and worthwhile discussion of questions which

Science Lectures, sponsored by the American are always worth re-examination, and it will be

Association for the Advancement of Science. of interest to many members of the Eugenics

The purpose of the lectures, the author tells us, Society.

is "to broaden the scientific horizons of the

ROBERT PLATT

29

