SINANTHROPUS AND OTHER FOSSIL MEN

Their Relations to Each Other and to Modem Types By S. ZUCKERMAN, M.A., D.Sc., M.R.C.S.

HE recent discovery of fossil man in plainly over-emphasize the significance of

China, and the still more recent finds what human fossils we have, and whose

.L. of his remains in Java, have com- enthusiasm, stimulated by an overwhelming

bined to raise, in a light not readily apparent popular interest, tends to distort the proper

before these discoveries, the trying issue of position of these studies in the wider body

the correct classification of the zoological of our knowledge. An over-enthusiasm for

family to which modern man belongs. The human paleontology, however, is usually

evidence is critically reviewed in this paper, far less biased than is the kind of opposi-

and the conclusion is drawn that the exist- tion, both lay and scientific, which this field

ing classification is irrational. One of its of study usually receives.

more serious drawbacks is that it prevents Of the many criticisms it has to with-

a convincing evolutionary interpretation of stand, two are perhaps worthy of notice:

the remains of fossil man already available the one, that the subject has no practical

for study. The tentative suggestion is made significance, and that its pursuit, by attract-

that archaic types and modern men fall into ing money, deleteriously influences the

two readily definable groups, the sub-family progress of studies of more immediate

Palaeanthropidae comprising such forms as social importance: the other, that the

Peking and Neanderthal man, and the sub- general principles upon which it proceeds

family Neanthropidoe consisting of types are unscientific and not in accordance with

like modern man and men of the Upper those principles which operate in com-

Paleolithic.

parable biological fields.

INTRODUCTION
Although the study of Fossil Man is an

There is no good answer to the first argument. Paheontology is an essential part of geology, which, as is generally recognized,

organized and accepted branch of anthro- is of great economic importance; but fossils

pology, and in spite of the fact that it has
been this for over half a century, there are still writers who deny both its intrinsic scientific interest and its relevance to wider questions of human biology. For example, at the last meeting of the British Association (I932), a well-known speaker affirmed

regarded purely as zoological specimens
obviously have little practical value, and
this is particularly true of the few human ones so far discovered. On the other hand, the intensive study of these human bones is a branch of anthropology, and it is permissible to argue that such study provides

that Fossil Man was of no account in dis-
cussions of man's zoological position. Again, in a recently published criticism of
evolutionary doctrine, a section is devoted to what are derogatively styled " supposed links between man and other a-nimals."'L Reactionary views of this kind may con-
ceivably act as a deterrent to those more extreme writers on evolution who very

a solid basis for investigations of racial heredity-even though it could not be said
that the knowledge so provided forms an essential foundation for these investigations. In being almost devoid of more than cultural significance, the study of human fossils does not, however, stand alone in scientific inquiry. It is not yet demanded of all scientific investigation that it neces-

1 Douglas Dewar: Difficulties of the Evolution Theory. Arnold. London. I93I.

sarily possess some recognizable practical value, either immediate or remote.

273

274 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Far less deserving of adverse criticism will, of course, argue on these matters, and

are the biological principles on which the they will make mistakes; but though both

study of human fossils proceeds. Physical the classification and the phylogenetic

anthropology has been somewhat adversely inferences of systematic biology may be

described as pursuing its course " with a arbitrary processes unsustained by any

serenity unimpaired by the results of firm logic, classification is nevertheless

experimental investigation," the reason for both essential and valid on its own level,

this being, so we are told, that geneticists while phylogenetic inference is inevitable,

have not indicated the " devastating conse- and up to a point of value too. The fact

quences " of their discoveries.' But even that the stamp' of scientific certainty cannot

if it be assumed that geneticists have not embellish the conclusions of these studies

done this, and that systematic biologists is no reason why they should be discon-

and physical anthropologists are altogether tinued. The same criteria of exactitude

in ignorance of the implications of the con- are unfortunately missing in the conclu-

clusions of genetics,3 it would in any case sions of many other fields of biology, which

be impossible in the circumstances of nevertheless merit exploration simply on

present biological knowledge to conceive account of their intrinsic interest.

of a kind of systematic treatment of fossil

skulls different from that which they at THE INEVITABLE CONTROVERSIES

present receive.

Cut off though it may be from immediate

Theoretically, human palaeontology pro.- practical ends and from the main body of

ceeds on the same principles as do other biological inquiry, the study of man's

palaeontological studies, all of which may phylogeny pursues its course with any-

be regarded as branches of systematic thing but serenity. Its roots are deeply

biology. These principles are the best that embedded in the conflict which raged in the

all biology, including such experimental nineteenth century between established

studies as genetics, can at present offer. religious ideas and the scientific view of our

Nevertheless, to-day there are few students kinship with the animal world. To-day

who would claim that the tracing of phylo- the conflict has mostly subsided, but even

genetic relationships through any group of now fossil human remains do not allow

animals, existing or fossil, is in large part themselves to be treated in the detached

more than speculation. Experimental way the palaeontologist regards the bones of

science may have helped in the realization a Triassic reptile.

of this fact, but it has altogether failed to Argument begins with every report of

provide new methods in place of those their discovery and continues endlessly.

which have always been employed in The bony fragments may not be found close

systematics. The almost automatic com- together, and it will have to be decided

parison of every new object of interest that whether or not they are parts of the same

is discovered with already familiar things individual, sometimes even if they are parts

is responsible, as far as fossils are con- of the same kind of individual. The

cerned, for their systematic classification. deposit from which they are recovered may

When the fossils are man-like in character not be well defined geologically, and their

this automatic treatment is strengthened correct horizon will be matter for argu-

by an inescapable anthropocentric interest, mient. This will not be all, for authorities

and quite as inevitably the classification are unlikely to agree about the way the

leads to phylogenetic inferences. Students fragments should be reconstructed and how

they should be described, and all these

2 L. Hogben: Genetic Principles in Medicine and trying issues will only be preliminary 'to

Social Science. Williams & Norgate. London. I931. the more important one of proper interpre-

3 An assumption not generally borne out in the literature either of systematic zoology or of anthropology.

tation, which demands meticulous comparison of the new find with previously

SINANTHROPUS AND OTHER FOSSIL MEN

275

described human fossils, with existing Man." The teeth were described by Dr.

human beings, and with the great apes. Zdansky,7 a Swedish pakeontologist, who

Finally, stock will have to be taken of was disinclined to regard them as a basis

current views on human phylogeny in the for far-reaching conclusions about human

light of the newly gained knowledge. If origins-a conservative point of view which

one is to take Sir Arthur Keith seriously well merits commendation in spite of its

when he expresses' the doubt " if the belief strange sequel.

of modern anthropologists in Evolution is Professor Davidson Black, the Professor

more than skin deep," perhaps even more of Anatomy at the Union Medical College

fundamental issues may be raised.

in Peking, took a different view of the find,

and was instrumental in interesting the

SINANTHROPUS PEKINENSIS

Rockefeller Foundation in the matter. This

These questions have recently been given institution immediately undertook to subsi-

prominence by.the discovery of the Peking dize further excavation at Chou Kou Tien,

human fossils. The facts of this discovery and late in I927 another human molar tooth

are perhaps too well known to merit more was found, this time by Dr. Bohlin. To

than brief description here.5

give recognition to the peculiarities of this

China had long been considered a pos- tooth, Dr. Davidson Black courageously

sible home of primitive man. Thirty years created a new genus and species of man,

ago, Professor Schlosser, of Munich, Sinanthropus pekinensis. His enthusiasm

described a tooth that a certain Dr. Haberer was well justified, for a year later frag-

had found included in a collection of ments of two jaws and two brain-cases were

" dragon bones," bought in Peking.6 It found in the same early pleistocene deposit,

was a left upper third molar, completely and in I929 Mr. W. C. Pei found, again in

fossilized, which showed on its surface a the same deposit, an almost complete brain-

reddish clay that suggested it had been case. In I930 still anoth& brain-case was

unearthed either from some tertiary or unearthed. In addition to these remains

from some very early pleistocene deposit. many teeth have been recovered, and to-day

Unable to reach a definite decision, Pro- several complete sets, both milk and

fessor Schlosser suggested that it might be permanent, are available for study. The

the tooth of a manlike ape or an apelike excavations have also shown that the site

man. However vague this diagnosis was, at Chou Kou Tien was the home of the

it clearly pointed to China as a field in Sinanthropus people for an extremely long

which to search for fossil man, and excava- period, and that they knew the use of fire

tions at Chou Kou Tien nineteen years later and made implements.8

(financed partly by the late Ivar Kreuger, Enough remains have been found to

the Swedish " Match King "), led to the allow of exact description of the type of

finding in an early pleistocene deposit of skull possessed by these extinct early

two more human teeth, an immature left pleistocene people. Both of the complete

lower pre-molar and a somewhat worn adult crania are in length and breadth well within

right upper molar.

the range of modern European skulls, but

The latter discovery, more than Dr. they are very low, so much so that the

Haberer's, marks the rebirth of " Peking cranial capacity of the specimens found was

4 New Discoveries Relating to the Antiquity of Man. Williams & Norgate. London. 1931.
5 See Davidson Black: Pakeontologica Sinica.

little more than about 950 cubic centimetres (the average modern European skull has a capacity in the region of I,400 cubic centi-

Series D, Vol. VII, Fasc. I, I927, and Ibid., Fasc. 2, 1930. The latter monograph provides a full bibliography relating to the discovery. Also

metres). The eyes are surmounted by strong eyebrow ridges, immediately behind

G. Elliot Smith: The Search for Man's Ancestors.

Watts. London, I93I.

7 Bull. Geol. Soc. China, Vol. V, 1927.

6 Abh. d. kon. Bayer-Akad. Wiss. Math. Phys. 8 Davidson Black: Bull. Geol. Soc. China, Vol.

Kl., Bd. XXII, 1903.

XI, I931. C. Pei, Ibid.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

which the skull is very constricted. The the first as a male. This in itself shows

frontal slope is not steep, and the wide the difficulty of forming a positive opinion

lower occipital part of the skull (the maxi- on the matter, and the doubt it suggests is

mum width of which is situated low down, very much strengthened by the fact that

just above the ears, as in adult large apes) sex identifications of many types of skull

is bent at an angle to the rest, and shelves (for example Australian, Tasmanian and

sharply into the neck. The mastoid pro- South African) on the basis of anatomical

cesses, though massive, do not markedly characters, are regarded as being valueless

project. The base of the skull is preserved on account of their uncertainty.9 In view

in only one of the specimens, and it shows of the extent of variation unrelated to either

certain peculiarities in the region of the ear. sex or age that exists, not only in modern

The lower jaw, too, shows several strange human but in the Mousterian human

characters. For example, there is little, if remains and also in existing ape skulls, it

any, chin, and although the teeth are big, would be extremely unlikely that Sinan-

the canines are not overdeveloped.

thropus would fail to show similar varia-

tion. Because of this probability it is

VARIATION IN THE REMAINS

perhaps hazardous either to under-

The two brain-cases differ slightly from emphasize the phenomenon of individual

each other in many ways-e.g. in dimen- variation when explaining the differences

sions; in the thickness of the bones, a which exist between the two specimens

feature in which there is great variation, already found, or to imply that these

especially when the fragments found in differences are of no particular account

I928 are remembered; in the inclination of since they might be ascribed to sex and age.

the frontal slope; and in the development of the frontal bosses. Such differences are

/THE SYSTEMATIC POSITION OF PEKING MAN

only to be expected, and they may be As was stated above, the remains found

related to a variety of factors. Thus they at Chou Kou Tien have been ascribed to

may be accounted for on the scores of sex, a new genus of the Family Hominidcz, the

age, or of individual variation irrespective other accredited genera of the Family being

of sex and age. Actually, Professor Black, Pithecanthropus (the Ape-Man of Java),

who is responsible for the official account of Eoanthropus (Piltdown Man) and Homo, to

the skulls, regards the differences as being the last of which belong such widely

solely due to differences of sex and age. different types as modern man, Neander-

This is a debatable point, and it is thal or Mousterian man, and Rhodesian

doubtful if any opinion on the matter could man. Professor Black, while he states that

be regarded as conclusive. The skulls are the Sinanthropus skulls show certain

without doubt of different age, the one resemblances to Neanderthal skulls, never-

apparently being that of an individual who theless regards the two types as pro-

died between puberty and maturity, the foundly different, and although he also

other that of a you,ng adult.

admits that the Chinese brain-cases show

It is obviously impossible, however, to closer resemblances to the Pithecanthropus

tell whether the younger skull would have skull-cap, he still feels " that they differ

grown, had its owner lived to become a from one another in points of size, propor-

young adult, to reach or exceed the dimen- tions and detail to a degree amply sufficient

sions of the older skull. It is equally to proclaim their generic distinction."

impossible to be certain of the sexual differ- From the point of view of systematics, it is

ence. Before the second skull was found, worth while examining this conclusion more

the first was thought to be that of a female. closely, since the differences, especially

When the second was found and compared

with the first, the diagnosis was changed, the second being regarded as a female, and

4 On this question see Wood Jones, Journ. Anat., Vol. LXIII, 1929, and Hrdlicka, Prac. United States
Nat. Mus., Vol. L4XXI, 1928.

SINANTHROPUS AND OTHER FOSSIL MEN

277

those between the younger Sinanthropus characters which serve to differentiate

and the Pithecanthropus specimens are, as certain types from others. Thus a differ-

Black's data show (I930; table, p. 92), not ence which in one case served as part of the

very great. One has to guard against over- basis for generic differentiation, should

emphasizing their significance, particularly have been given equal consideration in

when the variation in the different Sinan- another. Moreover, any common physical

thropus remains themselves is remembered. characters which bind the species of Homo

The relegation of the Chinese remains to into a single genus should not occur in any

a new genus rather than to one of the three other genus of Hominidce; also any char-

previously known, is largely dependent on acter or characters on which the validity of

the definition of the term genus, a defini- the other genera depend should be peculiar

tion which for practical purposes is unfor- to these genera. These theoretical criteria

tunately vague. The question of the of differentiation should be satisfied unless

systematic differentiation of genera and the generic term Sinanthropus is to be

species is discussed more fully below. For accepted as one of convenience designed to

present purposes the following points may define an outstanding palaeontological find.

be noted here:

In coining the term, however, this was not

If the creation of the new genus is fully what Professor Black wished, a point he

justified, and if the accepted classification clearly indicates by devoting a considerable

of the other members of the family is indis- part of his I930 monograph to an exposi-

putable, it should follow that the differences tion of the differences which separate the

which separate Sinanthropus from its skull of Sinanthropus from those of other

fellow genera are greater than those which fossil men."1

separate the various species of the single A classification could not, however, be

genus Hom -sapiens, neanderthalensis, thoroughly tested in the light of these

rhodesiensis, and heidelbergensis -from criteria of differentiation unless data were

one another.10 This will not be the case if available giving the full range of variation

equal value has not been given throughout of the forms being classified. Since there

the classification of the Hominidac to are only few data relating to the variability

10 From the evolutionary point of view it might be argued that stronger emphasis could be laid in
classification on differences which exist in an earlier

of Sinanthropus, and none at all in the case of such archaic members of the Hominidcz as Pithecanthropus and Eoanthropus, the

stage of the differentiation of a group of related organisms than on equivalent or even greater differences which may be found at a later stage, e.g. the

satisfaction of these criteria cannot be insisted upon too heavily in testing the

differences between Sinanthropus and Pithecanthropus (both of which are usually referred to the beginning of the Pleistocene) should be given greater weight than those between H. sapiens and

generic status of any one of these types, while the extent to which variation in these forms is denied or admitted becomes largely

other relatively recent forms of Homo which do not fall into the species sapiens. Thus it might be said that small differences in an early geological horizon demonstrate the divergence of a group into

a matter of opinion rather than one of scientific analysis. There are certain facts, however, given in Black's 1930 monograph,

several separate lines of descent, within each of which occurs still greater differentiation (as indicated by the range of both later fossil and existing forms). Theoretically this may be true, but in practice it is extremely hard to give recognition to the point in classification. The phylogeny of systematic zoology is a series of secondary abstractions from a

which do bear on the general question of the generic and specific differences of fossil men. Thus a table is provided (p. 74) showing the values of certain measurements in the two Sinanthropus skull-caps and in

primary series constituted by correct classification.

Such classification must take cognizance of every member of the group being classified, and of the stum of all their resemblances and differences. Unless on the strength of an a priori belief special weight were attached to the characters of fossil forms, specific differences could not possibly be greater than generic ones.

11 As was noted above, the genus Sinanthropus was created to give recognition to certain peculiar characters of the tooth found in 1927. As yet no study has been published to show how far this tooth is typical of the scores of others since found in the same site, and how far the characters of all these teeth overlap with those of other anthropoid teeth.

2'78 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

twelve other fossil human skulls, of which from a single homogeneous and contempo-

ten, in accepted classification, are referred raneous population might well be." Thus

to the species H. neanderthalensis. These arises the anomalous fact that intra-specific

ten skulls were biometrically studied differences of linear dimensions of the skull

by Morant"2 who writes of them that " the are often greater than generic ones in the

type was remarkably homogeneous." Dis- Family Hominidce, as at present classified.

regarding the juvenile La Quina specimen Not only is this so, but the facts also fail

of Neanderthal man, it is clear (see Table to fit the other criterion of classification

on opposite page) that in all but two of mentioned above-namely that equal value

Black's thirteen selected dimensions, about be given in classification to characters which

which it is possible to make a statement, a serve to differentiate certain types from

smaller gap separates the Sinanthropus others. Thus a main distinguishing feature

skull-caps and those Neanderthal speci- of Neanderthal skulls is shown by Morant

mens which in these dimensions approxi- to be their peculiarly small and flattened

mate to them most closely, than that which sagittal arcs,"' the flattening and abbrevia-

separates these Neanderthal skulls from tion being demonstrated not only by the

other skulls classified in their own species. entire arc, but also by its constituent seg-

The two exceptional measurements are the ments. This phenomenon to some extent

height of the skull above the ear holes and indicates an unexpanded vault, and it is

the measurement of the least frontal therefore not surprising to find that in

breadth.

respect of the measurements defining the

In all but five of the thirteen measure- flattening, the Sinanthropus brain-cases

ments the Sinanthropus remains are con- correspond, not only to Neanderthal skulls,

sistently smaller than the Neanderthal. In but also to the Rhodesian type15 as well as

three of these five dimensions both Sinan- to Pithecanthropus. In this there again

th-ropus skulls are bigger than, or as big occurs an anomaly in the classification of

as, the smallest Neanderthal skull. Ex- the Family Hominida3. The flattening of

cluding these three measurements, ten of the sagittal arc is sufficiently pronounced

the thirteen comparative dimensions are not only to bring these archaic skulls

left, and in five of these the Gibraltar, in together, but also to differentiate them both

four the adult La Quina, and in one the from skulls of the upper Palaeolithic" and

Krapina, approximate most closely to from those of recent people. As a taxonomic

Sinanthropus. The La Chapelle specimen character, however, it cuts across accepted

is the skull furthest removed from the classification, since the Neanderthal and

Peking brain-case in almost all these ten Rhodesian types are regarded only as

dimensions."3 When superimposed contours separate species of the genus Homo (other

are examined (Black provides several such species of which do not exhibit the charac-

figures) it again becomes plain that one ter), whereas in Sinanthropus it is made

Neanderthal contour may differ from an- part of the complex of features determining

other of the same kind as much as the con- generic status.

tours of Sinanthropus differ from them all. Peculiarities of the zoological classifica-

Yet, as Morant has shown, the Neanderthal tion of man do not cease here. As one of

specimens, although widely separated from the few significant differences between
one another in space and time, form a group Sinanthropus and Pit hecanthropus, on

" not more variable than a sample drawn which he argues their generic distinction,

Black points to the fact that the vertical

12 G. M. Morant: Annals of Eugenics, Vol. II,

Parts 3 and 4, 1927.

14 The sagittal arc of a brain-case is the contour

13 Since the Mousterian type is a homogeneous of its median longitudinal section.
one, it is possible to imagine that one of its repre- 15 See Morant: Annals of Eugenics, Vol. III, Parts

sentatives (still to be found) will approximate in all 3 and 4, 1928.
Black's selected dimensions as closely to the Peking 16 See Morant: Annals of Eugenics, Vol. IV,

skulls as La Chapelle is removed from them all. Parts i and 2, 1930.

§ z;a At I. 9
u,t oJ;2t-

SINANTHROPUS AND OTHER FOSSIL MEN
4) Q)
Id I-4 10
V4Cd Cd Cl

279
4c)o

'o~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~4

Cd
.-4 - - Cd

o t ox C XC e~~~~~~~~~~~"0 0 A

00 0 CO O4

C'
d t w |: | | | ^ | t | + |N|l|Ol

l (d d C

I0O0 '0

m U-~~i) C'N N t>.. H kt- 00 00 H C' q"d

LI) ->z~~~~~~~) ~~C ~~~~~~

t 4ce
o-

N

X X N bN

~~ ~ ~4-)

_ _-

-

C" 1_

-N_ _ _

_

C.) -
Cd
4-
oI1"0mI1I1Im1s1t41141mI
ON 04-)
, 04))d
III
_
U)= '(D
04

-U7t-Q44H. en

04D

IN C) 0 CN NH

H H . HN
N '.Z C'
CN it) C HH

H0 it N

HN H C) H

Cd
ZN
,x;rX

U-~i) en) co) co)

0'%

0C0)

0 00

0C0Y)

0C0N 0C0

- X IH

HN

U) IN '~~~~~1 '~~~~~t '.0 ~~~~~~0
N co) 00 0 N

oH i) CY,) C) H '.0 C")
H t)H
CN N
H:
CtcI'N0 '1
C1% N

HH N '0 H HH

H
(ON -
H

00 C" C7%
N0 '00 0
I

0H0

r, tN% IC 0 e0

en00

00

IN-

N% C") 00

0

H

ON 0 H HHHHHH it~~~~~~~U)HH

0

ON ON

(4 .In) C)) 0
g0
(4
*(o4p,e=

4 4) p4,D v

b0
IQ *4bo~-4)

4) -
Cd 'IO

0

o

=t 4- 4

Cd

4.) 17-: 0 0

4

5~30 Y Cd 41Cd0

9

Cd
"0
4)

4L)

.4
Cd -4-I
4)
*_t

0Co
0
Cd

4 Cd

(4 0 4) o

I-

*Cd Ira.S 04) 1,.4

0

Cd
-4I

Cd

4)

*;44-)
41; 1-1 6z
C,v) Iro,0
Z -4 . 0q IIzS04

90 0

Cd 1I4 Cd Cd

04)1-4

Cd r.41 *U?

4-I

4.)

0 0

cd u4) 4-I

0
Ii

1.4

1-4

I-4(L 0. Cd

ZZZ

28o THE EUGENICS REVIEW

planes in which certain breadth measure- simply as a matter of opinion, by students

ments of the brain-cases fall, are different better versed in controversial discussion.

in the two types. Quite as important a This treatment of Neanderthal -man does

difference in one of these breadth measure- not lead one to expect a logical explanation

ments differentiates all Neanderthal skulls for the fact that the differences between this

from modern types. In their case, however, type and modern man have received smaller

it is not regarded as indicating more than recognition than the differences between

specific differentiation.

Pithecanthropus and Sinanthropus. Since,

however, it may conceivably be incorrect in

DISCREPANCIES IN THE ACCEPTED CLASSIFICATION OF THE HOMINID/E

the systematic classification of skulls to lay, on a priori grounds, equal emphasis on all

From what has been said above, it is measurable cranial characters,"9 it might

fairly plain that discrepancies, or apparent be argued that it is wrong to state that the

discrepancies, exist in the commonly morphological gap in cranial form between

accepted classification of the Hominidc, modern man and Mousterian man is no less

for on the basis of single cranial dimensions than that between the two fossil men of the

there can be little doubt that Neanderthal East. It may be that those characters in

man is differentiated from modern man quite which modern man and Neanderthal man

as definitely as Sinanthropus is from Pithe- differ are less significant than those which

canthropus. While the two Eastern forms, separate the two Eastern types. Actually,

however, are regarded as being genericallv there is little strength in such an argument,

distinct from each other, modern man and and it is very difficult to point to any

Mousterian man are placed in the same measurable criteria which justifiably could

genus--apparently an almost wholly arbi- be considered to merit greater value than

trary measure.

others for purposes of the classification of

The species, Homo neanderthalensis was the four types under consideration. The

created by King,"7 who disagreed with most likely one would perhaps be the height

T. H. Huxley's opinion" that the Neander- of the skull, which is an important measure

thal skull was simply an extreme variant of cranial expansion. Thus a few pages

of the modern skull. King himself seems to back, when considering the table of com-

have believed that the characters of the parative measurements provided by Black,

Neanderthal brain-cases were so peculiar it was pointed out that the measurement of

that they almost justified generic recogni- the height of the brain-box above the ear

tion, but in view of the strong bias against holes was one of the two dimensions in which

admitting human evolution that existed in the extent of the gap between Sinanthropus

the period when he wrote (1864), it is not and Neanderthal man was greater than the

surprising that he chose to regard the Nean- range of the distribution of this dimension

derthal remains as those of a new species of in fossils of the latter type. In all other

Homo rather than as those of an altogether dimensions except that of least frontal

new kind of man. Even this moderate view diameter, the variation within the species

was strongly opposed, and until quite H. neanderthalensis exceeded the gap

recently writers on the subject have had to

defend Neanderthal man's specific status rather than push the separation still

19 As a general rule, of course, more attention is paid in the classification of the Hominide to characters which most clearly distinguish the modern type

further. The few who, like Sergi, the of human skull from all non-human varieties. On

Italian anthropologist, were inclined to emphasize the generic distinction of the

an a priori basis, however, the many characters which come under this heading (e.g. chin, median axis of the foramen magnum, prognathism, etc.)

type, have had their views pushed aside,

cannot be differentiated amongst themselves as being more or less valuable as characters of classi-

17 Quart. Journ. Sci., Vol. I, I864. 18 Man's Place in Nature, I863. Everyman Edn.,
Dent. London. 192I.

fication. They could be, only when the ratios of their inter-and intra-racial variabilities have been found and graded for a much larger series of types than have as yet been studied.

SINANTHROPUS AND OTHER FOSSIL MEN

which separated the Peking skulls from the If special linear dimensions fail to provide

Mousterian. The height of the skull may an explanation for the accepted classification

therefore be a more signficant criterion of of Mousterian man, Sinanthropus and

differentiation than are other cranial mea- Pithecanthropus, it is still possible that

surements.

its justification could be found in the

Although both of the two chief height existence, in each of these archaic types,

dimensions of the brain-case (basi-breg- of peculiar morphological characters merit-

matic and auricular) of Neanderthal skulls ing differential treatment. Special empha-

are, relatively to their cranial lengths, less sis, for example, could be laid, as has been

than in modern types, they both in absolute done by many writers, on the peculiar

measure fall within the range of variation features of the temporal bone of Sinanthro-

of these mensions in the skulls of existing pus, particularly of its tympanic element,

menSIIere, it is then possible to argue, is a in support of its generic distinction.

reason why this archaic type should be Unfortunately, the corresponding part of

regarded not as a different genus, but as a the skull is not known in Pithecanthropus,

separate species of Homo. Sinanthropus is and so it is impossible to argue that these

different. Its skull-cap is remarkably low, two types are distinguished from each

although not so low as that of Pithecan- other in this character. Moreover, equally

thropus. With the naked eye it can be seen striking anatomical peculiarities can be

that its frontal and parietal regions are more found not only in the corresponding region,

expanded than in the Javanese Ape-Man. but also in other parts of the skull of

In this, as Professor Elliot Smith has Mousterian man (H. nealnderthalensis),

pointed out,20 Sinanthropus shows certain which differentiates this type from modern

similarities to Piltdown man, Eoanthropus man (H. sapiens). Thus on the grounds of

dawsoni. As a basis for generic distinc- special morphological characters it would

tion, however, this difference between seem that Neanderthal man as much merits

Sinanthropus and Pithecanthropus should generic distinction from Homo as Sinan-

not be too heavily stressed, since almost as thropus does from Pithecanthropus.

great a difference both in size and form (a Apart from the fact that such considera-

difference which cannot with any certainty tion of separate morphological characters

be ascribed to sex and age) separates the exposes inconsistencies in the present

two Sinanthropus specimens. Moreover, if arrangement of the Hominidce, there are

the height of the brain-case were to be made serious theoretical objections to the a

a special criterion of classification, it would priori differential evaluation of morpho-

be necessary arbitrarily to divide the dimen- logical characters in classification. When

sion into classes. Even if this were done, two different types are associated as differ-

the results would not be in accordance with ent species of the same genus, it follows

accepted classification, since variation in that they are united by more resemblances

cranial height in the Neanderthal species, than would be the case were they classified

so far as is possible to judge, is greater than in different genera. The resemblances

the difference in this dimension between which are taken into account are altogether

Sinanthropus and Pithecanthropus (heights arbitrary. As Crow has remarked on this

being judged from the n-y plane).2" On the subject,22 " each character, as it is observed

basis of this criterion, therefore, and assum- in nature, must be accorded equal weight;

ing the judgment of Morant and others there can be no evaluation of characters on

regarding the homogeneity of the Neander- the nature of the characters themselves."

thal race to be correct, Sinanthropus does Emphasis can be laid on special charac-

not merit generic distinction from Pithe- ters only when it is impartially discovered

canthropus.

that some have a wider distribution among

different types than have others, and it is

20 Nature, MaY 3oth, 1931.

21 See Biometrika, Vol. XVI, pp. 73-101, 1924.

22 Journ. Genetics, Vol. XVII, 1927.

B

282 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

as they are widely or otherwise distributed that these characters serve to differentiate the different groups (Orders, Families, Genera, Species) recognized in systematic biology. Living forms are thus classified by the sum of their physical resemblances. To suggest on a priori grounds that any one character is more important than others in classification implies a far greater knowledge of the development of new characters than actually exists. At the present time, the correct basis for systematic comparison is the quantitative evaluation of all characters, and the denial of this point of view leads only to confusion. An example will perhaps make this point clearer.
ANATOMICAL AND BIOMETRICAL CRANIOLOGY
Morant has shown,23 by exact and extensive biometric study, that the Chancelade skull (found in i888 in a definite Magdalenian stratum near the village of Raymonden in the Commune of Chancelade) cannot be differentiated in any measurable character from the mean Eskimo type, and in doing so he has demonstrated how readily the eye emphasizes a cranial divergence "which tested numerically is found to be no mark of racial differentiation at all.)" In this he is simply confirming a diagnosis made by many anatomists, including the original describer of the skull, Dr. Testut. It is on grounds to which he refers as " anatomical " that Sir Arthur Keith, however, comes to an opposite conclusion.2" He states that he is guided by characters whose value for purposes of race identification can be assessed bv the unaided eye. In stating this he is ignoring both Dr. Morant's demonstration of the fallacies to which the unaided eye may lead, and the fact that wherever thev can, anatomists, like biometricians, employ quantitative and statistical methods. Measurement can only increase the powers of observation. If it were otherwise, one might be permitted to
23 Annals. of Eugenics, Vol. I, Parts 3 and 4, 1926.
24 New Discoveries Relating to the Antiquity of Man. Williams & Norgate. London. I931.

wonder why anatomists, including Sir
Arthur Keith, constantly use it. Yet, on the strength of a photograph showing the position of the nasal bones in the Chancelade skull, before they were broken off, Sir Arthur denies the evidence, presented by the rest of the skull, of its Eskimo affinities.
The argument does not seem to be very strong. If it is true that nasal bones springing forward at such an angle as this photograph shows, could not be found in a large series of Eskimo skulls, there is yet no evidence that the condition depicted by this photograph is not one of posthumous deformation. Moreover, if the type of argument expounded by Sir Arthur is pursued, it demands the very far-reaching assumption that all the many characters in which the Chancelade and Eskimo type agree have been separately evolved in each type.
Sir Arthur himself believes that they are simply the results and evidence of similar habits, resemblances of a " functional nature " as he calls them. Thus he writes " the conditions under which the Eskimo have lived have called forth their great and peculiar development of jaws, and seeing that the European Magdalenians lived under similar climatic and cultural conditions we may presume that their jaws became modified in a manner similar to that found in modern Eskimo." Experimental science, however, provides little, if any, evidence in favour of such a view, and in the circumstances it is far less strain on the imagination to regard the conditions of the nasals as of no particular account, than to consider all the similarities between the Eskimo and Chancelade man as due to a kind of convergent evolution.
EVIDENCE OTHER THAN THE SKULLS, RELATING TO THE SYSTEMATIC POSITION OF SINANTHROPUS
The facts clearly suggest that neither measurable cranial criteria, nor cranial peculiarities which are not so readily measured, can provide justification for the seemingly unequal and inconsistent treat-

SINANTHROPUS AND OTHER FOSSIL MEN

283

ment in classification of Sinanthropus, the teeth might have been part of members

Pithecanthropus, and Neanderthal man. of the species H. soloensis,28 and it would

Up to the present, however, only skulls therefore be perhaps unwise to institute

have been considered, and possibly the comparisons between these teeth and those

characters of its jaws and teeth might pro- of Sinanthropus in order to discover a basis

vide the explanation why Sinanthropus is for the latter's generic differentiation from

generically separated from Pithecanthropus Pithecanthropus.

when Neanderthal man is only specifically

separated from Homo sapiens. Unfortu- THE NEED FOR RE-CLASSIFICATION

nately, however, these remains do not On all sides difficulties have been encoun-

help, since corresponding Pithecanthropus tered in the explanation of the unequal

material with which a comparison could be significance attached in classification to the

effected does not exist.

peculiarities of Neanderthal man, Sinan-

It will be remembered that the Pithecan- thropus, and Pithecanthropus. These diffi-

thropus discovery consisted of a brain-case, culties point to one of two conclusions-

a femur, and three teeth, all found fairly either Sinanthropus should be included in

close together (over a radius of some fifteen the genus Pithecanthropus, or alternatively

metres) between the years I89I and i898.25 the accepted classification of all extinct

The relegation of these remains to the same Hominidce should be revised. As the

individual has always been a matter for inclusion of Sinanthropus in the genus

warm dispute. The recent discovery of a Pithecanthropus would in no way straighten

new, and apparently more developed, type out difficulties in connection with Neander-

of fossil man in a site in the Solo Valley thal man, a complete revision of the classi-

only a few miles away from the one in fication is plainly required.

which the Pithecanthropus skull-cap was The inconsistencies arising in the present

found, has thrown even more doubt on the classification are due largely to the inclu-

grouping together of the several Pithecan- sion of Neanderthal man in the genus

thropus remains than their own discordant Homo, a classification the arbitrariness of

anatomical characters had already stimu- which is amply demonstrated by its history.

lated. Fortunately, the technique for exactly

This doubt is strengthened by the fact expressing the differences between skeletal

that the new skulls, for which Oppenoorth remains has developed sufficiently far in

has created a new species, Homo soloensis, recent years to reveal the futility of ex

were found in a mid-Pleistocene stratum 26 cathedra judgments regarding the correct

to which horizon certain well-known systematic allocation and phylogenetic

authorities27 are now referring the Pithe- interpretation of new finds of human fossils.

canthropus remains. The circumstances of Moreover, the time has come for a thorough

this find plainly suggest the improbability recognition in physical anthropology of the

of ever deciding whether the Pithecan- fact that the species concept as used in

thropus fossils did all belong to the same systematic biology is artificial, and that in

kind of individual. Both the femora and consequence it is necessary to define the

amount and kind of differentiation which,

25 A gap of six years separated the finding of the in the Family Hominidae, should determine

last tooth from the recovery of the previous remains. It may also be noted that a fragment of a mandible had been unearthed some time before the skull cap was found (I89I). Just recently two more femora,

either specific or generic status. Data (such, for example, as those of Morant and Black) are already available to allow of this

also found in the same period, have been described, and referred to the same species as the other

being done, and it is not until it is done

remains.

26 Oppenoorth, W. F. F.: (a) De Mijningenieur, 28 The skulls referred to this species have thus

Bandoeng, No. 6, 1932; (b) Natur und Museum, far only been superficially described. They show

Frankfurt, 62, I932.
27 See Osborn, H. F.: Science, Vol. LXIX, I929.

many resemblances to those of Neanderthal and Rhodesian men.

284 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

that due recognition will be given, both in classification and phylogeny, to the fact that such archaic types as Sinanthropus, Pithecanthropus, Eoanthropus, Neander-
thal man, and Rhodesian man, correspond to one another in a greater number of characters of significance in their classification than they do either to modern man, or to men of the Upper Palholithic.
Not the least unlikely result of a rational classification would be the subdivision of the Family Hominidae into two sub-
families, the Palwanthropidce and the Nean-
thropidcw (to use terms coined by Professor
Elliot Smith to emphasize the cultural con-

trast in their industries), the first-named containing archaic types like Sinanthropus
and Neanderthal man, the second modern
man and men of the Upper Palaeolithic.
But whether or not a rational classification results in such a sub-division of the
Hominidae, it will at any rate allow of both the immediate recognition of the essential similarities between different types, and of more convincing speculation as to phylogenetic relationships than is possible at present, when opinions in these matters are
largely determined by an unquestioned faith in a classification whose history examina-
tion shows to be largely unscientific.

THE GALTON DINNER
will be held at
THE REMBRANDT HOTEL
SOUTH KENSINGTON
On Thursday, February 16th, at 7.15 p.m. for 7.30
The Galton Lecture "MY OUTLOOK ON EUGENICS"
will be given by
THE HONBLE. Mr. JUSTICE McCARDIE Sir Thomas Horder, Bt., K.C.V.O., M.D., F.R.C.P., will be in the Chair
Fellows and Members are requested to get their tickets (10/6) from the General Secretary as early as possible
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 4.

