REVIEWS OF BOOKS

rapidly acquired speech, and his IQ score rose. Monsieur A. Isambert describes the develop-

At eight he entered a school for the blind, and at ment of the well-known "Schools for Parents"

sixteen the Royal Normal College for the Blind. which have been successfully developed in

At eighteen he was a well-poised young man France since the last war, having been founded

with considerable charm and good looks, and in 1929 as part of a scheme to overcome the

wide interests. The remarkable change in mental indifference of parents to their children's sexual

and emotional development was due to skilled and emotional problems. The school in Paris

teaching, warm interest and affection.

at first concentrated on teaching parents about

child development, based on psychoanalytic

HILDA LEWIS principles, but was later drawn into much

broader fields of educational psychology and

sociology. It also provides personal psychological

Aspects of Family Mental Health in Europe. By various authors. Public Health Papers, No. 28. Geneva, 1965. WHO. Pp. 124. Price 8s. 6d.

help for the parents themselves, marriage guidance, and advice for young people. M. Isambert enumerates similar organizations in
other European countries, but comments on the relatively slight interest shown in Britain.

THIS BOOK, CONTAINING papers written by Among other papers dealing with the role of

psychiatrists, therapists and other workers from individual and group psychotherapy in clearing

a number of European countries, is evidence of up family upsets, an account by Drs. Jirina

the current widespread interest in the family. Knoblochova and Ferdinand Knobloch of the

The first paper is a stimulating account by methods practised at the Psychiatric Department

Dr. H. Hoffmeyer of the work done for the of the University Polyclinic, Prague, shows how

mother and the family particularly in Scandi- far such efforts have advanced in Central

navian countries, through family protection Europe.

schemes, and specifically in Denmark through The British contributions include an account

the famous "Mothers' Aid Centres". These of the Family Discussion Bureau at the Tavistock

centres provide legal, social, medical and Institute of Human Relations, and of the Child

psychiatric services for unmarried as well as Therapy Clinic at Hampstead, described by

married women. They have a duty to interview Mrs. L. Pincus and Dr. Joseph Sandler

and help women seeking abortion: to provide respectively.

contraceptive advice, to supervise adoptions,

HILDA LEWIS

to support with financial and other aid over-

burdened mothers, and to help resolve family

discord. There is much in these schemes which

ABORTION

is relevant to the revision of our own abortion laws and the Seebohm Committee's inquiry into better ways of integrating our local authority

Abortion: An Ethical Discussion. London, 1965.
Church Information Office. Pp. 70. Price 4s. 6d.

and personal social services.

THIS REPORT IS the work of a committee set up

Among the papers dealing with practical by the Board for Social Responsibility of the

social welfare, there is an interesting account by Church Assembly of the Church of England,

a psychiatrist of the slowly changing situation under the chairmanship of Canon I. T. Ramsey,

in the employment of women in Spain-a Nolloth Professor of the Philosophy of the

country particularly late in making use of this Christian Religion at Oxford, the secretary being

reservoir of labour and talent. Various suppor- the Reverend G. R. Dunstan. It is lucid, impartial,

tive schemes and centres to protect the family and thorough, and presents a cogent argument

from breakdown have already been found for a limited reform of the present law, while

necessary, although at the same time the stopping short of the proposals made by Lord

cultural value of widening the women's horizons Silkin in the Bill which has recently been before

has been recognized.

the House of Lords.

167

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

It is a typically Anglican report, valuable for
its endeavour to understand and do justice to both sides, and for its attempt to reconcile them in a practical, moral, and humane solution of this pressing problem of the termination of pregnancy. Both the extremes, of uncontrolled liberty and of absolute prohibition, are rejected,
and an ethical mean is established which pays regard to the rights of the foetus, the health of the mother, and the good of society. While relying no longer upon traditional beliefs about the point at which the "soul" was thought to animate the body, the committee is firm in its recognition of the moral significance of the foetus as potentially a human life which should be destroyed only for the weightiest reasons. Its "broad conclusion" is that "in certain circumstances abortion can be justified"-that is, if it could be "reasonably established that there was a threat to the mother's life or wellbeing, and hence inescapably to her health" the existence of such a threat being decided by the doctor concerned, in full consultation with those competent to advise him upon the different

professional and personal issues involved. In particular, such consultation would be important in cases of rape or incest, or where there seemed to be a risk of a defective or deformed child being born; always the decision taken should be grounded upon the "prognosis concerning the mother as affected by the pregnancy in question"-and in this connection it would be wrong to take insufficient account of the capacity of persons to respond to the challenge of difficult circumstances. Suggested amendments to Lord Silkin's Bill indicate the means by which reform could most satisfactorily be attained, though the Report stresses the importance ofsupplementing legal reform by education.
Should a second edition of the Report be called for (and it is to be hoped that it will be) consideration might be given to the claim that emotional stress during pregnancy may adversely affect the unborn child (pp. 37 and 46); many experts in the field involved would not accept such a claim on the basis of the authorities cited.
SHERWIN BAILEY

OTHER NOTICES

Barish, Natalie. The Gene Concept. London, index. Altogether the book is a "must" for the

1966. Chapman and Hall. Pp. xi+116. Price student who has not got a clue-he will soon

lOs. 6d. Paperback.

have one.

THIS LITTLE PAPERBACK iS one of the "Selected Topics in Modern Biology" series.

K. H.

The series editor, Peter Gray, describes it as a "background book" designed to help the young
student in his introductory biology course. Naturally, the author (of Chatham College,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania) starts off with a

Delevoryas, Theodore. Plant Diversification. Modern Biology Series. New York and London, 1966. Holt Rinehart and Winston. Pp. vii+145. Price 18s. Paperback.

chapter on "Mendel and his famous peas" and THIS LITTLE BOOK is an introduction to the

carries the reader along with her in her enthusi- study of plants. It is written from a new point

asm for all the "intriguing" and "exciting" of view in which fossils and classification, discoveries which have been made since then. breeding systems and physiology are all brought

There are plenty of good, clear diagrams-a in to play. The illustrations, both diagrams and

few of them reproduced from the classics of photographs, are a pleasure to see.

genetic writing-a very full glossary and a good

C. D. D.

168

