CORRESPONDENCE.

357

matter determining that such applicant is entitled to such certificate of health presented and filed with such county clerk, shall have the same foroe and effect as such certificate and such county clerk shall thereupon issue a license to marry, to such applicant.
5. Any person a resident of this State, who with intent to evade
the provisions of this Act shall go into another State and there have a marriage solemnized and who within one year from date of such marriage
shall return and reside in this state, shall upon information or knowledge to the district attorney of any county be required by him to file with the county clerk of any county in which such person may be then a resident, a certificate of examination from such physician as set forth
in this section. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection
shall be punished by imprisonment in the county jail not less than
thirty days nor more than one year. 6. Any county clerk who shall unlawfully issue a license to marry
to any person who fails to present and file the certificate provided by
subsection i of this section, or any party or parties having knowledge of any matter relating or pertaining to the examination of any applicant for license to marry, who shall disclose the same, or any portion thereof, except as may be required by law, shall upon proof thereof be guilty of a felony, and shall be punished by imprisonment in the State prison not less than one year nor more than five years.
7. Any physician who shall knowingly and wilfully make any false statement in the certificate provided for in subsection I of this section shall be guilty of perjury and upon conviction shall be punished as for perjury, and a conviction under this subsection shall revoke the license of such physician to practice in this State.
Section 2.-All Acts or parts of Acts inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are repealed.
Section 3.-This Act shall take effect on and after January ist,
1914.
This Act originated in the Senate. Approved by the Governor, August Ist, 1913.

THE ALLEGED INFERIORITY OF THE FIRST-BORN.
In the October number of the EUGENICS REVIEW there is a paper by Mr. S6ren Hansen adducing evidence that amongst the tuberculous patients in a Copenhagen hospital there were 6I per cent. more first-born than might be expected if liability to consumption were independent of order in the family. This evidence is corroborated by M. Lucien March, who, in the same volume, quotes further similar evidence from Professor Pearson as regards tuberculosis, and also gives diagrams showing an excessive number of first-born amongst criminals, lunatics, and sufferers from extreme myopia.
It has been suggested in explanation of these results that prenatal conditions are less favourable in the case of the first-born. But if thi.s unfavourable environment has such an enormous influenoe on the subsequent life of the child, then the principle of the predominance of nature over environment, which is at the basis of the eugenic movement, will have to be reconsidered. I do not, however, believe that there is

358 EUGENICS REVIEW.

sufficient evidence of the inferiority of the first-born, and will proceed

to criticise Mr. Hansen's paper. Before doing so I should say that I

believe my criticisms to be equally valid against other writers who have

arrived at conclusions similar to his.

I suggest that there are three sources of error in Mr. Hansen's

paper. The first is in his method of calculating the probable number

of first-born.

Mr. Hansen deals with 3,522 patients. These persons had 17,078

brothers and sisters. The total number of persons in the 3,522 infected

families was therefore 20,600, of whomn 3,522 were patients. How

many first-born should one expect to find amongst these 3,522 patients?

Mr. Hansen argues thus about one-sixth of all the members of the

infected families were patients, and there were 3,522 first-born in all

the families. Therefore we should expect to find about one-sixth of

3,522, or 602 first-born patients. Now in making this calculation he

takes no account of the fact that there must be one patient in each

family. He simply takes 3,522 persons at random from amongst the

20,600 members of the infected families and asks how many first-born

there are amongst these 3,522 persons. He should have taken one

person at random from each of the 3,522 families. The difference

between the two methods can be shown by a simple example. Sups

pose that there are two families one consisting of one member only,

the other of 20 members. If (following Hansen's method) two persons

are taken at random from the two families combined, the probable

number of first-born will be 2 x 2 = I9; while, if (following my method)

one is taken from each family the probable number of first-born will

be one from the family of one and 1 from the family of 20, the total

being Io5.

To calculate the probable number of first-born from Hansen's

table, on page 254, we take I78, the number of patients with no brothers

or sisters who are all first-born, one-half of the fraternities with two

mfembers, one-third of those with three and so on, then the sum

1I78 X3
first-born.

+ 424, etc., which equals 89I is the expected This compares with Hansen's expectation of

number of 602. The

actual number is 988, II% more than mv number and 64% more than

Hansen's.

The method of calculation which is adopted by Dr. Hansen was

used by Professor Pearson in " A First Study of The Statistics of

Pulmonary Tuberculosis," and by Dr. Heron in " A First Study of

the Statistics of Insanity," and also apparently by Professor Pearson

when constructing a diagram referring to criminals, which is quoted in

the October number of this REVIEW.

There is a second source of error which is deserving of notice.

It has hitherto been assumed that if a person of a given age is selected

at random from amongst fraternities of a given size then all positions

in that fraternity are equally likely. But this is not the case. If the

number of births has been increasing he is more likely to be one of the

older members of his fraternity, and if the number has been decreasing

he is more likely to be a younger member. For while the number of

births is increasing there are more children born every year who belong

to the first half of their fraternities than who belong to the second half.

CORRESPONDENCE.

359

Take any man A. who was born in I870 and suppose that we know
that he has or has had a brother B., who is five years older or five years
younger than himself, which year I875 or i865 is the more probable as
the year of B.'s birth? Obviously, if there were more males born in
1875 than in i865 B. is more likely to have been bor in I875. A.
then it is more likely to be B.'.s elder brother than his younger. The excess of first-born due to this variation ofl yearly births is not very easy to calculate. But I think one can safely assert that it is by no means
negligi ble. A third possible source of error is inaccuracy of the data. The
information as to size of family and order of birth seems to have been
obtained from the patients themselves, some of whom may have been stupid or careless, and it must have been very difficult to check the accuracy of their information. This suspicion of inaccuracy has been strengthened by an examination of Mr. Hansen's table, which shows a remarkable bias towards even numbers both as regards the size of the families "and the patient's position in them. The numbers of the patients who described themselves as tenth in a family of io and twelfth in a family of I2 also seem strangely high.
Now it is a curious fact that inaccuracy would be liable to cause an apparent excess of first-born. For the mistake most likely to be made would be the omission of those brothers or sisters of the patient who died before the patient was a year old. Such omissions might considerably raise the proportion of those described as first-born, and although the calculated expectation of the proportion of first-born would also be raised, it would nlot be raised to the same extent. To give an
example. Suppose there are twelve fraternities, each consisting of two
brothers, and that in each fraternity one brother dies within a year of his birth and the other brother survive,; and becomes a patient. In half the cases it is the elder brother wh-o survives. He describes himself as first-born in a family of two. In the other six cases the younger brother survives. As he has no recollection of his elder brother who died before he was born he describe.s himself as an only child. So we have twelve persons, six of wlhom are described as belonging to fraternities of one and six as belonginga to fraternities of two. We should expect according to the ordinary calculation to find nine first-born amongst these twelve persons, while, in fact, we find all twelve described as first-born. The omission of elder brothers who died young has therefore raised the apparent number of first-born to 33% above the
expected number. A similar result can be shown in the case of larger fraternities. It
therefore seems possible that the apparent excess of first-born may be partly due to this factor.
J. A. COBB.

