R. W. PARNELL
M.A., D.M., M.R.C.P., Research Physician, The Warneford Hospital, Oxford. (External Staff of Medical Research Council).

Physique and Family Structure*

W HEN LAST I SPOKE to your Society types and thereby increase confidence in the

(1952), on the subject of recording procedure of somatotyping, which when carried

human constitution, I mentioned that out by photography alone provides no final

there was hardly a topic of social interest from court of appeal beyond subjective opinion.

murder to matrimony on which records of Details of these technical modifications may be

constitution do not touch, and cannot quicken found in my recent book on Behaviour and

interest. I have not spent the intervening years Physiquet and I need not therefore devote more

studying murder, but I have examined certain time to describing them here in greater detail.

aspects of marriage. Among these are the There, too, you may find an account of a pilot

variety of human matings, the kinds of children study of the parents and children in forty-five

born to different unions, the varying sex ratio families: this was the main stimulus for the

of offspring, their individual attitudes, per- further survey about which I want to tell you

formance at school and university, sexual this evening. Somatotyping is now pretty widely

interest and activity, tendency to marry or known, but for anyone who may not be familiar

remain single, and variations in family size. with it, let me just insert one or two introductory

The study of eugenics has proceeded by notes, including, in particular, a description of

attempting to avoid what is defective: but in my the somatochart about which much of the dis-

view more emphasis is needed on a positive cussion must inevitably revolve, and without

outlook which might lead to the birth of a better which the gist of what I have to say may not be

population. Any possibility of bringing this understood.

about by conscious endeavour depends on the Somatotype is expressed as a three-numeral

definition of attainable good qualities: it is not index of body build descriptive of the amount of

enough to say what is wanted, we need better endomorphy, mesomorphy and ectomorphy

understanding of how to achieve it. But before according to Sheldon's definition, each being

this we need knowledge of what normally measured on a seven-point scale with maximum

happens. People may be less shy now than they 7 and minimum 1. This index is an abstract

used to be of undressing their minds in public, concept describing the genetically determined

but imagine, if you can, a stockbreeder refusing path through life that is expected for a healthy

to look at his stock physically, and you may be individual of a particular build. However, we

surprised at the notable absence of reliable can more easily measure people than abstract

records of physique in most human biological concepts that are difficult to define with pre-

studies.

cision, and so I shall speak of a phenotype index

The method of classifying physique that I comprising three scores on seven-point scales,

shall use stems from modification of Sheldon's the first for fat, the second for muscularity, the

system of somatotyping. The modification con- third for linearity of build.

sists of employing physical anthropometric The somatochart is a map on which the

measures of bone, fat and muscle. These bring various indices may be plotted. People of similar

greater consistency of typing by different physical appearance with similar indices are

observers, for they add sharper definition to found close together, those with widely differing

* A paper read at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics

Society on March 18th, 1959.

t London, 1958. Edward Arnold.

7S

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, June 1959, 51, 2

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

CHILDREN OF FAT PAR
(F4+ x F4+)

ENTSFAMIAmFiLY STUDY.

CHILDREN OF THIN
PARENTS

/ ,,,

(F32- x F32-) 04 ;

FAT

~301

~~

@

451

#. 3\

09

351 \

\\

w^ \FIGURE 1.

/" ^394
/ _ \>M3

/

a

<r

,"
\

Y

,,,Illustrating the difference in physique among children of fat and thin

parents.

9. 3"54T
I731 S
* 4~~~~~~~4

0 2 33 203"

A SONEMATiC TWOWDMPICONAL PROSCTON OF TIll THMIOUCAL SPATIAL RELAT1#NWSM AMONG 1r6 IKOWN SOMATOrfS

physiques appear far apart. It is a tripolar chart, the three poles indicating extreme development in each component with minimum scores in the remaining two, e.g. the extremely fat 711, extremely muscular 171, or extreme in linearity 117. The mid-point is 444 and represents individuals of near average measurements and thus balanced proportions of each component. The three main sectors of the somatochart, F, M, L, cover primary dominance of Fat, Muscularity or Linearity; the small letters f, m, 1 indicate the secondary dominance in the sub-sectors. In arriving at component scores, allowance is made for changes in subcutaneous fat and weight brought about by age.
Pilot Family Study
Let us start then with the distribution of parents in the pilot family study already mentioned (Behaviour andPhysique, p. 50, Somatochart 11). The fathers are mostly distributed in the more muscular sectors of the somatochart sectors Mf, Ml and Lm, but there are a few others, five in sector Lf, one in sector Fl and two in Fm. The

distribution of mothers, on the other hand, lies mostly in the dominantly fatter sectors Fm, Fl and Lf, together with some in Mf, but none as it happens in the thin muscular sectors Ml and Lm. This is what is found when the same standards of measurement are used for both men and women.*
Variety of Matings. The first point of importance we may notice is the great variety of matings encountered. Considered in terms of the six sub-sectors (omitting central 444 for the moment) there would be 36 possible kinds of matings. Actually eighteen of these were found among the forty-five pilot families, and the largest number of one kind was seven, between Ml men and Fm women. Twelve theoretically possible matings are not represented in the sample because no Ml or Lm women were present. It is evident that before any adequate grasp of the variety of human matings can be
* The arguments in favour of common standards are described by W. H. Sheldon (1954) in Atlas of Men. The need for some correction of the women's distribution is discussed in Behaviour and Physique, p. 25.

76

PHYSIQUE AND FAMILY STRUCTURE

obtained, very large numbers of families must and Physique, p. 46. Broadly speaking one may

be examined. The process of selecting a mate is summarize them by saying that about one-half

not so specific, in the sense that one kind of of the children appeared to fall on a line drawn

person always choses one kind of mate, that the between their parents on the somatochart; that

natural history of mating can be greatly simpli- about one-quarter fell clearly at some distance

fied, or that we can afford to ignore the real and from this line, and in the remainder there was

recognizable variety that exists. On the other doubt about the relationship in likeness. These

hand, human mating is anything but random, findings serve as a stimulating start in a new

however desirable that might be from a statisti- field, but it is obvious at this stage that the exact

cian's point of view. I doubt, too, if there is mathematical relationships underlying these

much biological meaning in the concept of an happenings have not been clarified, although

average marriage.

one might anticipate something of the kind

Variety of Children. At this point I should like discovered, from the assumption that half the

you to vizualizc a muscular father type Ml (163) child's genes are contributed by each parent.

and a fat mother type Fm (731). Imagine if you Difficulties in interpretation arise for several

will what kind of children would be born to reasons. First, the exact genetic equivalents of

these parents, assuming some degree of family male and female somatotypes are not known, if

likeness. Now, as a contrast, consider father indeed they can be, and some doubt exists

type Lf (415) and mother type Lf (2126) and therefore about the exact position for plotting

recreate in your mind's eye a new picture of them on a somatochart.* Secondly, the somato-

family likeness among their children. One may

doubt the two families would look much alike. * Equivalent percentile ranking as suggested by W. H.

"Line Principle". The findings in the pilot survey have been reported in detail in Behaviour

Sheldon (1954, Atlas of Men, p. 16) would ignore any sex differential in pre-natal mortality; as will be seen later there is evidence that differential mortality occurs.

FIGURE 2.
IUustrating the difference in physique
among children of more muscular and less muscular parents.

CHILDREN OF MUSCULAR PARENTS jFFAMILY STUDY. (M4+x M4+) *

CHILDREN OF WEAKER /

N. MUSCULARITY.

PARENTS

1/3".

(M32- x M32-C)/j" a

4

do
5/.w 4 dIS

*10I .
0O, jI 1
553 as'5

\
\

t i,

A
M4+

as

M

M.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.5
sa~~4

3-ER

A 5CsEMATSc

AMOEN; TrfE KNOWN SOMATOTP3
77

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

CIULDREN oP LINEAR PARtENTS "
(L4+ x L4+) *

~ FAmiLY STuDY.

CULDREN oF NON-LINEAR <7

LINEARITY.

PARENTS

us

(L3- x L3O) 0//u

I

Y/ n .

\

/a"u

S2 sos.'

2
010

IQ

Jr F Pv,4e\' (13 e

L44 / us",

FIGURE 3.
Illustrating the difference in physique
among chilldirneenar opfarleinntesa.r and non-

9 3x

3f4

6n orci m~~~~~~~~~~~~u

sa _l *10u

£ ~pmy~~np~en'~PI1SC~WOP1) ISOu C 5P£2A SSIOPS£N 46SOSSM?1P

typing of young children is not easy (the children with more than four children per family among

in this survey were seven years old), and there the most muscular mothers. This clue was

are further difficulties because the phenotype followed up on data from 393 women mental

distribution of the children (Behaviour and hospital patients over thirty years of age: in them

Physique, p. 50) is more central than that of their significantly larger families were found for

parents, due most probably to their as yet women with higher ratings in muscularity.

incompletely differentiated growth in fat and Sex Ratio of Children Hypothesis. Reports of

muscularity. To overcome some of these diffi- variation in the sex ratio of children born under

culties it is clearly desirable as a next step to a particular star or other special set of circum-

measure a group of young adults together with stances go back a long way in history. Most have

their parents, for the typing of adults is more proved unfounded, so that to enter discussion of

reliable.

a topic of such ill repute must test the temerity

There are two other findings from this pilot of any serious investigator. It was with mis-

family study which seemed important enough to givings therefore that I viewed the earliest

require further investigation at the earliest suggestion from the pilot survey that the body

opportunity. The first was family size, the second build of parents might influence the sex ratio of

the sex ratio of children born to different kinds their children. I was encouraged to report the

of mating.

results, however, because confirmatory findings

Family Size. With regard to family size, the were unearthed when examining the sex ratio of

first clue was that the marriage of the four Mf the children born to 337 mothers and 171 fathers

mothers to M fathers produced seventeen chil- who had been seen and questioned specifically

dren, whereas at the other extreme seven Fl on the sex of their children in course of a survey

women produced only fifteen children, giving of mental hospital patients. From the three sets

an average of 2-1 children per family compared of data a tentative hypothesis was formulated

78

PHYSIQUE AND FAMILY STRUCTURE

that the mating of muscular men and muscular women tends to produce an excess of boys, and that fatter and less muscular men and women tend to produce more girls.
Summarizing what has so far been said it will be seen that there are four primary features in family studies that demand further investigation. We need:
(1) to establish the recognizable variety in human matings;
(2) to establish the form and variety of children born to particular kinds of matings;
(3) to examine the fertility of specific kinds of marriage;
(4) to further confirm and, if possible, establish the reasons for variations in the sex ratio among children from particular matings.
All four appear to deal with fundamental facets of human biology, and it was the imperative need to gather further information on these topics that led to the survey of some 900 university students' families which I want to describe now.
The Birmingham Survey For some years past it has been customary,

through the kindness of Dr. R. H. Bolton, to
include a phenotype assessment at the routine health examination of all students entering Birmingham University. It has proved possible with two measurers and two clerks, working at two minute stations, to measure the entire
University entry (740 men and 224 women last year) during the course of one week. In 1958 a third station was added at which each student was invited to choose from a set of nine standard three-view photographs that which most closely resembled his father's physique: then from a second set of photographs he chose the one most closely resembling his mother's. The following is a list of phenotype photographs included in each series.

No. 1 No. 2 No. 3 No.4 No. 5 No.6 No.7 No. 8 No. 9

Fathers 462 5J4 1j 5 2j4 2j53 335 4 1Ij5 344 1j3 5*
1 117

Mothers 4 4J2 5 4 1* 6*2*1
3j43j 5 3*3
524 334
2J3 5 2*2 6

SoNS oF FATHERs 462 & 52412 MARRED TO MOTHERS

_

BHAM SURVEY, 1958.

4422 &5412

74

3
"j"

|

L \ L32-2
\ ~~~~~~~7~.~~L4+

FIGURE 4.
Illustrating the distribution of sons who considered both parents to be
""pyknic'".

X s '.

"S'S'

A SCIMEMKI ?*AWO.lilNOlA PSOIICTIOW 00 THMPTEOICA& SPAIIAL SKATICONShhhS AMOWO4 TNll KNOWN SOMATOTYPI
79

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

SoNs OF FATHERS 344 mmwigo Z

BHAM SURVEY 1958

TO MOTHERS 334. 01 \

4' 1

/ ~ ~ ~~~~~~I\

,M/,e, ,,,

,A ,, ,,,

em /S ;Nt,\ 1!gy

4~~~~~~~~~~~~~3

-S

4535

woes
/\ ,,,

I

^Z/FIGURE 5. Illustrating the distribution of sons who chose Father type 344 and
\Mother ptayrpenets"3'34phyassiqnueea.rest their

0SM

rFutc wolol

SM AS

AM

M

S

A SCNSAMATIC TWOS0MUNSIONAL PItOJC?IOS OF PSI TSSOASTICA SPATIAL SSLATIOSSNPS A5055 15 KNOWNS 505ATOTVPS

Now the question uppermost in your minds is are correctly chosen, and similar relationships

likely to be: "What reliance can one place on are present. The results will yield at best a

students' estimates of their parents' physique- minimal statement of any underlying truth.

in fact, can one place any reliance on their That the survey proved worthwhile will become

guesses, when admittedly a proportion approach- clear from the results, but it is important to keep

ing one-third will say they have never seen their in mind the likely limits of accuracy. No one will

parents either nude or in a bathing costume?" deny the immense advantage of being able to

The range of physiques in the photographs was collect so large an amount of family data in so

limited deliberately to preclude too many ex- short a time. The subsequent development of a

treme types, because it was felt that parents of family photograph test for use with mental

this kind would be comparatively rare, and hospital or other patients depends not only on

secondly that students would be less willing to the information gathered about normal family

identify their parents with anything so extreme. backgrounds, but also on the accuracy with

The range is still wide however, and it should be which photographs are chosen, and this must

remembered that it is not necessary to see some- therefore be considered next. It will be estimated

one undressed to decide whether they are linear here by considering the results of homo- and

or obese. In undertaking the survey the basic heterogeneous matings.

argument ran as follows: If students are completely unable to select correctly corresponding

Homogeneous and Heterogeneous Matings

photographs, their errors will randomise and Figures 1, 2 and 3 illustrate the phenotype dis-

lead to non-significant results; they will not tributions of children born to homogeneous

confirm expectations based on the pilot family matings where both parents were rated four or

survey. Significant confirmation of expectations more in a particular component. Table 1 shows

will only be obtained in so far as photographs the proportion of children rated 4 or more in any

So

PHYSIQUE AND FAMILY STRUCTURE

component who spring from four different kinds of marriage: where both parents were rated 4 or more, where both parents had 31 or less, where the father was 4 plus and mother 3j minus, and
lastly the converse. The last two may be des-
cribed as heterogeneous matings, and in these the proportion of 4+ children is, as one might expect, close to that for the sample as a whole. A higher proportion of children from homogeneous matings are like their parents. Similar proportions of 4+ children were found in the
pilot and Birmingham surveys, 45 9 per cent and 45*0 per cent respectively from heterogeneous matings. But the proportion from homogeneous matings which rose to 76 5 per cent in
the pilot survey, rose only to 59 per cent in the Birmingham survey. In short, the errors in photographic estimates appear to reduce the efficiency of this technique by roughly a half compared with when parents are measured as well as the children. The true difference between
the results of homogeneous and heterogeneous matings may, of course, be greater than this. One must remember, too, that efficiency in this

kind of test may be greatly reduced by halfpoint errors in the measurements of students themselves; errors of this degree are to be expected in somatotyping, and the cut-off at
4+, 31 - is near the centre of the scale where subjects are most numerous.
Matings lustrated
In many ways it is easier to illustrate genetic influence on family likeness than to give a comprehensible yet concise enough account in numerical terms. Figure 4 illustrates the families of marriages between Fathers 462 and 5*41* and
Mothers 44j2 and 5411. Here we have a group
of marriages between what may be described as pyknic men and pyknic women. Twenty-one of
the twenty-eight sons were rated 31 or less in
linearity. Only one was a pronounced ectomorph.
Figure 5: Father 344 x Mother 334. The sons congregate closely near the parents.
Figure 6: Father 344 x Mother 53*3. Here the twenty-four sons are plotted who assessed their own physique correctly. They congregate very closely. To estimate one's own physique is, of

SONS OF FATHERS 344 MARRIED ,tS #A0M
TO MOTHERS 5323

SHOWING 24 WHO ASSESSED I/In

THEIR OWN PWSIQUE CORRECTLY.

i

/

\,
,\

SURVEY 958.
N 36.

FIGURE 6.

Illustrating the distribution of sons

/

who chose Father type 344 and

Mother type 53j3 as nearest their

/

parents' physique. Twelve who failed

to assessarteheoirmiotwtnedph(syeseiqteuxet.c)o.rrectly / -

a 731

*|
a, | ,\ *,
no w 43

am Pu em~~~~Su

A

w aa

A SCW#MATIC TWODIsaE55At PROJON OP TM THEOIMKAL SPATIAL U"LK*1W$ AMONG VW KNON SOMAIOIWI
8x

Sos OP FATHgRs 344 1 335
4AaID ToMarm 2226 '

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
BHAM SURVEY. 1958. \\

16f-/

tf

,"
4/\ -

_ su
*/
"/ " oU b tb \3
0

w

X
\

P~~~~~~~~~~I7G.URE
Illustrating the distribution of sons
who chose Fathers type 344 and 335
and Mother type 2126 as nearest their parents' physique.

~~~~~PfNC*N 0K TM YM0Wl SAInAL RIAMO &M4

O" SOAOM

course, a different exercise from telling other people's build, but the remaining twelve sons who were poor judges of themselves may have been less good judges of their parents too, for their distribution was rather more scattered.
Figure 7: Fathers 344 and 335 x Mother 2J26.
This represents two sets of marriages between men and women of linear build. Most of the sons are linear too, but there is some drift in the distribution towards fat. The exact reason for this is not clear, but it may be that some sons credited their mothers with greater slenderness than they really possessed. Figure 8: Father 462 x Mother 2j26. Here we have the distribution of sons from matings of almost polar opposite builds. It is a smallish sample but it is notable that the sons are distributed apparently evenly along a line between father and mother. They do not congregate, as the general distribution does, near the centre of the chart, half-way between the parents. If in time a larger sample can be gathered, it may become possible to decide between the natural distribution that would characterize multifactorial inheritance, and the more even distribution suggesting segregation of characteristics belong to only a few genes.
I hope I have said enough to convince you of genetic influence on body type, and also that in

somatotyping we have a useful instrument for investigating the inheritance of body shape.
Other Aspects-Sex Ratio in Students' Families
Now I want to turn to other aspects of the survey. You will realize from the fact that two sets of nine photographs were employed that the possible number of different matings in this experimental design totals eighty-one. The variety of matings reported was actually sixtysix. The total number of sons whose parents were alive and sufficiently well known to identify was 605.* Thus the size of samples of individual matings was usually small-too small, for instance, to study the sex ratio of their children in a satisfactory way. But it is possible to look at the proportion of brothers and sisters of students who claimed that their fathers had one particular build (see Table 2). Bearing in mind the hypothesis mentioned earlier that more muscular fathers tend to have more sons, and fatter men more daughters, the fathers were
* Those whose parent's likeness lay between two photo-
graphs have been excluded from the analysis.

82

PHYSIQUE AND FAMILY STRUCTURE

grouped in this way. A significant excess of sons Such a notion fits the facts where there is an

was found for more muscular fathers as antici- excess of boys, but where there is an excess of

pated, and more daughters were found in the girls it would not, and it would be necessary then

families offatter men. The sex ratios encountered to postulate some perhaps unlikely quality in the

range from seventy-six for the children of fatter vaginal medium to confer aquatic superiority on

men, to 123 for those of the more muscular. the larger headed x sperm. If sex-linked lethal

The difference reaches the 2 per cent level of genes are postulated, a similar double argument

significance. In the pilot family study sex ratios with certain genes lethal to girls, and others

showed greater variation, ranging from 62 lethal to boys, would need to be advanced. On

to 181, but we have already seen how much less the whole it seems more likely that some differ-

efficient students' photographic estimates may be ential failure in implantation, or differential in

than actual measurement.

miscarriage rate, must be sought as explanation.

The implications ofthese admittedly surprising These suggestions are not, of course, incom-

findings are considerable, for if we assume that patible with the usual slightly masculine sex

the numbers of potentially male and female ratio found for the sample as a whole.

sperm are equal, the disparities in sex ratio must arise subsequently, either before fertilization, or Evidence from the Somatotype Distribution

later by means possibly ofsex-linked lethal genes, We know there are limits to muscularity for

by failure at implantation or through miscar- women, and also fewer endomorphic men: this

riage. Should we speculate that male determining lack of balance in somatotype distribution could

sperm from muscular men are more active and be due, in part, to sex hormonal differences in

therefore reach their target first? Their heads growth, but I see no reason to suppose it must

are smaller than the female kind, and even a be due to this alone. If more girls are lost from

short head would count, without a photo finish. matings between muscular parents, we should be

SONS OF FATHERS 462 MARRIED O£0'
TO MOTHERS 2226.
ole

B HAM SURVEY,_ 958.

FIGURE 8.
Illustrating the distribution of sons who chose Father type 462 and Mother type 2j26 as nearest their
parents' physique.

/\ 'U /
p."3

. ,*,

5445
2M

Kon
452 2~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~3

A SOIM*TIC

A P CTM 1of5IN 2C SPAATL ILATONSISf AMOIIG tH KOWN SOMATOTMS
83

THE TEN COmmONEST MATINGS.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW BHAM SRVEY, 1958.

P M3I

\S

/ X~3

FIGURE 9.

|, ,\4 l3lustrating the ten commonest

~243~~~~~~~~~~ains (For fuller description see

21 text.)

9on

A

TVo NO

0C,1100N

sCn

i SO

left with an excess of boys in this area of the somatochart. If potentially weak or mesopenic sons of mesopenic parents do not survive in adequate numbers, then an excess of endomorphic girls in this area would be the consequence. This is the situation as we know it.
At present there is no satisfactory data on abortion rates from various matings, nor of the sex ratio of abortuses. The topic as a whole is linked to rates of fertility, but where planned parenthood predominates, very close links are unlikely if parents stop once they have achieved their wishes. In such a situation, any differences found may be tied more closely to temperamental wishes than to fertility itself. We can examine variations in family size in a moment, but first let us look at certain interesting features in the frequency of different matings.
Commoii Matings
Figure 9 shows the ten commonest matings found. Their numerical size ranges from thirtysix to seventeen, and it is not surprising to find

that the central photograph in the mothers' series (type 53j3, which was chosen altogether 184 times) figures in five of the ten commonest
unions. Similarly, the mid-range photograph for fathers, type 344, appears in four of the com-
monest marriages, one of which with mother
5313 has already been mentioned. The last three
common marriages were with mother type
3J43j, though I suspect 4314 may be nearer the
real centre of her distribution. If my suspicions are correct, there is only one common mating in
which the mother is strongly dominant to her husband in the second component, muscularity: this is mother 53j3 x father 4115, and its
frequency here may be related to the fact that
we are dealing with a university sample. It is
much commoner, as one might expect, for
husbands to be dominant in muscularity. Certain parents are conspicuous by their absence from the commonest matings: they include peripheral types such as fathers 51411, 524, 11I7, and 1135, and mothers 61211 (chosen by only two men out of the total of 605 students), 5411, 4412, 524 and 2135. Their infrequent

84

PHYSIQUE AND FAMILY STRUCTURE

appearance is mainly due to the fact that they are less common in the population.
Parental "'I[ncompatibility"
Now by way of contrast, I want to show you the ten matings where "incompatibility" was commonest. But let me hasten to explain what is meant by incompatibility in this context. Temperamentalcompatibility, ormorecommonly incompatibility, is commonly mentioned in connection with the breakdown of marriage, and if temperament is reflected in physique this would be an interesting topic for investigation in this way. Here it has a rather different meaning. Each student was invited confidentially, anonymously and voluntarily to enter whether in his view his parents got on together "very well", "fairly well" or "not so well". The proportion answering "not so well" was small. The overall proportion answering "fairly well" was 22 per cent, and the frequency for different matings was separately calculated. In the group of ten plotted here (see Fig. 10) as "most frequently incompatible", the proportion was

56 per cent. Among these marriages it is interesting to note that there are eight in whom the mother is equal or dominant in muscularity.
There was one (father 5j41j x mother 334) in
whom the usual direction of the marital axis was almost completely reversed, and lastly there is
the mating of father 335 x mother 2*26 which
represents the union of two strongly dominant and, I imagine, extra-sensitive ectomorphs. None of these less compatible matings appears among the ten commonest mentioned above. I bring them in here to draw attention both to the important temperamental influences closely bound up with physical attributes, and because of the hold temperament has on our everyday lives.
Family Size
Let us return now to the study of family size. The range in family size among eight mothers of
different build was from mother type 3j43j with
2-1 children per family up to mother type 541j with 2-6 children, and mother type 524 with average family size of 2-8. This variation, if we

Til TIN MATINGS MOST
FRtQUENTLY INCOMPATIBLE.
UI,ATONSwIP FAIR ONLY,,,'-
56 PER CENT)A

BHAM SURVEY, 1958
\
\

FIGURE 10.
Represents the ten kinds of marriage
where it was most often stated that the parents got on together only
"Fairly Well".

"W/

8,5
4-ER

,ThE 10 MATINGS COMMONER THAN EXPECTAT ION.
25 nil CENT OF THE FULL PUA n 61 0)M

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
B'HAM SURVEY 1958.

do5 3in

ALSO FATHER 135 MOTHER 5412

AND' 4125

5323

3 12

*p38 s4434o4 \d&3~~~13/3 C1u^21 R 'u- X $ 8

C.R2.31

~~~I 2 160

It;

433 23~~~31" 13

FIGURE 11.
Shows the, ten kinds of marriage that were commoner than expectation in
this university sample.

114W

- °~

CR18

*50 ==.

C.R. COMPARATIVE RATIO.
A SCHIATK TWODIN3IONAL MONCTIOWN Of TI YIUOSTICA SPATIAL RATION33UIS AMONG THE KNOWN I50 TOTVI

employ a chi squared test with 7 degrees of Statistical Dilemma

freedom (omitting the small sample of mother This set of figures illustrates the kind of dilemma

6j2j1) is not significant (x = 4 56). However, into which the current fashionable use of

if instead of pooling the records from all women, statistics may land us. Valuable as statistical

we examine the children born to women of one methods are, indispensable indeed when rightly

particular kind of physique, say 53J3, who applied, their blind application to larger and

marry men ofvarying build, not only is the range larger samples of pooled data is capable of

of average family size greater-from 1'6 to 3-4 erasing important evidence ofindividual happen-

depending on the father-but the results tell a ings. When a man and woman marry and a child

significant story in spite of the total sample is born in their likeness, orderly biochemical

reduction from 605 to 184. The eight kinds of events of unparalleled, if not miraculous, com-

husband, given 7 degrees of statistical freedom, plexity occur under the name of growth. It is

give X =8-9 which yields a greater probability of significance, although it still does not quite reach the 5 per cent level. Regrouping adjacent husbands, however, in three groups, fat-linear (Lf), muscular-linear (Lm) and nonlinear gives x = 6'1 which is significant at 5 per cent: or alternatively, comparing fathers of

well nigh impossible to overrate the biological significance of this, whatever you think of the social significance of the birth of a baby. Yet no valid statistical argument can be based on one case. We have seen, too, how the sex ratio of children may be close to unity for the population, but once the critical way to segregate matings has been spotted, the overall ratio splits into two

type 41j5 with the rest shows that when a significant and opposing tendencies. Similar

woman of type 5313 marries a man of this build situations constantly recur in population studies,

her chance of having a large family is signifi- where populations maintain their distribution in

cantly smaller.

size and shape in self-adjusting equilibrium.

86

PHYSIQUE AND FAMILY STRUCTURE

Centrifugal movement with regard to the distri- Mothers of Academic Families

bution in one generation reduces the chances of finding a more peripheral mate and thereby increases the probability ofcentripetal movement in the next generation. By pooling alternate generations, individual genetic action is obscured in a semblance of stability.

The results are extremely interesting and they are illustrated in Figure 11 where you may see eight of the ten matings which appeared most often compared with expectation. They concern 151 of the total of 605 sons. There is a remarkable tendency for mothers to be linear, and also much

Eugenics and University Selection I indicated at the outset that for eugenics to

more linear than their husbands. If you were to
assume that the median woman 53j3 is likely
to make the best mother, the one most fit for

become more positive than negative, greater knowledge is needed of what ordinarily happens when A marries B. The conscious avoidance of
uncommon defects is by nature rare. Let us assume, however naively, for purposes of argument that eugenists would like to see large
families of intelligent children capable of profiting by a university education. On this assumption, let us examine what kinds of
marriage are commoner than expectation in families sending their children to university. Knowing the individual numbers of paternal
and maternal photographs chosen by the students, it is possible to calculate the expected proportions for each particular type of marriage. Since the actual numbers are known too, it is a

motherhood on the grounds that such women
have survived most often in the population, then you would have to assume that linear mothers of
university students, although they may be among the best, are less often so. Yet linear
mothers have, it seems, a special contribution to make, in this case to academicity. Any departure from the population mean survives, if it does, presumably because of some intrinsic merit, but in so doing it is usually accompanied by diminished fertility, otherwise the balance of the population would be disturbed. So let us next examine the size of families of students of different body build, and the proportion of each build in the university population.

simple matter to identify those marriages which Somatotype-Family Size-University Entry

are commoner than expectation among students' This we can do most easily in graphic form (see

parents. Any consistent bias in students' photo- Figure 12). On the vertical axis is the proportion

graphic estimates is here excluded because of families with three or more children, on the

expectation is based on the actual numbers of horizontal axis the proportion of students which

photographs chosen.

each of the six main physique sectors contributes.

so ~ ~G~~1.i,m ~ au1U ~.

FIGURE 12. illustrates graphically therelationship
between university entry and family sizein students ofparticular physique.

, (30

Fl :W
||

=

to

v. S. #0-b

. .b 1 1 l

JW a" Xt WdverAU ftm _o& _wftr.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to the university population. (In this case inde- understanding will be found. If anyone should

pendent data is taken from the student entries in feel dismay at these trends, or think that his

1955 and 1956 combined.) In the bottom left- genes have sinned against him more than he

hand quadrant you find central Fl phenotypes deserves, then he or she should remember that

with small families contributing relatively few he or she may be an exceptional person with

university students. Top left you find Ml students, merits in some other direction.

more especially peripheral ones, members of

large families sending but few to the university.

Bottom right we find the phenotypes most often

TABLE 1

arriving at university. Both phenotype groups

FAMILY STUDIES

are linear, but the Lf types have notably few brothers and sisters. Lastly, in the top right quadrant we find central Ml and Mf physiques, the only groups from larger than average

Pilot Birmingham FamilySurvey 1958 Survey
Children Children Like Unlike Like Unlike

families who in addition reach the university Homogeneous matings

more often than you might expect. Now, I do not deny that these constitutional findings are in

Father4+ x Mother4+ 22
Father3f-x Mother3f- 27

8 208 178 7 309 181

part the result of environmental conditions, indeed they are recognisably the result of the

Subtotal like parents Proportion like parents

49 15 517 359 76-5 per cent 59-0 per cent

current machinery of academic selection by Heterogeneous matings

successive examination hurdles at the age of eleven and later. This machinery picks out

Like Father 4+ Like Mother 4+

15 19

25 277 326 15 146 190

conscientious linear children by a process that I Subtotal like have described in more detail elsewhere. Proportion like

34 40 423 516 45 9 per cent 45-0 percent

(Behaviour and Physique, p. 53 et seq.) But there are genetic factors too, as the greater frequency of linear mothers indicates, as well as the effect of parents' build on that of their children. It is

The calculations were made for each component separately and then pooled to obtain an overali measure of the difference between the two
classes of mating.

evident that taking all in all something like a

negative correlation exists between family size

TABLE 2

and academic aptitude, quite apart from the fact

SEX RATIOS OF BROTHERS AND SISTERS

that interruptions in a large family may later on

OF STUDENTS

increase the difficulties of study, and the two Men

Birmingham Survey, 1958

influences combined may lead to poorer intellectual performance. Successful selection for

Brothers Sisters Sex Ratio

both family size and intelligence could be achieved by concentrating on central muscular boys, the

Fathers 462
more 2153
muscular 335

all-rounders good at games and work, but it is

2j44

333 271 1-23

said to take all types to make a world, and it

1J35

should be clear by now that concentration in one Fathers

field commonly leads to dangers, diminished more fat 5j41 j

family size or other risks, some of them doubtless unforeseen. Population studies are needed not

than 52j4 muscular 41j5

76 100 0-76

only for their own sake, or to expose the weak- All Fathers

409 371 1 10

ness of present society; they are needed to indicate where present strength lies and future

More muscular v fatter fathers
x2 = 7-817** Sig. = 2-5 per cent level

S8

