THE

EUGENICS REVIEW

LAW AND EUGENICS.
By Sir JoHN MAcpDoneELL, K.C.B., LL.D., F.B.A.

Two doubts presented themselves to me when I was invited by
your President to address you. Yours is entitled an Education
Society, and such a society might, I thought, possess a body of
settled doctrines, a large collection of truths which it was its
business to disseminate through expert representatives. What
right had I to intrude into that circle, and speak to you,
custodians of new truths of which I know little? And
then, too, I asked myself—it was the second doubt—what
qualification could a lawyer possess for sharing in a discussion
of problems peculiarly within the province of the biologist, the
statesman, the sociologist? I have not been able to banish
entirely these doubts. They still haunt me, and often return
with as much vividness as at first. But I derived some
comfort from learning that, whilst educating the public mind
as to questions second in gravity to none, you were still engaged
in inquiries; that you had not reached the dogmatic stage; that
you were open to fresh light from any quarter; that you
recognised the obscurity of some parts of your vast subject ; and
that you were working in the spirit of receptivity and openmindedness in the ceaseless quest of truth which were the
characteristics of the founder of your science. I met Sir Francis
Galton several times long ago, and the impression which I retain
is that for him much of the Book of Nature, even in what
seemed its most thumbed chapters, was still a book unread, and
that in its interpretation aid might be got from all, even those

1 Address delivered before the Eugenics Education Society, at the Grafton Galleries,
London, on December 16th, 1915.
230 EUGENICS REVIEW.

wholly ignorant of the sciences with which he was familiar and
devoid of his penetrating insight.

A society which confined its activity to the discovery and
enunciation of abstract truths might have no need to admit
lawyers into its councils. In the laboratory they may not be
wanted. But yours is a society which, while pursuing strictly
scientific methods, would also influence public opinion. It
would ask to be heard in regard to conduct. If your principles
are right, as I believe them to be, you are entitled to speak and
be listened to upon many questions familiar to the lawyer.
Upon the law of marriage; upon the law of divorce; upon the
law of succession; upon the law of lunacy; upon the law as to
the feeble-minded ; upon several parts of the criminal law, your
opinion ought to weigh for much, and as to some matters ought
to be decisive. Underlying all these laws, or the customs relating
to such matters, are certain principles or assumptions; some of
them well founded, the result of long experience; others doubtful and needing close examination in the light of modern
research ; others probably resting upon principles which, if once
sound, need, I submit, to-day to be modified.

I take as an example the law of marriage. In this country,
as in others, there are certain rules defining marriages which are
invalid, by reason of consanguinity. Outside these rules, most
of which have come down to us from the Mosaic laws, there are
virtually no legal impediments. No matter what the difference
in age of the parties; no matter what the maladies to which one
or both of them are subject; no matter what may be the family
record of both; no matter what the likelihood that defects will
be transmitted to some of their offspring, the State recognises
the validity of such unions, provided the parties thereto were
competent to give, and actually gave, their consent. Such
unions, permissible by law, but to be deprecated, are not confined to the poor and ignorant. Examples are by no means
unknown among the wealthy and educated. My own observation goes to show that the influence of wealth is here sometimes
as deleterious as ignorance. We hear of improvident marriages,
and but little of the instances in which riches and advanced age
are mated with poverty and youth.
LAW AND EUGENICS. 231

Public opinion does not always condemn such instances
of dysgenics, or if it does so rarely in terms commensurate with
the gravity of the mischief likely to be done. Akin to this
subject is that of divorce. I am reluctant to introduce here a
matter so highly controversial, one, too, with many bearings,
besides its relation to eugenics. I should be the last to deny
the difficulties surrounding the subject, or to say one word to
wound those who would stand fast by the old order. But I
should not be candid if I did not say that the time seems to me
to have come for examining the present law cautiously and
reverently, and in the full light of modern knowledge and of the
experience of countries in which permanent insanity 1s
recognised as a ground of dissolution of marriage. In legal
text-books you will read of certain principles which are said to
be part of public policy; for example the principle that there
must not be restraint of trade or of personal liberty; that there
must not be created perpetuities tying up property for long
periods; principles, no doubt, very important and wholesome.
But if you are right, as I believe you are, eugenics must, in
due time, form a part, second in importance to none, of that
public policy, and its teaching must permeate the regions which
I have mentioned. If disabilities are imposed on account of
consanguinity, largely by reason of an alleged tendency to produce certain grave defects in the offspring, is there not reason to
discourage, and as far as possible to prevent, unions between
those who actually suffer from such grave defects? The
Mental Deficiency Act of 1913 is, I am inclined to think,
the first of a series of measures dealing with subjects
peculiarly yours. That Act was a much-needed measure, to be
followed by other advances, I should hope, towards what
Professor Pearson calls ‘‘ racial purgation,”’ or ‘‘ the strengthening of the racial conscience,’’ or what, in the language of
jurisprudence, might be termed a rational jus connubit.

Only let us proceed with caution, and let not zeal outstrip
knowledge. If there is one thing to be deprecated little less
than ignorance or indifference, it is science in a hurry—eagerness to go to market with one’s crops before they are fully ripe.
Let us see clearly the object in view of the student or promoter
232 EUGENICS REVIEW.

of eugenics. Especially, let us recognise the many-sided
character of mankind; which is not always done. I have read
statements which implied that the production of the perfect
human animal was the end in view. The cattle or poultry
breeder, the dog fancier, or the owner of the stud farm
could suggest wider notions; he knows that there are endless
varieties of his stock, each good for its particular purpose.

In an article in the Journal of the American Institute of
Criminal Law, an American Judge, Mr. Gemmell, expresses
himself upon this point with remarkable vigour: ‘‘ Men
are not measured by their height or the length of their belts,
but by the spirit which moves them to good or ill. The North
American Indian was a more perfect specimen of physical manhood than any of his pale-faced conquerors. . . . The purpose
in breeding a horse is to produce the strongest beast. In
developing the finest Percherons we have sacrificed brains for
flesh. In doing this we have bred nearly all the sense out of
the animals. The wild horse of America, and the little Shetland
pony, born away up on the rocky slopes [sic] of the Shetland
Islands, are more intelligent, and can be trained to do more
things than the most highly-bred animal of the prize ring. The
best bred hog can only grunt and snooze and die. The prairie
rooter of a hundred years ago had more wit than all the Chester
Whites and Poland Chinas of our day.’’? The wild duck has
probably much more intelligence than its domestic kinsman,
though the latter is bigger and heavier.’

One of the earliest statements of eugenics is to be found in
the fifth book of Plato’s ‘‘ Republic.’’ There it is said that
children who are deformed or otherwise defective will be exposed
or made away with. Even children born of fathers over 55 and
mothers over 40 are to share this fate; and M. Glotz, the wellknown authority on Greek law, has shown that the practice of
infant exposure prevailed in ancient Greece.” What may have
been the loss to humanity by such a law or practice I cannot
conjecture. It may have been great. About two hundred and

1 Journal of American Institute of Criminal Law and Criminology, VI., 99.

2 Headley’s ‘‘ Problems of Evolution,’ p. 9g.
3 Etudes Sociales et juridiques sur l’Antiquité Grecque, p. 187.
LAW AND EUGENICS. 233

seventy years ago was born a child weak and sickly, so small
that, according to an eye-witness, it might have been put into
a quart pot; just the sort of child which, according both to
primitive eugenics and to Plato’s, should be put away promptly,
more especially as, if one looked into the history of its forbears,
they were not of a high strain, and one at least, it is said, was
scarcely normal; a clear case for ‘‘ eugenic purgation.’’ That
child, which showed no great aptitude for some years, was spared.
That child grew up and lived to a considerable age. That
child was Isaac Newton. It is right also to recollect that there
is a mass of facts going to show that the highest faculties may,
and often do, accompany defective physical organisation. Much
of the evidence has been collected in two works—one, ‘‘ The
Insanity of Genius,’’ by the late Mr. Nisbet; the other, ‘‘ Genie
und Wahnsinn,” by Dr. Paul Radstoek' (Breslau, 1884). 1
might add to these an article with a like purport in the American
Journal of Criminal Law by Mr. Gemmell.

These writers, as it seems to me, do not sift the evidence very
carefully. They compile uncritically long lists of men of great
gifts who have been insane in some period of their lives. They
throw together names of men of letters who, from time to time
in their lives, were insane and those who became so in old age.
They compile a second list of persons of genius, some of whose
near relatives were insane. Mr. Nisbet lumps together Swift,
Dr. Johnson, Comte, Southey, Shelley, Byron, Campbell,
Goldsmith, Charles Lamb, Landor, Rousseau, Chatterton,
Pascal, Chateaubriand, George Sand, Alfieri, Poe, Donizetti,
the elder Pitt; many persons who were either not insane or
became so only in old age. Dr. Radstoek sweeps into his net
Lucretius, Tasso, Ben Johnson, Reinhard Lenz, Schumann,

Swammerdam.
Mr. Nisbet goes so far as to say that there is ‘* the impos
sibility of finding a single celebrity of the first rank who, the
facts of his life being sufficiently well known, does not either
personally or by heredity fall into the morbid group.’”

Out of 250 men selected only on account of their eminence

1 My knowledge of Dr. Radstoek’s work is derived from the “Revue Philosophique,” 1886, vol. xxi., p. 97 ¢ seg.
2“¢Insanity of Genius.” Nisbet, p. 315.
234 EUGENICS REVIEW.

‘“the total number of these are to be found to be neuropathic,
suffering from or dying of, some description of nerve-disorder.’”?

I am not satisfied that these authors have proved their point.
Dryden’s lines, ‘‘ Great wit to madness sure is near allied, and
thin partitions do their bounds divide,’’ may not be a scientific
truth. But I think there is evidence—I draw upon my own
experience of life, and I appeal to yours in confirmation—that
much of the best work of the world is being done and has
always been done, by the physically feeble; the highest form of
intellect is very often allied with poor physique, with a defective
or disorganised nerve system. Nature specialises—mind and
intellect do not always go together—and when she turns out the
all-round person with the mens sana and the corpus sanum
She often makes him a finished mediocrity.

I should like to add a word as to a subject upon which, as a
lawyer, I may be permitted to speak. I refer to the legislation
which has been passed in some dozen States of America as to
sterilisation of certain classes of offenders which does not appear
to me to be justified by the present state of knowledge to be
necessary. There may be habitual criminals in the sense that
from defective intellect they are practically unamenable to any
good influences. I speak, of course, with diffdence, as most
persons do who have given close attention to the matter and
considered the conflicting evidence, but I am inclined to think
that the untamed and untamable brutes are comparatively few.
Many or few, they ought to be segregated. More than this
seems needless. The great majority, even of the habitual
criminals, are undisciplined, ill-conditioned, dissatisfied with
themselves as well as with others, with low tastes; of poor
physique; not made of fine clay, but stuff out of which, taken
in hand in time, something might be made. Lombroso’s teaching as to the born criminal—the man who has the murderer’s
ears, the thief’s fingers, whose physical qualities predestine him
for certain crimes—is not borne out by fact. No more careful
and patient study of the subject has been made than that by
Dr. Charles Goring, in his work published in 1913: ‘‘ The
English Convict: A Statistical Study.’’ One of his chief

1“*TInsanity of Genius.” Nisbet, p. 315.
LAW AND EUGENICS. 235

conclusions is that ‘‘ although Lombroso’s criminology is dead
aS a science, it is equally true that as a superstition it is not
dead. There is some quality in it which has appealed to those
imaginations whose impressions of the criminal have been
gained chiefly from newspaper sketches, from the romantic
literature of picturesque villains, or from popular pseudoscientific treatises. To register the extinction of this superstitious criminology, and to lay the foundations of a science of
the criminal, truly accurate, and unbiassed by prejudice, is the
purpose of this investigation.’’ ‘‘ With our figures,’’ he adds,
““ we have refuted the doctrine that a type of the born criminal
exists; that, therefore, a human being exists predestined to do
wrong, different from other men. Our inquiry shows that he
does not exist, the mental and physical conditions of born
criminal and law-abiding persons of the same age, stature and
class are identical.’’ ‘‘Now Cesare Lombroso’s data were
practically no facts at all’’ (p. 15).

To much the same effect, though more favourable, are the
results of other inquiries; for example, a study by Mr. August
F. Bronner, Assistant Director, Psychopathic Institute, Juvenile
Court, Chicago. His figures show that ‘‘on the basis of a
study of more than 500 cases in a group, as little selected as is
possible to obtain, we find the percentage of feeble-minded to
be less than to per cent., while the group of those normal in
ability exceeds 90 per cent.’’ (Journal of the American Institute
of Criminal Law. V., 568). True, Dr. Goring, like many other
inquirers, finds the average inmate of our prisons below the
normal stature in body, weight and intelligence. ‘‘ Our final
conclusion is that English criminals are selected by a physical
condition and a mental condition which are independent of
each other, and that the one significant physical association
with criminality is a generally defective physical physique,
and that the one vital mental constitutional factor in the etiology
of crime is defective intelligence.’’ But whether such defects
are due to a deteriorating environment in its largest sense,
prolonged over several generations; whether a subsequent
generation, if well nurtured and planted in wholesome surroundings would be improved, is left uncertain. Those who have
236 EUGENICS REVIEW.

seen what wonders have been effected by good food, pure air,
exercise, and discipline in the case of persons feeble physically
and mentally, will not readily set bounds to the achievements of
like influences prolonged upon many of the habitual inmates of
prisons. What we generally find is that ‘‘ the main conclusion
is that the criminal man is, to a large extent, a defective, either
physically or mentally, or in the words of Sir B. Donkin, is
‘unable to acquire the complex characters which are essential to
the average man, and so is prone to follow the line of least
resistance.’ ’’?

The habitual inmates of prisons are a mass of people, for
the most part, who have been ill-trained and exposed to temptations to which they succumb; not a few mentally weak if not
actually insane, others no worse than many who more favourably situated escape punishment. For the former segregation
may be necessary; for none, as it seems to me in the
present state of knowledge, are such measures as have been
taken in the United States justifiable. And if they were,
have we the means of discerning with accuracy and safety
the individuals to whom they should be applied? And that
suggests a further observation, which I must mention at the
risk of being misunderstood. Along with physical improvements there are some mental and ethical qualities which have
been slowly and painfully acquired. They have been won with
difficulty ; they might be lost with ease. In the rich heritage
of the invisible possessions of civilised races nothing is more
precious than the sense of human dignity, and incalculable
mischief might be done by anything which, in the name of
law, violated it. Nor do I know anything more likely to retard
the progress of eugenics than the premature adoption of such
measures. The history of criminal law is mainly the history of

1“Penal Law” is, through its prohibitions, the expression of the social standard
of life in the country; when that standard is high there must be a residuum of
individuals whose mental and physical state does not enable them to live up to that
standard; they fall below it through constitutional incapacity, which manifests itself
in weakness of will and power of resistance. This inquiry goes to show that it
may be predicated that, with regard to the great mass of offenders coming within
the meshes of the criminal law, this defectiveness, in its economic sense, is a predisposing cause, and has no necessary relation to definite physical or mental
disease. It is a relative reason only, related to a high standard of social requirement, to maintain which the law exists.’—Sir E. Ruggles-Brise, Preface to
‘“ The English Convict,” p. 8.
LAW AND EUGENICS. 237

excessive harshness; this might have been another chapter in
the same deplorable history.

So far I have been discussing the law as to unions between
individuals of the same social groups, the jus connubu in a
narrow sense. I would now in these discursive remarks invite
you to contemplate a larger task than the amendment of certain
departments of municipal law. I ask you to look to the jus
connubiu in a larger sense than Roman law knew, to a possible
future development of your science, to the application one day of
your principles to facts hitherto neglected or misunderstood, and
largely obscure. To a student of international law and to one
interested in the laws and customs and the future of the so-called
backward races, there is an aspect of your science of profound
interest, too litthe examined, so far as I can find, but sure to
command attention later on. It may seem presumptuous on my
part to touch the subject ; and I should not have done so if I had
not found that the authorities which I consulted gave no clear
answer to the apparently elementary questions which I put;
the only very notable exception being Mr. Darwin in a famous
chapter in the ‘‘ Descent of Man.’’ In the legal history of
every country you find important consequences follow according as the marriage law is exogamous or endogamous, according as the tribe or sept marries outside or inside certain lines
of relationship. You come also to a time in the history of
certain communities when between them jus connubu, as it is
called, is established, and when between certain others it does
not exist. It may not exist between all classes in the same community. It did not exist for a time between the patricians and
plebians in ancient Rome. The disability is affirmed in ¢he 12
tables. It was abrogated by the Lex Canuleia. There still
remained the barrier of marriages between freeborn and
freed. This barrier was removed by a law of Augustus
who at the same time prohibited senators and their descendants
to the third degree espousing women of low morals or low
professions. The right of intermarriage did not exist in effect
in feudal times between nobles and roturiers. It may be said not

to exist between princely families and subjects under the Royal
1 Girard, Manuel de Droit Romain, p. 155, third edition.
238 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Marriage Act, which declares that ‘‘ no descendant of the body
of George II. shall be capable of contracting marriage under the
age of 25 without command of the King in Council first had
under the great seal (except the issue of princesses who have
married or still marry into foreign families).’’ It does not exist
in the Southern States of America between whites and negroes.
Thus in Maryland marriage is prohibited between whites and
negroes or persons of negro descent to the third generation. In
Nebraska one quarter negro blood is a disqualification; in
Florida, Indiana and Missouri one-eighth. The laws of some
States prohibit marriages of whites with Mongolians. Even
where the jus connubiu nominally exists unions between whites
and coloured persons may be regarded with hostility.

I mention these facts in order to lead you to consider what,
for want of a better phrase, I may call world or race eugenics ;
which may one day be the most pressing of practical problems.
While such laws as I have named against the unions of races
exist; at all events, while the antipathies of which they are the
expression remain, races are likely to keep apart; there may be
friendly relations between them; there may, and will be, many
irregular unions; philanthropists will continue to labour to
civilise savage peoples and bring together and_ reconcile
different races. There will remain a great gulf between the
various races with dissimilar physique and mental characteristics.
Now is this estrangement, which lapse of time seems in some
countries only to accentuate, based on a sound instinct or upon
a dim preception of a biological truth? Has the world been in
a rude, blundering way conforming to a wholesome truth?
Does safety lie in continued separation of races with very dissimilar characteristics? Or is the antipathy in great part the
mere expression of racial vanity and prejudice? I have searched
in a spirit of docility for answers to these questions, but with
disappointing results. i have found in most discussions conflicting answers and several distinct problems inextricably
mixed up, and a surprising lack of precision as to points of
importance. What is a race? Is it a scientific conception or
only a loose popular term? Is race based on physical characteristics only, or on both physical and mental. Kant defines a
LAW AND EUGENICS. 239

race as a body of human beings whose unions produce
children with characteristics similar to their parents. Huxley’s
definition is somewhat similar: ‘‘ The name of a_ subdivision of one of these groups of living things which
are called ‘species’ is the technical language of zoology
and botany; and the term connotes the possession of
characters distinct from those of other members of the species,
which have a strong tendency to appear in the progeny of all
members of the race.’’! |

Some writers—probably the majority—appear to mean by
races social groups with like characteristics, physical and mental.
Others would introduce the element of common history. If
race is a true scientific concept, how comes it that there are
profound differences of opinion as to the actual races existing ?
Kant mentions four races, the white, the negro, the
‘‘Hunnische’’’ (Mongolian, Kalmuck), the Hindoo.? Mr.
Whetham reduces the races in Europe to three (the Mediterranean, the Alpine, the Northern). Mr. Keane finds only three
groups (Ethiopic, Mongolian, Caucasian). Dr. Brinton names
five (Eurafrican, Austafrican, Asian, American, Insular or
Littoral). Comte de Gobineau knows only three races (white,
yellow, black). Other writers enumerate many. Pickering,* the
well-known ethnologist, writing in 1849, could say with some
confidence that there were eleven races of men: Arabian,
Abyssinian, Mongolian, Hottentot, Malay, African, Negritto,
Indian, Ethiopian, Australian, Nego. Then, too, if for some
purposes the term is admissible and convenient, is there known
to be any ‘‘ pure race,’’ a phrase which is the leit-motif of a
whole literature, it may be of no great scientific value, but with
no small influence at present, which confidently declares that
purity of race is everything— it is the secret of eugenics.

Here are some words by Comte de Gobineau, the apostle
of this creed: ‘‘ Il est demontré que les race humaines sont,

1 See ‘‘ Aryan Question,’? Huxley’s Collected Works VII., p. 279.

2 Kant, Werke II., p. 432, ed. 1867.

3“ Races of Men,” p. ro. I have seen in all eleven races of men, and
though I am hardly prepared to fix a positive limit to the number, I confess,
after having visited so many parts of the globe, that I am at a loss to look for
others.
240 EUGENICS REVIEW.

chacune, enfermées dans une sorte d’ individualité d’ou rien
ne les sortir que le mélange,’ and that ‘‘les types sont si
complétement hereditaires, si constants, si permanents, en un
mot, malgré les climats et le temps, l’humanité n’est pas moins
complétement, et inébranlablement partagée.’’’ He does not
deny that good results have come from mixtures. ‘‘ Le monde
‘des arts et de le noble litterature résultant des mélanges du
sang, les races inférieures améliorées, énnoblies, sont autant de
merveilles auquelles il faut applaudir. Les petits ont été élevés.
Malheureusement les grands, du méme coup, ont été abaissés
et c’est un mal que rien ne compense ne répare.’’*

Here are some words on the subject by Mr. Houston
Chamberlain, the spokesman of a large body of opinion in
modern Germany: ‘‘ Such is the state of things in the lifegiving centre of Western Europe. All round is a swarming
population of tartarised Russians, a lovable people richly gifted
though brought up in the most contemptible superstition, in
unfreedom and ignorance, destroying with the sure instinct of
slaves every racial element that had up to the present given it
strength and importance; far away across the world the busy
soulless yellow race; the dreaming, weakly mongrels of Oceania
and South America; finally the millions of the blacks, povertystricken in intellect, bestially inclined, who are even now arming
for the war of races in which there will be no quarter given.
The man who with an open eye looks round the world to-day,
a century after Kant’s death, will shiver to the very marrow of
his bones. No danger from outside would be invincible if we,
true men of Northern Europe, not contaminated by the slavish
blood of Syria and Carthaginia, the homines Europa of
Linnzeus (Teutons if we only understood how to conceive the
word with sufficient large heartedness)—no danger from outside
need be feared if we only had the courage to stand united and
strong in the possession and consciousness of a freedom won,
never to be lost.’”?

Opposed to this rhetorical tirade is a large body of evidence
to the effect that certain admixtures have resulted in the pro
1 Essai sur l’Inegalité, 2 der 1, pp. 128, 218.
2 Houston Chamberlain. Kant II., 332.
LAW AND EUGENICS. 241

duction of the very highest types of civilisation. I need not
labour a point which will scarcely be questioned. I quote a
few words from Ratzel: ‘‘ While race blending is not everywhere desirable yet the crossing of distinct races, especially
where it occurs with social sanction, often produces a superior
type; certainly such crossing as has occurred tends to prove
absurd the conclusion that the dilution of the blood of the
so-called higher races by that of the so-called lower races will
either set the species on the highway to extinction or cause a
relapse into barbarism.’’* ‘‘Interbreeding is making rapid
strides in all parts of the earth. ... If there is any consolation in the universal disappearance of native races, it is in
the knowledge that a great part of them is being slowly raised
by the process of intermixture. No doubt people like to repeat
a statement, professedly based on old experience, that in halfbreeds the vices of both parents predominate, but a glance at
the national life of the present day is enough to show that
Mulattos, Mestizos, Negro, and Arab half-breeds stand in
America, and in Africa, at the head of Indians and Negros.
The mixture once begun continues to increase, and each fresh
infusion of higher blood tends to reduce the interval by
levelling up.”? Dr. Brinton: ‘‘ Throughout Mexico, Central
and South America, there has been a blending of the white and
red races on an enormous scale, and the result has been that
both physically and mentally this mixed race has repeatedly
taken precedence in political and social life over the pure
descendants of the European colonists. It is well known
that the half-breeds of our frontiers, of British America
and Greenland are singularly hardy, intelligent and vigorous
scouts, guides, hunters and soldiers. Not a few of them have
distinguished themselves in our colleges, and later in clerical
and political life.”’? ‘‘ I know of nothing,’’ says Dr. Brinton,
‘‘ within the range of human power to control, more decisive
of the future prosperity or failure of the human race than this
of the effect of race intermarriage.”’

Even higher claims than these may be made for crossing as

a civilising agency. Rivers, in his wonderfully instructive

1 Ratzel, ‘‘ The History of Mankind,” I., pp. £12, 12.
2 Dr. Brinton, ‘“‘ Races and People,”’ pp. 285, 283.
242 EUGENICS REVIEW.

volumes on the history of Melanesian Society, remarks that :
‘* The chief aim of this book has been to show the importance
of the interaction and conflict in the production of human
culture. The oceanic evidence points unmistakably to degradation and even to disappearance as the result of isolation, and
suggests that the mixture of peoples have to be taken much
more into account by the historians of human culture than it has
been in the past. Indeed, the study of this part of the world
suggests that the contact and interaction of peoples have been
the great starting points of all the great movements in human
history which we are accustomed to regard as progress.’”*

To much the same effect are some remarks by Lord Bryce,
founded on wide historical knowledge. ‘‘ All the great people
of the world are the result of a mixing of races. Taking our
own continent, we see that in France, Gauls, Iberians and
Teutons; in Germany, Teutons, Slavs, and, doubtless, also
Celts; in Russia, Slavs, Finns, and (to a less extent) tribes of
Turkic or Mongolic stock have been blent to form one nation.
The Basques and the Lapps, and the four Scandinavian peoples
seem to be of comparatively pure race, but may seem so only
because we know little of their early history. The original
source of the largest of all civilised nations, that which inhabits
the temperate parts of North America, was not only itself the
product of diverse sources before it crossed the Ocean, but has
within the last seventy years received such enormous accretions
from Ireland, Germany, Scandinavia, and the Slavs of Central
Europe, that it is becoming the most mixed of the peoples we
know.’”?

Now assuming that some crossings are good and the others
are followed by bad results, what are these which it is desirable
to encourage? In putting, perhaps somewhat bluntly and
crudely, this question, in asking what should be the principle of
the jus connubii for the races, I am stating one of the greatest
problems confronting humanity. Conceivably there may be
at least three answers: (a) the only barriers should be physical ;

races with very unlike physical characteristics should not mix;

1 Rivers, Vol. II., p. 595.
2 Lord Bryce, ‘‘ The Relations of the Advanced and the Backward Races of
Mankind, ” p. 15.
LAW AND EUGENICS. 243

or (6) that the chief barrier should be that of culture or civilisation. Races belonging to an old stage of development, with
group marriages, for example, should not unite with races more
advanced, those living, for example, under the patriarchal
system and with monogamy ; (c) or (as would be generally said)
there should be no mixing of the highest and the lowest, but
true progress lies in the unity of races with points of similarity,
physical and mental, and in the gradual formation of groups
somewhat higher in the scale of civilisation than the individual
elements or constituents out of which the new race was formed.

Probably it will be agreed that the last named is the true
criterion. The crosses which have resulted in stable societies
appear to have been so formed. It would seem that the races
which have initiated, which have ruled, which have been progressive, have been made up of constituent elements not very unlike.
The tribes which at the times of the great migrations passed into
Europe seem to have been for the most part physically, and in
point of culture, not very dis-similar. Where there has been a
meeting of races very unlike, there has been either gradual
extinction of one, or segregation of the lower in reserves (as in
America and parts of South Africa), or the formation of a new
race on a lower plane. That is the history of colonisation since
the age of the great discoveries; that is likely to be the
melancholy repetition of events in the future unless from
science, that is, race eugenics, we get more information as to
races which can with advantage unite; unless there is formulated
one day, to recur to an ancient expression which I have before
used, a rational race jus connubit.

Now as to this, there is, so far as I can find, a deplorable
lack of precise data. Searching with some diligence in volumes
of ethnology I have discovered few precise data as to the
physical qualities (e.g., physical strength, capacity of the
various senses) of cross-breeds as compared with the races out
of which they were formed. I have generally found as to the
mental characteristics of the mixture and its constituent
elements only vague generalisations by travellers, explorers,
missionaries and casual observers. What Mr. Darwin calls
the ‘‘ unexplored residuum ”’ is still very large. To name an
244. EUGENICS REVIEW.

initial difficulty, it is so hard often to say what communities are
really alike. Under apparent similarity there prove generally
on closer examination to be great differences. What the
theorists of the eighteenth century complacently termed the
“savage ’’ turns out to include most diverse kinds. A quarter
of a century ago most of us read accounts of ‘‘ the Australian
native,’’ who existed only in books, and I can well remember
the impatience with which certain ethnologists resented the
suggestion that the apparent similarity in the indigenous dwellers
in a vast continent might be due to incomplete knowledge. Now
we find the burden of the reports of later and better informed
observers is to emphasise the many varieties of culture, habits
and capacity in the Australian tribes.*

I am not foolish enough to suppose that science will one
day construct for races something as precise as the ‘‘ Table of
Kindred and Affinity’ stuck up in churches, with prohibitions as between races similar to ‘‘ A man may not marry
his grandmother.’’ But surely patient research may one day
give some clear guidance regarding a momentous matter as to
which so far humanity has merely muddled along.

In this hall we are far away from the tumult of party
politics of every kind. But I may be permitted to refer to one
matter not concerning entirely any one party or country, but
belonging to politics in the largest and highest sense of the
word, that is, as the science concerned with the life of every State.
As hitherto known, democracy has meant equality of white races.
It is the European name for a white aristocracy. Even a
Condorcet did not extend it much further. It has excluded the
black and brown. The most democratic of modern communities—for example, some of our colonies and certain States of
the American Union—insist most strongly upon the colour bar
and their blue blood. Political equality, it has been said, by
high authorities, is all a matter of epidermis. Sometimes the
hostility to the yellow or brown races springs from fear that
labourers belonging to them may undersell the white and
permanently reduce wages. It may also come from a fear that

1 See “The Material Culture and Social Institutions of the Simpler Peoples,” by
Hobhouse, Wheeler and Ginsberg, r915, p. 13.
LAW AND EUGENICS. 245

with no common standard morals may be lowered. But I
believe also that it often proceeds from an apprehension that the
purity of the race would be in the long run deteriorated by the
intrusion of foreign and diverse elements. The great modern
exponent of the progress of democracy was de Tocqueville; the
great modern exponent of the natural aristocracy of certain
races was Comte de Gobineau. Poles asunder in opinion, they
were life-long friends. Only lately has been published the
voluminous correspondence between them. It turns largely
upon the matters which we are considering, and it brings out
into sharp relief the antagonism between the ideas which they
represented. But in one point they agreed—that the question
over which they were divided was becoming the question of
questions for many States. Fortunately, it is in these days for
the first time approached, not solely by inquirers eager to excuse
high-handed acts, but also by those who have no desire except
to know and accept the truth. It is not to be solved, if it ever is
solved, without patient research, but it cannot without peril be
shelved or even long postponed. For the whole world, including the so-called backward races, is restless and in motion as it
never was in the days of the great migrations. Races of all
kinds are crowding over old barriers, neither mountains nor
seas nor penal laws keeping them to their birthplaces; the
very communities which pass these laws providing by facilities
of communication for their evasion.

Should the answer of you or your successors who examine
these problems be that such unions are deleterious; that there
iS a scientific truth in the racial theories of M. de Gobineau,
Mr. Houston Chamberlain and their school; that the mixed
breed is a bad breed, the verdict of science must be accepted.
But it will be a capital sentence—capital in the old sense of that
word—pronounced upon millions, in being or to be born, henceforth authoritatively branded as inferiors, with the knowledge
on their part that they are such. They may not become extinct,
for some of these races, and not the best endowed, are wonderfully prolific. But they will be ruled out of the work of civilisation and progress. In ancient times, conquests by warlike
tribes drove feebler races to the mountains, the swamps, and to
246 EUGENICS REVIEW.

the poorer and barren lands. Should the discoveries of
eugenics be unfavourable to such mixtures certain races will
be pushed more than ever into isolation. Reviewing the facts
which we have been considering, Lord Bryce remarks that “‘ it
may be doubted whether any further mixture of advanced and
backward races is to be desired.’ May I append a doubt to
his doubt, and say that it is hazardous to put limits to that
process of fusion which has always been going on in the past,
and sometimes with good results ?

Should scientific research tend to show that there are no
valid reasons against unions between certain races, physically
different; should it go further and say that new unions are
desirable and propitious; should it declare that certain stocks
would be enriched and strengthened by infusions of the blood
of less advanced people, then the outlook for races now dying
out brightens; then, perhaps, we should all be in a new sense
‘* citizens of a better world ’’; then the unity of humanity would
have a new, and, perhaps, for the first time a real meaning.
There will then be, also for the first time, a rational jus connubu,
such as neither Roman law nor any other conceived. Hitherto
men have walked as to these matters in darkness. Who knows
but that your science may show how by wise crossings the
backward races may be levelled up without the advanced being
debased ? Who knows but that it may be the solvent of the
pride and intolerance of race and may one day send a message
of hope to people now apparently doomed to disappear ?

1** The Relations of the Advanced and the Backward Races of Mankind,”’
p. 36.
