THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF A DECLINING
POPULATION

By FRANCOIS LAFITTE

Introduction

WELL-CONCEIVED population
Avie cannot be elaborated unless

the most careful and objective assessment of the consequences of present population trends is first attempted. If we wish to
modify the British demographic situation
we have to know why it needs modifying,
and in what direction it should be guided.
The consequences of differential fertility
and mortality are the main concern of
eugenists, and less attention has been
devoted to the possible effects of changes in
age composition and total numbers. The
present article is limited to a discussion of
the latter in relation to Britain’s economic
future, and is written in lieu of a review of
W. B. Reddaway’s The Economics of a
Declining Population (1939)*, the first systematic study of the subject in England.

Human Needs and Resources

If we ignore the existing economic arid
social system, population trends down to
1980 give no cause at all for alarm. Smaller
numbers mean more material resources per
head, the ratio of active workers to dependants does not deteriorate, and there is no
danger of increasing average age affecting
the productivity of labour. The new projections into the future of population trends
jn England and Wales made by Glass (1940)
suggest that the ratio of men aged 20-54 to
the total population to be maintained is
hardly likely to vary at all in the four decades that lie ahead of us. If the war kills
off a proportion of this labour force, it is
equally likely to bring about a corresponding
reduction of dependants, young and old
alike.

But the working population (age groups

* Allen & Unwin, 8s. 6d.

15-64) will grow older. Between 1891 and
1937 its average age rose by 2} years, from
34°3 to 36:9 years. In the coming forty.
years Glass’s projections suggest a further
ageing of between 34 and 6 years. Will this.
affect the productivity of the worker adversely ? We do not know, but, since the’
whole trend of industrial technique is away
from types of work involving great physical
strength, I doubt whether any possible
deterioration of productivity due to ageing
of the working population could not be made
up for by improvements in health and working conditions. In any case, productivity per operative employed in Britain rose by
7 per cent in 1924-30 and by at least 20 per
cent in 1930-35, whilst in the U.S.A. physical
output per man-hour in industry rose by 27
per cent in 1929-35. The advances in’
technique which made possible such stupendous progress in productivity are far more
important than any adverse effects which
might result from the ageing of the working
population.

The objective needs-resources situation is,
therefore, reassuring. Why worry about
population trends at all? Because between
human needs and their satisfaction by use of
the available human and material resources
there stands a complex system of economic
and social relations which must be taken into
account. Thus, in 1931 there were 23:1
men aged 21-54 per 100 of the population,
but 12 per cent of the men in these age
groups were available for work but could
find no one to employ them. While the effect of population trends upon the primary
relationships between our society and our
material resources may be insignificant in
one or two generations, their effects upon
the superimposed economic and social relationships within our society may be of great
importance.

122
122

It is, therefore, necessary, as Reddaway
argues, (a) to make an analysis of the
economic system, and (0) to assess the importance of population trends as one of
many factors which influence the working
of the economic system, on the assumption
that the system will continue more or less
as at present. This assumption is necessary,
although we may be certain that the system
will change, because we cannot predict such
changes, and because only thus can we see the
general shape of coming problems and the
sort of changes we ought to welcome and
work for.

The Economic System
(1) Capital Outlay and Economic Progress
Following Reddaway and Keynes, I take
the view that capital outlay (the “ propensity
to invest ’’) plays a key role in the economic
system. Economic depression may be regarded typically as a state of affairs in which
the level of consumers’ demand anticipated
by entrepreneurs appears too low to inspire
in them confidence in the profitability of new
net capital outlay, which, if undertaken,
would, by the mechanism of the “ multiplier,’ expand production approximately
to conditions of full employment. Instead,
capital and labour remain unemployed
because entrepreneurs do not anticipate any
profit from expanding production. Although
there are many methods of effecting the
economic expansion necessary for recovery,
the surest, indeed, the classical method (as
Reddaway points out) has been a direct
expansion of the production of capital goods,
producing an additional flow of wages and
a rise in demand for consumers’ goods to
which the consumption goods’ industries then
respond. Expansion of the consumers’ goods
industries depends on the level of consumers’
demand, which can, of course, be raised by
an expansion of the consumers’ goods industries themselves. But recovery on these
lines would be slow and uncertain, since some
of the additional purchasing power would be
saved and the expansion in expenditure
would be less than the expansion in production of consumption goods which generated
it. <A really convincing advance, argues

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Reddaway, requires the intervention of a
third factor, ‘“‘ something which will create
extra incomes and so extra demand, without
providing a simultaneous increase in the
volume of goods to be bought.”’ Expansion
of the production of producers’ goods fulfils
this function.

But capital outlay is not undertaken by
business men unless they expect an adequate
level of profits. Economic recovery, in our
present economic system, thus depends upon
the foresight, imagination and “ confidence ”
of a numerically small but economically allimportant group of people known as entrepreneurs. Their “confidence” is a fragile
thing, (a) because no one can forecast
business conditions more than a year or
two ahead, (0) because they depend for their
capital on banks, and on the “ investing
public ” who may be even more influenced
by short-term considerations than the business men. Unfortunately for the mass of
ordinary folk, the “confidence ”’ of entrepreneurs is exposed to a constant tendency
for the “‘ marginal efficiency” of capital—
ie. the profitability of investment—to
decline. The accumulation of capital itself
tends ultimately to diminish the ‘‘ marginal
efficiency” of capital. The more plentiful
capital becomes, the lower tends to be the
net yield which the next capital goods produced will give to the entrepreneur, unless
counteracting forces simultaneously create a
new and proportionate demand for net addttional capital outlay. ‘‘ Capital has to be kept
scarce enough in the long period,” says
Keynes (1936), ‘to have a marginal efficiency ” sufficient to induce entrepreneurs
to continue producing new capital goods.
He points out that

“ of two equal communities, having the
same technique but different stocks of
capital, the community with the smaller
stock of capital may be able for the time
to enjoy a higher standard of living than
the community with the larger stock ;
though when the poorer community has
caught up the richer . . . then both alike
will suffer the fate of Midas.”

Thus, although from the objective needsTHE ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF A DECLINING POPULATION

resources point of view, a greater quantity of
socially useful capital is invariably preferable to a smaller quantity, man-made
obstacles to consumption may convert this
accumulation of material wealth into a cause
of poverty.

Hitherto there fave been counteracting
forces which succeeded in keeping capital
scarce enough in the long run—by expanding
the demand for it—to maintain its ‘‘ marginal efficiency.”’ These forces were (a)
technical advance (i.e. new knowledge embodied in inventions, improved organization
of production and in a labour force trained
to apply new methods) ; (d) steady and rapid
growth of the home population (i.e. expansion of the internal consumers’ market) ;
(c) expansion of foreign trade (i.e. expansion
of the number of overseas consumers embraced in the British economic system as
customers or as borrowers) ; and (@) the rise
in the standard of living (i.e. rise in the level
of consuming power per head. This factor
was largely a function of the first three).
Prolonged stagnation of any one of these
forces of expansion would, if the other
factors continue to expand demand for net
additions to capital no faster than before,
have a depressing effect on capital outlay.
What has happened to them ?

(2) The Forces of Expansion

There is little doubt that technical advance
will continue, but there is much dispute
among the experts about whether it will
require large volumes of new net capital
outlay comparable to those needed in the
nineteenth century for heavy industrial
equipment. Pigou (1936) and Hicks (1936)
are optimistic, but Harrod (1939) and
Keynes* are less hopeful. At any rate, there
are no important signs at present of the
emergence of new major capital-absorbing
industries. Recent technical trends have
been mainly in the direction of reducing the
amount of capital per unit of output. Discussing the British and American productivity trends referred to above, Keynes
(1938) wrote :

*For example in his Galton Lecture, EUGENICS
ReEvIEw, April 1937.

123

“‘ In circumstances of such rapid technical progress accompanied by a demand
which is no greater than can be met by an
unchanged value of plant, it 1s probable,
both here and in America, that the deprectation allowances currently set aside by
manufacturers are sufficient to pay for all,
or nearly all, of the cost of new plant without
requiring to be supplemented out of current
net savings. This factor is a further aggravation of the contemporary problem of
finding a volume of profitable new net
investment sufficient to maintain equilibrium with the readiness to save... . It
is certain that in the last quarter of a
century such a state of affairs has never
existed, apart from very brief periods in
abnormal conditions, in any industrial
country in the world, except perhaps in
the United States in 1928.” |

Similarly Colin Clark (1937) has shown
that “‘ of the remarkable gains in productivity
which have been made since 1913, nearly the
whole has been lost’’ [in the form of increased
unemployment].

Even if new big capital-absorbing industries do develop, im itself the net additional
capital outlay involved would not suffice to
get us out of Joan Robinson’s vicious circle :

“ The accumulation of capital is always
tending to bring itself to an end, while at
the same time generating the need for a
greater rate of investment to keep up
employment.”

The number of consumers in the domestic
market increased by 1-1} per cent annually
from 1801 to 1911, by $ per cent from I9QII
to 1931, and by # per cent from 1931 to
1937. Keynes (1937) makes the following
rough estimates for 1860-1913 :

(2) Real capital increased by 170 per cent.

(6) The long-period average rate of interest
was constant.

(c) The technical period of production
lengthened by at most Io per cent.

(d) Population increased by 50 per cent
and the population served by British
industry and investment by much
more.
124

(ec) The standard of living rose by 60 per

cent.

According to this estimate the demand for
net additions to capital arose very little from
technical changes which required “ increasing capitalization per unit of consumption ”
(say 9 per cent), but mainly from increasing
population (say 41 per cent) and from
increasing consumption per head (say 50 per
cent). Somewhat less than half of the additional home investment arose from expansion
of population ; substantially more than half
of additional overseas investment was made
possible by expansion of the number of overseas consumers served by the British economic system. Over two-fifths of the additional
stock of capital would not have been required
if the same improvement in the standard of
living and the same lengthening of the
period of production had not been accompanied by any increase in population.

The new capital outlay necessitated by the
nineteenth century expansion in the number
of consumers was not necessarily devoted to
direct production of their basic needs. Much
of it was used to foster production of foodstuffs and raw materials in ‘‘ new ”’ countries,
(a) by direct exports of capital or (b) by
producing industrial exports to exchange for
“new ” country products. Man-power was
also exported in the form of emigrants.
Exports of capital on this basis can continue
to expand, (a) as long as Britain’s effective
consuming power for ‘‘ new” country products continues to expand (which depends
on continued growth of our population and/
or on a continued rise in consumption per
head of such products), and (2) as long as the
“ new ” countries continue to need to borrow
additional capital from Britain to increase
total output and productivity per worker.
Just as cessation of population growth will
remove one source of demand for net
additional home investment and depress the
total demand for new net investment (unless
counterbalancing changes in other sources
of demand occur), so it may be a cause of
decline in overseas investment of the traditional pre-1914 type. For example, the
annual increase in British food imports has
fallen steadily from 8 per cent in 1860-73 to

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

no more than 1 per cent since the last
war.

In the inter-war period overseas investment gradually dried up as a source of
demand for new net capital outlay. Is it
therefore ‘‘ played out ” because ‘‘ no fresh
continents remain to be discovered ”’ (Joan
Robinson, 1937), or because ‘‘ the channels
of overseas investment are closed and are
not likely soon to be reopened” (Harrod,
1939)? There are immense possibilities of
new demands for capital, not only in countries
like China and India, not only to restore the
colossal destruction of real capital that will
result from the present war, but in South
America, Australia and even in Central and
Eastern Europe. Enormous obstacles, even
before the outbreak of war, prevented this
latent demand from becoming effective in
backward countries and no change for the
better after the war is likely in the absence
of planned international action to raise
consumption on a world scale. Harrod is:
therefore probably right, if, but only if,
“ nothing is done about it.’’ It is impossible
henceforth to count on overseas investment
to stimulate the demand for new capital in
the absence of deliberate measures to promote
it. |

If 50 per cent of the net additions to
Britain’s stock of capital in 1860-1913 arose
from the rising level of consumption per head,
the standard of living is in any case a prime
factor in keeping the economic system
functioning healthily. But it has not hitherto
been an independent factor of economic
expansion, but rather a function of the other
factors we have discussed. Raising the
standard of living depends in the long run on
technical advances making possible a higher
output per man-hour. But in the short run the
actual level of demand may be well below
the upper limits imposed by the state of
technique. Short-term changes in the level
of consumers’ demand depend upon the
state of employment of capital and labour,
which in turn depends upon the “ marginal
efficiency ” of capital. Within a trade cycle
the standard of living is not the agent of
change but the subject affected. Because in
the short run the standard of living depends
THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF A DECLINING POPULATION

upon the “ marginal efficiency ” of capital,
a rise in the level of demand has traditionally
been not a cause of economic recovery, but
a result of it. If population increase disappears as a source of demand for net
additional capital outlay, if the prospect of
future demand for additional investment
arising from technical advance and overseas
borrowing is uncertain, then a further longterm rise in the standard of living (generated
by technical progress) may not materialize.
Instead: the prospect for the post-war years
ahead of us may quite well be one of prolonged economic depression with a steadily
rising volume of output per man-hour
counterbalanced by a formidable increase in
the proportion of workers left unemployed.
The problem of bridging the gap between the
standard of living technically possible and
that actually achieved is no new one. It was
not engendered by population trends, but
cessation of population growth is likely to
accentuate it in the future.

With two expansive factors ruled out and
with uncertainty about a third, profitability
and “confidence” may disappear and the
prospect may be one of prolonged economic
depression, relieved only by fresh booms in
production when future wars break out.
Economic recovery and progress in the future
would therefore appear to be bound up with
advances in the standard of living, which
will only be achieved if the trend of the
standard of living can be made to cease
being dependent upon the effects on capital
outlay of population expansion, technical
advance and overseas investment.

The Employment of Capital and Labour

« Provided we avoid under-employment of
capital and labour at least as well as in the past,
Reddaway argues that projections of population trends in the next four decades suggest
an economic situation that is potentially
highly favourable, since the ratio of workers
to total population would remain satisfactory and smaller numbers imply greater
amounts of natural resources per consumer,
of industrial capital per worker and of social
capital per citizen. But in an economy the
mainspring of which is the profitability of

125

investment to private entrepreneurs, may
not the cessation of population growth make
it more difficult to avoid unemployment of
men and resources than in the past ? On this
issue there are optimistic and pessimistic
schools of thought. I follow Reddaway in
giving the benefit of the doubt (but not more)
to the pessimists, providing nothing 1s done
to alter the working of our present economic
system. In a progressive economy technical
advance continually reduces the number of
workers employed by a given quantity of
capital. To maintain full employment and
prosperity, sustained cumulative annual
additions to our stock of capital are therefore
necessary ; that is to say, economic progress
depends on continually increasing the stock
of capital employed by maintaining the
demand for net additional capital outlay,
which means, at present, maintaining its
profitability to entrepreneurs. Keynes (1937)
has estimated that, since 8-15 per cent of
the national income is saved in conditions of
full employment, “ with our existing organization, and in conditions of full employment,
we shall have to discover a demand for net
additions to our stock of capital amounting to
somewhere between 2 per cent and 4 per cent
annually. And this will have to continue year
after year indefinitely.”

Uncertain about the future effects of
technical change on the demand for net
additional capital outlay, gloomy about the
prospects of overseas investment, pessimistic
economists are inclined to argue that cessation of population growth will remove one
major source of demand for new net investment and will exert a chronic depressing
effect on investment, employment and the
standard of living. A cautious expression of
this view is given in the League of Nations
World Economic Survey, 1938-9:

“In past decades, in Western and
Northern Europe and in Northern America,
a great deal of capital construction has
been necessitated simply by the growth of
population. ... Even the demand for
ordinary industrial capital equipment may
be diminished when the number of new
consumers of the product of industry
126

ceases to grow. ... The incentive to
borrow savings for capital development
may be depressed below the funds which
people wish to save, so that unemployment
and trade depression result from the
reduction of activity in the construction
industries.”

To this the optimist can make many replies,
chief among them being the argument that
the pessimist is really assuming a close
relation between the number of consumers
and the total consumers’ demand. Yet the
level of demand per head (or standard of
living) may be far more important than the
total number of heads. Thus New Zealand
with two million inhabitants imported 87,000
road motor vehicles in 1935-7, while India,
with 360 million people, imported only
72,000. But I agree with Reddaway’s
summing up of the debate between optimist
and pessimist :

“The optimist’s arguments fundamentally amounted to saying that openings for
capital outlay arise out of the need for
more capital to provide a rising standard
of consumption for a constant or even a
declining population, as well as out of the
need for more capital to provide the same
standard for larger numbers. Previously
we have had both factors at work; now
our stock of capital is larger, our standard
of consumption already higher, and our
population no longer expanding. There is
no theoretical impossibility about the
maintenance of the level of capital outlay,
especially if we visualize a great wave of
inventions ; but the probabilities are all
against it, unless conscious measures are
taken to secure tt.”

Reddaway’s conclusion is :

“Unless we do succeed in avoiding
catastrophic slumps, and in convincing
entrepreneurs that there is a reasonable
prospect of demand remaining at a prosperity level, then it will seem very risky
to undertake capital outlay which will
only be justified if the average person’s
consumption rises—and not, for example,
if real wages are high for those in work, but
25 per cent are unemployed.”

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

This is a fair statement of the problem posed
by our economic system. I do not however
agree that a solution can only be found by
somehow “convincing entrepreneurs that
there is a reasonable prospect of demand
remaining at a prosperity level.” This could
be achieved by mass hypnosis of business
men, but the issue is not in fact a psychological one. An economic system does not
have to depend on the “confidence” of
business men, although our present system
cannot work well without it.

A second argument of the pessimist is that,
because in a stationary or declining population total demand will depend far more than
hitherto on the standard of living, expansion
of demand in future may be far less ‘‘ automatic,” far more uncertain than in the past.
This may generate a general mood of caution,
if not of pessimism, among business men and
undermine their ‘‘ confidence ” and eagerness
to undertake new production.

Hicks (1936) in particular has used this
argument, but I feel that this is too speculative a question to argue about, and would
say with Jewkes (1939) :

“TIT am not convinced that, in fact, the
tendency mentioned above is particularly
likely to become actual since possible
counteracting forces cannot be ruled out.”

But again the pessimist may quite well be
right if ‘‘ possible counteracting forces” are
not consciously brought into play.

A third argument of the pessimist,
favoured by Harrod, is that, if we avoid
economic depression as well as in the past
(and once we recover from the effects of war),
real income per head is likely to continue to
grow. The number of dependants per income
receiver will also diminish. The effect will
be that an increasing proportion of expenditure will be available for consumption of
non-essentials. As Reddaway says,

“Catering for a rise in the standard of
consumption is almost bound to be a
riskier business than extending existing
industries to provide for more consumers.
Demand is more fickle as between one
semi-luxury and another.”’
THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF A DECLINING POPULATION

I accept this argument as, on the whole,
probably valid, but it is possible to place too
much emphasis upon it. It is however true
that capital and labour will have to be more
mobile and adaptable in a diversified economy
producing a large volume of “tertiary ”’
consumption goods and services, because of
increasing likelihood of shifts in demand due
to changes in tastes and fashions.

A fourth undoubtedly correct argument of
the pessimist (which again is commonly
over-emphasized) is that a stationary or
declining population will engender a greater
amount of structural unemployment. Increasing fickleness of demand would increase
the number of necessary readjustments in the
supply of capital and labour, and increase
the risk of loss of productivity through
temporary unemployment of specific types
of material and human resources. A shift
in demand, when population is declining,
may involve actual contraction of the total
output of the industry concerned, which
would involve physical transfer of capital
and labour to new employments, with unemployment in the interim; whereas in a
period of population expansion a fall in
demand for capital and labour of a specific
type (e.g. horse transport) might more
commonly be met simply by ceasing to
expand production of that type. Structural
readjustments of this character might also
be more difficult than hitherto, since an older
working population is inevitably less mobile
and adaptable than a younger one. Once
again I give the pessimist the benefit of the
doubt unless special measures are taken to
counteract these tendencies.

In general, what are we to conclude?
Within the framework of our present
economic system, I have no doubt that the
conclusions of Keynes in his Galton Lecture
(1937) are broadly valid (although the war
may disturb these basic trends for a number
of years). He doubted whether even the
2 per cent minimum annual net addition to
our stock of capital, postulated by him as
necessary to maintain the *‘ marginal efficiency” of capital (and so prosperity) in future,
would be possible “if things go on as they
are.” He argued that the chaining up of the

127

Malthusian Devil of Population does give
us a chance of increasing economic welfare
all round, but omly on condition that “* the
increase in resources or in consumption .. .
which the stationariness of population makes
possible, does actually take place.” For the
Devil of Unemployment, “ escaping through
the breakdown of effective demand,”
threatens us.

“When Devil P. of Population is chained
up, we are free of one menace ; but we are
more exposed to the other Devil U. of
Unemployed Resources than we were
before. . . . With a stationary population
we shall, I argue, be absolutely dependent
for the maintenance of prosperity and civil
peace on policies of increasing consumption
by a more equal distribution of incomes
and of forcing down the rate of interest.
. . . If we do not, of set and determined
purpose, pursue these policies, then without question we shall be cheated of the
benefits which we stand to gain by the
chaining up of one devil, and shall suffer
from the perhaps more intolerable depredations of the other.”

The National Income

We must turn from considering whether
a declining population will mean more or.
less employment to examining whether more °
or less income will accrue from employment.
On this question I follow Reddaway’s views
closely. In the past the amount of capital¢
increased much faster than the population,
and most of the additional capital that was
not needed for satisfying the needs of the
additional population was available for
raising the level of consumption per head.
The advent of a stationary or declining
population makes it possible to raise the
standard of living even faster than in the
past, since there will be little use for savings
merely to duplicate existing industrial equipment to provide for new demand resulting
from growth of population, and more savings
will be available to raise the level of output
and consumption per head. Moreover the
abundance and cheapness of capital would
make it possible to stimulate a rapid rise in
the amount of capital per worker employed
128

and hence in productivity, (a) by further
mechanization of production, (0) by facilitating the expansion of highly capitalized
industries relatively to those in which the
ratio of capital to labour is low. Reddaway
therefore concludes :

“Unless people become less successful
in using them [capital equipment and land],
we shall expect the real income per person
employed also to rise more rapidly than
in the past.”

Real income per person occupied (i.e.
including the unemployed) may not however
rise as rapidly as real income per person
employed, and the divergence between these
two curves may be greater than at present.
The difference between them is due to the
extent of unemployment. We have assumed
that general unemployment will be no more
prevalent than at present, but we have seen
that structural unemployment is likely to be
somewhat more prevalent. But structural
unemployment need not be of great importance if there is no general unemployment. It
is the latter which is the real problem.
Reddaway sums up his discussion :

“If we consider the whole field of
economic activity, the changed age composition of the employed population may
on balance be favourable, even if some of
the elderly are not really up to standard ;
for there will be a smaller proportion of
boys and learners to pull down the
average.”

The pessimists have several arguments
which must be considered. Harrod (1939)
‘states that

“‘ dwindling numbers would lead to a net
loss of production per head. The economies
of large scale production have not yet
reached their limit in this country and a
contraction of the market would lead to
diminished efficiency in many fields.”

This pessimism is really rooted in a general
pessimism about the future of the standard
of living, which, we have argued, is quite
unjustified except on the assumption that the
economic system is simply to be allowed to
flounder on from crisis to crisis as in the past.

-_

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Consumers’ demand need only be determined
by the number of consumers in the case of
commodities such as bread, the demand
for which is inelastic. In any case, even
admitting that a smaller population may
involve a shrinking demand for the products
of a whole series of significant industries, it
is difficult to think of a single important
industry in which a falling off of demand
would not raise productivity by eliminating
the least efficient productive enterprises.
Thus the physical output of British mines
and quarries fell by 14 per cent between
1924 and 1935, but physical output per
employee rose by no less than 31 per cent.
Much of this rise in productivity was due to
improvements in technique, but undoubtedly
an important proportion resulted simply
from the closing down of inefficient pits and
quarries. Diminishing returns would of
course inevitably set in if our population
were to fall from 40 millions to 10 millions.
Such a nightmarish trend is not impossible,
but it is futile and idle to speculate about
what may happen in A.D. 2100. It is nevertheless theoretically true that population
decline will have to be slowed down and
halted before the point of diminishing returns
is reached.

The whole of the foregoing discussion
depends on the overriding proviso that
general unemployment is avoided as well in
the future as in the past. If it is, the potentialities of the demographic situation are
very favourable. Whether we seize the
chance given us by the chaining up of the
Devil P. of Population, to chain up once and
for all the Devil U. of Unemployment is
another matter. It will not be done without
planning. If it is not done, “redundancy”
of capital equipment and productive capacity
are more likely than any advance in prosperity. Population trends are not the cause of
this problem (nor of the mental laziness of
those who call it a “ redundancy ” problem),
but they ave going to make the problem more
acute.

International Trade
In this sector of the battlefield the pessimists are well entrenched. Their first
THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF A DECLINING POPULATION

argument has been well stated by Dr. Snow
(1935) :

“In the pre-war period we adjusted our
commercial and industrial machinery to
provide [by means of exports] for an
annual increase of about 2 per cent in
our total food supplies, and this necessitated an annual increase of about 5 per
cent in our imports of foodstuffs. Between
1911 and 1926, however, our total consumption (by weight) of foodstuffs increased
by less than } per cent per annum, and the
highly complicated commercial and industrial machinery which we set up on the basis
of requiring an increase of 5 per cent per
annum in our imported food supply is only
required to produce an annual increase of
less than 1 per cent. This simple fact seems

to me to be at the bottom of many of the ©

world’s economic troubles. Australia and
Argentina, for example . . . have organized
themselves in the post-war period to
expand their production more or less at
the same rate as in the pre-war period.
... The cause for the slowing up of
international trade since the war is, to a
large extent, due to the change of [demographic] circumstances in this country.”

Yes, declining numbers of home consumers
does mean a falling demand for “ inelastic ”
commodities such as cereals and sugar, but
why for anything else ? Unless the standard
of living ceases henceforth to rise, a declining
population simply does not of necessity
imply any fall in the demand for most raw
materials. League of Nations nutrition
surveys have repeatedly shown tremendous
world under-consumption of most foodstuffs
except perhaps basic energy-yielding foods
(cereals, rice, sugar, etc.). Even in Britain
Orr (1936) estimated that increases of 29 per
cent in the consumption of meat, 80 per
cent for milk, 41 per cent for butter, 55 per
cent for eggs, 124 per cent for fruit (money
value) and 87 per cent for vegetables other
than potatoes (money value) were needed to
raise food consumption generally to the level
of the best fed class. Nor need there be any
falling off in the demand for cotton, wool,
leather, timber and almost all other raw

129

materials until we are a much better clothed,
housed and materially equipped nation than
at present. The raw-material countries could
be kept busy at full producing capacity if the
international and internal barriers to food
consumption could be overcome.

Another form of Dr. Snow’s argument is
the assertion that cessation of population
growth is a cause of the world agricultural

crisis. The League of Nations World
Economic Survey, 1938-9, for instance,
states :

“‘ With a cessation of population growth,
the demand for agricultural products will
cease to grow or at least will grow at a
very much slower rate. If agricultural
inventions and improvements in agricultural technique continue at their present
rate, this may mean that agriculturists
will be threatened with serious overproduction and a serious excess of productive capacity, which can no longer be
remedied simply by waiting for a growth
of population to bring forth a new and
increased demand.”

The answer to this is that the main barrier
to feeding the malnourished half of the
human race is not cessation of population
growth in one part of the world, but lack of
“effective demand ” in all parts. Another
League of Nations publication, the Interim
Report of the Mixed Committee on Nutrition,
Vol. I (1936), makes this clear :

“ The dislocation of international trade
which resulted from the crisis [after 1930}
fell with exceptional severity upon agricultural exporting countries. One of the
outstanding features of the depression was
the disproportionate fall in the prices of
agricultural products, leading to a restriction of purchasing power in agricultural
communities and, consequently, to a
limitation of the intake of industrial
products. In three years the price of
leading products in the world market fell
from the 1929 level by more than 50 per
cent, a development which might at first
blush appear an ideal one for securing an
abundant food supply through international trade. But, in fact, many indus130

trial communities were unable to purchase
their necessary supplies of foodstuffs owing
to their inability to sell their products to the
impoverished agriculturists. Industrial
workers fell into unemployment; agricultural produce went into stocks, not
into consumption.” '

It is perfectly true that less foodstuffs might
have gone into stocks and more might have
been sold if the populations of the advanced
industrial countries had been growing more
rapidly. But it is equally clear that we shall
get nowhere by blaming on to population
trends the crazy and tragic effects of international economic anarchy.

Another argument of the pessimists is that
cessation of population growth, by stopping
expansion of demand for certain foodstuffs
and raw materials, is undermining international investment. The declining tendency
of the Western populations, writes Henderson (1937), “‘ greatly diminishes, in my
judgment, the opportunity for sound international investment ; and large-scale international investment was an integral part of
the old system of international economic
intercourse.”” We have already dealt with
this argument in another form. Even
admitting that there is a large grain of truth
in it, such a trend would only imply the
drying up of overseas investment of this
type—i.e. to facilitate expansion of production of various raw materials. Other types
of overseas investment are easily conceivable.

Public Finance

The favourite argument of the pessimists
in this field is that of Harrod (1939) :

“In the coming decades we shall have
a rapidly ageing population and the maintenance of the older members will be an
increasing burden on those actively employed.”

Taking the average of Charles’s two most
important projections of population trends,
Reddaway makes the following estimate of
the order of magnitude of future expenditure
on pensions :

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(£ millions)
Widows
Old Age’ and War Total
65-70 70 Orphans
1936-37 20 46 24 40 130
(actual)
1945-46 24 56 28 32 140
1955-56 25 67 31 ai 144
1965-66 28 76 33 Io 147

At first sight this appears to justify Harrod’s
alarmism. But Reddaway goes on to point
out a factor which all the pessimists have
hitherto overlooked: the future yield of
death duties. The rapid fall of death rates
in the past has—by postponing the demise
of many owners of property—deprived the
Chancellor of the Exchequer of much income
from death duties. Even a continued fall in
age-specific death rates will not however in
future avert a steady rise in the total number
of deaths of elderly people whose estates will
come under the axe, simply because the
proportion of elderly people with one foot
in the grave is increasing every year. This
will gradually raise the proportion of capital
which is taxed for death duties each year.
Reddaway estimates the future yield of
death duties (assuming no change in the rate
of taxation) as follows :

Death Rate Yield

(per 1,000)  (£ millions)
1935-39 12°9 80
1940-44 13°7 85
1945-49 14°5 go
1950-54 15°3 95
1955-59 16-1 100
1960-64 16:9 105

The rise in the yield of death duties would
continue for some time after 1965. By 1965
we might thus expect an increase in pensions
expenditure of about {£17 millions to be
balanced by an additional income from death
duties of about {25 millions. This was the
likelihood if war had not broken out. But
increased pensions expenditure due to war
losses and higher pension rates may be
counterbalanced by a higher yield from death
duties resulting from war-time deaths and
heavier taxation. At any rate there is little
THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF A DECLINING POPULATION

justification for gloomy talk about the
increasing financial burden of old people.

The changing age structure of our population will however transform the nature of
the dependency problem. In 1891 children
under 15 constituted no less than 35 per cent
of the population of England and Wales,
while old people over 64 were less than 5 per
cent. To-day children have fallen to under
22 per cent and old people have increased to
about g per cent. Glass’s first estimate
suggests that by 1985 old people will slightly
outnumber children, but his second estimate
(continuance of present trends) reaches this
situation about 1965, and by 1980 shows a
population in which children are only 12 per
cent and old people amount to 20 per cent.
The dependency problem of the past has been
mainly a children’s problem; in future an
old people’s problem is going to be added.
The children’s problem has not yet been
solved, and its solution may require largescale readjustments in our social and
economic life. If such readjustments are
embarked upon, they will, in future, become
increasingly complicated by the need for
another set of readjustments to tackle the
old people’s problem.

Conclusions: Is a Population Policy

Necessary ?

I have endeavoured to show that many of
the economic arguments currently put forward
as grounds for stimulating the birth rate are
ill-conceived, and that others are really
arguments for dealing with our economic
lack-of-system rather than with population
trends. I am strongly in sympathy with
Reddaway’s general conclusion :

_ “The problem is essentially a ‘ man
made ’ one, which human ingenuity should

be capable of solving. Our difficulty is not
to overcome the niggardliness of nature,
but so to organize ourselves that we can
make use of the (relative) abundance which
should be available, but seems likely somehow to elude our grasp. . . . Suppose it
were possible, by elaborate action, to raise
the birth rate by an appreciable amount ;
would this be a sensible thing to do?
Failing all else, perhaps it would, and of

131

course there may be plenty of other
reasons for wanting to do it. But what a
commentary on the ingenuity of homo
sapiens! That he should be reduced to
laboriously increasing the number of
children born in order that we may keep
up the level of capital outlay, and so avert
a slump, by making it attractive to build
houses for them to live in! In view of the
large gap between what so many of us
actually get with our incomes and what
we would like to have, surely we can devise
(and carry out) some better policy for
“maintaining employment’ than that? ”

I have also tried to show—following Reddaway to a considerable extent—that if our
economic structure persists without considerable readjustments it is going to encounter worse and worse difficulties as a
result of present demographic trends. I do,
however, hold that, in the short run (i.e.
speaking in terms of decades) the influence of
economic trends on the demographic situation far outweighs the influence of demographic trends on the economic situation,
although this may not be so true in the long
run (i.e. speaking in terms of centuries).
In this respect there is an analogy between
population trends and war. The outbreak of
a major European war for the second time in
one generation has brought to a head all
those economic problems the solution of
which was easier, but less urgent, as long as
peace was preserved. In the same way the
cessation of population growth is bringing
to a head all those economic problems the
solution of which was easier, but less urgent
and evident, in the period when population
was still steadily expanding. But these
economic problems arise in the main from
the economic system itself. Their existence
is independent of whether we are in a state
of war or peace, or whether the population is
young and expanding or ageing and dwindling. It is futile to blame either war or
population trends for this situation. They
cannot be isolated from other factors as
fundamentally to blame, although they make
a solution at once more urgent and more
difficult. As Reddaway says :
132

“Tf there is to be an ‘economic
verdict,’ then, on the population changes
which we are to expect in the next
twenty-five or thirty years, it must be
couched in much the same terms as those
used for the outlook as a whole. They put
us collectively on our mettle. If we can
show sufficient social resourcefulness and
adaptability to solve various problems of
adjustment, then they will give us a good
reward; if we cannot, then they will
prove a curse instead of a blessing.”

Reddaway believes that future economic
policy will have to aim (a) at stimulating
consumption up to the limits technologically
possible, (6) at stimulating the employment
of capital and labour (by reduction of
interest rates, etc.), (c) at increasing the
mobility of capital and labour. (His book
should be consulted for a discussion of
possible ways of achieving these ends.) I
would add that (a) and (d) can probably only
be achieved by releasing over an everwidening sector the employment of material
and human resources from their present
dependence on the profitability of investment
to private persons; and that all such
measures are not likely to succeed unless they
are fitted into the framework of a general
programme for peaceful world (European,
Empire) economic reconstruction.

There are nevertheless sound reasons for
hoping that the demographic situation will
be kept in the forefront of any post-war
plans for social and economic reconstruction.
If population decline goes too fast and too
far, most of the pessimists’ gloomy prognostications may come true . . . ultimately.
The outbreak of war may bring this doomsday measurably nearer. In my opinion the
desirable trend would be one of slow population decline (since some decline cannot be
averted) reaching ultimate stationariness of
numbers and stability of age structure by
the end of the century. The 1980 level of
33-36 millions for England and Wales
indicated by Glass’s projections would be
adequate, provided we achieve replacement
of numbers by about the same period.
Jewkes (1939) sees no reason why anything

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

should be done in the meantime. But in fact
the achievement of stationariness by about
1980 involves action now, and not forty
years hence, as Harrod (1940) makes clear
in his rejoinder to Jewkes. With agespecific death rates as they were in 1935-6,
maintenance of a stationary population at
the 1935-6 level would require immediately
a Net Reproduction Rate of less than unity,
though it would have to rise gradually to
unity. This is because the proportion of
women of child-bearing age in our population
is at present “inflated,” and this factor has
staved off population decline so far, in spite
of a N.R.R. below unity for nearly two
decades. A N.R.R. of unity at present, if
maintained, would mean population growth
for some time, because replacement of the
present generation of potential mothers by
a generation of future mothers of equal size
at present implies a somewhat larger total
population (about 46 millions, according to
Glass and Blacker, 1938). Kuczynski (1938)
gives stationary death rates for 1935 and
1936 as 16-02 and 16-08, compared with
crude death rates of 11-75 and 12°14.
Following Harrod’s method, these rates
imply that to maintain a stationary population at the 1935-6 level, a N.R.R. of
11°75
16-02
with an actual N.R.R. of 0-76, and in 1936

12°14
a N.R.R. of 6.08
pared with an actual N.R.R. of 0-77.
Continued maintenance of the population at
the given size would involve gradual raising
of the N.R.R. to unity, which should be
attained by the time when the age-composition of the population becomes “ normal”
(i.e. that required by a stationary population), perhaps in fifteen or twenty years
ahead. Thus the present N.R.R. of about
0-75, if it rises over the next two decades
to unity, should suffice to keep our
numbers up to the present level. If the
achievement of unity were to take twice as
long we should attain a stationary population
about 1980 only two or three millions smaller
than its present size.

= 0:73 was needed in 1935, compared

 

 

= 0°75 was needed, comTHE ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF A DECLINING POPULATION

Supposing now we take Jewkes’s advice
and do nothing until 1980. Let us assume
also that fertility and mortality persist unchanged at the 1935 level. According to
Glass the position in 1980 would be: a total
population of 36 millions, 38 per cent of all
females would be in the child-bearing age
groups (compared with 46-7 per cent in
1935), the crude death rate would have risen
to 18-90 (because of the greater age of the
population), and the stationary death rate
would, of course, still be 16-02 as in 1935.
To maintain the population stationary at the
1980 level would require a N.R.R. of
18-go
16-02
N.R.R. of 0°76 (as in 1935), so that a group
of potential mothers constituting a proportion of the total female population smaller
by one-fifth than the present generation of
potential mothers would each have to
produce about three children for every two
now needed to maintain a stationary population. To avert further decline of numbers
this N.R.R. of 1-18 in 1980 would have to be
achieved immediately, after which the N.R.R.
could be allowed to fall gradually to unity
by the time when the proportion of potential
mothers in the population had been raised
to the level required by a stationary population. The N.R.R. would actually have to be
a little higher than 1-18, since the age
distribution of women of child-bearing age
themselves would be less favourable to
fertility than to-day. In 1935 51-4 per cent
of potential mothers were under 30; in
1980 (on the above assumptions) only 47-9
would be. If fertility and mortality continue
to fall from the 1935 level, the position in
1980 would be much more difficult. The
population would be about 33 millions, the
crude death rate 18-88, the proportion of
women in the child-bearing age groups would
be 35°3 per cent, of whom only 42-3 per
cent would be under 30. The actual N.R.R.
would be about 0-55; the N.R.R. required
for a stationary population at that level
would have to be at least double, falling
gradually to unity.

= 1-18, compared with an actual

 

133

Thus action now involves gradually raising
the Net Reproduction Rate from its present
level to unity over a period of forty or fifty
years. This would ensure us a stationary
population a little smaller than to-day. The
achievement of this trend would have been
no easy matter even if war had not broken
out. But it is a hundred times easier than
Jewkes’s alternative of waiting (say) until
1980. Action in 1980 means at best an
immediate raising of the N.R.R. by 58 per
cent, from 0-76 to about 1:20, and then
allowing a gradual fall to unity. It might
mean an immediate doubling of a N.R.R.
fallen as low as 0°55, which is an evident
impossibility. Clearly Jewkes’s alternative
would run us into the very real risk—brought
nearer by war—of a nightmarish future in
three or four generations, not so much
because of changes in the szze of the population, but because of the changes in age composition that are indissolubly wedded to
changes in size.

Indifference to the birth rate is not therefore, in my opinion, justifiable. The right
time to gain a hearing for the adoption of a
population policy will come in the immediate
post-war years when, assuming the destruction of the Nazi and Fascist systems, there
will undoubtedly arise in Britain a ferment
of new ideas about social policy and a general
atmosphere favourable to proposals for
social reconstruction. Economic measures
will have to be included in any birth-rate
policy which is intended to succeed. Optimists will do well to admit that reform of the
economic system in itself will not solve
everything and that measures to encourage
parenthood are also desirable. Pessimists
will do well to admit that many features of
our economic system are not sacrosanct and
that no substantial and sustained rise in the
birth rate is likely to be achieved in the
absence of far-reaching economic reforms.
Both optimists and pessimists would do
well, in the field of economic policy, to
advocate measures intended to raise the birth
rate which are at the same time acceptable
as part of a programme of reform which is
desirable in itself. Reddaway’s book contains a host of ideas on this subject although
134,

no reference is made to eugenics. It should
be read and pondered over by all eugenists
who are in the habit of attempting to
strengthen their case for a population policy
by the use of non-eugenic arguments about
the effects of population trends in the future.

References
Colin Clark (1937): National Income and Outlay.
D. V. Glass (1940): Population Policies and
Movements.
D. V. Glass and C. P. Blacker (1938) : Population
and Fertility.
R. F. Harrod: ‘‘ Modern Population Trends,’’
The Manchester School, April 1939.
“The Population Problem: A Rejoinder,”’
sbid., April 1940.
H.D. Henderson: ‘“‘ Economic Consequences and
Problems,’’ Sociological Review, July 1937.
J. R. Hicks: ‘‘ Mr. Keynes’ Theory of Employment,” Economic Journal, June 1936.

 

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

J. Jewkes: ‘‘ The Population Scare,” The
Manchester School, October 1939.

J. M. Keynes (1936): The General Theory of
Employment, Interest, and Money.

(1937): ‘“‘ Some Consequences of a Declining Population,” Galton Lecture, EvuGENics
REvIEw, April 1937.

(1938) : Letter of Times, October 3rd.

R. R. Kuczynski: ‘‘ The Analysis of Vital
Statistics, II Birth and Death Statistics,’’ Economica, August 1938.

League of Nations: The Problem of Nutrition,
Vol. I. Interim Report of the Mixed Committee on
the Problem of Nutrition (1936).

— World Economic Survey, 1938-9 (1939).

J. B. Orr (1936) : Food, Health and Income.

Prof. Pigou: Economica, May 1936 (Review of
Keynes).

Joan Robinson (1937):
Theory of Employment.

E. C. Snow (1935): ‘‘ The Limits of Industrial
Employment,” II. Journal of Royal Statistical
Soctety, II. 1935.

 

 

Introduction to the

i

  

Articles appearing in forthcoming issues :

Stanford University.
C. Gresz, Stanford University.

Quarterly by the University of Chicago

English Agents: CAMBRIDGE

 

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY

REACTIVITIES OF COLPODA DUODENARIA TO ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS. II. FACTORS
INFLUENCING THE FORMATION OF RESTING CYSTS. By C. V. Taytorand A.G.

RETARDATION OF EARLY CLEAVAGE OF URECHIS BY ULTRA-VIOLET LIGHT. By Arrnuur

ty
ON THE KILLING ACTION OF OPTICALLY ISOMERIC NICOTINES IN RELATION
PROBLEMS OF EVOLUTION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM IN ANIMALS. By G. F. Gause and

N. P. Smaracpova, Institute of Zodlogy, University of Mos
THE PRODUCTION OF DUPLICITAS CRUCIATA AND MULTIPLE HEADS BY REGENERATION
IN EUPLANARIA TIGRINA. By Rosert H. Srzper and Vixror Hamsurcer, Washington University.

Edited by W. C. Autes, Professor of Zodlogy, The University of Chicago. Published

      
 

R. STRICKLAND,

 
   
      

TO

 
         
   
    
 

Subscription : 35s. 2d. per year.
UNIVERSITY PRESS
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXII, No. 4.

  
