RACIAL POISONS

Il. ALCOHOL

S

By C. W. SaLezsy, M.D., F.R.S.E., F.Z.S. |

A. Preliminary Considerations

Ir may be as well to begin by removing a misconception
regarding the use of the term racial poison. Unfortunately it
has been employed in various quarters lately as if it were applicable to any substance that poisons a large number of individuals
at any time. When thus used, however, the differentia of the
term is entirely missed. Indeed, the term was introduced by
the present writer some three years ago precisely in order to
distinguish between the action of substances upon an individual
as an individual and their action through the individual upon
the race: ‘‘ by a racial poison I understand a substance which,
whether or not injuring the individual who takes it, is liable to
injure the race of which he [or she] is the trustee.” It is allimportant for the eugenist to make this distinction. Thus
strychnine is a poison, but deadly though it be to the individual,
it is so far as we know not a racial poison—except in so far as
that anything which kills the individual interferes with the race.
Again, the community as a whole takes very many poisons—as,
for instance, boric acid—in its food every day, and this is a
question by no means negligible; but it is a problem in hygiene,
not in eugenics, so long as we are without any evidence that these
adulterants prejudice the individual’s parenthood. Morphine,
on the other hand, is believed by the most authoritative observers,
such as the late Professor Brouardel,'! to have a racial influence,
and a still more recent student of high authority, Dr. Harrington
Sainsbury, writes as follows:

1 Opium, Morphine, et Cocaine, P. Brouardel (Bailliére et fils, 1906), p. 68.
RACIAL POISONS 31

“It has been established that the unborn child may acquire the habit
from a mother; this is not surprising, seeing that the saturation of the
parental system with morphia must involve a saturation of the system of the
offspring. Such children, after birth, may show a restlessness and sleeplessness which resist ordinary treatment but at once yield to a dose of
morphia.””!

It may not, at first, seem at all obvious why one alkaloid,
such as morphine, should be included in our category, and
another, such as strychnine, should not; and it would lead me
too far afield at present to attempt to show in detail why these
distinctions exist. It may, however, be pointed out, by way of
an indication to the line of reasoning, that in the case of morphine
we have a substance which, besides its local influence upon the
brain, has a general action upon the bodily chemistry as a whole,
as is remarkably shewn by its influence upon the disordered
chemistry of the disease known as diabetes mellitus. Strychnine,
on the other hand, has a conspicuously localised action, the
most careful pharmacological experiments having failed to reveal
almost any appreciable action of this drug except upon one special
type of nerve cell, which is found in the anterior cornua of grey
matter in the spinal cord and in the homologous morphological
elements of the medulla oblongata, the pons, and possibly even
higher encephalic centres. This distinction between two
substances apparently so similar is worth insisting upon. _

In alcohol we have a remarkable parallel to morphine and a
contrast to strychnine. All three compounds affect nervous
tissue, and it is this effect upon nervous tissue that is generally
known. What is not generally known is that alcohol, like morphine and unlike strychnine, has an effect upon the tissue-chemistry everywhere, as can be readily shown by its numerous
actions upon general metabolism, upon the chemical reduction
of the oxy-hzmoglobin of arterial blood, and in many other
ways. It is therefore not incomprehensible that morphine and
alcohol have racial effects and are to be classed as racial poisons,
whilst strychnine, so far as we know, is outside this category.

Hitherto, I have made no attempt to form a comprehensive
catalogue of racial poisons. My object from the first has been

1 Drugs and the Drug Habit, by Harrington Sainsbury, M.D., F.R.C.P. (The
New Library of Medicine, Methuen & Co., 1909.)
32 C. W. Saleeby :

to direct the attention of professing eugenists to the fact,
wholly ignored by them hitherto, that such poisons do exist. I
have never referred to more than four—alcohol, lead, morphine
and the poison of syphilis. Of course, there are many more, such
as mercury, phosphorus and the “ protoplasmic poisons” generally,
and quite apart from the true “‘ blastophthoria ” of Forel, recent
research has gone far to enable us to distinguish between poisons
which, circulating in the blood of the expectant mother,
are arrested by the placental filter, and fail to enter the circulation of the child, and those on the other hand which pass readily
through the filter, thus poisoning both organisms. All of these
details are important, but the main point for eugenists at this
early stage of our campaign is to recognise that there are such
things as racial poisons, and to concentrate upon combating
the more important of them, which are undoubtedly alcohol,
syphilis and lead.

It may be noted that, alike in practice and in theory, the
term racial poisons may be equally applied to a substance, such
as alcohol or lead, which is introduced as such into the body, or
to any substance, no less chemical though of different origin,
which is produced in the body in consequence of the vital interplay between the bodily tissues and the cells of some invading
micro-organism, such as the spirochaete of syphilis. No doubt
there is here a practical distinction for the eugenist, since
marriage without parenthood may be permitted to a person
suffering from, shall we say, lead-poisoning, whereas marriage
even without parenthood is a crime on the part of a person
suffering from a contagion such as syphilis. But though this
pragmatic distinction exists, both lead and the toxins of syphilis
may legitimately be called racial poisons. Syphilis was dealt
with in the last number of this REVIEW; lead will be dealt with
in the next. The special concern of the present paper is with
alcohol.

B. Alcoholism as a Symptom of Degeneracy

Very few people realise how complex are the relations of
alcohol to parenthood, and any failure of analysis, depending in
its turn upon ignorance of the biological facts involved, will lead
RACIAL POISONS 33

to error. In the first place, I will refer as briefly as possible to
an extremely important relation between alcohol and parenthood,
in which the action of alcohol as aracial poison is in a sense
quite subsidiary. There exist large numbers of persons in the
community whose nervous organisation is naturally defective,
and who take alcohol to excess—that is to say, to what is excess
for them, though the actual amount may be incredibly small—
and whose intemperance is not asin butasymptom. In such
cases, to be scientificis to be charitable. The person in question
is a patient, and alcoholism is one of his symptoms as pain is one
of the symptoms of a fracture. Here the business of the eugenist
is to recognise the alcoholism as a symptom, index, label, what
you will, which declares the individual to be dysgenic—a term
that may conveniently be used to mean unworthy for parenthood.
It is true that alcohol as a racial poison, acting upon the parents
of such an individual, who may themselves have been natively
healthy, is very probably the cause of his native condition, in the
fashion which I shall later discuss. But he is what he is whether
he be or become a total abstainer or not, and the real importance
of the alcoholism in his case, if he happens to present that
symptom, is as a warning for the eugenist. It is true, also, that
if such a person be alcoholic, the blastophthoria, or poisoning
of the germ, which in the previous generation produced him,
may be resumed, still further to injure the next generation. But
in any case such a person is condemned by the principles of
negative eugenics and our duty is plain.

I now go on to show, also as briefly as possible, how the case
lies in contemporary politics.

The Eugenics Education Society has, from the first, recognised and fought for the principle that alcoholism is often a
symptom of native nervous defect such as should most certainly
disqualify for parenthood. But time passes, and many readers.
may have forgotten what we have already accomplished. A
recent administrative scandal in this connection in London
brought eugenists into the field and a Committee of the Home
Office was appointed, which reported in January, 1909, and the
report of which will doubtless form the basis of legislation.

Such legislation was indeed promised in a recent King’s speech,
3
34 C. W. Saleeby:

but nothing further has been accomplished hitherto, for the cause
of the future, by what Adam Smith described as “ that insidious
and crafty animal vulgarly called a statesman or politician.”
I have elsewhere dealt with this question in detail, and it is not
necessary to return toithere. Eugenists and especially members
of the Eugenics Education Society may be gratified to know,
however, that since January rst of the present year 1910, it has
been again possible for magistrates in London to commit chronic
inebriate women to reformatories, the sordid squabble between
the Treasury and the London County Council having been
adjusted in deference to the public opinion which our Society
did much to create.?

C. Alcoholism as a Cause of Degeneracy

Let us pass now to the action of alcohol as a racial poison.
It is a notable circumstance, yet easy of explanation, that overt
eugenic research hitherto has totally ignored the question of the
origin of defects such as bring the individual under the ban of
negative eugenics. Anyone whose daily business it is by voice
and pen to preach eugenics will soon discover that the thoughtful
members of the public to which he appeals are interested in this
question, as indeed they ought to be. So, indeed, ought we to be,
but hitherto official eugenic research has concerned itself entirely
with transmission and not at all with origin. However, when the
eugenist has pointed out how urgent is the need of interference
with the transmission of degeneracy, he is certain to be asked
as to the origin or prime cause or causes of degeneracy. Members of one political party, for instance, will ask him whether
under present environmental conditions, such as, for instance,
overcrowding and bad nutrition, healthy stocks are not daily
being converted into unhealthy ones. We really cannot afford
any longer to be so absorbed in the question of transmission as
to ignore the question of origin. It is our great claim that we
begin at the beginning, and reckon with the nature of the individual, which the rest of the world takes for nought, regarding
only his environment or nurture. But if it comes to that, we

1 The reader may be specially referred to Dr. Welsh Branthwaite’s lecture
*‘ Inebriety : Its Causation and Control,” British Journal of Inebriety, Jan., 1908.
RACIAL POISONS 35

must begin at the beginning ourselves. We might find, for
instance, that environment in preceding generations had been
the beginning of the degeneracy we were later confronted with.

Or we may not so find; but in any case we must seek for
what there is to find. Eugenists are too apt to accept without
analysis the modern biological rejection of Lamarckianism,
believing that ‘‘ acquired characters are not transmitted,” and
assuming an exact correspondence between words and realities
which may obtain in Paradise but is only a Will-o’-the-wisp here.
We utterly confound things which are utterly different, and we
do it quite contentedly, notwithstanding that our error had been
corrected in anticipation, before many of us were born, by the
august Honorary President of our Society, who is the founder of
the modern doctrine that parental modifications due to use and
disuse, and the like, are not transmitted, as well as by Weismann,
who is commonly but erroneously credited with the priority in
this theory which, as can be shown, is in point of fact Sir
Francis Galton’s.

The aid of the practical biologist, and not least of those who
are at work upon the various branches of medical science, is
much needed inthis connection. Unfortunately, too few students
of eugenics are medical men, the medical profession not yet
having realised that the stage of attention to individual hygiene,
in which it is now finding itself, must necessarily go even further,
when racial hygiene—that is to say, negative eugenics—will be
the goal and ideal of that great profession. It is at present a
very serious matter that eugenists are not acquainted with
physiology or pathology, pharmacology or toxicology; not to
mention the great science of obstetrics, which will be the handmaid of practical eugenics in the near future. It is quite certain
that we cannot for ever be content with the familiar enquiries
which show to what extent feeble-mindedness, for instance, is
transmissible. There is also the pathological inquiry, needing
an inquirer who is a pathologist, as to its primary causation.

The Meaning of Reversion.—By way of preamble it may be
briefly noted that persons not too familiar with the work either
of Darwin or of his successors are very apt to darken counsel in
this regard by using words without knowledge. The most con36 C. W. Saleeby:

spicuous instance of what I mean is the misuse of the word
‘‘reversion.” People who know neither the Darwinian employment of the word nor the Mendelian elucidation of the thing tell
us that feeble-mindedness is a case of reversion. Mating certain
fancy pigeons, Darwin obtained the blue rock ancestor, and that
he called reversion. But, in the first place, our ancestors,
primitive man, the remoter Lemuroids, were not feeble-minded.
A much graver objection is that the Mendelians have now discovered what reversion is, and have given the word a definite
meaning.! In this particular case, for instance, we now know
that the so-called reversion is due to the coming together again
of those two Mendelian units, the combination of which in the
zygote conditioned the blue colour and other characters in the
ancestral form. When the modern biologist hears talk of an
idiot, for instance, as a case of “ reversion,’ he may almost be
excused for the contempt which I fear he too commonly feels for
these excursions, guided only by uncomprehended words, into
the realm of biology. If we are to apply a word of this kind to
the case of feeble-mindedness, we can make a compromise by
retaining the last two syllables of the term which has so long
been conjured with and changing the first. I suggest perversion
as the best term to describe the process which results in the
defective-minded. This term suggests a vitiation of development, and the evidence has now for several years been overwhelming that this perversion is often due to that damaging or
poisoning of the germinal material, which the great contemporary master of this subject, Forel of Zurich, has termed
‘“‘ blastophthoria,”’ and which I shall discuss in detail shortly.
The Lamarck-Galton-Weismann controversy.—The modern
teaching regarding heredity is that functionally produced
modifications are not transmissible, since they are not capable
of producing representative reconstructions in the germ-plasm.
If, following Lucretius, we liken the germ-plasm to the lamp
carried by runners in certain ancient races,? then we may say
that changes produced in the runner’s body do not representa
1 See The Methods and Scope of Genetics, by W. Bateson, M.A., F.R.S.,
Cambridge University Press, 1908, p. 48, and Mendel's Principles of Heredity, by
W. Bateson, Cambridge University Press, 1909, p. 99 é¢ seq.

2 ** Bt, quasi cursoves, vitai lampada tradunt.”
RACIAL POISONS 37

tively affect the lamp. An instance of a functionally produced
modification is the biceps of the blacksmith; in another sphere
we may take the knowledge of a language. By a most unfortunate substitution, this clumsy but accurate and unambiguous
phrase, functionally produced modifications, has lately been
replaced by the term ‘“‘ acquired characters.”” Herbert Spencer,
who in any case thought in realities, and not in other people’s
phrases, always used the older term. The newer one is based,
I suppose, upon Lamarck’s original ‘“‘ changements acquis,” by
which he meant such things as the blacksmith’s biceps. Neither
Lamarck, however, on his view, nor Galton, when he denied that
such a thing as the blacksmith’s biceps is transmissible, nor yet
Weismann in his subsequent labours, ever committed the quite
puerile absurdity of confusing such a thing as the hypertrophy of
the blacksmith’s biceps with, say, the consequences of soaking
the entire organism for years in the poisons of syphilis, or
alcohol, or salts of lead. Unfortunately, people talk about what
happens to acquired characters, and what is and is not possible,
without ever having read their Galton or their Weismann, and
the phrase catches them out. The general bodily consequences
of alcoholism are, of course, acquired characters in the ordinary
meaning of English words. And so we used to have one party
declaring, on what they supposed to be the Galton-Weismann
theory, that alcoholism cannot possibly affect offspring; and
another party declaring that, since plainly the effects of alcoholism
must and do affect the offspring, the doctrine that acquired
characters are not transmissible is evidently nonsensical. Both
parties are fooled by the words. If we had retained the older
phrase—“ functionally produced modifications ”’”—people would
see that, as Weismann has specifically stated in The GermPlasm’, the effects of poisonings have nothing to do with the
controversy. One may quotea sentence from Galton, and we shall
observe how perfectly simple and self-evident the whole thing is
when dealt with by a man who is thinking in terms of things,
and not in terms of phrases that someone else has invented.
Says Sir Francis in the prefatory chapter (p. 15) to the second
edition of Hereditary Genius: ‘‘ As a general rule, with scarcely

1 English translation in ‘‘Contemporary Science Series,” p. 386.
38 C. W. Saleeby :

any exception that cannot be ascribed to other influences, such
as bad nutrition or transmitted microbes, the injuries or habits
of the parents are found to have no effect on the natural form or
faculties of the child.” We see that it never even occurs to him
that bad nutrition (¢.g., through alcohol or lead) or transmitted
microbes (e¢.g., of syphilis) can possibly be regarded as having anything to do with the question which he is discussing—that is, the
question of thetransmission of functionally produced modifications.

The Royal Commissioners on the Care and Control of the
Feeble-minded have declared that feeble-mindedness is not due
to influences acting on the parent, and by introducing the word
*‘ spontaneous ”’ they have succeeded in excluding any causation
at all for feeble-mindedness—a very interesting conclusion, but
one against which the whole universe protests. The word
‘* spontaneous ”’ the Commissioners have borrowed from Darwin.
Its fate is the same as in every other case where a great man
introduces a term. Darwin specifically and scrupulously
employs the word as a convenient expression which meant for him
‘due to causes I do not know.” The inevitable has happened,
and now the word means “due to no causes.” The Commissioners consider that feeble-mindedness is not due to influences
acting on the parent, and they base this conclusion on “‘ grounds
of fact and theory.” I wonder whether they would allow us to
say that it is due to influences acting 7m the parent, or whether
they could find grounds of fact and theory contravening that
supposition. What, then, if we put alcohol or lead into the
parent? Directly we leave words and begin to think of things,
we discover that the individual body contains tissue from which
new individuals are formed. We discover also that this tissue,
being alive, depends for oxygen and food upon the body of its
host, and upon that body, also, for the removal of its carbonic
acid and other excreta. We can actually see the blood-vessels
running to this tissue and the veins coming back from it: we can
readily, when the substance has been taken by the individual,
detect alcohol in it!; and in the light of these concrete realities,
phrases about ‘‘ grounds of theory’ tell us more about Royal
Commissions than about mere feeble-mindedness.

1 In about eight minutes after ingestion.
RACIAL POISONS 39

Evidently, the onus of proof now rests with those who shall
deny that alcohol, for instance, has any influence upon the
germinal tissues through which it demonstrably circulates. The
controversy between Lamarck and Galton has no more to do
with the subject than the controversy between Galileo and the
Inquisition; it is a mere red-herring drawn across our path.
The question is whether the germ-plasm, unlike all other known
tissues, is incapable of being injured by alcohol.

D. Blastophthoria

For various historical reasons, and also no doubt as a consequence of our sterner attitude towards vivisection, we in this
country have long lagged behind in almost every branch of experimental pharmacology and toxicology. It is necessary to go
to continental and American workers for positive facts of experiment and observation obtained under scientific conditions, in
these important fields of medical and, as we shall see, of genetic
science. It has already been shown, by quotations from Galton
and Weismann, that the possibility of poisoning the germ-plasm
In either sex cannot be questioned. When we enquire into the
conditions under which the racial or parental tissues, as we may
call them, are nourished, we find, as has been shown, that they
are at the mercy of the blood and its contents. If these contents
include certain substances, belonging to the category of racial
poisons, there not only may ensue, but has been exhaustively
proved to ensue, a poisoning of the germ for which the generally
recognised name amongst those who study this subject is blastophthoria. Forel, to whom we owe this name, very well remarks
that it might be called ‘‘ La Fausse Hérédité.”’ By heredity in
the strict sense we ought to mean nothing but the normal
organic relation between living generations. The action of a
racial poison upon the germinal tissues is therefore wisely to be
distinguished as ‘false heredity.” As Forel puts it—and perhaps it may be more convenient to quote from the English
translation, which is in this case quite literally rendered from the
French :

“ Blastophthoria thus acts on germs not yet conjugated through the
medium of their bearers, and creates at their origin hereditary stigmata of
40 C. W. Saleeby :

all kinds, while true heredity only combines and reproduces the ancestral
energies. . . . It is not a question here of the reproduction of the
hereditary ancestral energies in the descendants (in different combinations)
as is the case in the heredity which we have just studied, but, on the contrary,
a question of their perturbation. However, the store of cells reserved as
germinal cells in the embryo the germ of which has been damaged by
blastophthoric action, being usually also affected by the disturbing cause, it
follows that the pathological change introduced by blastophthoria in the
hereditary mneme is transmitted to the descendants by ordinary heredity.
In this way blastophthoria deposits the first germ of most pathological
degenerations.””!

The reader may also be referred toa lecture delivered by
Forel so long ago as 1890, before the students of the Universities
of Christiania and Upsala, and published under the title ‘‘ La
boisson dans nos moeurs.” After referring to the work of
Legrain, Grenier, Garnier, Laurent and Demme, Forel summed
up the evidence as it was twenty years ago in the following
words :

‘“‘ Les faits ci-dessus sont la démonstration du fait que l’alcool que nous
absorbons empoisonne directement les germes de l’homme et de la femme
avant la conception et les tare ainsi d’une facon variée dont I’eftet se retrouve
sous la forme de diverses maladies et difformités des malheureux qui en sont
le produit.”

But it need hardly be said that a matter of such immeasurable importance does not remain now merely where it was twenty
years ago. Since this announcement of Forel, a vast amount of
work has been done, and several specially devised experimental
studies upon the lower animals have been included. In some
of these, as for instance in the work of Combemale, the distinction between true blastophthoria and any action of alcohol
through the mother upon the development of the individual
(after conception) has been carefully observed. In his work,
which was done upon the dog, the father alone was treated with
alcohol, both father and mother being healthy in the first place.
The pups showed definite proof of blastophthoria.

The Parallel between Alcohol and Lead.—As I pointed out
some years ago, and showed in a paper, “‘ Racial Hygiene or
Negative Hygiene,” read before the Congress of the Royal Institute of Public Health in 1908, there isa detailed parallelism

1 The Sexual Question, pp. 36, 37, French edition p. 35.
RACIAL POISONS 41

between the action of lead and the action of alcohol upon parenthood. In the case of both poisons we have definite evidence of
blastophthoria, though in both cases the effects of maternal
poisoning are much more serious since, in the case of the mother,
we have to reckon with the effects of ante-natal nutrition—
though whether these have been reckoned as “nature” or
*‘nurture,”’ or indeed have been distinguished at all by some
enquirers, is a point which may be left to a more convenient
season. Here, however, without any intention to anticipate
what may be said in a forthcoming article upon the racial
influence of lead, reference may be made to the evidence cited
and discussed by the present writer in his paper, ‘‘ Alcoholism
and Eugenics” (British Journal of Inebriety, July, 1909), to which
may be added the following quotation from the new edition of
Horsley and Sturge’s Alcohol and the Human Body, p. 294:

‘‘ Prof. Adami describes a series of thirty-two cases in which the fathers
suffered from lead-poisoning, whilst the mothers were free from such
condition. The offspring were affected adversely as to mortality, and
showed signs of mental and other disturbances in a way that was very
striking. Again, a case which is typical of hundreds of others is reported
by Dr. Norman Kerr, in which first was born a son and then a daughter, who
both mentally and physically were excellent specimens of vigorous humanity.
After the birth of the daughter the father fell into habits of dissipation and
rapidly became an habitual drunkard. He had four more children, of whom
one was defective in mind, while the remainder were complete idiots.”

Reference may also be made to the well-known work of
Bezzola, which may be most conveniently quoted from Forel as
follows :—

‘* The recent researches of Bezzola seem to prove that the old belief in
the bad quality of children conceived during drunkenness is not without
foundation. Relying on the Swiss census of 1900, in which there figure nine
thousand idiots, and after careful examination of the bulletins concerning
them, this author has proved that there are two acute annual maximum
periods for the conception of idiots (calculated from nine months before
birth). In the wine-growing districts the maximum conception of idiots at
the time of vintage is enormous, while it is almost iJ at other periods.
Moreover, these two maximum periods come at the time of year when
conception is at a minimum among the rest of the population; the maximum
of normal conceptions occurring at the beginning of summer.

“If these facts are confirmed by further research, we may conclude
42 C. W. Saleeby :

that even acute alcoholism! has a blastophthoric action. We may, therefore,
assume that when a germinal cell leaves its gland at the moment when it is
impregnated with alcohol, and achieves conjugation, it is unable to return to
its normal condition, for want of opportunity to be completely and promptly
cleansed by nutrition and the circulation. This explains howit may transmit
to the individual which develops from it all kinds of taints and defects.”

It is quite impossible here to describe in detail the more
recent evidence regarding alcoholic blastophthoria. There are
appended in a foot-note a few typical references.”

Blastophthoria and Gametogenesis.—A theoretical point is
in my judgment of no small interest. Our modern ideas of
the ‘continuity of the germ-plasm’’ have inclined many
students of heredity, unacquainted with the actual physiology
of the metazoan body, towards the belief that the germplasm and the germ-cells are things fixed and unchangeable
in the course of the individual life. There could be no greater
error. On the contrary, in both sexes during the whole of the
reproductive period, the germ-cells are continuously being made,
in consequence of continuous vital processes involving the
growth and division of pre-existing cells. The proper name for
a germ-cell is a gamete, and the process of formation of germcells, equally continuous and equally necessary in both sexes, is
known as gametogenesis. Directly we realise that every germcell is a product of a complicated process of cell-growth and
cell division, which involves nutrition, respiration, excretion,
and, above all, karyokinesis, on the part of living protoplasm, we
shail see how incomprehensible it would be if the composition of
the blood of the individual had no influence upon gametogenesis,
and through it upon the natural quality of future individuals.

1 On this point see also the remarks of Weismann, which are in entire agreement with the above; The Germ Plasm, English translation, p. 387.

? Causation of mental defect in children, W. A. Potts, British Medical Journal,
October 14th, 1905.

Inter-Departmental Committee on Physical Deterioration, evidence of Dr.
Claye Shaw, Vol. III., Appendix 16, 1904.

A morphological continuity of germ-cells as the basis of heredity and variation.
John Beard, Review of Neurology and Psychiatry, Vol. I1., 1904.

The problem of heredity with special reference to the pre-embryonic life, W.
L. Andriezen, Journal of Mental Science, January, 1905. Seealso Dr. Wiglesworth in
the same journal, October, r1goz.

Heredity and Disease, by F. W. Mott, British Medical Journal, October 28th, 1905.

The reader may also be referred to Chapter 15, ‘‘ The Influence of Parental
hee ne upon the Race,” in Horsley and Sturge’s Alcohol and the Human Body,

acmillan.
RACIAL POISONS 43

There is a general impression, however, not only amongst the lay
public, that on modern theories the germ-cells are simply something packed away for their future destiny as coins are packed
away in a sovereign purse. How absurd this is one can only
realise when one recalls the remarkable phenomena, affecting
every tissue of the body, which are associated with the menstrual
process of ovulation or gametogenesis in the case of one sex.
It may be noted as a clinical fact that these phenomena are
markedly affected by alcohol.

Blastophthoria and Mendelism.—The reader must permit me
to note yet one other point of theory, as this question has.
never yet been dealt with in the light of the new knowledge of
gametogenesis which Mendelian experiment, coupled with
microscopic cytology, has revealed during the last few years.
We must realise that, as has been shown above, blastophthoria is
not a case of heredity in the proper sense of the word. We must
not, therefore, expect it to obey the Mendelian laws, and in point
of fact it does not, whether the poison in question be alcohol or
lead, morphine or the toxin of syphilis. Similarly in the experiments of MacDougal, the American botanist, upon plants, the
production of variations, transmissible in successive generations,
by the injection of chemical solutions into the ovaries, showed no
Mendelian ratio. This is, of course, exactly what we should
expect. No doubt it will be proved in due course that the
individual is made up of definite factors, to use the Mendelian
term, and that in gametogenesis these behave according to the
lawofsegregation. We are to expect the influence of a protoplasmic
poison, such as alcohol or lead, to act upon the vital processes
of gametogenesis as upon any vital processes anywhere. The
resulting germ-cells will not be altered in the main lines of their
constitution, they will simply be damaged—avariées, as Brieux
would put it. Protoplasmic poisons will damage a nerve
cell or a liver-cell, but they remain a nerve cell or a liver cell.
In the same way we may imagine that the gametes resulting
from gametogenesis that has been vitiated by the influence of a
racial poison are what they would in any case have been, except
that they are damaged. The motor-car, so to say, is still a
Napier and not a Daimler, but owing to bad conditions in the
44 C. W. Saleeby :

course of manufacture, it is rusty, ‘‘ ill-assembled,” cannot be
“tuned up,” and is, in short, damaged or defective. What we
readily understand of the dead machine may help us to understand the case of the living one.

Blastophthoria, by whatever agent, is equally possible in
both sexes, and in this respect there is strict parity between
fatherhood and motherhood, as there is in the case of alcoholism
symptomatic of anterior degeneracy, which was briefly recognised
in an early part of this paper. In dealing with blastophthoria,
emphasis has of course been laid, both in the case of human
beings and in the experimental work done with the lower animals,
upon the case of paternal blastophthoria, for the excellent reason
that, in the case of the mother, so many other modes of action
are possible that blastophthoria—as distinguished, for instance,
from simple ante-natal poisoning of the embryo or foetus,—cannot
be demonstrated. The crucial observations must be made upon
the male sex, whose organic relation to the child wholly consists
in the germ-cell alone.

In leaving this subject and passing to a further question of
no less importance, it may be noted that much experimental and
observational work remains to be done. The modern chemical
tests for lead, to take a single instance, are so delicate that it
would be desirable to see whether, in cases of lead-poisoning,
contamination of the paternal germ cells by lead—no doubt in
the form of a soluble salt—cannot be chemically demonstrated.
Possibly this has been done, but if so, the record has escaped my
search. Similar inquiries should be undertaken in the case of
paternal alcoholism. In neither case are there insuperable practical difficulties, nor is there any lack of clinical material, and the
matter may be commended to the study of young house-physicians
and surgeons. We have definite chemical evidence that alcohol
reaches the reproductive glands, but it should be looked for
in their secretions.

E. Alcohol during primary Nurture

What follows has regard only to one sex, and does not
depend upon blastophthoria at all, though it must be clearly
understood that poisoning of the germ cells themselves is as
RACIAL POISONS 45

possible and disastrous in the female sex as in the male sex. In
practical eugenics—though, sooth to say, when eugenics begins.
to become practical some of us seem to think that it is wandering
from the point—we have to reckon with the fact of expectant
motherhood. To decline to do so is, in effect, to declare that
eugenics is concerned with bringing the right gametes together,
but does not trouble itself about what may or may not happen
to the product of their conjugation. We desire, however,
not fertilised ova merely, but worthy men and women, and
expectant motherhood is therefore part of our province. If we
do not so recognise it at present, the next generation of eugenists
certainly will.

We here have left the department of nature and have concerned ourselves with the primary stage of nurture. The
secondary stage of nurture—the first post-natal stage—is,
normally, that of lactation. Those who, like primitive man and
contemporary jurisprudence, attach overwhelming importance to
that particular change of environment which we call birth, may
protest that, if the care of expectant motherhood is eugenics, at
any rate the question of lactation is not. We need not argue
about names, but it is necessary for any useful presentation of
the relations between alcohol and parenthood that we should
consider the stages of development here defined—necessary
because their study lends additional weight to the principle,
protect parenthood from alcohol, which is or should be the guiding
idea of all sane and well-directed temperance reform.

The distinction between (1) the case of alcoholism as a mere
symptom of preceding defect ; (2) the case of blastophthoria,—
each of these applying equally to both sexes of parents; (3) the
case of ante-natal alcoholic poisoning, acute and chronic, by
means of maternal drinking; (4) the case of post-natal alcoholic
poisoning through the mother’s milk; (5) the influence of the
alcoholic home upon children, and (6) the influence of the direct
ingestion of alcohol by children—will form the obvious basis for
the very careful analysis of data which will be required of any
workers who, as I hope, may care to undertake the difficult
question of determining the comparative influence of nature and
of the various kinds of nurture, ante-natal and post-natal, not for46 C. W. Saleeby :

getting blastophthoria, in regard to the relations between alcohol
and parenthood. They will have to decide, also, where to put
blastophthoria in this too-simple category. But our modern
Pythagoreans, in their assiduous worship of Number, must not
be led by the immutable fourness of twice two, to suppose that,
if the units on which they demonstrate it be (1) a nebula, (2) a
memory, (3) a budget, (4) Pantheism, either the astronomer,
the lover, the financier, or the philosopher will cease to
distinguish between these several objects of their attention.

E.—Ante-Natal Alcoholism

On the subject of ante-natal alcoholism, the greatest living
authority is my friend and teacher, Dr. J. W. Ballantyne of
Edinburgh. It is fortunately not necessary for us to consult his
large work on “ Ante-natal Pathology,’ as he contributed an
important paper on this subject to our first National Conference
on Infantile Mortality held in 1906. We decided to reprint the
Report of that Conference and I believe that a few copies of the
reprint are still obtainable from Messrs. P. S. King & Son. Dr.
Ballantyne’s paper on the ‘‘ Ante-natal Causes of Infantile
Mortality, including Parental Alcoholism,” cannot be reproduced
in full here, running as it does to more than thirty pages of the
Report. That, it may be noted, is my difficulty throughout this
article. An adequate discussion of the subject would involve the
writing of a large volume, so great is the mass of modern knowledge regarding it, and wherever one passes the facts over, one
feels one is failing to do justice to the case. If we were to go
into this subject as it really requires, we should of course have
to distinguish those various stages in ante-natal nurture which
are distinguished by embryologists. For the very rough and
ready analysis of this subject which is all that is possible here, it
may suffice to regard the whole of the ante-natal period as one
stage of nurture; and here a paragraph must be quoted from
Dr. Ballantyne :

‘“‘ It is only of recent years that experimental methods have supplied us
with the chemical proof that alcohol given to a pregnant animal finds its
way to the foetal tissues, while the demonstration that alcohol given to a
‘woman in labour can be found in her infant at birth was also long in coming.
RACIAL POISONS 47

The delay, however, in the establishment of proof of the transmission of
alcohol from the maternal to the fcetal organism, appears to have been due
not to any difficulty in transmission, but to the extraordinary rapidity of it.
This fact, taken in conjunction with that other fact, the great diffusibility of
alcohol, explains the failure of previous experimenters to find the drug in
the foetus, the liguoy amnit, and the placenta ; they were too late in looking
for it ; it had already been and had gone before tests were carried out to
detect its presence.”

After dealing with some of the recent work, such as that of
Matthews Duncan, Kirk, Lancereaux, Sullivan, etc., Dr.
Ballantyne summarises as follows:

“It must then be concluded that parental and especially maternal
alcoholism of the kind to which the name of chronic drunkenness or persistent soaking is applied, is the source of both ante-natal and post-natal
mortality. It acts in all the three ways in which I indicated that ante-natal
causes can be shown to act in relation to the increase of infantile mortality,
vtz., by causing abortions, by predisposing to premature labours, and
by weakening the infant by disease or deformity so that it more readily
succumbs to ordinary morbid influences at and after birth. By causing
diseases of the kidneys and of the placenta it also leads to that failure of the
filter to which I have already referred; the placenta being damaged, not
only does the alcohol more readily pass through it itself, but it is also.
possible for other poisons, germs, and toxins, to cross over into the feetal
economy. So it comes about that the most disastrous consequences are
entailed upon the unborn infant in connection with syphilis, lead-poisoning,
fevers, and the like in the intemperate mother.”

It must be remembered that this was written as long ago
as 1906, since when much further work has been done by Hodge,
Laitinen, and others. A good deal of this work will be found
summarised in the forthcoming Report of the International
Congress on Alcoholism held in London in 1rgo9.

The particular case we are now discussing is of special
interest because of the analysis which it requires, and a paragraph may here be quoted from my own study of the parallel
between alcohol and lead which is disclosed by the most recent
observations :

“We see here [in the case of lead poisoning] that, as is also true in
the case of alcoholism, the germinal tissue itself may escape, or, at any rate,
may recover from, the effects of chronic poisoning of the individual who is
its host. The race is more resistant than the individual. If, however, the
poisoning continues whilst a new individual is being formed—that is to say,
48 | C. W. Saleeby :

during pregnancy—that new individual succumbs, and, indeed, is far more
gravely affected than its mother. Such a pregnant woman presents three
distinct living objects for our study. Her own body is one, and this is
already developed. It has some measure of resistance to the poison, but is
gravely affected. The embryo is the second; it is developing, and because
developing is highly susceptible. It is usually killed before birth. The
third is the germ-plasm or the race, and this, as we have seen, may withstand the poison so well that when the poisoning is discontinued healthy
children may be produced from it. Undoubtedly the case is the same as
regards alcohol. The race or germ-plasm is most resistant, the developing
individual is least resistant, and the adult individual—that is to say, the
mother—occupies an intermediate position in this respect.’”!

F. Alcohol and Secondary Nurture

The influence of maternal alcoholism has an organic relation
to the child after birth if it is nursed by its mother. In the case
of the nursing mother there is one fresh avenue of excretion
which the organism can employ for ridding itself of the poison,
and to the efforts of the lungs and the kidneys are added those
of the mammae. “Alcohol can be readily traced in the mother’s
milk within twenty minutes of its ingestion into her stomach,
and it may be detected in it for as long as eight hours after a
large dose. . . . Numerouscases have been reported in which
infants at the breast have been the subjects of both acute and
chronic alcoholic poisoning, the results of which have remained
as permanent defects in the individual.’”

The reader should also consult the chapter “ Alcoholism in
relation to women and children,” contributed by Mrs. Scharlieb
to the volume, The Drink Problem, in the present writer’s New
Library of Medicine. One sentence may be quoted: ‘‘ The milk
of the alcoholic mother not only contains alcohol but it is otherwise unsuitable for the infant’s nourishment ; it does not contain
the proper proportions of proteid, sugar, fat, etc., and it is
therefore mot suited for the building up of a healthy body.”

At this stage of nurture, I must leave the question for the
present. Enough will have been said to show how many distinctions require to be made in any analysis of scientific value.

1 Parenthood and Race-cultuve, An Outline of Eugenics, p. 249.

2 Lees and Raper Memorial Lecture, 1908, delivered at Oxford, under the
Presidency of Prof. William Osler, by W. McAdam Eccles, M.S., F.R.C.S.
RACIAL POISONS 49

It has to be added that large numbers of children take alcohol
not merely before birth nor through the mother after birth but
by theirown mouths. In any analysis of nature and nurture
the consequences of these various kinds of youthful drinking will
of course require to be distinguished, each of them in its turn,
from blastophthoria, whether paternal, maternal, or both; and
all of these from the inheritance of nervous defect exhibiting the
symptom of alcoholism in one or both parents. The problem is
really much more complicated than this, involving as it does all
the complexities of nutrition during gameto-genesis, and in the
various distinct stages of ante-natal and post-natal life: not
to mention questions of dosage, dilution, chronicity, idiosyncrasy,
etc. But the outlines of it, at any rate, have been indicated.
This part of the subject may be concluded with the brief
verdict of Drs. A. and F. Leppmann of Berlin, who contribute
the chapter on ‘Alcoholism and Morphinism ” to Senator and
Kaminer’s recent comprehensive treatise on Marriage and Disease :

‘‘ The four special forms of degeneration, epilepsy, idiocy, drunkenness,
and an early tendency to crime, appear in the children of drunkards
undoubtedly far more frequently than in the offspring of other degenerates,
say of lunatics, neurasthenics or hysterical persons.”

Finally, it falls to be recorded that in a lecture on “‘ The
Relative Strength of Nurture and Nature,’ a recent statistical
enquirer, working upon the data of defective children in the
special schools in Manchester—working, be it most notably
observed, upon this admittedly degenerate material—has come to.
the following conclusion:

‘The little influence it [drink] has is in favour of the children of
drinking parents; they are healthier and more intelligent. These results.
are certainly startling and rather upset one’s preconceived ideas, but it is.
perhaps a consolation that to the obvious and visible miseries of the
children, arising from drink, lowered intelligence and physique are not added.”

G. The Soctety’s Recommendations

The Eugenics Education Society has from the first paid
attention to the question of inebriate parenthood, and it is worth
while, I think, to quote here the memorandum which we pre
sented to the Departmental Committee on inebriates, and which
4
50 C. W. Saleeby :

is to be found in its report. The reader will notice that
blastophthoria has been omitted from this memorandum. It
could not have been discussed intelligibly without making the
memorandum unduly long. The memorandum runs as follows:

‘‘It may be pointed out that the children of the drunkard are on the
average less capable of citizenship on account of

‘‘(a) The inheritance of nervous defect inherent in the parent.

‘‘(b) Intra-uterine alcoholic poisoning in cases where the mother is an
inebriate.

“(c) Neglect, ill-feeding, accidents, blows, etc., which are responsible
on the one hand for much infant mortality, and combined with
the possible causes before mentioned, for the ultimate production
of adults defective both in body and mind.

‘It would appear, then, that the drunkard, if not effectively restrained,
conduces to the production of a defective race, involving a grave financial
burden upon the sober portion of the community, to say nothing of higher
considerations. It therefore seems to the Eugenics Education Society of
extreme importance that some substantial effort should be made for the
reform of existing drunkards, or the permanent control of the irreformable.

‘‘ Scientific warrant for the foregoing propositions is now to be found in
no small abundance. Reference may be made, for instance, to the chapter
on ‘ Alcoholism and Human Degeneration’ in Dr. W. C. Sullivan’s recent
work, Alcoholism (Nisbet, 1906). Dr. Sullivan quotes the results of more
than a dozen observers in this and other countries, and special attention may
be drawn to his own well-known study of the history of 600 children born of
120 drunken mothers. The works of Professor Forel, of Zurich, are widely
known in this connection, notably Die Sexuel Frage and The Hygiene of Nerves
and Mind (translation, Murray, 1907). Parental alcoholism as a true cause of
epilepsy in the offspring is now generally recognised. For numerous and
detailed proofs from many sources reference may be made to p. 210 of the
last work named.

‘It is not necessary, however, to go over the ground which has doubtless
been covered by the Royal Commission on the Care and Control of the
Feeble-minded.

‘The existing laws comply to only a very small and almost negligible
extent with the eugenic requirement. They only deal with (a) the very
minute proportion of inebriates who can be induced to voluntarily sign away
their liberty, and (0) those who are also criminal or all but hopeless, and who
have done harm already, either as individuals or in becoming parents. The
third group of inebriates (c) not included in (a) or (0) constitute the overwhelming majority of the whole. They are absolutely untouched by the
present law, and further powers are urgently required to deal with them.

‘‘ Such legislation would be by no means without precedent, and may
avail itself of the experience of several of our own colonies and various
RACIAL POISONS 51

foreign countries. Such methods as compulsory control on petition,
guardianship, and so forth are in employment, for instance, in the Australian
Commonwealth and New Zealand, California, Connecticut, Massachusetts,
various cantons in Switzerland, Nova Scotia, etc.

‘“To sum up, the Society advocates the retention of the present law so
far as classses (a) and (b) are concerned, but would most strongly urge the
addition of powers to deal with that great majority of inebriates whom the
present law does not touch.”

If any part of our knowledge on this subject is more extensive and decisive than another, it is that which demonstrates
to us the native and transmissible defects of many chronic
inebriates. It will be remembered that Dr. Branthwaite found
that approximately two-thirds of all the certified inebriates in
England and Wales suffered from native and transmissible defect
of which, of course, their alcoholism was only a symptom—
though, as has been shown above, an aggravating symptom. I
have dealt with this aspect of the subject at great length in my
book, to which the reader must be referred. The quality and
fate of the children of these women, as officially recorded, is
almost too horrible for description in these pages. On the other
hand, of course, there is the recent assurance that the children
of parents who drink are favoured in the matter of physique and
intelligence. Eugenists must decide as to their duty. I fancy
that the dictum, Protect parenthood from alcohol, with all its variety
of ‘possible application to negative eugenics and to what one
may conveniently advocate and define as preventive eugenics, will
be found worth following. But if, on the strength of a comparison between defective children whose parents were reported
to ‘‘ drink,” and other defective children whose parents were
reported not to “ drink’’—whatever the word may mean—we
agree that the little influence drink has favours the health and
intelligence of children, we are bound by our principles as
eugenists to do everything that lies in our power, to have as
much alcohol as possible drunk by parents and potential parents,
and to encourage parenthood on the part of drunkards. This
may involve sacrificing the individual to the race, but that cannot
be helped, Nature being so singularly constructed—and in any
case there would soon be no individuals at all.
52 C. W. Saleeby :

H. Concluston

I am aware, that, notwithstanding that I have deliberately
omitted much, this article is far too long for convenience, but
I hope the reader will think that the importance of alcohol in
relation to the duration of races and states fully justifies its
length. I have elsewhere adduced arguments in favour of the
view that the practically complete immunity of their parenthood
from alcohol is one of the great factors that explain the all but
unexampled persistence of the Jews, and their present status in
the van of the world’s thought and work. It may be added that
the emergence of sober nations, such as Japan and Turkey, into
contemporary history, and the possibilities latent in China—to
mention none other of the “‘ dying nations” of glass-eyed statesmen—incline me to believe that in the Armageddon of the future,
those ancient races and civilisations, hitherto so much despised,
which do not drink alcohol, will be in a position of immense
advantage as compared with the relatively transient western
civilisations which continue to countenance the use of this most
potent of all agents of racial degeneration.
