SOME MODERN VIEWS OF THE HUMAN
MIND AND ITS DISORDERS*

By R. J. A. BERRY, MD., FRCS, FERS.

(Director of Medical Services, Stoke Park Colony, Stapleton, Bristol, and Chairman of the
Burden Mental Research Institute)

HE case of Charles William Ross,

hanged in Kenya Colony on January

11th, 1933, for the murder of two
young women, may serve as a text to illustrate the progress made during the last
twenty-five years in the scientific study of
the human mind and its aberrations, especially those due to imperfect development of
the brain and nervous system.

To plunge into Ross’s psychogram before
explaining to you on what it is based, how it
is achieved, and the illuminating facts it
reveals, would be a waste of time, so I must
ask you to begin by forgetting much you
were ever taught about Nature’s greatest
masterpiece—the human brain—and introduce you to a newer conception of neurology.
In doing so I shall first ask you to make a reexamination of the well-known neuronic arc,
which is of the first importance because it is
the unit of physiological structure of the
nervous system of all animals, man included.
The neuronic arc is, indeed, the kindergarten of the newer neurology, so I make no
apology for asking you to re-examine it in
this newer light, and in doing so please try
to forget most of the names you ever learned
about its component elements.

THE NEURONIC ARC

A simply constructed neuronic arc is a
protective nerve mechanism, as it gives a
quick, immediate and usually reflex response
to the stimulus. In the type of nervous
system universally found in all vertebrates,
as also in the spinal cord of man, it is, especially in view of what is to follow, the intermediate or internuncial neuron which is so
supremely important. Its cell body is in the

* The substance of a lecture (illustrated by lantern
slides) delivered before the Eugenics Society on March
zoth, 1934.

grey matter, but its axon runs into, and
through, the white matter, of which it forms
a part, before re-entering the grey matter to
establish synaptic contact with the dendrons
of the effector neurone.

Now, instead of this theoretically single
internuncial neurone with an axon of appreciable length, which is not confined to the grey
matter, let us introduce, between the receptor
and effector limbs of the arc, several scores,
hundreds, or thousands, of exceedingly
minute but complete neurones, all parts of
which shall be strictly confined to the grey
matter.

The introduction into the arc of these
numerous minute granular Golgi Type II
neurones, in place of the single long internuncial element found in the spinal cord,
clearly delays considerably the passage of
nerve impulse through it. The arc is now no
longer capable of giving a quick, instantaneous response to the stimuli. On the contrary,
an arc so constructed delays the reaction,
provides the important factor of inhibition,
and produces a period of latency by holding
in check the effector response to the stimulus
until the most favourable moment for its
accomplishment. Behaviour thus ceases to
be a matter of instant response to the incoming stimuli, but is made subject to a
certain degree of supervisional review, and
this is the essence of mind, and the psychoassociational neurone and the arcs that it
forms are its units of structure.

BRAIN AND SPINAL CORD

The human body is composed of thirtyone segments with neuronic arcs, with a
theoretically single internuncial element. At
the cephalic end of these thirty-one segments
are the non-segmented or supra-segmental
portions, with complex neuronic arcs con
127
128

taining many thousands of granular Golgi
Type II neurones as their internuncial elements. The human cerebellum, being a
supra-segmental structure, is entirely compounded of neuronic arcs of this kind, and
is thus totally unlike the spinal cord. Interpreted in the terms of the newer neurology,
the structure, functions and significance of
the cerebellum become understandable to
even a sixth form schoolboy. Under all older
methods they are completely hidden from
the minds of our students and practitioners
in an impenetrable smoke screen of meaningless and obsolete names, phrases and words.

The human brain is the product of a long
series of evolutionary changes spread over a
vast number of extinct and living animal
forms and over long periods of geological
time. Fortunately, the main steps of the
evolutionary changes which have alone made
possible the mind of man can be accurately
studied in animal forms living around us
to-day.

‘“‘ That there is an immense gulf between
the primitive nervous system of the earthworm and the complex brain of man, both
structurally and functionally, is perfectly
obvious. What is not so well known,
though it is equally obvious, is that this
gulf, as regards the nervous system, is
bridged over by living and intermediate
animal forms, and in such a convincing
manner as to leave no room for doubt
that neurons in combination of arcs, with
a constantly increasing complexity of
internuncial neurons, are the physical
basis of all intelligence and mind in the
animal kingdom, and that disease, or
developmental absence, of functioning
neurones is the neurological key to many
disorders of mind.

“Tf the central nervous system of such
living animal forms as the earthworm, sea
lamprey, teleostean fish, alligator, dog,
anthropoid ape, and man, be regarded in
series, it will be observed that there is
continually bemg added to the cephalic
end of the neuraxis additional numbers of
neurons linked together in series of arcs,
and that these neurons are developed
within the successively developed cerebral

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

vesicles. The last one of these to be added
in each animal form constitutes the ‘‘ endbrain ’’—an unfortunate and somewhat
misleading term because it does not follow
that the end-brain of one animal is the
same as the end-brain of a higher animal.
In fact, it is not. The end-brain of man
is not the same as the end-brain of the
reptile, for example, nor is the end-brain
of the reptile the same as that of the earthworm. As each of these new end-brains is
added on to the neuraxis there is a shifting
forwards to it of the functions previously
undertaken, if at all, by the earlier
‘ brains ’ of the neuraxis, and the last one
to be added assumes control over all the
older ones. This process of shifting forwards of cerebral function to a newly
added end-brain is known as ¢elencephalisation. In every instance the histological
construction of these evolutionary additions to the cephalic end of the neuraxis
always involves an increase in the number
and complexity of the internuncial neurons,
so that comparative anatomy, embryology,
and histology all compel the conclusion
that no matter what may be the behaviour
of the animal to its environment the
physical instrument is always’ the
neuron.’’*

Passing next to the cerebral cortex itself,
its minute structure is now so well known that
it can be reduced to terms so easy as to be
readily understandable. The cortex is simply
formed everywhere and throughout of two
great types of neuronic arcs, and two only,
namely, those already described—the spinal
cord or segmented type with long internuncial neurones, and the cerebellar or
supra-segmental with numerous interpolated
granular neurones. .

DUAL FUNCTION OF THE BRAIN
Expressed physiologically, and in terms of
function, the human brain is thus constructed
for a dual purpose: to give (1) by means of
its segmental arcs, an immediate reaction to
the stimulus, and (2) by means of the suprasegmental arcs, a delayed, or even altogether
inhibited, reply to the stimulus. An infant

* Berry: Brain and Mind.
SOME MODERN VIEWS OF THE HUMAN MIND AND ITS DISORDERS 129

makes use of the former simpler type of
neuronic arcs when first learning to speak,
and it does so in that early phase of speech
known as echolalia—that is, repetition of
sound without understanding.

Now the internuncial elements of these
cerebral segmental arcs have long been
taught to medical students in the form of a
multiplicity of names to be memorized for
examination purposes, but totally void of all
sense, meaning or explanation. But fit these
so-called cerebral association systems into
their proper arcs, forget entirely their
anatomical names, even if you know them,
and it is clear that they are nothing more
than the cerebral equivalents of the internuncial elements of the spinal cord type of
neuronic arc with which you are quite
familiar.

Conduction over such spinal cord or cerebral segmental arcs is known as “ path”’
conduction, because some part of the arc—
in this case, its internuncial element—forms
paths or tracts. But if we are to understand
the real significance of Ross and his psychogram, I shall have to ask you to be a little
patient while we examine that much more
complex form of cerebral conduction, now
known as “ripple,” where the nerve impulses flow between and involve the innumerable internuncial neurons of the suprasegmental cerebral arcs.

STRUCTURE OF THE CEREBRAL CORTEX

If you will carefully scrutinize any modern
micro-photograph, or camera lucida drawing,
of the normal human cerebral cortex, you
will see that the granular cells—that is, the
internuncial elements of the supra-segmental
neuronic arcs of the cortex—occupy a very
definite position therein. They form, just
like the milky way of the heavens, a regular
easily recognizable band almost in the exact
centre of any microscopic section of the
cortex. They thus divide the cortex quite
naturally into two parts—one lying internal
to the granular belt and next to the white
matter, and another external to it, and between it and the surface of the brain.

The cerebral cortex is thus distinctly
laminated, and its three layers are termed

Cc

from without inwards, the supra-granular
cortex, the granular and the infra-granular,
and these laminz are of the first importance
in the modern conception of the brain and
its functions, and each stratum is composed
of differently shaped cell bodies.

The infra-granular cortex is the oldest
lamina of the mammalian brain. It is composed of fusiform cell bodies of different
sizes, and subserves those instinctive activities such as the self-protective and the sexual,
which are essential to the maintenance of
animal life and its perpetuation.

The granular layer, composed of very
numerous minute neurones of the Golgi Type
II variety, is strongly sensory or receptor in
character, particularly in primary receptive
areas, such as the visuo-sensory, auditosensory, and somaesthetico-sensory but, as
stated, pervades the whole cortex except the
agranulous, and clearly plays a very important part in the phenomena of mind, as
it must have much to do with the retention
of those nerve stimuli responsible for the
psychological phenomena of memory.

The supra-granular cortex, the most recent
evolutionary addition to the mammalian
cortex, is composed of pyramidal cell-bodies
of different sizes, and subserves those mental
functions which may be described as indicating intelligent, as opposed to instinctive,
acts. Unlike the infra-granular cortex, it is
but poorly developed at birth, is slow in
attaining maturity, and in many individuals
never does so. It is the last layer of the cortex to be evolved, the last to commence to
develop, the last to attain maturity, and
consequently the first to undergo retrogression, Its lack of complete development,
especially in the parietal and other true
association areas, is the structural basis of
amentia. Judgment, common sense, reason,
as evidenced in behaviour, in a word, social
efficiency, are largely dependent on the control of the animal activities of the infragranular cortex by the supra-granular.

The cells of the granular cortex, as also the
minute pyramidal cells of the supra-granular,
form the internuncial elements of the suprasegmental cerebral neuronic arcs. According
to Ariens Kappers and von Economo both
130

are receptor in function, and thus play a part
in the brain analogous to that of the same
varieties of cells in the cerebellum. The
similarity in structure is altogether too
remarkable to doubt a similar function.
The cerebral cortex is thus not that
higgledy-piggledy arrangement so frequently
figured in our textbooks, but is a most
beautifully arranged and orderly sequence of
cell-bodies and axons. Although we have as
yet no staining methods which will simultaneously display both, we know that all cerebral
cells are arranged in regularly aligned
vertical columns, and with an evolutionary
lamination as perfect and as orderly as are
the geological strata of the earth’s crust.

THE “ NEWER ” NEUROLOGY
Unfortunately it is only too true that there
is no part of the human body of which even
the most intelligent are so ignorant, or in the
structure of which they take so little interest,
as the nervous system, and yet there is none
of greater everyday importance, though
probably few have ever been given the chance
of acquiring it. In these circumstances
this newer and simpler neurology comes as
a shock and appears so revolutionary that
those hearing its lessons for the first time
naturally think them untrue, exaggerated
and incapable of demonstration. Such an
attitude towards the magnificent world-wide
research work of the last twenty-five years,
which has made the nervous system intelligible to all of us, would be disastrous to the
progress and dissemination of medical and
scientific truth. But the average medical or
psychological practitioner seldom or never
has the chance of learning of this progress,
and even if he did would regard anything
connected with the nervous system as being
quite beyond him. I want, once and for all,
to shatter this frame of mind. Scientific
neurology has now definitely come within the
orbit of the mental practitioner, and some
intelligent observations of patients on these
newer lines would be of value as a corrective
of, or addition to, the accumulation of knowledge now at our disposal concerning the
human brain and mind and their many
abnormalities and aberrations.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

GROWTH OF THE BRAIN

Whilst the mental practitioner, like Atalanta of the legend, has been picking up the
golden apples of panel practice, the equally
modern Hippomenes has been seeking how
to apply the known facts of cerebral growth
and cortical lamination to the living subject.
Although we cannot actually see the growth
of a child, we can and do estimate it by
measurement; and so with the brain.
Clearly, growth is not confined to the body,
the brain grows too ; and brain growth concerns the conversion of neuroblasts into
neurones, myelinisation of axons, increments
in dendrons, the weaving of neurones into
arcs and chains, and these into engrams, and
part passu with this increment in structural
materials there occurs an associated functional increase in intelligence and a gradual
transition from the natural idiocy of the
infant to, under normal conditions, an adult
mentality. Of the growth of the brain we
now know much. It has indeed been closely
studied from the time of the publication of
Donaldson’s Growth of the Brain, published
in the ‘eighties, to the present day.

Brain growth may be measured by weight
on the dead, by accurate observation in the
laboratory of the varying thicknesses of the
cerebral cortex, and by measurement and
calculation in the living. As this last has now
been done for you, it only remains for those
who will to apply it.

It is obvious that, just as the body of an
adult is larger than that of an infant, so also
is the brain. It is further obvious that all
other things being equal—which is not always
the case—the larger the brain, the larger
must be the containing skull or brain box
and these differences may, just as with
alterations in stature, be approximately
indicated by measurements of the head.

Just prior to the onset of puberty, there is
apparently a resting phase in brain growth as
reflected in the size of the head. These facts,
combined with those already given from
microscopic investigation, show that postpubescent cortical increment must be almost
entirely concerned with the final development of the supra-granular pyramidal controlling cells. If, therefore, an adult only
SOME MODERN VIEWS OF THE HUMAN MIND AND ITS DISORDERS 131

possesses a brain capacity of an II or I2year-old child, it is a justifiable inference
that not only is his brain development
arrested, but that he is lacking in the powers
of inhibition and control mediated through
the supra-granular cortex. A prognosis of
the consequences to society will then largely
depend on a study of the environment and
the individual’s social surroundings. Upon
these facts can a real practical psychology be
founded.

THE FRONTIERS OF ABNORMALITY

In all biological problems of growth,
adaptability to the surroundings, reactions
to the environment, sexual manifestations,
resistance to disease, and the like, there is
a fairly wide range of variation, and it is
scientifically important to know what this
range is. In other words, when do we
pass from the allowed deviation from the
normal to the confines of, at least potential,
abnormality ? To take an instance—below
what stature does an individual become a
dwarf, and above what height is he to be
reckoned a giant? In other words, when
does a departure from the normal become so
pronounced as to warrant its being regarded
abnormal? These are problems of everyday
occurrence in medicine, yet the tendency is
to regard them as matters of opinion, faith,
and utterly unchecked beliefs. Now there
is a science of statistics and it has formed no
part of the educational equipment of the
medical man, and hence the “‘ brickbats ”’ so
frequently thrown at medical figures by our
biological friends, for in the presentation of
statistical facts the medical profession has
still much to learn. Statistical methods show
us how to estimate correctly departures from
the average. Where the frontiers of abnormality should be placed depends upon observation and experience in conjunction with
accurate measurements and their correct
analysis. Departures from the normal may
be estimated by the complicated calculations
of the true means, their standard deviations,
and the probable errors, but much more
simply by the clinically useful percentile
tables. In all the tests and measurements
used in Ross’s and other psychograms, the

calculations for comparison for both sexes
and all ages up to the completion of growth
have been made for you, and it only remains
for us—if we are so disposed—to make use
of them.

MIND AND BRAIN

It is perhaps one of the misfortunes of
mental science that psychological theory so
frequently mistakes itself for, and altogether
ignores, neurological fact. But when the day
comes, and come it must, when the problems
of the mind and its aberrations are strictly
correlated with the known facts about the
structure and functions of the human brain
and its evolution there can, I think, be no
doubt that mental science will make a great
and revolutionary advance.

It is clear that the views expressed in this
demonstration are based on the simple fact
that the human brain is the physical instrument of the mind and that the unit of brain
structure is the neurone. There is, therefore,
one more acid test to be applied to the truth
or otherwise of this assumed relationship
between mind and matter, and that is the
examination of the brain itself in individuals
known during life to have been suffering
from a disordered or insufficient mentality.

As is well known, the human cerebral
cortex presents a corrugated appearance—
the depressions being known as fissures or
sulci, and the intermediate elevations as
convolutions or gyri. What is not so well
known is that this convoluted appearance is
due to the proliferation within the cortex,
during pre-natal development, of neuroblasts and neurones. Theoretically, the
greater the multiplication of neurones the
more should the cortex be fissured and
the more adequate should be the future
mentality of the individual.

Contrast a normally developed brain with
that of a typical imbecile age 12-1 years and
a mental age impossible to test but much
below 3 years. The length of this imbecile’s
cerebral hemisphere is only two-thirds that
of the normal. The frontal operculum is not
developed. The all-important post-central
somesthetic area is almost non-existent.
The parietal lobe is altogether abnormally
132

composed of a few stellate convolutions, and
there is marked microgyria of the frontal
association area. The naked eye appearances
are in themselves sufficient to reveal to the
expert that its owner could only have been
of the idiot-imbecile class. But neurones
cannot be seen with the naked eye, and it
is therefore necessary to substantiate this
naked eye evidence by that of the microscope. If both agree in their revelation of an
insufficiency of cortical neurones the case is
established beyond all scientific doubt, and
the facts adduced in this lecture fall into their
correct places like the originally scattered
units of a jig-saw puzzle. As a matter of fact
the micro-photographs of this imbecile brain
do amply confirm the naked eye appearance

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and prove that her mental deficiency results
from an insufficiency of adequately developed
cortical neurones.

This explanation of the psychogram and
the principles underlying it has necessarily
been very inadequate and has done but scant
justice to the laborious researches in various
parts of the world which have not only
evolved it but, in doing so, have placed a new
weapon in the clinician’s hands. But without some explanation, however inadequate,
Ross’s psychogram would be unintelligible.

(Ross’s case, which is fully described in
the Stoke Park monographs on Mental Deficiency, 1933, page 233, was then illustrated
and elucidated, and his psychogram was
shown upon the screen.)

—_>_[_—ES_ ee”

 

THE WISTAR INSTITUTE BIBLIOGRAPHIC SERVICE

AUTHORS’ ABSTRACTS

insure accuracy, advance information, and a saving of time and costs. Since the beginning of The Wistar Institute Bibliographic

Service in 1917, each contributor to the journals included in this service has s
ted and mailed without the delay necessary to the publishing o

summary is prin

lied an abstract of his own manuscript. This brief
e complete article. Subscribers to the service thus

receive advance information from those best qualified to give it.

ADVANCE ABSTRACT SHEETS
bearing ten or more abstracts without bib

phic references, are sent for the present to members of the American Association of

Anatomists, to members of the American Sone of Zodlogists and to Members of the American Institute of Nutrition, without cost,
and sold to others at $3.00 per annum for all abstract sheets issued. This is a convenient means of selecting such articles as may be
desired in reprint form. Prices of reprints are given on each Advance Abstract Sheet.

BIBLIOGRAPHIC SERVICE CARDS

bearing authors’ abstracts wi with complete bibliographic reference for all articles appearing in The Wistar Institute journals and those

co-operating, $5.00 per y:
Abstract cards may be obtained from the
Each abstract car

ABSTRACTS IN BOOK FORM

ing of the series, June 1, 1917.
is issued to subscribers seine e complete paper appears in a journal.

Abstracts with authors’ and analytical subject indices are brought together periodically in book form. Volumes 1 to 7 covering the

- ete issued from June 1, 1917, to December 31, 1933, $5.00 each. Li

discount to subscribers to the Bibliographic Service

The Wistar Institute Bibliographic Service covers the publications listed below :

Journal of Morphology
The Journal of Comparative Neurology
The American Journal of Anatomy
The Anatomical Record
The Journal of Experimental Zodlogy
The Journal of Nutrition

EARLY SERIES

and Physiol
Folio Anatomica Japonica Tokyo. Plsiooey

In addition to the above, bibliographic reference cards, without abstracts, may be secured for articles Mer a, appeared in the

Journal of Morphology, from vol. x (1887) to June Ty 1027 cvnnveresonevesensevesenesnsavescwsenevensens

The Journal of Comparative Neurology, from vol. x orl tO JUME I, TOT ..ccevcscccssccsessceers 450 —So*y,
The American Journal of Anatomy, vol. 1 (1901) to JUME I, IQT7 ..rccsccessccscsscsccececssseresecas 344 ‘5
The Anatomical Record, vol. 1 (1906) to JUME K, TOU sssccewses s0.0000085 0000054081603 sb edeneosdereagene 464 55
The Journal of Experimental Zodlogy, Vol. 1 (1904) tO JUME 1, TOTZ ...cssccscsccsccccecvecsctececees 423 sss

The American Anatomical Memoirs .....cccssecessessesess

CROCHET ETOH OOO DEED EO HOE SEEEEEEOH SEES EEO CO COS ESLODOOS

9
These cards, containing full bibliographic references, enable a subscriber to have a complete record of authors and titles with their
subject headings for all articles which have appeared in the above journals from their beginning to current issues.

The price for these Bibliographic Reference Cards is two cents for the first card of each title. Additional cards for each title may
be had at one-half cent per card when ordered at the same time.

THE WISTAR INSTITUTE OF ANATOMY AND BIOLOGY, Philadelphia, Pe., U.S.A.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 2
