WE are indebted to General Osborn and to the Planned Parenthood Federation of
America for permission to publish this address, which was delivered by General
Osborn at the Federation’s Annual Luncheon held on May 7th, 1953 in New
York City.

IT will be seen that some of the arguments advanced by our President, Sir Charles
Darwin, in his book The Next Million Years provided a theme for General
Osborn, whose address is followed (p. 161) by some comments from Sir Charles
Darwin.

THE views of Fellows and Members of the Society on this discussion are
invited.

THE CONTRIBUTION OF PLANNED
PARENTHOOD TO THE FUTUREOFAMERICA*

By FREDERICK OSBORN,

Secretary, American Eugenics Society

: E are here today because we are
deeply concerned with the well
\ ( being of our fellows. As Americans
we can meet with a certain satisfaction,
because in recent years we have seen a
great improvement in the general conditions
of life in this country. We have great hopes
for the future.

But if we are hopeful, we are also frightened. Our world is full of dire prophecies
that man’s efforts to improve the world he
lives in will be frustrated by overpopulation,
famine and race deterioration. Not even
Scrooge in the awful presence of the Spirits
invoked by Dickens gould conjure up a more
dreadful end. Yet this spectre is outlined

‘for us by some of our best scientists, and
we had better take a good look at it just
as they have drawn it for us. Charles
Galton Darwin gives us the picture in his
recent book, The Next Mullion Years. + It
is about as follows :

Darwin assumes that the natural rate of
ncrease for man is such that he should
double his numbers in a century. He believes
it is evident that no increase of food pro
* A speech given at the annual luncheon of the
Planned Parenthood Federation of America, New York

City, May 7th, 1953. |
{ Hart-Davis. 1952.

duction, however fantastically imagined,
could cope with the natural increase of
mankind for more than a fraction of a million
years, and that, though there may be
occasional golden ages, as that in which we
are now living in the United States, most of
the time and over most of the earth there _
will be severe pressure from excess populations, and there will be periodic famines.
The fact has to be faced, says Darwin, that
it will be starvation that limits the numbers
of the human race.

Darwin believes that the limitation of
population (by family planning), if it were
fully established, would be an unstable
condition, which cannot persist. That people
with a natural instinctive wish for children
would tend to have larger families than the
rest, and would hand on the same instinctive
wish to a greater number in the next generation. He thinks that a new balance of

_ population pressures would result, and would
“not take very long to become established,

perhaps thousands of years, rather than
hundreds of thousands.

Darwin, comes therefore to the following’
conclusions: That widespread wealth can
never be common in an overcrowded world,
and so in most countries of the future

155
156

the government will inevitably be autocratic or oligarchic, in other words—dictatorships. That there is no reason to foresee
that war in the future will be any less
dreadful than it has been in the past. That
there will be a caJlousness about the value
of the individual’s life, and often there will
be cruelty to a degree of which we do not
willingly think. |

All these are not my words; they are
the words of the grandson of Charles Darwin.

Charles Galton Darwin goes on to say that
the prospects do not seem at all good for
improving the hereditary qualities of man.
He ascribes to civilized life a tendency to
sterilize its ablest citizens. He believes that
this is the experience of nearly all countries
which enjoy even a passable degree of
prosperity ; that the whole thing is a
catastrophe which it is now almost too late
to prevent ; that it is an example of what
happens when a country succeeds in
avoiding the Malthusian threat of overpopulation, and that for a million years
we have got to put up with all the defects
in man’s nature as it is now. These again are
Darwin’s words, not mine.

Now this is a serious picture, which is
drawn by many scientists today. It comprises the major rational arguments against
planned parenthood. It has many variations.
Most French scientists, for instance, believe
that the general use of family limitation
will rapidly wipe out the race that practices
it ; so they oppose contraception and urge
larger family allowances. This would remedy
some evils but enlarge others. It is a gloomy
picture.

Now to go back to Dickens. When the
spirit of Christmas Yet to Come finally
pointed to the lonely grave, Scrooge in
anguish asked it, ‘‘ Are these the shadows
of the things that Will be, or are they
shadows of things that May be only ?”’

The spirit indicated, as you know, that
Scrooge himself could provide the answer.
In a very real sense the dark shadows we
face today can be dispelled if you, the
women of planned parenthood, can achieve
your aims. The most recent findings of
science do not spell out the doom of man.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

You have it in your hands to alter man’s
future for the good. Here are some of the
reasons. :

There is no evidence that there is a
biological.urge forcing women to have more
than five or six children when they find it
hard to rear those they have. If women
everywhere have only the number of children
they can adequately care for, and in proportion to the reduction in the death-rate,
overpopulation will no longer be so threatening. Recent changes in popular attitudes in
India and in Japan have shown, I think,
that there are greater possibilities than we
have previously realized for voluntarily
reducing the proportion of overly large
families among poor and uneducated people
in overpopulated areas, even though their
point of view about many things is very
different from ours. This reduction in
presently unwanted children will not necessarily happen, but it can happen if it is
properly handled. Your efforts to spread
planned parenthood can be made to succeed.

I am not afraid of Darwin’s argument
that we would soon build a race of people
who would want children so much that
births would again become unlimited. It
seems to me that the new race would be
more likely to lavish its increased affections
on three or four children properly cared for,
rather than bring five or more into the world
to starve. |

With a reduced proportion of families of
five or six or more, births in high birth-rate
areas are likely to gq, down towards the
replacement level. If better means of contraception are devised, as they surely will.
be, and if wisdom is used in their introduction, people will use them voluntarily, not
to avoid having children, but to avoid having
too many. This process of cutting down the
unreasonable proportion of overly large

* families may be fairly rapid all over the

world if planned parenthood is intelligently
handled. | |
There are far greater dangers facing the
planned parenthood movement in dictatorships accustomed to authority than in
democracies where people are accustomed to
sensible voluntary decisions. Dictators will
CONTRIBUTION OF PLANNED PARENTHOOD

want larger populations than those which
would be sought in democracies, because the
optimum population for purposes of power
is higher than the optimum for purposes of
human welfare. But beyond a certain point,
a country gets weaker, not stronger, by
having a large population. If too many are
hungry, the population is way past the
optimum of power, and becomes a threat to
its rulers. Smart dictators will learn that
they will stultify themselves if their peoples
increase too much.

In some of the European democracies, the
partial use of family limitation has at times
reduced the birth-rate below that needed

for replacement. As a result, most French.

scientists seem to believe that, if effective
means of contraception were available to
everyone, there would be danger of the race
dying out. The situation which has produced this belief in France is probably
unique. For a number of generations
French laws for the inheritance of agricultural lands have put pressure on French
farmers not to have more than one son to
inherit the farm ; and this together with the
French tendency to thrift engendered by
many years of hard living resulted in the
use of family planning in France earlier than
in any other country of Europe. For years
France was pointed out as a decadent country
because Germany and England outstripped
her in growth of population. Dreadful losses
of manpower in the first world war further
reduced her relative numbers, and strengthened the belief that France was underpopulated. But there are three important
facts to note about French reproduction ;
after the first world war, the English as well
as the German rate dropped further below
replacement than that of France ; after the
second world war, the French rate climbed
up to or above that needed for replacement ;
and finally, the important fact that today,
of the three countries—England, Germany
and France—France is the only one with a
good enough balance between population
and resources to be practically self-supporting at a reasonable level of living. This is
far from the case with either England or
Germany, whose over population in relation

E

157

to their resources multiplies their problems
and puts a heavy load on the United States
to prevent their starving. It would seem to
me that in the long run the French were
benefited, rather than hurt, by the early
start their people made in family planning.

Quite apart from the example of France,
the experience of the United States since
the last war lends strong evidence for the
belief that the increasing spread of contraception does not necessarily reduce the
birth-rate below replacement. In the middle
thirties, during the depression, the birth-rate
went for the first time below that needed for
replacement ; ten or fifteen years later, after
the war, the birth-rate went back to a point
well above replacement, even though family
planning had in the meantime become more
widespread. The increase in births since the
war has been greatest among the people who
used contraception most, and the increase
least among the people who were least open.
to any form of family planning. Evidently,
psychological and economic factors play a
large part in the birth-rate. We are justified,
I think, in believing that, as family planning
becomes more widespread, economic factors
and psychological values favourable to
having children can, if necessary, be developed to offset the reduction in the number
of unwanted children...

The development of conditions which will
lead people to want and plan more children .
will undoubtedly become one of your
activities as you approach your goal of
family planning for everyone. Meantime, .
it might be well for planned parenthood to
recognize that the cry of race suicide is still
used against you effectively. People too
often get the impression that you are against
large families. What you are. actually
against is unplanned families and against
large unwanted families. It seems to me
you should make this very clear in everything you put out. I know that you favour
large families where the parents want them
and can give them adequate care. In certain
cases, this may mean really large families.
No one would contend that the twelve .
children of Mrs. Gilbreth of Cheaper by the
Dozen fame were a detriment to the country,
158

or that they suffered from being so many,
or that they were a handicap to their
parents. —

If society can devise means to encourage a
sufficient proportion of large families within

a universal system of planned families, we .

-need not fear a decline in population ; we
can even count on an increase when that
seems desirable. The vital job of balancing
population to resources can be done by
‘family planning by individual couples on a
voluntary basis, in the framework of an
advancing civilization. It is not inevitable
that population be balanced by starvation,
plague and war, in the framework of barbarity and concentration camps. The task
will require all the brains, all the sincerity,
all the sense of purpose which you can
muster. But I know it can be done. The
evil spectre raised by Darwin’s recent book
and by so many others can be exorcised if
we are so determined.

If we escape the dangers of over population, as well as those of under population,
can we also escape the even worse danger of
race deterioration which so many people
prophesy ? Two different reasons are given
for the belief that the race is deteriorating
and will continue to do so. In the first place,
it is assumed that because we save the lives
of the weak who would otherwise die, we
are denying Nature’s method of the survival
of the fittest. But this argument is less
effective if properly stated. Natural selection
made for a strong race not because the weak
‘did not survive, but because they did not
have enough children to spread their weaknesses. We need not be anxious about saving
lives by modern methods of medicine, sanitation and public health so long as the birthrate of those with constitutional defects or
weaknesses is sufficiently below that of the
rest of the population. Natural selection
as practised by Nature is very hit or miss.
Nature operates on the law of averages.
More of the weak die than of the strong ;

but that does not mean that all the weak’

die, or that all the strong survive. In recent

times in this country we have so reduced

deaths that death selection can operate on
only 10 per cent of the population, which

THE EUGENICS REVIEW - St 
is the proportion of those who die before
the end of their reproduction period. Among
this 10 per cent, a considerable proportion
may have some constitutional defect. For
a larger operation of selection, we must rely
on a selective birth-rate. There is 1o evidence
that I know of which indicates that people
with constitutional weaknesses have on the
average more children than do people who
are strong and healthy, though the notable |
exceptions are often quoted.

Studies which were made by the Milbank
Fund on the birth-rate of people with a
tendency to tuberculosis in upper New York
State indicate that with the introduction
of family planning the birth-rate of the
tuberculous dropped sharply below that of
their non-tuberculous neighbours. This reduction was voluntary and made for purely
personal reasons. The reduction in births
would have been even greater if an attempt
had been made to educate tubercular parents,
or the doctors or social workers who worked
with them, in the danger that their-children
would be likely to inherit a tendency to their
parents’ disease. Such a process of education
is now getting under way. In the years
since the war there has been an upsurge of
interest in the subject of what is now generally called medical genetics, which should
sharpen the selection already exercised by
reduced births among the sick and deficient.

‘A number of heredity clinics have been

established in the United States, some of

them in connection with medical schools.

Books on medical genetics have recently
been published for the use of the general
physician, so that he can intelligently advise
his patients on the risks they may be running
in having children when they are themselves
carriers of some form of weakness or defect.
It should surely be possible for an informed
people to make the birth-rate as selective
as the death-rate has been in the past, or
even very much more so. Personally, I
believe we may count on the medical profession and the public health authorities’
for just such a result. They may occasionally
need a little prodding, and we should bear
that in mind. We should never for an instant
forget that family planning can be a major
CONTRIBUTION OF PLANNED PARENTHOOD

instrument in reducing the incidence of
constitutional weakness and defect.

' Those who believe that planned parenthood will bring about the deterioration of
the race have another argument based largely
on the so-called class differentials in births
which exist today in all countries where
birth control has been widely introduced.
This argument is a good deal like the answer
of the man who was brought into court
because a neighbour said his dog had bitten
him. The man testified that the dog never
bit anyone, that he was tied up the day the
neighbour was bitten, and anyway the dog
had died the month before. It is true that
birth control is responsible for an increase

in class differentials when it is first intro-.

duced, because it tends to be used by the
upper socio-economic classes before it gets
down to general use in the lower. But the
most careful recent studies indicate that the
average differences in hereditary potential
between social or economic classes, where
they exist at all, are very small as compared
to the very large differences m hereditary
potential which are known to exist between
family lines within the different socioeconomic classes. Birth differentials between
individuals of different types within each
socio-economic class would therefore be
far more important than differences between
the classes, and until we know the trend of
birth rates among different types of individuals within various economic and social
classes it is impossible to assess the changes
which may now be taking place in the
hereditary potential of the race from one
generation to another.

But present conditions are probably temporary. As birth control gets more firmly
established, and the practice of family
planning is more widely accepted, class
differentials in births diminish. Recent
studies indicate that among people all of
whom practice family planning with some
evidence of success, birth differentials
between classes not only disappear, but in
most cases are reversed. People at the
higher income levels have’ the most children.
The more successful college graduates have
more children than the less successful. If

ay"

Charles Galton Darwin’s argument for racial
deterioration has validity, then more planned.
parenthood, not less, is the answer. But.
Darwin’s argument is at best only partly
correct, and not alone the extension of birth
control, but more the manner of its extension
will determine the future quality of the race.
Undoubtedly the first great mission of
planned parenthood is to remove the dreadful.
burden of over population. But as you move
‘towards this accomplishment, another and
even greater aim will present itself; the
aim of raising the level of all our people
to the level of the best human beings weknow at present. You will be allied with.
geneticists to find and give information on
the familial basis of those hereditary
characters which form the pattern for a high
intelligence, a strong physique and a
balanced personality ; with psychologists to
tell how genetic potentialities are moulded
by different types of environment:; with all.
types of social scientists to help determine
the social, psychological and economic
influences which will result in parents quite
unconsciously and voluntarily fixing the
size of their families in some relation to the
probabilities of their genetic inheritance.
These things are for the future. But even.
now you can be moving in that direction, |

‘Probably you are already doing so. Every

visiting nurse, every doctor, every social
worker knows that there are families where
more children should be encouraged, because
the parents will give them a good upbringing, and the children have a better than
average chance of becoming good citizens ;
and at the same time everyone who works
with families knows that there are parents
who should be discouraged from having
more children, because they will not give
them adequate care and the children will
grow up to be a burden on society. Under
these circumstances, I feel certain that all
those Who are in a position to give advice
on contraception are already showing some
bias. That is, they are exercising their own
judgment in the advice they give as to size
of family, because they do not want to see
children growing up with the burden of a
bad social inheritance. Probably they are
quite tinconscious that sucha selection of
births would also favour the better genetic
‘strains. But it would be difficult not to
believe that couples who give their children
a good upbringing are on the average
genetically superior to couples who give
their children. a bad upbringing. Nature
works by averages, and not by individual
cases,.and it is probable that this unconscious

bias exercised by those giving family.
planning advice may be not far from being

as effective as the hit-or-miss natural
selection which takes place under natural
conditions. It appears that, quite unconsciously, birth control is already beginning
to be used as a tool for the improvement
of the race. You can imagine how much
more effective it will be when it is used
consciously, with a broader scientific understanding,. and after more study of its
possibilities.

In his recent book, Evolution in Action,*

* Chatto and Windus. 1953.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Julian Huxley says: “ If we could raise the
average of these characteristics [physical
vigour, less liability to specific defects and
diseases, greater general intelligence, and
various special aptitudes] by even 5 or I0
per cent, an almost incalculable burden of
suffering and frustration would be lifted
from human shoulders. ... What is more,

‘the geneticist knows that with appropriate

methods such a result could be achieved
over a measurable series of generations.’

This cause in which you are so deeply
committed means. more than alleviation of
suffering in this present generation ; in itlies the hope of balancing the world’s
population to the resources available to keep
mankind well nourished, active and at peace ;
and beyond that lies the final goal of a race
of men and women more diverse perhaps
than now, but having in common a buoyancy
of physical well being, a keenness of intellect,
a balance of personality and character such
as only a fraction of the human race possesses
today.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLV, No. 3
