MENTAL HEALTH SURVEY IN A RURAL
AREA
A preliminary report*
By W. MAYER-GROSS, M.D., M.R. C. P,

Crichton Royal, Dumfries

which aimed at ascertaining the men
tally abnormal persons in the population of a rural area. One can think of many
other ways of assessing the mental health of
a sample population, for instance, by describing progress in industry, housing, education, working conditions, community life,
etc. This was and is the procedure of the
social surveys initiated in this country by
pioneers of progress such as Charles Booth
and Seebohm Rowntree. Their work sprang
from concern about slums and poverty in
large industrial centres. Dr. Caradog-Jones,
in his Merseyside Survey, and others, gave
these social studies a scientific foundation.
His work contains chapters on epileptics and
other chronic invalids ; but abnormals—one
would think—can only be of secondary
interest in an inquiry dealing with the life
of the average population.

As a kind of forerunner of the social surveys of our days, the Statistical Account of
Scotland has to be mentioned. Its last edition
was published in 1841. It was drawn up by
the ministers of the Church, each recording
the life of his parish. Industries, commerce
and trade, prices and wages, amenities and
important events are carefully reported and
sundry other noteworthy facts. Among them
was the number of “ fools,’ ‘“‘ insane,”
“‘fatuous persons ”’ and idiots for which the
parish had to provide.

This was probably the first survey of the
prevalence of mental cases in this country,
certainly the last based on intimate knowledge of the population. Later statistics,
here and in most other countries, relied on
the mental hospital admission rate, a figure
dependent on public prejudice, legal pro
[os present report is based on a survey

* Paper read before the Eugenics Society on March
16th, 1948.

cedure, the number of available beds, enlightenment of doctors, etc. Moreover, the
less severe cases of mental abnormality living
within the community are, from the point
of view of mental health, much more important than those within hospitals.

During the last thirty years the interest
of psychiatrists has shifted from the major
psychoses, statistically relatively rare occurrences, to the milder and borderline cases,
the minor deviations from the normal
average. Their dependence on social conditions and their influence on the social life of
the patient himself, of his family and of the
community, have been studied. This has led
to some measure of understanding of the
human aspect of certain social problems
which in any material study of social life is
so difficult to assess. Thus, psychiatry, one
of the youngest branches of medicine, has for
many years taken a greater interest in the
social side of its subject than many older
medical specialities.

It is, therefore, not by chance that

psychiatrists believe themselves able to

assess the mental qualities of sample populations, using their clinical experience and
nomenclature. But it is not claimed that
psychiatric surveys can be compared with
the broad and comprehensive social surveys
previously mentioned. The psychiatrist
looks at the complex fabric of social life from
one angle only. The facts he tries to assess
are more subjective, less tangible and less
definite. While he considers them essential
and close to the roots of social conditions—
good or evil—others may think of them as
casual and unimportant.

The evils of urbanisation were mentioned
as inspiring the large-scale surveys in townships. Psychiatric surveys have, with a few
notable exceptions, been carried out in

140
MENTAL HEALTH SURVEY IN A RURAL AREA
4

country districts. This is not because of any.
greater urgency, or because a larger number
of abnormals was suspected, but because
rural populations are, as a rule, more static,
people are better known to one another and
especially to persons in authority and to

other key persons, so that fuller information -.

should be available. Islands with certain
traditions and characteristics of language,
like Bornholm in the Baltic Sea, used by
E. Strémgren, are especially suitable for a
census of abnormals.

The area of our own survey can be regarded as a natural unit, bounded by very
sparsely populated hills and moors to the
North and East, by the sea and a national
boundary to the South. The country adjoining the West is much poorer farm land
and less densely populated. More than 30
per cent of the male population was in 1931
engaged in agriculture, by far the largest
number in one occupation. There are several
small centres of industry, quarrying, stonecutting, textile industry, food manufacture
and coal-mining on the northernmost edge
ofthe county. The main town of the county
and certain parishes of suburban character
were excluded from the survey. It can be
maintained that the area represents a fair
sample of many rural districts in England
and Scotland.

Besides the relatively easy access to personal information, the homogeneity and the
representative character of the area, there
are other reasons for studying the mental
health of rural populations in this county.
The population of our area appeared to be
relatively stable because the number of inhabitants, about 56,000, has hardly changed
since the beginning of the century. This impression, however, was misleading. Accordang to the Registrar-General of Scotland’s
estimate, not less than 14,000, that is, onequarter of the present inhabitants, have
migrated from the district since 1901. Ifthe
district is taken together with the group of
counties in the Scottish Lowlands to which
it belongs, this larger area lost more than
half of its mean population by migration in
the sixty years before 1931. The excess of
births over deaths has just counterbalanced

Trevelyan).

141

the net loss by migration, hence the
stationary figure of inhabitants. The migration is the district’s tontribution to the
general exodus from the land setting in “ on
a national scale about 1880 as a result of
the import of American foodstuffs ’* (G. M.
Trevelyan adds: “ The later
Victorians looked on with indifference at this
tremendous social disaster as a natural and
therefore acceptable outcome of Free Trade,
and did nothing to check it at all.”’

The first inference of the migration figure
on our survey must be that it can hardly
serve as a basis for working out the incidence,
in an average population, of certain types of
mental illness presumed to be hereditary in
nature ; nor can it be used to calculate the
expectancy of becoming a victim of this or
that mental affliction: too many subjects
have probably left the district before reaching the age of susceptibility. Others whose
mental abnormality existed from birth or
started in an early age will probably have
stayed behind. In short, we are dealing with
a “‘ residual population,”’ and this has to be
kept in mind if the results are compared
with those of similar surveys in other
countries.

While, thus, the value of our findings for
genetic research seems questionable, their
interest from the social and economic point
of view is increased. The survey was undertaken at a time when, under the pressure of
war, the slump in farming, prolonged for 60
years, came to what then appeared a temporary end. A similar temporary improvement occurred during the first World War.
This time, however, for reasons which do not
require explanation, the vital necessity of a
prosperous home agriculture in peace-time
has been realised by the authorities. An
economic depression lasting for decades is to
be reversed by assured prices for agricultural
produce, by re-equipment and reconstruction in housing, in communications and in
many other fields. It is obviously of great
importance to know something about the
people who are to manage and carry forward
this process of material recovery, not only
as to their numbers, but also as to their
human qualities. |
14a

Before discussing the method and some
results a second finding of vital statistics
is to be considered: the change in age distribution while the exodus from the land was
in progress. There were, according to the
Registrar-General, in the group of lowland
counties, of which our district forms a part,
7,000 more persons living over the age of 65
in 1931, and 45,000 less under 20, than 60
years’ earlier. This change in age structure
and its social and economic implications he
regards as alarming when the future prosperity of the area is being considered. It is
far more serious than in the neighbouring
urban and industrial regions. “ It is evident
that a community consisting of a disproportionate preponderance of old people is
one that cannot hope to share in any industrial revival of the country ”’ (Kyd, 1946).

The last sentence does not only refer to
agriculture, but also to the small industries
demanded by many economists as an important supplement in rural districts. It also
applies to the important rdéle of the countryside as the place of recruitment for workers,
managers and members of the professional
classes who during the last hundred years
have increased the population of the industrial towns. A steady flow, not only of
numbers, but also of fresh blood, intelligence,
enterprise, went from the open country into
the cities. This has continued in face of a
fall of the birth-rate to about one-half what
it wasin 1871. Rural populations have been
and probably always will be an important
source of renewal of town populations. If this
source deteriorates or dries up it must have
important consequences for our general industrial efficiency. This lends further interest to
the study of the health, and especially the
mental health, of rural populations.

Method of the Survey

The procedure in the Scottish investigation was modelled on that of Strémgren in
his survey of the Danish island of Bornholm.
He lived in the district as a doctor of the
local hospital and got in touch with the key
persons of the island. He searched the records
of hospitals and almshouses for patients
belonging to the area.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The records of the local mental hospital,
where most patients from the area have been
treated for the last 100 years, provided a
nucleus of cases from which our own survey
was started. The social worker began her investigation by enquiring about patients discharged during the last ten years and about
the relatives of those still in hospital. Thanks
to the collaboration of the County Medical
Officer of Health contact was made with the
Local Government Officers who are also
Public Assistance Officers and Sanitary Inspectors, and with the former, now superseded, Inspectors of the Poor. The interest
of the county’s Director of Education
assured access to teachers and schools;
equally valuable was the use we could make
of the results of an intelligence test given
to all school-children at the age of eleven.
This test, introduced in 1937, is the Moray
House Test, standardised for Scottish children. As a rule we considered as suitable for
inclusion in the survey the children who
scored less than an I.Q. of 80, but in all cages
the present or former teacher was consulted
as well as other informants.

The moral support given to the enquiry >
by the Board of Control was helpful in
gaining the co-operation of district nurses,
welfare officers, N.S.P.C.C. officers, and
other officials or semi-officials. Ministers of
the Churches could be interested and so
were certain private persons known to have
extensive knowledge of the population.

The value of information gathered from
these different sources naturatly varied a
great deal from person to person and from
parish to parish. Assessing the judgment and
reliability of the witnesses was one of the
foremost tasks of the worker in the field, as
well as confirming the facts on which his or
her information was based; contradictory
views had to be weighed before reaching a
decision. Many preliminary diagnoses had to
be corrected in the light of new information
coming, for instance, from a neighbouring
district ; and judgment on cases with too
scanty information had to be suspended.

Strémgren, mainly interested in the major
psychoses among the population of 46,000
of his island, visited and examined most of
MENTAL HEALTH SURVEY IN A RURAL AREA

his cases personally. In a district of Balti
more, on the other hand, where the John
Hopkins School of Hygiene carried out an
urban survey, most of the evidence was based
on social workers’ reports, or on other circumstantial evidence. Only a restricted number
of cases were seen by the psychiatrist. There
is no doubt that examination by a psychiatrist would be the most desirable supplement
and the most reliable check of indirect information. Nothing of this kind has been
attempted in our district, mainly because it
would have meant in most cases an intrusion
into the privacy, which might endanger the
smooth working of the survey. The inclusion
of the minor abnormalities in their different
disguises in such visits would have made the
work most unpopular. Even with the
greatest tact and discretion it would have
been very difficult to find a reason or pretext
for such visits from a psychiatrist.
Examination of every person in a sample
population arranged by the authorities seems
the only way out. It would, however, have
yielded much less reliable results because the
unavoidable publicity would have led to
deliberate withholding of cases and facts.
Some of the American workers, using
similar indirect ways of enquiry, thought it
necessary to mirror the variety of information obtainable in different cases in a great
variety of diagnoses, some of them with
very little medical or psychiatric meaning.
To keep the scope of an investigation like
this within its proper limits and to make its
results comparable with similar work it is
desirable to arrive in each case at a clearly
defined diagnosis, or, if two or more diagnoses
are needed, to consider one as primary. In
a relatively small number, with well-established mental deviation, diagnosis was not
possible and they were included under
“ undiagnosed.”’ In an even smaller group
abnormalities were suspected, but could not

be established with sufficient certainty. They ©

were listed as “‘suspected.”” Both groups
together represent 6-3 per cent of the
material.

This effort at fixing a diagnostic label,
despite the vagueness and discrepancy of
available information, may appear arbitrary

143

and is, in fact, often only an approximation
to what could result from a thorough
examination and evaluation of the person
included. But in the circumstances it seemed
the best and most reliable method.

From the commonly used clinical diagnoses
twenty-two applicable to an enquiry of this
kind were selected. Some of them refer
merely to symptoms which were expected to
be easily recognised, such as stammer, chorea,
enuresis; the majority are the generally
used groupings of psychiatry based mainly
on the psychological conduct of the patient.
This also applies to the grading of the intellectually subnormals which form almost onehalf of our diagnoses. As in a considerable
proportion of our cases under fifteen an intelligence test had been carried out, one was
on relatively safe ground here, that is, in
71 per cent of all cases in which the diagnosis
of backwardness and mental deficiency was
made.

~The field of subnormality was enlarged
towards the normal by including the dull and
backward with an I.Q. between 80 and 70.
This has, to our knowledge, not been
attempted by other observers. In view of the
preponderance of high-grade mental deficiency found in rural districts by E. O.
Lewis, the inclusion of these cases seemed of
special interest.

Results of the Survey

Turning to a summary of our findings (see
table), we decided that 5,105 persons should
be included as abnormals, being 9 per cent
of the total population. Although in keeping
with the idea of the ‘‘ psychopathic tenth ”
of popular writers, the proportion is above
the average of 7 per cent found in the comparable American survey of Williamson
County in Tennessee. In certaim parts of this
large and prosperous county, however, which
*“‘ have been subjected to special study,” the
rate of cases per hundred of population rose
up to 12 per cent.

Examining the nine diagnostic subdivisions into which the original 22 diagnoses
were telescoped for the purpose of tabulation
we have no comparable results from other
workers to check our large rate of dull and
144

backwards of 28-5 per thousand. One-third
of the figure of 1,606 refers to children under
15, most of whom have been tested. The
diagnosis of dullness among adults may be
incorrect in some instances: but where it
errs, it errs in favour of the subject, placing
what is in fact a tolerably adapted highgrade defective among the dullards. The
problem of adaptability of these cases under
the present economic conditions will be discussed presently.

The rate of incidence of menial deficiency,
15°6 per 1,000, is high if compared with
the mean figure of 10-49 found in 1927 by
E. O. Lewis in three English rural districts.
The difference is significant and far beyond
expectation as a sampling error. Here,
again, one-third belongs to our best ascertained group of under 15; correction of
possible mistakes would rather tend to
increase the figure than to reduce it.

Under the heading neurotics and psychopaths we have put together all milder nonintellectual deviations from normality, including maladjusted children as well as
hysteria and other neuroses disguised as
physical illness. The rate of 19 per 1,000
is very close to the findings in Tennessee,
which was 20:7, and to a figure compiled
from 15 investigations of small sample
populations in Germany and Switzerland,
which was 20:8.

The incidence of affective and schizophrenic psychoses has been studied by many
observers in different countries. A/ffective
psychoses show considerable variation of incidence. The high figure of 3-5 per 1,000
in our survey surpasses that of the Bornholm
survey, which was conducted with much
greater thoroughness. The difference is
statistically significant. One-quarter of our
cases suffered from involutional melancholia,
an affliction supposed to be relatively frequent in Scotland. The proportion of schizophrenia is also high. It is only exceeded by
the compiled figure from Germany and
Switzerland, which may be due to different
criteria of diagnosis. Schizophrenia in our
area occurred in an almost identical fre~
quency with urban and rural samples in
Finland. The Finnish census was carried out

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in 1935-36 by eight psychiatrists, who personally saw every suspected case within
populations numbering in all over 400,000.

With our method of case finding, alcoholism
was relatively easy to ascertain, while the
underlying abnormality of which it frequently is only a symptom often remained
doubtful. The rate of 3-9 is similar to that
found in Tennessee ; the much higher midEuropean figure being influenced by the
habits of Bavaria, where many of the samples
were collected.

The incidence of epilepsy, 1-7 per 1,000 of
population, is definitely higher than that in
Bornholm and in Finland (standard error of
differences +0:2). In Tennessee epileptics
were not assessed under a separate diagnosis.

European surveys omitted the psychiatric
conditions of old age, which, because of the
increasing longevity of the population, are
now of special interest. From the age distribution table of the Tennessee survey an
approximate rate of 3 per 1,000 can be
calculated, which is one-half only of our
finding of 6 for the same group.

Summing up this bird’s-eye view of the
results of our enquiry it can be stated that,
in spite of the relative superficiality of our
case-finding method, the number of mental
health problems of all kinds is high compared
with the findings in similar work here and
abroad. There was half as much mental
deficiency disclosed as in rural England 20
years ago. All psychoses in which hereditary
factors play a part, affective and schizophrenic psychoses and epilepsy were found
to be more frequent than in rural districts
abroad. On the other hand, afflictions possibly due to environmental stress, such as
psychopathy and alcoholism, are as numerous
as in the populations available for comparison.

Cases Below Age of Fifteen

For a more detailed analysis I propose to
discuss the cases below the age of 15. Their
number (see table) represents between onefourth and one-fifth of the total and is just
above 2 per cent of the total population,
but more than 11 per cent of the school
population. The latter figure and the other
MENTAL HEALTH SURVEY IN A RURAL AREA

rates calculated with reference to the number
of school-children are slightly too high
because of a small number of children below
school age included in the material. Thanks
to the help of the education authorities, and
the teachers’ co-operation, our information
in this group is much more complete than
in the rest of the material, the proportion of
undiagnosed cases being much smaller. From
the social point of view, the mental health
of the children born in a country district is
no doubt of great interest. They will have to
carry through the programme of economic and
social recovery initiated during the last few
years while our investigation was in progress.

Columns 2 & 3 of the table show the
telescoped diagnoses and their rate per 1,000
school-children.

Compared with the total material the rate
of dullards is more than doubled, that of the
mental defectives almost doubled. The
absolute figures, founded on the teachers’
estimates and, in children over II, on test
results as well, do not lend themselves to
exaggeration. They form the biggest single
item, over 70 per cent of the abnormal cases
found among children. If imbeciles and
idiots are omitted, 8-1 per cent of school
population represents the subcultural group
of defectives of Dr. Lewis, a figure which
agrees well with the estimate of this group
by the Ministry of Education.

One can think of three possible explanations for the higher proportion of dullards
and defectives among the children if compared with the adults. The difference may
either be an artefact due to the fuller information about .the children from the
educationists; or dullards and defectives
may adapt themselves so well after leaving
school that their abnormality cannot be detected ; or, thirdly, the greater incidence in
children may be a real one, perhaps connected with a general lowering of the nation’s
intelligence so much discussed recently.

To test the second theory, that of adaptability of the subnormals, we have made use
of the next higher age group (15-24). In
this group of 1,107 cases we found 816 dullards and defectives, a proportion very
similar to that in the school-children. A con
145
: &
siderable number had undergone the intelligence test and the test results were known.
Ascertainment was, therefore, almost as
complete as in the under-15s. What was
their social position at the time of survey ?
Exactly two-thirds of the 816 subnormals
were at the time of the survey either fully
employed or working in the house as housewives. We have also data on the steadiness
of work record, although less complete.
However, only one-fifth of the subnormals
between 15 and 24 were reported to have an
unsteady work record, 29 being in need of
institutional treatment.

The comparison of the two groups of
dullards and defectives suggests that under
the present conditions of labour shortage on
the land subnormals can easily lead a useful
life in the community. Their handicap will
be little noticed after leaving school and
probably forgotten in later life. This is
certainly one important factor explaining
the smaller figure of subnormality in the
adult population.

Maladjusted children are often the precursors of neurosis and psychopathy and
are listed under this heading. The number is
in the same range as that of the total, but is
twice the official estimate of the Minister of
Education. Child guidance clinics have recently been opened in the district to deal
with this problem. Among the maladjusted
are included 20 cases with the secondary
diagnosis of dullness. The group also includes
45 children with speech defect, stammer, etc.
It is difficult to suggest help for their handicap except by a travelling speech therapist.

Among the organic group are 19 cases of
chorea as primary or secondary diagnosis.

Five per cent of all the children have a
chronic physical handicap, including deafness, blindness or other crippling afflictions,
besides being mental problems.

Turning from the medical to the soczal
conditions of these children and their families
and homes, we find, as one would expect,
that the majority come from the occupational
group of semi-skilled and unskilled workers.
There is a definitely greater number of farm
workers and labourers among the parents of
these children than among the adult cases.
146

As in so many formerly depressed rural
districts, housing conditions of the labouring
population are deplorably bad. No up-todate record exists of the average number of
persons per room. Many derelict dwellings
at the time of the survey were still in use
and had not been condemned. This explains
why only 24 of our cases live in officially
condemned houses. Thirty-nine per cent
of the children in whom this could be
assessed live in overcrowded houses, three
and more persons to one room. In about onethird of those of whom we received information about the home conditions these were
characterised as “‘ bad,” i.e. dirty or dilapidated or verminous or with insufficient
furniture.

The 1,163 children in our group come from
831 families, i.e. 1-4 children per family ;
they are, therefore, not the offspring of
limited numbers of parents, but are sprinkled
throughout the population. ‘Nevertheless a
majority of 56 per cent have three brothers
and sisters or more, and 33 per cent have
more than five siblings. In 7 per cent of the
material we have no information on this
point. Fifty-seven per cent of the mothers
are still in the childbearing age. The fertility of these subnormals and abnormals is
certainly above the average of the population.

In 10 per cent the children or their siblings
were neglected. In one-third of the cases
there was a report of sexual immorality in
the family, promiscuity or incest of parents.
In over 600 cases the parents were included
among the number of abnormals and in
about 300 cases one or more brothers and
sisters. On the other hand, the ratio of
illegitimate children in the material (13 per
cent) is not much above the ratio of the district calculated from the Registrar-General’s
data as being 11 per cent of births.

The character of the family life, as it
appears to the outside world, could be
estimated in 80 per cent of our child material.

In over 50 per cent it was described as har-'

monious, and in only 14 per cent as disturbed by frequent quarrelling and violence,
leading in some cases to disruption.

The relative contentment and absence of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW,

aggression in this group is also shown in the
low figure of juvenile delinquents—55 cases
only ; an even smaller number of offenders
was found in the next age group (15-24).

Another sign of the contented and inactive
outlook in these families is the small number
of siblings of our cases who have migrated
from the county. We ascertained this figure
in 94 per cent of the age group and found
migration only 86 times (—7-4 per cent),
a figure probably still too high because it
may include in some instances the same
migrating siblings more than once.

Summing up the findings in our youngest
age group, it can be stated that subnormality
is the main mental health problem among the
children in this rural district, closely followed
in importance by emotional maladjustment.
Dull, defective and maladjusted children are
to a large extent the offspring of families
of the labouring population. The fertility
of these families is above average; they
often live under very unfavourable conditions, physical and moral, in overcrowded
dwellings. On the whole, they seem to be
happy and content and show little sign of
resentment or protest against their life
situation.

It would, however, be misleading to conclude this report, and especially the part
dealing with children, in this sombre note of
peaceful gloom.

It has to be remembered that our enquiry
only surveyed the subnormals and abhormals, who, of course, only form a small
minority. There is no reason to doubt the
mental health of the great majority of the
children. .

Proposed Remedies

Turning to the remedies the psychiatrist
can suggest for his disquieting findings, I
would like to quote one more figure: 330,
or one-third, of these abnormal children are
in need of special schooling without receiving
it. They now attend ordinary classes and
their presence in smaller or larger numbers
must necessarily cast a shadow on the
teachers’ work and on the education of the
healthy.’ In some schools the dullards form
a large minority, frustrating the schoolMENTAL HEALTH SURVEY IN A RURAL AREA

master’s efforts. The fact that the subnormals do relatively well after leaving
school in practical work on the land points
the way to the education they need. First
and foremost they should be taught the
daily routine of a civilised life: how to wash
and keep clean, how to dress and eat properly, how to make use of the appliances in
the house, of the street, of leisure time, how
to be helpful and honest and to live as
members of a community—all things which
a normal child of normal parents learns as a
matter of course at home; but which are
not so easily picked up by the subnormal
child and are often not practised in the
families of subnormals. The educational
emphasis has to be put on activities of a
practical kind, which, however, does not
mean on arts and crafts, but on the simple
prerequisites of ordinary life in the country.
Reading, writing and arithmetic should be
secondary subjects and should not be pushed
beyond the ability of the child.

A boarding school or home is needed for
those maladjusted children whose home conditions are inadequate, as suggested in the
Education Act, 1945. Preparations for such
a home are on the way, but in a county
without its own mental defective colony it is
most important to prevent such a home from
being flooded by defectives and dullards.

As to the adults, a policy is needed not
only to stop the exodus of the active and intelligent, but to add to the “ residual population’ by attracting fresh incomers to the
rural communities. Experts have fully discussed this problem and suggested solutions
on paper; since the end of the war some
start has been made in our area with improved housing and- afforestation on a larger
scale, the latter attracting a desirable type
of incomer. Speaking without expert knowledge in such matters, I venture to suggest
that the scarcity of farms which are owned by
the cultivator and can be developed as a
family property, prevents the settling of
young and progressive people ; equally, the
absence of marketgardening and other intensive methods of cultivation doubtless
reduces the prospects of the enterprising individualist so suitable to life on the land.

147

Light industries are needed giving those
children of the worker who are unsuited for
farming an opportunity of apprenticeship
and of permanent work; such industries
would at the same time provide the seasonal
labour without which certain types of farming cannot prosper.

The last word in all these changes must be
with the economist and the politician. Some
may find drastic changes unnecessary because
the area is now a prosperous one, thanks to
guaranteed prices, wages and subsidies. But
it should be remembered that material prosperity alone cannot reverse the effect on
human qualities of sixty years’ depression
and neglect.

It would, however, be unjust to deny
certain signs of recovery and of the increasing
consciousness noticeable in the human and
social sphere. One of them was the widespread understanding and friendly support
of this survey. I doubt if it could have been
concluded so smoothly and successfully while
the depression still lasted. If it could in a
small way hasten the revival of country
life at a turning point of rural history, the
sad facts it has revealed will have been worth
while collecting.

REFERENCES

Kaila Martti, ‘‘ Ueber die Durchschnitts-Haufigkeit der
Geisteskrankheiten & des Schwachsinns in Finnland,”’ Acta Psychiat. & Neur. (1942), 17, 47.

Kyd, J. G., Some Thoughts on Scotland’s Changing
Population. Report of Conference held by the
Scottish Council of Social Service, Edinburgh,
1946.

Lemkau, P., Tietze, C., and Cooper, M., ‘‘ Mental
Hygiene Problems in an Urban District,” Mental
Hygiene (1941/3), 25, 624 ; 26, 100, 275; 27, 279.

Lemkau, P., Tietze, C., and Cooper, M., ‘“‘ A Survey of
Statistical Studies on the Prevalence and Incidence
of Mental Disorders in Sample Populations,”’
Public Health Reports (1943), 58, 1909. Washington. !

Lewis, E. O., Report on an Investigation into the Inctdence of Mental Deficiency in Six Areas. London,
1929.

Roth, W. F., and Luton, F. H., ‘‘ The Mental Health
Programme in Tennessee,’ American Journ.
Psychiat. (1943), 99, 662. |

Special Educational Treatmeni, Ministry of Education
Pamphlet No. 5. London, 1946.

Statistical Account of Scotland, by the Ministers of the
Respective Parishes. Edinburgh and London,
1841.

Strémgren, E., “‘ Beitrage zur Psychiatrischen Erblehre,”” Acta Psychiat. & Neurol. (1938), Suppl. 19.

Trevelyan, G. M., English Social History. London, 1944.
148 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

RESULTS OF A MENTAL HEALTH SURVEY IN A RURAL AREA OF SCOTLAND

I 2 3 4 5 6
in 10,141 | per 1,000} in total | per 1,ooo}/ E. O.
school- | school- | popula- | of popu- Lewis

 

Germany| Finland,
and

Diagnosis | children | children tion lation 1927, and
(56,231) rural urban
Dull and back
ward 35 599 59°1 1,606 28°5
Mental

Deficiency 279 27°1 878 156
Neurosis and

Psychopathy 217 214 1,091 19°4
Affective ‘

Psychoses ... — — 199 3°5 0-3
Schizophrenia I _ 236 4°2 43
Alcoholism ... — — 220 39
Epilepsy wee 13 1-3 85 1-7 io
Senile-arterio
sclerotic

psychoses ... —_ — 339 6:0
Other organic

psychoses ... 16 1-6 126 2-2
Undiagnosed... i 1° 174 3:0
Suspected... 27 2-7 151 2°7

Total eee 1,163 114°3 5,105 90-7

 

 

Findings in persons under 15 (columns 2 and 3), in the total population (columns 4 and 5) and in similar surveys
for comparison (columns 6-10)

|

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY

Edited by Warder C. Allee, the University of Chicago.
In the October 1948 number:
INGESTION OF COLLOIDAL MATERIAL AND WATER BY GOLDFISH. By W. C. Auiez and Perer FRANK.

THE EFFECTS OF THYROXINE AND ANTITHYROID COMPOUNDS ON THE SYNTHESIS OF PIGMENT GRANULES
IN CHICK MELANOBLASTS CULTURED IN VITRO. By Crement L. MARKERT.

RELATIONS OF AN ENDOGENOUS DAILY RHYTHMICITY IN THE FIDDLER CRAB, UCA, TO TEMPERATURE. By

Frank A. Brown, Jr., and H. MARGUERITE WEBB.
PATTERNING OF CENTRAL SYNAPSES IN REGENERATION OF THE OPTIC NERVE IN TELEOSTS. By R. W. Spgrry.
STUDIES ON THE RESPIRATION OF AN AMOEBA, MAYORELLA PALESTINESIS. By K. Reicu,
PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY is published quarterly in January, April, July and October
Subscription $10 a year Single copies $3 Canadian postage 20c. Foreign postage 48c.

THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS, 5750 Ellis Avenue, CHICAGO
Eugenics Review, Vol. XL, No. 3

 
