THE BIOCHEMISTRY OF CONCEPTION
CONTROL"

By N. W. PIRIE, M.A., ERS.

HIS is not the place to discuss the
optimal number of people in any
country or in the world, nor is it the
place to discuss the possible social consequences of the ability to make pregnancy
invariably a matter of deliberate intention.
It is clear however that, although the world
could no doubt support more people than
there are in it now, it could not support an
indefinite number (cf. Four Thousand Million
Mouths, 1951). It is also clear that there are
many circumstances in which the ability to
control pregnancy would be an advantage.
The words in the title were chosen carefully ; we are concerned with control which
means not only prevention but also promotion if there is difficulty. The words contraception and birth control were avoided
because the former, although in principle it
has the required meaning, has taken on amore
restricted meaning in popular use, and the
latter would extend the subject to include
the termination of established pregnancy as
well. Not only is the biochemistry of
pregnancy a formidable subject but if, like
conception, it is examined in both a positive
and negative sense, it leads to the discussion
of abortifacients and that would broaden the
field too greatly. It is obviously better to
stop a conception rather than cope with an
unwanted pregnancy.

The Ideal .
Both at the present time and in the past
many methods have been used for controlling
conception, but they will be referred to only
briefly for few of them are biochemical and
still fewer desirable. Thus none of the social
arrangements designed to restrict sexual
contact or diminish sexual interest are
germane. People enjoy sex and are entitled
to go on doing so. The enjoyment may some
*A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics
Societv, May 30th, 1952.

times reach levels which those with a different
response describe as addiction, but that must
be accepted even if it is not welcomed. This
fact limits the discussion of methods of
control. It makes it necessary to leave alone,
to the greatest extent possible, the phenomena of which people are aware while
copulating and to be chary of altering the
hormone balance, for this greatly influences
sexual enthusiasm. A fully satisfactory
method of contraception should not obtrude
itself ; methods that involve an insertion
just before copulation, as most present
methods do, would not therefore be ideal
even if they were in other respects satisfactory. Neither, of course, are permanent
or nearly permanent methods such as
vasectomy or oophorectomy for, admirable
as they are in many circumstances, few people
easily accept such a radical solution. The
ideal is something which when eaten or
injected induces a temporary sterility without other effects. No such substance is
known and its discovery is likely to call for
much sustained biochemical research. This
is not at the moment being undertaken and
the main purpose of this paper is to see
whether a prima facie case can be made out
for its inception.

The Problem and Method

First the problem may be briefly stated.
Sperm are made in the testis, mature there
and in the epididymis and are ejaculated
into the vagina whence they move by
swimming or bulk movement of semen into
the uterus. Mature ova are discharged from
the ovary into the mouth of the Fallopian
tube. The sperm and ovum, or gametes,
move into the Fallopian tube from opposite
ends and unite in it ; the fertilized ovum, or
zygote, then continues down the tube into
the uterus. It undergoes some stages of
development on the way, but most of its

129
130

development takes place after it has become
attached to the uterine wall.

- Achain of events as elaborate as this would
be expected to contain many weak links and
the frequency of involuntary sterility bears
out the expectation. A better understanding
of the chain would improve treatment of
these cases, but our primary interest here is
to find weak links that could be weakened
still further. The search is for a process that is
exceptional, or preferably unique, in its
biochemical nature. If such a mechanism
can be found it should be possible to inhibit
it without upsetting any of the other
mechanisms on which normal life and health
depend. The evidence is largely gained from
experiments with animals and this involves
the difficulty that animals differ more from
one another and from man in their reproductive behaviour than in most other respects.
Thus the rabbit, unlike most other species,
normally ovulates only after copulation
and in several species sperm can survive in
the female tract for weeks or even months,
whereas in most species they only survive
for a few days. Observations made on one
species, therefore, give hints rather than
evidence about the behaviour of even a
closely related species. From our present
point of view therefore it is a pity that the
main mass of sound evidence relates to such
a remote animal as the sea urchin.

Sperm and Semen |
Spermatogenesis in most mammals is
temperature sensitive, so that it only proceeds
satisfactorily in the scrotum where the
temperature is intermittently lower than
that of the body as a whole. This peculiarity
has excited some interest, but the deliberate
maintenance of the testes at constant temperature would be inconvenient. Furthermore there is some evidence that exposure to
constant temperature interferes with the
production of the testicular hormones. The
mechanism of this temperature dependence
is unknown, but spermatogenesis is probably
controlled by the balance of two or more
actions with different temperature coefficients. If this is the mechanism it should be
possible, and it would be more satisfactory,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to interfere with the balance chemically.
Spermatogenesis is controlled by other
factors such as the level of thyroid function,
but an alteration of this would bring about
too general effects to be useful.

In the epididymis the sperm ‘“ matures.”’
This noncommittal term covers changes in
both morphology and metabolism; thus
Lardy, Ghosh and Plaut (1949) find that bull
sperm entering the epididymis respire more
slowly than those that have passed through
it but they can be activated by storage in the
epididymis and by extracts from sperm.
Sperm that have not undergone these
changes seem (Young, 1931) to be less able
to cause fertilization, so that fuller investigation might well be profitable.

Several accessory glands are involved in
making the seminal plasma and its composition is of the greatest biochemical
interest. It contains significant amounts of
citrate, fructose, inositol, ergothioneine and
phosphatase (Mann, 1951, 4 and 6). All these
substances occur elsewhere in the body, but
seldom in such high concentrations and never
all together. Fructose can be metabolised by
the sperm and probably acts as the main fuel
for swimming ; the function, if any, of the
other substances is obscure. Although all
these components may not be essential for
the effectiveness of sperm, the general, and
probably valid, assumption is that they
contribute to it. If therefore the mechanisms
responsible for the secretion of these unusual
accessory substances could be inhibited, it
is possible, though by no means certain, that
sperm function would be impaired. The
seminal plasma is not only a source of metabolites that may be used by the sperm, it is
also a system with enzyme activities of its
own. Thus at the instant of ejaculation
semen is a mobile fluid, but it quickly
coagulates to a gel and then several minutes
later liquefies again. This process, which has
excited interest since the time of Aristotle
(c. -330), is now being elucidated and is
probably advantageous in carrying semen
to the os and ensuring its contact with
cervical mucus. Semen that did not clot,
or, having clotted, did not liquefy, would
probably be less effective.
BIOCHEMISTRY OF CONCEPTION CONTROL

The ejaculated sperm is clearly the most
accessible part of the whole fertilization
process. Some people (e.g. Baker, 1935) have
in fact written as if contraception were
synonymous with sperm killing, and this is
the aspect of the subject to which almost all
attention has been directed hitherto. This
is not the place to discuss all the spermicides
that have been used or suggested, but it is
perhaps worth while discussing a few of the
principles that underlie this type of work.
We do not yet know enough about the metabolism of sperm to be able to plan contraception rationally. As soon as we think beyond
some simple mechanical barrier we are
forced to use the purest empiricism. The
problem is superficially similar to that in
chemotherapy ; two systems exist side by
side, the host and the “ parasite,’ which in
this case is the sperm. The problem is to
inhibit the one without affecting the other.
It is more difficult than the chemotherapeutic problem because we have to envisage
the regular use of an agent during many
years ; it is easier because the “‘ parasite ”
has no independent powers of multiplication.

Empiricism versus Biochemical
Understanding

Crude empiricism, that is empiricism unilluminated by established knowledge of the
mechanism by which an action takes place,
can only work in certain directions. Where
tests are easy to do there is perhaps no
reason to adopt any other method. Thus in
searching for antibiotics thousands of strains
of microorganisms are ‘‘ screened ”’ against a
set of test organisms in the hope of finding
an efficient producer. There is an old
laboratory adage ‘‘ Anything is worth doing
if it is easy enough to do’’; the cynic adds
“or if you can find someone else to do it.”
But where tests are not easy to do this
empirical approach is extravagant and it
becomes imperative to be more analytical.
The process goes in stages. If the problem is,
or is being approached as, a chemotherapeutic one, the first stage consists simply of
trying everything one can lay ones hands on
to see what happens. This was the state of
pharmacology nearly to the beginning of

131

this century. Ehrlich wrought a revolution
when he thought about the chemical structure of the agents he used and, having found
a promising line by random methods,
changed the molecule slightly in various
ways according to a logical chemical plan
till, within that group of substances, he
reached optimal activity. This was the
method adopted by Baker (1935); it is
analytical over the chemical half of the
problem, but it leaves the biochemical
mechanism of action unconsidered.

The second revolution springs from
academic work on enzyme inhibitors and
was enunciated as a principle by Woods and
Fildes. Drugs act, in part at least, by
specific enzyme inhibitions and their structures have some resemblance to that of the
normal substrate; they: are analogues or
caricatures of it. Normally the substrate
combines with an enzyme, undergoes whatever change is brought about, and then leaves
the enzyme in a state to carry out the process
again. The analogue type of inhibitor upsets
the process by not letting go so that the
process catalyzed by that enzyme stops. If
we know the chemical nature of the processes
we are trying to inhibit, the search, in the
light of this picture, becomes a limited search
for analogues of the normal substrate. This
introduces logic from the other side. As well
as analysing the structure of our agents we
must analyse the enzymic make-up of the
process we wish to inhibit. Success depends
on finding an inhibitable enzyme which is
unique to the system we wish to inhibit or
which is at least very much more important
in this system than in any neighbouring
ones.

Logically therefore the study of spermicides should wait until we know more about
the biochemistry of sperm. But such a delay
would be carrying logic too far. While this
work is being done much would be gained if
some of the firms already screening synthetic
or natural substances for antibacterial
activity would include the sperm of some
convenient mammal] in their group of test
systems. Positive or negative results in such
a test would not be a final answer, but they
would give useful suggestions.
132

With many cells, even if we have a good
analogue, attack is not feasible because the
cell does not pick up the analogue readily.
The available evidence suggests that this is
less likely to cause difficulty with sperm
because they are exceptionally permeable.
Furthermore the exceptional composition of
the fluid in which sperm are ejaculated
suggests that their metabolism may be
exceptional too. So far, however, this
expectation has not ‘been borne out. The
field has been admirably surveyed by Mann
(1949) and he concludes that much of sperm
metabolism depends on systems found in
most other cells; it is unlikely that these
could be inhibited without causing damage
to other tissues. At this stage of the discussion only the swimming of the sperm is
relevant and one anomaly has been described
that may be connected with it. Wajzer and
Brochart (1947) claim that both boar and
guinea pig sperm contain phosphoarginine.
This substance plays a similar role in muscular contraction in many invertebrates to that
played by phosphocreatine in mammals and
it has not been found in any other part of a

mammal. Its presence in sperm would have

a double interest ; it would be an interesting
example of evolutionary “ recapitulation ”’
and it would offer a mechanism on which an
an uitro search for inhibitors could start.
Unfortunately this line of research does not
seem to have been pursued and the statement
has not been confirmed.

Sperm are relatively good antigens and
even induce antibody formation in the same
species as that from which the sperm were
got. Antisera immobilize the sperm specifically (Henle, Henle and Chambers, 1938)
and Parsons and Hyde (1940) have found
that such antisera are effective in preventing
fertilization when introduced into the vagina
of the rabbit. This is encouraging, but it
simply amounts to using an antibody as a
specific and harmless spermicide. Some of
the defects inherent in all spermicidal
approaches to the problem remain. The high
antigenicity of sperm has suggested to many
people that it might be. possible to immunize
a female against sperm so that her tissues
generally became toxic to them. Successes

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

have been claimed but they have not been
confirmed (cf. Parkes, 1944; Tyler, 1948) and
even if it should prove possible to produce
this type of immunity there is the danger that
it would lead to a response similar to hay
fever at any mucus surface subsequently
exposed to sperm. Furthermore such immunization, if powerful enough to be
effective, might well prove permanent.

The Movement of Sperm

Sperm movement deserves more study for
theoretical as well as practical reasons. Sir
Geoffrey Taylor (1952) has found existing
hydrodynamic theory inadequate to cope
with it and, as a step towards improving the
theory, has had to study the movement of a
model sperm driven by twisted rubber bands.
This demonstration of the complexity of the
problem and of the fact that theory has had
to invoke simple, one might almost say
crude, experimentation is very encouraging
to an unashamed empiric, but it suggests
that no immediately useful conclusions are
likely.

The movement of sperm towards the
Fallopian tube can also be obstructed by a
barrier at the cervix and both primitive and
more sophisticated communities have shown
considerable ingenuity in constructing them.
The only technique of this type that calls for
consideration here depends on the fact that
semen and cervical mucus do not mix readily
but that actively motile sperm invade the
mucus. This capacity diminishes the effect
of normal spermicides because the sperm get
away from them, but it opens up possibilities
of rendering the mucus impenetrable. Barton
and Wiesner (1951) have found im vitro that
cetyl pyridinium chloride acts in this way
and they suggest that, although it is not a
spermicide, it will prevent sperm from getting
into the uterus. Other surface active substances, e.g. ricinoleic acid, appear to act in
the same way. This is a very interesting
development in which the cervical mucus,
which is constantly being renewed, is in effect
being turned into an occlusive cap. The
method is mentioned here, not because it has
yet been fully tested, but because it illustrates a new line of biochemical thought. If
BIOCHEMISTRY OF CONCEPTION CONTROL

these agents are simply put in the vagina they
have the defect that only mucus that has
come through the cervix is exposed to them
and that fresh unexposed mucus is constantly appearing. This approach would be
extremely hopeful if a substance could be
found that was excreted into the uterus and
was then able to modify mucus in this way,
but it does not seem that a substance with
these properties will be found easily.

Ovulation

Sperm are produced in the testis by a
complete cycle of cell division and maturation
continuing throughout the period of fertility.
Ova, on the other hand, appear to be formed
in youth and only processes of maturation
and discharge take place later (cf. Zuckerman, 1951). Maturation is under close
hormonal control; this suggests that it
could be inhibited. At first sight it may seem
that the more elaborate process of cell
multiplication which is involved in spermatogenesis would offer more opportunities for
interference and it may seem that this is the
process to which most attention should be
paid. Cell multiplication is however probably
fairly uniform throughout the body so that
it is unlikely to be easily stopped in one place
without being upset in other places as well.
The maturation of oocytes to ova is likely
to be more specific.

The literature of world travel contains
many references to herbs that are eaten in
primitive communities to prevent conception. As a rule the plant is left unidentified,
but one, Lithospbermum ruderale, is known to
be so used by the Navajo. The extracts of
the root that have been made so far are
poisonous and have to be used with care, but
they indubitably inhibit ovulation. The
effect is apparently due to inhibition of the
anterior lobe of the pituitary (Noble, Plunkett and Taylor, 1950), but circulating
hormones may also be sequestrated (Skelton
and Grant, 1951) and there are effects on
other glands. Some of the effects can be
reproduced by tannins and there is no reason
to think that all are due to the same substance in these crude extracts. In their

present state the extracts are not of practical

133

use, but further work with this plant and
others like it will be awaited with great
interest. A general inhibition of the action
of any part of the pituitary, even although it
prevented ovulation or the maturation of
oocytes, would create as many problems as
it solved. But the discovery of specific
inhibitors, either as a result of fuller knowledge of the function and action of the
pituitary hormones or by following up hints
from folk medicine, would present us with
one of the most satisfactory methods of
contraception.

The Approach and Union of the Gametes

In some species, e.g. ferns, eggs produce
substances towards which sperm swim;
this chemotactic action greatly increases the
chance of collision and so of fertilization.
Lord Rothschild (1951) has pointed out that
the perception of a concentration gradient
by an organism as small as a sperm involves
an unusual sensitivity to small differences
in concentration. If human sperm were
influenced in this way it ought to be possible
to attract them in the wrong direction
because the amount of any substance that
the ovum can secrete must be very small and
it should be relatively easy to offer a counter
attraction. Unfortunately, even in the sea
urchin, the evidence for any such mechanism
is equivocal. In mammals the gametes
appear to meet in the Fallopian tube by
accident and there seems to be little chance
of interfering with their meeting in this way.

The actual union involves many separate
processes ; these are to some extent understood and hold out good hopes of inhibition.
Mammalian ova have probably never been
fertilized 2m vitro (Austin, 1951; Smith,
1951), but Moricard (1950) has fertilized them
in pieces of isolated Fallopian tube. The
nature of the contribution made by the tube
is not understood, but it would repay study
for it might be specific and inhibitable.
Although the whole process cannot be studied
an vitro useful information has been gained
about different aspects of it.

The first barrier that the sperm has to pass
is the gelatinous mass of cumulus or follicle
cells surrounding the ovum. This mass can
134

readily be dispersed by the enzyme hyaluronidase which is found in the testis and in
or on sperm. The obvious interpretation is
that the sperm gets through because of the
presence of hyaluronidase (McClean and
Rowlands, 1942) and the corollary of this,
since the enzyme is found in few other places
in the mammalian body if indeed in any, is
that if the enzyme were inhibited penetration
would be impaired or prevented. Hadidian
and Pirie (1948) found that nitrated hyaluronic acid inhibited the enzyme and Pincus,
Pirie and Chang (1948) found that it
inhibited the dispersal of cumulus cells i
vitro and acted as a contraceptive when put
into rabbits’ vaginas before mating. Martin
and Beiler (1952) have used the same idea to
better effect by giving phosphorylated hesperidin, which is also an inhibitor of hyaluronidase, by injection and by mouth. In
rats it reduced fertility to one-fifth without
being toxic or affecting oestrus. These
results are encouraging because a selective
enzyme inhibitor could be used at higher
concentrations than the types of substance
used hitherto as spermicides. If something
even better than phospho-hesperidin can be
found which works by a route other than the
vagina the prospects are hopeful. Vaginal
hyaluronidase inhibitors do not immobilize
sperm, so that they will be ineffective unless
they can remove or permanently inhibit the
enzyme during the period of contact in the
vagina ; this capacity has not been demonstrated. It is claimed that the importance of
hyaluronidase has been exaggerated because
rabbit eggs have been found that are fertilized although still surrounded by cumulus
cells ; but for fertilization it is only necessary
for the sperm to make a tunnel large enough
for it to get through and there is no reason
why such a tunnel should be visible. A
powerful and harmless antihyaluronidase
would not necessarily be a practical contraceptive, but the possibility seems good.
Having passed the layer of cumulus cells
the sperm meets first the zona pellucida and
then the vitellus. Austin (1951) finds that
rat sperm make a slit in the zona and
suggests that this is due to the action of a
mucolytic enzyme whose action is favoured

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

by an acid and reducing environment. There
is no detailed information about the nature
of this action and therefore no reason to
think that it will be more easily inhibited
than hyaluronidase. The same difficulties
apply ; the inhibitor is put in at one place in
the hope that it will act at another. Nothing
is known about the biochemistry of the
penetration of the vitellus. Two sperm
rarely get into one ovum; the surface
becomes impenetrable soon after one sperm
has passed through it. Much is known about
this phenomenon but its mechanism is still
obscure and it deserves still further study.
What a sperm can do a biochemist should be
able to do also.

The Implantation of the Zygote

The fertilized ovum moves down into the
uterus and erodes an attachment site for
itself. By the time attachment is complete
and a placenta has begun to form the
problem has passed beyond the scope of this
paper, but many biochemical processes are
involved during the period of attachment.
It is now generally agreed that deficiency in
either progesterone or vitamin E impairs
attachment and work is proceeding on the
possibilities of simulating such a deficiency
with analogues to either substance. This
method of approach has the great advantage
that the agent would probably be given by
some other route than the vagina and its
effects would last for several weeks at least.
Unfortunately no results have been published
as yet that suggest that the problem has
been solved, but there have been some statements in the popular Press suggesting that
results are encouraging. A method that may
have a somewhat similar rationale is the
Grafenberg ring which was used extensively

_ twenty years ago but was then nearly

universally condemned. A loop of silver wire
in the uterus irritates the endometrium
sufficiently to prevent implantation as a
tule. But implantation sometimes takes
place in spite of it and the ring may come out
or get corroded. For these reasons the
popularity of the method has declined, but
there may still be the germ of an idea here.
If the action is predominantly mechanical it
BIOCHEMISTRY OF CONCEPTION CONTROL

may be that another metal, such as tantalum
or stainless steel, would be more suitable than
silver. If on the other hand the action is
chemical and the slow corrosion of the ring
is an essential part of the process, research is
called for to see if the results would not be
better with slowly dispersing pellets than
with the rings used now.

All the subjects for research that have
been discussed so far have certainty as their
object; they have been treated from the
standpoint of the prevention of conception
although, as has been pointed out, the same
knowledge is likely to be of use in certain

135

object. Much could be done to change a
population trend if the general fecundity
were altered so that the same amount of
sexual activity led to a different number of
pregnancies. This could be the result of a
relatively trivial change. Thus it has been
suggested that the decline in fertility which
generally accompanies a rise in the standard
of living is due to the more widespread use of
soap, for soap is a potent spermicide.
Furthermore, changes in hygienic customs
affect the bacterial flora of the vagina and
cervix and this probably affects fecundity.
The suggestion has indeed been made that

SYNOPSIS OF THE SUBJECTS CONSIDERED AND OF THEIR USEFULNESS IN CONTRACEPTION

Subject Present Prospects for Probability of Probability of
information inhibition specificity  satisfactoriness
Spermatogenesis fair good little little
Sperm maturation little — — —
Semen composition and texture good good good some
Sperm motility ... “s fair good good some
Movement through cervix some good good fair
Oogenesis little poor poor poor
Ovum maturation and discharge fair good fair fair
Ovum movement little — — —
Meeting of the gametes little — — —
Union of the gametes
Traversing of 1. cumulus... see good good good fair
2. zona pellucida ... little — — —
3. vitellus ... none — -— —
Movement of zygote little — — —
Implantation of zygote ... good good good good

cases of involuntary sterility. The survey of
present knowledge and future prospects has
been unavoidably brief and a table may make
the sequence of events and their relative
vulnerability clearer. It is hardly to be
expected that those familiar with the subject
will agree with all the judgments made on
such imponderables as the extent of knowledge in different fields and the probabilities
of success in research. All that can be hoped
for is that absurdities have been avoided.
For the sake of simplicity the table has been
limited to biochemical aspects of the
problem.

Social Influences on Fertility
The problem is not however limited to
techniques that have certainty as_ their

D

floral changes could be made deliberately
which would promote or discourage fertility.
The decline has also been attributed to the
increase in protein intake that generally
accompanies a rise in the standard of living,
but most of the experiments carried out with
animals do not substantiate this suggestion
and so many things alter when the standard
of living alters that it is unreasonable to pick
on one of them without further evidence.
The effects of variation in the intake of
protein, vitamins and other nutrients were
analysed at a symposium on “ Nutrition and
Fertility ” that the Nutrition Society held in
1949 ; the record bristles with suggestions
for further work, but nothing immediately
applicable emerged.
136

_ The behaviour pattern of a community
affects its fertility in many other ways. Thus
the hormonal interrelations of lactation and
ovulation diminish the likelihood of another
pregnancy in the period while a child is being
suckled. This is important in many primitive
communities where weaning, on our contemporary standards, is delayed. But Shakespeare accepted without surprise the weaning
of Juliet at three. The experience seems to
have done her no harm ; she was responsive
enough at fourteen. In an industrialized
community, however, delayed weaning would
have disadvantages. The precise effect of
each social change on fecundity has not been,
and perhaps cannot be, ascertained and it is
unprofitable to pursue the matter further for
we are in a realm in which fad takes precedence over fact. In any event, in spite of
Hecate’s assertion that “‘ —security is mortal’s chiefest enemy ”’ this is a field in which
most people value security above a mere
alteration in the odds however important
that may be demographically.

Factors Discouraging Research

It is obvious that there is no shortage of
problems in a study of the gametes, their
union and the development of the zygote.
From the appearance recently of several
excellent reviews (Tyler 1948, Mann 1949,
Biochemical Soc. Symp. 1951, Rothschild
1952) it is also clear that there is a growing
awareness of the intrinsic interest of the
subject. The need for intensive work on the
application of this knowledge to contraception is less widely recognized or accepted.
On the one hand one gets told “ Work is
being done on that ; there is so-and-so and
so-and-so.”’ This misconceives the amount of
work that will probably be necessary. It is
only because more than a hundred able
scientists have studied pepsin during the
last hundred years that we can now make
adequate technological use of it. If as much
work had been done on hyaluronidase we
would be using it for something, though
possibly not contraception. To take a more
recent example: antibiotics do not yet give
complete satisfaction in spite of the 10 to
100 million able man-hours that have already

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

been expended on their development and
improvement.

On the other hand one is told that existing
methods are not so bad. ‘‘ Not so bad as
what ? ”’ is the obvious reply. Clearly they
are better than nothing and every form of
help and encouragement should be given to
those who spread knowledge of them. But
even among people in a civilized environment
they fall short of perfection and are largely
impractical among more primitive peoples.
It is no use arguing that they would be
adequate if people were more sensible. The
fact that people are sometimes silly must be
recognized and it is as unreasonable to
devise a contraceptive method that disregards this as it would be to devise one that
depended on sperm having properties different from those u.ey are known to have. No
method can be looked on as fully satisfactory
unless it has such a margin of safety as to
remain effective even when used with some
lack of skill. Furthermore a satisfactory
method should require only infrequent
attention, otherwise a revulsion against the
whole business (cf. Mitchison, 1930) may be
built up. This would certainly solve one
problem, but only at the cost of introducing
another. The facts of psychology, inconvenient as they may be, are as real as the
facts of biochemistry.

The Royal Commission on Population,
reporting in 1949, fully recognized the
defects of present methods. The Commission’s words are worth quoting (para.
427): “Control by men and women over the
numbers of their children is one of the first
conditions of their own and the community’s
welfare and in our view mechanical and
chemical methods of contraception have to
be accepted as part of the modern means,
however imperfect, by which it can be
exercised.”” The Commission makes no
proposals: about how these recognized imperfections could be remedied ; its acceptance of them has the sublimity of Margaret
Fuller’s remark ‘I accept the Universe.”
To this Thomas Carlyle responded ‘“ By
God ! she’d better.”” Fortunately there is no

_ similar compulsion in this instance and we
BIOCHEMISTRY OF CONCEPTION CONTROL

may go on to consider how and by whom the
necessary research could be done.

Potential Supporters of Research

Pressure of population and shortage of
food are such well-known stimulants to
aggression that the international bodies such
as the World Health Organization and FAO
have an obvious interest. At present they
seem to be more concerned with medical
services, which exacerbate the problem, and
with arranging for food shipments and
improvements in agriculture, which are
palliatives. There is as yet no sign that the
world organizations have recognized that
there is a population limit somewhere and
that we are not equipped with the information to deal with the problems that will arise
when we seem to be getting close to it. When
it is possible to plan at least the upper limit
of a country’s population there will be one
simple criterion of aggressive intent; the
ratio of population to food supply. During
the last half-century there have been several
examples of deliberate attempts by governments to create a population problem, even
in hungry countries, by encouraging fecundity. The idea is not new; it was apparent
to Shakespeare when he wrote

“To’t luxury, pell mell! for I lack
soldiers.”

But Lear was mad when he said that ; more
recent users of the same argument are sometimes not so judged. Hitherto an expanding
population has found room by filling an
empty area or by shoving the earlier occupants out of a filled one. We from Britain
have done both exuberantly and we are open
to the charge of hypocrisy if we now say that
other people should not follow our bad
example but should try to live within their
present domain and on its produce. There is
no fairness in our plea; we had our turn of
expansion, why should not others have
theirs? There is no fairness but there is
some practical sense. It is practical, if
immoral, to replace the occupants of a filled
land when there is a great disparity in the
technical attainments of the two sides. There
are few areas in which this disparity still

137

exists so that what looks like hypocrisy may
in fact be the beginnings of wisdom.

The nations fall into three fairly distinct
categories ; some have already an obvious
population problem but lack the research
organization to do anything about it, at least
along the lines suggested in this paper.
Others, notably Britain and similar industrialized countries, feed precariously with
their present populations. A few countries
still seem to have ample food. We in the
middle group have a special responsibility,
we not only need the knowledge ourselves
but we have a duty to help the others. In
the past we have shown great missionary
zeal in spreading education round the world
and in undertaking a wide range of activities.
for other peoples less able to cope with them ;
it may be that we should undertake research
for the world also.

_ The best reason why we should undertake
research on contraception is that the results
would probably be welcomed by most of our
own population.. There are other reasons and
one important one is that this research should
diminish the number of illegal abortions.
There are no accurate figures, but the rate
may safely be put at 50,000—100,000
annually in this country and some authorities give an even higher figure. Even under
proper conditions abortion is not to be
undertaken lightly ; under the inadequate
conditions created by illegality it is a major
health hazard and a cause of subsequent
ill-health. There are many diseases which
affect a much smaller proportion of the
population while having well-financed, and
deservedly well-financed, research organizations examining their prevention and cure.
The fact that abortion is illegal and is
entered upon voluntarily does not affect the
medical issue. Medicine is concerned with
the protection of people from the consequences of their deliberate even if foolish
actions as much as with their protection from
other causes of ill-health. We are concerned
simply with the question: How many
abortions are due to the failure of contraception? Only a guess can be made, but it is
very unlikely that the number is less than
half of the total. We do not therefore have
138

to go to distant or primitive peoples to find
a reason for wanting more research on contraception—it is on our doorsteps and in the
back streets. And it is there on a scale that
seems amply large enough to justify official
recognition and the establishment of a
research unit.

There are many other types of organization
that should support, or at least not obstruct,
this research and prominent among them are
the religious and ethical communities. Even
if we accept the view of some religious groups
that erotic satisfaction to an extent greater
than that needed to maintain the population
is to be deplored, it still seems unethical to
use a child as the sanction for promoting this
viewpoint. Similarly, fear of pregnancy
seems to be a poor method of enforcing a
moral code on those who are not married.
If an ethical belief is worth having it is worth
having for its own sake and lapses from it
should carry a spiritual rather than a domestic penalty ; there can be no proof that the
belief is genuine for as long as a lapse may
be followed by physical consequences. Much
emotional distress is caused by unattained
or unwanted pregnancies and it would seem
to be as much the business of the Churches
now to help in avoiding the consequent
personal and national troubles as it was the
business of the Church in the Middle Ages
to organize the hospitals.

Finally there are bodies such as the
Eugenics Society. Clearly there can be no
eugenics unless births are in some way
controlled. At present contraception works
dysgenically if at all. In the popular phrase
we breed from the “reckless and the
feckless’’ and the descendants of the
careless and the inexpert are a growing
community. If all births were deliberate there
might well be a sharp decline in the population, but it would be a controlled decline for
we should always be breeding from the most
philoprogenitive section of the community.
If philoprogenitiveness is inherited there will
therefore be no need to fear national extinction, for as soon as it appears that a larger
population is feasible or desirable expansion
is likely to be immediate (cf. Blacker, 1950).
As time goes on the awareness of social

_ THE EUGENICS REVIEW

responsibility becomes more widespread in
the community and it becomes easier to
persuade those who carry undesirable traits
that it would be a mistake for them to have
children. In general the more they want
children the easier it is to persuade them of
this because the positive wish to have
children is often part of a socially responsible
attitude. For the rest the availability of fully
adequate contraception should solve the
problem. The motive behind most copulation
is sex and not procreation. Housman’s
dictum |
The night my father got me
His mind was not on me;

is a fairly adequate summary of the matter.
Until a sustained attempt to get voluntary
eugenics has been made, and has failed in
spite of the provision of an irreproachable
contraceptive technique, there is no case for
advocating further legal restrictions. The
scientist is not entitled to advocate further
restrictions on childbearing, with all the
social and emotional complications they
involve, until the research that he has done
is beyond criticism.

In pursuing the question of how to get the
necessary enormous amount of work done on
the gametes we come in the end to the
research worker. There is no need to enlarge
on the intrinsic interest of the problem ; it
is obvious, and has already been commented
on briefly (Pirie, 1952). This alone, were it not
for a certain prudery and the relative
inaccessibility of the research material,
should have got much of the necessary work
done long ago. Material is now becoming
more accessible and, as has been pointed out,
there is an increasing recognition of the
theme. Scientists respond to much the same
set of stimuli as other people; if ordered
about they are obstructive, if flattered a
little and offered opportunities they tend to
co-operate. If the public moved angrily,
even if democratically, and said, as in my
view it would be thoroughly justified in
saying, ‘‘ What do you people think you are
doing occupying all these buildings and
spending all these millions every year while
we still have to put up with the common cold
and messy, inadequate and archaic methods
BIOCHEMISTRY OF CONCEPTION CONTROL

of contraception ! ”’ we scientists would talk
smoothly of the difficulties and dangers and
the necessity for hastening slowly. We might
convince our critics, but would we convince
each other? More important, would we
convince ourselves ?

There is no agreement about the imminence of world overpopulation. In some
quarters there is near panic, whereas the
contributors to Four Thousand Million
Mouths, by emphasising the unexploited
possibilities of getting more food, suggested
that we have a little time at our disposal.
At present erotics and fecundity are

entangled. The thesis of this paper is that

with adequate research they could be dissociated. Once a community had an emotionally and esthetically satisfactory contraceptive technique the birth-rate would
reflect the demand for children and nothing
else. Without any coercion a birth-rate
compatible with space and food supplies
would then be achieved. This is of course a
pure assumption, but it seems plausible and
there is no acceptable alternative. It is clear
that many social, moral and political consequences would follow the establishment of
this dissociation. With these we are not here
concerned ; equally serious though different
consequences will follow the failure to
establish it. But no control can be established until we have much more knowledge,
and research on the necessary scale is not
yet being done.

Ss

Present methods of contraception are
extremely useful and should be made more
widely known, but they fall short of perfection both on the score of reliability and
zsthetics. They have been produced mainly
by ad hoc research and the argument is
developed that better results would follow
a more elaborate and thorough investigation
of the biochemistry and physiology of sperm
and ovum and of the whole process of their
union, and of the development of the
zygote. This information would also help in
preventing some involuntary sterility. The

139

existing body of knowledge is surveyed
cursorily and suggestions are made about the
more promising lines.

A very great deal of work will probably be
needed before fully satisfactory methods of
contraception are developed and a few
suggestions are made about the organizations
or groups that might finance it and about
the arguments that could be used to persuade
them to do so.

REFERENCES

Aristotle (c. -330). Generation of Animals, Bk. 2, sect. 2.

Austin, C. R. (1951). “‘ Observations on the penetration
of the sperm into the mammalian egg.” Aust. J.
Sct. Res., 4, 581.

Baker, J. (1935). The chemical control of conception.
Chapman & Hall.

Barton, M., and Wiesner, B. P. (1951). ‘‘ Contraception—recent developments in technique and their
evaluation.”” Med. Press, 226, 43.

Biochemical Society Symposia No. 7 (1951). ‘“‘ The
biochemistry of fertilization and the gametes.”
Cambridge.

Blacker, C. P. (1950). ‘‘ The control of population.”
Eugenics Rev., 42, 149.

Clark, F. le Gros, and Pirie, N. W. (eds., 1951). Four
Thousand Million Mouths. Oxford.
Hadidian, Z., and Pirie, N. W. (1948). ‘‘ The effects of

serum and of hyaluronic acid derivatives on the
action of hyaluronidase.’ Biochem. J., 42, 266.
Henle, W., Henle, G., and Chambers, L. A. (1938).
“ Studies on the antigenic structure of some
mammalian spermatozoa.” J. exp. Med., 68, 335.
Lardy, H. A., Ghosh, D., and Plaut, G. W. E. (1949).
“A metabolic regulator in mammalian sperma
 

tozoa.’” Science, 109, 365.
Mann, T. (1949). ‘‘ Metabolism of Semen.” Adv.
Enzymology, 3; 329.

(1951 a). ‘ Mammalian semen: composition,
metabolism and survival.” Biochem. Soc. Symposia
No.7, 11. _

(1951 5). “‘ Inositol, a major constituent of the

 

seminal vescicle secretion of the boar.” Nature,
168, 1,043.

McClean, D., and Rowlands, I. W. (1942). ‘‘ The role
of hyaluronidase i in fertilization.”’ Nature, 156, 627.

Martin, G. J., and Beiler, J. M. (1952). “ Effect of
phosphorylated hesperidin, a hyaluronidase inhibitor, on fertility in the rat.” Science, 115, 402.

Mitchison, N. (1930). ‘‘ Comments on birth control.”
Criterion Miscellany No. 12. Faber and Faber.

Moricard, R. (1950). ‘‘ Penetration of the spermatozoon 1” vitro into the mammalian ovum oxydo
potential level.”” Nature, 165, 763.

Noble, R. L., Plunkett, E. R., and Taylor, N. B. G.
(1950). « Factors affecting the control of the
pituitary gland. II, Anterior lobe.” Recent Prog.
ain Hormone Research, 5, 284.

‘“ Nutrition and Fertility ” (1949). Brit. J. Nutrition,

3, 79.

Parkes, A. S. (1944). ‘‘ Reproduction and its endocrine
control.” Ann. Rev. Physiol., 6, 483.

Parsons, E. I., and Hyde, R. B. (1940). ** An evaluation of spermatoxic sera in the prevention of
pregnancy.” Am. J. Hygiene, 31, 389.
140

Pincus, G., Pirie, N..W., and Chang, M. C. (1948).
-. “The - effects of hyaluronidase inhibitors on
fertilization in the rabbit.’’ Arch. Biochem., 19,

388.
Pirie, N. W- (1952). ‘“*‘ Basic research into contraception.” Lancet, 262, 54.

Rothschild, V. (1951).
Biol. Rev., 26, I.
(1952).
Royal Commission on Population (1949).

|. H.M.S.O. Cmd. 7695.

Skelton, F. R., and Grant, G. A. (1951).
the action of Lithospermum ruderale.”’
Phystol., 167, 379.

Smith, A. U. (1951). ‘‘ Fertilization in vitro of the
mammalian egg.’’ Biochem. Soc. Symposia No. 7, 3.

“ Sea-urchin spermatozoa.”

 

“ Spermatozoa. ” Science Progress, 40, 1.
Report.

“* Studies on
Am. Jj.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Taylor, G. I. | 1952). “ The action of waving cylindrical
in propelling microscopic organisms.’’ Proc.
Roy. Soc., 211, 225.
Tyler, A. (1948). ‘‘ Fertilization and immunity.”
Physiol. Rev., 28, 180.

Wajzer, J., and Brochart, M. (1947). ‘‘ Présence de la
phosphoarginine dans les spermatozoides de
Mammiféres.”” C. R. Acad. Sci., 225, 965.

Young, W. C. (1931). ‘‘ A study of the function of the
epididymis. III. Functional changes undergone
by spermatozoa during their passage through the
epididymis and vas deferens in the guinea pig.’

exp. Biol., 8, 1 5t. ,

Zuckerman, Ss. (195 1). ‘‘ The number of oocytes in the
mature ovary.’’ Recent Prog. in Hormone Research,
6, 63.

EA TTR GIT
RS TNE SAC NE SS

POPULATION STUDIES

Edited by D. V. GLASS

Vol. VI. No. 1

CONTENTS

July 1952

Cicety Watson. Recent Developments in French Immigration Policy
~H. BernarpDevui. New Zealand and Asiatic migration
-H. Smtcocx. Estimating by Sample the Size and Age-Sex Structure of a Population

D. V. Grass.
Background

The Population Controversy in RIguteenin Century England. Part I. The

KENNETH SMITH. Some Observations on Modern Malthusianism

S. W. Carrin. Infantile Mortality Rates
Book Reviews

Books and Publications Received

Letters to the Editor

SUBSCRIPTION : 30s. net per volume of three parts

Published for the POPULATION INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE

by the CAMBRIDGE University Press, 200 Euston Roap, Lonpon, N.W.1.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLIV, No. 3
