‘REJUVENATION °
The Work of Steinach and Voronoff’

By ARTHUR WALTON, Ph.D.

Dr.

Walton was one of the Commission sent to Algeria by the Ministry of

Agriculture to investigate Dr. Serge Voronoff’s experiments on the wmprovement

of livestock.—Ed.

To the Living and Posterity
The History of Life and Death, being the last

of sixe monethly designations, seemed worthy
to bee preferred to bee the second in Publication, because the least losse of time, in a matter
of so great utility should bee pretious, for wee
hope and desire that it may redound to the
Bood of many; and that noble Physitians
raising their minds, may not be wholly imployed in uncleane cures, nor honoured only
for necessity, but become also the Stewards of
Divine Omnipotency and Clemency, in prolonging and renewing the life of Man, especially since it may be done by safe, convenient,
civill, but untryed new waies and meanes:
For while wee Christians aspire and labour to
come to the Land of Promise, it will be a signe
of Divine favour, if our shoos and the Zarments
of our frail bodies, be here little worne in our
journey in the world's wildernesse.

Francis Bacon (Trans. 1638)

petual youth or the restoration of the

old and decrepit has intrigued man’s
imagination, leading him to the creation of
many myths and superstitions and urging
him to search for the key to the mysteries
of senescence or for remedies by which it
might be avoided.

Experimental science has demonstrated
that with certain lowly organisms and certain isolated tissues life may be prolonged
indefinitely, provided the experimental conditions are maintained. But these conditions are remote from those which pertain
to the normal environment of highly evolved
forms; and while the experiments undoubtedly help to elucidate the mechanisms
of life and death, they offer but a vague
ultimate prospect of practical application.

‘ROM the earliest times the idea of per
Death and senescence must be clearly distinguished. Death may result from accident,
disease, or deliberate interference with the
essential functions of the body, and may
occur at any time from conception onwards.
Senescence implies a series of irreversible
changes in the organism, coincident with
growth and age, which lead to a diminution
in vital activity and to deficiencies in the
various functions of the body. The
organism becomes less active, decrepit, and
more susceptible to injury and disease.
Sooner or later death supervenes.

It is difficult to distinguish between the
effects of inherent senescence of the organism
on the one hand and the accumulative ravages
of the external environment on the other. An
organism may be progressively and irreversibly altered by disadvantageous circumstances, injuries, or diseases, and these alone
might conceivably be responsible for the
decrepitude of old age. Nevertheless there
are certain processes in the growth and
differentiation of the various structures of
the higher organisms which appear to be
irreversible and to lead to inevitable change.
If these changes are truly irreversible even
under the most favourable conditions, ‘ rejuvenation,’ in the sense of a return to a condition identical with that of former years
is consequently impossible and the claim to
effect ‘rejuvenation’ must be rejected.
Granted, however, that there are irreversible
changes in the organism, it may still be
profitable to inquire into the methods by
which they can be reduced to a minimum,
and the ravages of the external: environment avoided or repaired. It is in this
latter sense that ‘ rejuvenation ’ is now employed by the more responsible clinicians,
and in Germany “ Altersbekampfung ”’ has

253
254

replaced ‘‘ Verjiingung ’’ in order to express the same intention.

This change in attitude has undoubtedly
widened the field of inquiry, since it is
obvious that many factors may contribute
to the preservation of youthfulness and the
postponement of senescence. Eugenics,
Hygiene, Therapeutics, and Sociology are
all sciences which bear directly or indirectly
on the problem, but in this article we are
concerned only with the physiological aspects of ‘ rejuvenation’ and particularly
with the methods of glandular therapy associated with the names of Steinach and
Voronoff. These methods have come prominently before the public, first because of
the sensational claims that have been made,
and secondly because of their association,
with sex, a subject which never fails in its
appeal to the general public.

CASTRATION AND SENESCENCE

The rationale which underlies ‘ rejuvenation ’ is based upon the physiological properties of the sex organs. For simplicity
our discussion is confined to the male, but,
mutatis mutandis, the argument is also
applicable to the female. The testis of the
adult male is a relatively large organ of
highly specialized function, and as such will
require adequate and specialized nutrition
from the blood stream. Its activity will
involve by-products of metabolism, as well
as the primary products which are the sex
cells or spermatozoa. As one might expect,
therefore, removal of the testis involves a
considerable change in the internal economy
of the organism. The animal castrated
early in life fails to develop many of the
characteristics of the intact male. The
gelding, in comparison with the stallion, is
less well developed with regard to the
muscles, especially of the neck ; it has little
or no sexual desire, and is more amenable to
control. The castrated lamb also does not
attain the skeletal and muscular proportions
of the ram; its fleece is said to be finer, but
not so luxuriant, and it has a tendency to
fatten more readily. The eunuch, or human
castrate, shows skeletal and muscular differences. The growth of hair on the face,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

breast, and pubic region, which is characteristic of the adult normal male, is held in
abeyance. The voice does not ‘ break.’
The mentality is also said to be profoundly
different. | Replacement of the testis by
grafting, as has been frequently accomplished on animals, will mitigate or prevent
the appearance of these symptoms.

Now, many of the symptoms of senescence
are not unlike those of castration. There
is absence of sexual desire, loss of or diminished growth of hair; the voice may lose
its deep intonation, and there is a general
lowering of vitality. Based upon this
similarity of symptoms, the claim has been
advanced that testicular deficiency contributes largely to senescence, and that consequently ‘ rejuvenation ’ can be obtained by
stimulating to renewed activity the ageing
testis, or by reinforcing it by grafting
tissue from young and vigorous animals.
Before discussing these claims it is necessary to examine the problem a little more
closely. As we have shown above, by comparing castrate and normal animal, there can
be no doubt that the testis plays an important rdle in the internal economy, and that
its presence is necessary for the full development of the male characteristics. On the
other hand its presence is by no means
essential, and without it the castrate attains
a considerable degree of muscular development and vitality.

The gelding, for example, is strong,
vigorous, and capable of hard work and
rough usage. Although, no doubt, not so
strong and muscular as the stallion, it is by
no means decrepit or senescent. It is impossible to obtain critical data on the relative
duration of life of the gelding and stallion,
since their conditions of life are so different.
In the first place the stallion is generally
chosen from superior hereditary stock and
from only the best individuals within that
stock. Its superior economic value ensures
the best care and nutrition, and the stallion
is not subjected to the arduous toil which
is the characteristic portion of the gelding.
In the absence of exact data to the contrary,
I believe that the duration of life of the
gelding is not inferior to that of the stallion.
‘REJUVENATION ’

The same relationships probably hold good
for the other domesticated animals, but since
the butcher intervenes it is impossible to
get the requisite information on the duration
of life.

IN THE HUMAN

With man the problem is similar. Castration in early life involves the loss of the
male sexual characters, but it is doubtful
whether it has any direct effect on the incidence of senescence. Voronoff bases much
of his argument on the premature senility
which he observed in the eunuchs of Egypt,
but it would be necessary to inquire carefully into questions of social status, employment, and the psychological effect of enforced isolation from the normal life of the
community, before. passing a critical
opinion. It is also important to note that
the similarity between the symptoms of
senescence and castration is not absolute.
For example, arterio-sclerosis, or hardening
of the walls of the arteries, is an almost
universal symptom of senescence, but does
not appear amongst the symptoms of castration. The direct dependence of senility
upon the failure of the testis is therefore not
supported by an appeal to the effects of
castration ; and in any case the hypothesis
provides no explanation of the failure in
the first instance of the testis itself. It is
perhaps more reasonable to assume that
physiological deficiency of the testis and
the appearance of castration symptoms are
consequences of senescence, rather than
primary causes. On this hypothesis
‘rejuvenation’ by removing aggravating
symptoms might conceivably have considerable effect upon the general health and wellbeing of the organism, and prolong life beyond the allotted span. There is certainly
much that is problematical in this hypothesis and it remains to discuss how far it is
supported by the experimental evidence.

THE STEINACH METHOD

Early attempts at ‘ rejuvenation’ were
made by administering extracts and pre
255

parations from the testis; but no conclusive
evidence has been brought forward that such
extracts are physiologically active in removing the effects of castration or are in any
way advantageous to the senile. The first
important contribution was made by
Steinach, who showed that by simply tying
the spermatic ducts leading from the testis,
rats which were decrepit and sexually impotent became endowed with greatly increased
vigour and sexual activity. In explanation
he claimed that, although the primary
function of the testis, the production
of spermatozoa, was destroyed by this
operation, the physiological activity of the
testis was increased. Since success attended
the ligature of one testis only, leaving the
other intact, it was possible not only to
restore bodily vigour and sexual desire, but
also fertility. The animals so ‘ rejuvenated ’ lived beyond the normal span of life.

These experiments are, as they stand, of
considerable importance. But it is legitimate to offer certain criticisms as to their
general applicability to other animals, including man. In the first place, there is
the obvious criticism that the rat differs
specifically from other animals, secondly
that the animals were kept in confinement
and under laboratory conditions, and thirdly
that the experiments were not sufficiently
quantitative or extensive to allow statistical
analysis and the elimination of all variables.
Steinach’s experiments have been repeated
by many workers and on different species
of animals, sometimes with success, sometimes with failure (failures are attributed to
faulty technique or unsuitable material). In
general, however, the same criticism applies,
namely, that the experiments have not been
sufficiently extensive or quantitative, and
that there always remains an element of
doubt, rather than convincing proof.
Further critical research is undoubtedly
desirable.

UNCERTAINTY OF THE EVIDENCE

In the meantime the operation has been
applied to man, and it is claimed that
remarkable results have been obtained.
256

The results however cannot be regarded
with the same degree of certainty as a carefully controlled experiment. In the first
place, it should be noted that the operation
of ligature of the spermatic duct was in use
previous to Steinach’s research, in an
attempt to relieve hypertrophy of the prostate. Its rejuvenating effect was not then
remarked, although it is now claimed that
many of the cases showed otherwise inexplicable recoveries. As an alternative,
it has also been suggested that the modern
technique differs in important respects from
that used when hypertrophy of the prostate was the aim; but this objection, as far
as I am aware, has not been supported by
experiment. The operation has also been
in force as a measure of sterilizing delinquents, and it is claimed that improvement
in general health follows the operation. It
should be kept in mind, however, that advocates of sterilization would tend to lay stress
on the beneficial effect of the operation, and
that the results were not sufficiently striking
to demonstrate of themselves the alleged
value of the treatment.

Many case records of ‘ rejuvenation ’
patients have been published, and the
number which show definite improvement
is remarkable. In most of the cases, however, the patients were suffering from, or
even undergoing treatment for, various subsidiary complaints; and it is impossible to
eliminate the influence of this treatment on
the subsequent recovery of health and
vigour. There is considerable disagreement
as to the effect of the operation on the patient.
Some clinicians have stressed the recrudescence of sexual activities; others the i1mprovement in mental efficiency. In the
human subject it is impossible to eliminate the psychological effect. ‘ Rejuvenation’ has received such publicity that few
patients would undergo the operation without some previous conviction of its value.
In spite of this criticism, which, of course,
in no way disproves the hypothesis, it is
the firm conviction of many practitioners
that improvement does follow and cannot be
attributed to the subsidiary treatment or
psychological influence. Provided that both

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

practitioner and patient are satisfied with
the results, presumably the operation justifies its existence, but this post hoc propter
hoc argument can scarcely satisfy the
scientist.

We have discussed only the Steinach
operation, but there are several methods
from which equally advantageous results are
claimed. X-ray treatment, diathermy, and
the simple application of phenol to the
testicular nerve-supply belong to that category which aims at stimulating the deficient
testis to renewed activity. Ina second category belongs the application of testis grafts
to replace or reinforce the testis. Grafting
testicular tissue finds an obvious application
where either by accident or by disease the
patient has undergone virtual castration,
but these cases must be carefully distinguished from the same treatment applied
for the purpose of ‘ rejuvenation.’ Although
not the originator of this method of
‘rejuvenation,’ Voronoff has become the
principal exponent, and he and his associates
have been mainly instrumental in bringing
the subject so prominently before the
general public.

THE VORONOFF METHOD

Briefly, the method consists in making a
small pocket between the layers of skin
of the scrotum on each side of the testis.
The internal surfaces of the pocket are
slightly scarified in order to induce a mild
inflammation and to promote the formation
of new blood connections between the tissues
and the graft. A piece of testis is then sown
into the pocket and the wound stitched together. It should be noted that the graft
does not actually come in contact with the
testis of the animal grafted, being separated
from it by the internal layers of skin of the
scrotum, so that there is no possibility of
the sperms from the graft finding their
way into the reproductive tract of the
animal.

Voronoff’s work is based upon less critical
experimentation than that of Steinach. He
has described many instances of the operation performed on domesticated animals, but
little is known of their pedigrees, exact ages,
‘REJUVENATION ’

or previous nurture. Many of his cases
show remarkable vigour subsequent to the
operation, and the duration of life is apparently prolonged beyond the normal. But
statistical analyses have not been published,
and, as explained above, it is exceedingly
difficult to obtain critical data on the longevity of domesticated livestock. Voronoff
has applied testis grafting to the human,
using the glands of various species of monkeys, and he claims remarkable success.
But, again, the problem is complicated by
subsidiary treatment and possible psychological influence. Nevertheless, from the
case records which have been published, the
number of successful operations is remarkable and the patients appear satisfied with
the results.

RACIAL RESULTS CLAIMED

Although not bearing directly on the problem of ‘ rejuvenation,’ Voronoff’s experiments on the grafting of young rams, with
a view to increasing the yield of meat and
wool, may be mentioned. It is claimed that
young rams which are grafted with additional testicular tissue grow to increased
weight and produce a more abundant crop of
wool. Furthermore, Voronoff claims that
this acquired character is transmitted to the
offspring of both sexes.

Thus Voronoff claims what is virtually
“the creation of a new race,’’ and raises a
question of the utmost importance to geneticist, eugenist, and agriculturalist alike.
A detailed criticism of this work has been
published by the Commission of investigation appointed by the Ministry of Agriculture, to which report readers who desire
more detail are referred. Here it may be
briefly said that the ‘‘ racial improvement ”’
claims rest upon experiments in Algeria.
Certain young rams were chosen from Commercial flocks belonging to the French
Colonial Government, and were engrafted
with testicular tissue. The grafted rams
attained a greater weight and fleece than
their ungrafted fellows and, when mated
with ewes, the offspring of both sexes were
heavier and woollier than offspring of
ungrafted rams.

2$7

Samples of the various flocks were shown
to the Commission, and undoubtedly supported the claims made. ‘The Commission
were, however, not satisfied that rigid precautions had been taken to avoid chance
selection of superior hereditary types. All
the flocks were extremely variable, and
statistical safeguards and adequate control
of nutrition had not been taken. Also it
was noticed that the changes in the sheep
were not those which one would normally
associate with increased masculinity as a
result of the testis grafts, but were exactly
those improvements which are obtained by
genetic selection and improved nutrition. In
Voronoff’s latest book, The Conquest of
Life, the author claims much kudos from the
reports of the various Commissions, but does
not mention or even attempt to reply to the
criticism offered.

The experiments are now being repeated
in this country and abroad, and reports will
no doubt be published shortly; until then
it is perhaps better to treat the subject as
sub judice, and suspend comment.

The exponents of ‘ rejuvenation’ have
made out a strong case to which an answer
is undoubtedly required. If the facts are
in accordance with the claims made, eugenic
and social problems of importance are raised.
The chief difficulty which arises in assessing
these claims is the absence of critical experimentation ; and it is to the latter, and not
to hypothetical discussion that we must look
for an answer. :

BIBLIOGRAPHY (Selected)

Steinach. ‘ Verjiingung.” Roux’ Archiv fiir Entwicklungsmechanik. Bd. 46. 1920.

Sand. ‘ Die Keimdriisen und das experimentelle
Restitutions-problem bei Wirbeltieren,’? Handbuch der Normalen und Pathologischen Physiologie. Berlin, 1926.

Voronoff. ‘* The Study of Old Age and My Method
of Rejuvenation.’? London, 1926.

‘‘ The Conquest of Life.”’ London, 1928.

Haire. ‘‘ Rejuvenation.’’ London, 1925.

Benjamin, Marinesco, Schmidt, et alii. ‘‘ Verhandlungen des I Internationalen Kongresses fiir
Sexualforchung.’’ Berlin, 1928.

Marshall, Crew, Walton, and Miller. ‘‘ Report on
Dr. Serge Voronoff’s Experiments on the Improvement of Livestock.’? Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries. London, 1928.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XX, No. 4.
