WAR AND THE BREED.

By DAVID STARR JORDAN, Chancellor of Leland Stanford Junior
University. Pub.: Boston (1915; $1.35 net).

IT is almost incredible that this volume should have been published by a
biological student and the principal of a university: the book stands as a
warning against partisanship in science. For instance, in Professor Jordan’s
estimate of the losses in the present War, incredible as it may seem, the
casualty lists are taken as representing an unmixed record of permanent
losses. On p. 81 he quotes from the California Outlook to the effect that
every name on these lists represents the loss.of an adult male to the world,
and he evidently follows the same estimate on pp. 99, 183. Yet the very
lists which he quotes are expressly explained to consist of “killed,
wounded and missing.” Even if we neglect the fact that a good many
of these wounded are prisoners, the actual killed work out, with remarkable regularity, at only about 20 per cent. of the total casualties, and
maimed or badly wounded at only 30 per cent. more. Of those reported
killed and wounded, s0 per cent. are able to rejoin later on; or, at the
War’s end, to resume their ordinary civil occupations. Dr. Jordan, to
produce the impression which he needs, actually doubles the real figures,
in the teeth of his own documents.

The volume is marked by a similar neglect of the most obvious logical
requirements. One of the essential factors in this problem of War
Selection, as has been repeatedly pointed out, is that of the comparative
dysgenic action of the compulsory and voluntary systems. Principal
Jordan occasionally marks this distinction; but, in general, his thought
is here as loose as his language. On p. 37, and again on p. 1o1, he
clearly points out the necessary distinction between the “standing army ”
of professional and voluntarily-enlisted soldiers and the army raised by
compulsory service (or, as Dr. Jordan calls it, according to the looser
usage of to-day) by “conscription.” Yet he almost immediately forgets
his own definitions, and evidently includes the compulsory system also
under his condemnation of “standing armies” (pp. 37, 104, 111). Under
cover of this confusion, he attributes to the army system in general,
defects which are mainly characteristic of, or even altogether peculiar to,
the voluntary system. For instance, he quotes from Franklin, “ These
men in general never marry,” and leads us to suppose this is true of the
soldier in general, though Franklin definitely limits his observations to
the “standing armies” (pp. 37, 48). Darwin, again, to whom he appeals,
speaks of the dysgenic effect of enforced celibacy in standing armies;
and, though Darwin also uses the word conscription, the whole context
shows that he is mainly thinking of that word in its stricter technical
sense—in the sense of the then-existing French system, by which the
ballot was used to raise a standing professional army very closely
resembling that of Great Britain—in the sense again, in which the new
French law of 1872 proclaimed that “conscription” was henceforth
abolished in favour of “universal military service.” It is not unnatural
that Dr. Jordan should be ignorant of these military technicalities; but
commonsense should at once have warned him that, as Darwin speaks of
“standing armies” and of enforced celibacy, he cannot be referring to
the ordinary compulsory system as understood to-day—the system which
Dr. Jordan himself professes to distinguish from the standing army
system. There is no military reason, in France or Germany, to keep
the citizen in celibacy beyond the age of 22 or 23; and surely no eugenist
288 EUGENICS REVIEW.

would wish him to marry earlier than this. Enforced celibacy, during
the prime of life, is in no sense a defect of that compulsory system against
which our author is always railing; on the contrary, it is the peculiar
vice of the voluntary system, which Dr. Jordan defends. Even in Professor Guérard’s description of French barrack life which is printed on
pp. 234 ff., that author distinctly states that the worst things which he
saw during his service were due to the fact that, being stationed at Havre,
“T could see in all its hideousness the gross immorality which prevails
in all shipping centres... . the fault lay not with militarism, but with
social conditions.”! Sailoring, which is a voluntary business, is answerable for more syphilis and drunkenness than the short-service barrack
system prevailing in all compulsorily-enrolled armies. In British
barracks, in which the soldier must needs spend seven years, and may
spend twenty, the story is different. Dr. Jordan’s own tables show that
the British Army has 68.4 cases of syphilis per 1,000, and the American
Army 167.8, as compared with 19.8 in the German Army, and 28.6 in the
French! In other words, the voluntarily-enlisted soldier runs about four
times as many risks of syphilis as the compulsorily-enlisted man. Yet
our author makes no attempt to face the significance of these figures; he
uses them indiscriminately to support his campaign against everything
which he lumps together under the vague title of “militarism.” Though
the contrast here stares all thoughtful readers in the face, Dr. Jordan
actually does his best to obliterate it by persistently ignoring even his
own formal distinction between professional armies and citizen armies.
He equally ignores the fact that the French scientific authorities quoted
by Professor Kellogg based their arguments not on the present system of
nations in arms, but on the old semi-professional system. His whole
attitude towards this vital distinction involves the very negation of
scientific method.

Again, he seems to deal no less unscientifically with the question of
the inheritance of acquired characteristics. On p. 85 he denies the
inheritance of acquired characteristics; and on p. 157 he says roundly,
“we have no knowledge of the existence of nerve-stress inheritance.”
wut on p. 75, where the contrary view helped his argument, he had
adopted it without scruple, quoting with approval the statement “ it
seems safe to assume that all deep-seated, long-continued mental and
general nervous disturbances will affect unfavourably the trophic centres
that control the development of the germ-cells, with the result of a more
or less defective mental or nervous state in the progeny of such individuals.” On p. 66, again, he had assumed that a man invalided for
typhoid would afterwards produce weaker children on that account.

omparing these with pp. 58, 105, we may say that Dr. Jordan appeals
impartially to whichever theory happens to suit his momentary necessities
in argument.

His use of authorities is, in fact, unscientific to the last degree. A
good quarter of the book—probably more—consists of quotations from
other books and journals; yet he seldom gives any businesslike reference,
and frequently nothing beyond the bare name of the author or journalist.?
Passages quoted supply us with no actual facts, but simply the personal
opinions of George Bernard Shaw, or Ellen B. Sherman, or Julia Grace
Wales, or some equally irresponsible person whose ideas happen to
coincide on some particular point with those of our author. And, so

1 These few pages of Professor Guérard’s form the most valuable portion
of the book. The author is evidently an able and sincere man who has really
tried to see both sides; he admits that his anti-militarist testimony ‘‘is open to
discount ’’?; but his very clear and acute analysis of his own personal experiences
constitutes a human document of great value.

2 There are 21 quotations in the first 50 pages; in only eight cases does Dr.
Jordan vouchsafe even title of book, and in only three cases a full page-reference.
WAR AND THE BREED. 289

far as we have been able to check him, Dr. Jordan is _ hopelessly
inaccurate in his use of his chosen authorities. He makes much of the
evidence of Professor Kellogg, his own colleague, who has apparently
worked under his supervision upon certain valuable articles in the early
volumes of Annales dHygiéne Publique. For some of his most
important assertions Professor Kellogg gives no page-references, or, if he
does, Dr. Jordan has omitted them. We are thus left to check his
statements as best we can from an article of 50 closely-printed pages, or
about one-sixth of the length of Dr. Jordan’s own book. The main
passage apparently referred to is on p. 388, where the words closely
resemble Professor Kellogg’s assertion, but the sense contains an essential
difference. The French author does not claim to have actually noted a
decrease of stature for which he gives a hypothetical cause; on the
contrary, he gives both fact and explanation as hypothetical. It is
reasonable to suppose, he says, that the slaughter under Napoleon has
probably lowered the average stature of our generation: but he carefully
adds that he has no actual proof for this surmise. Professor Kellogg’s
idea that he had moted an actual reduction of height seems due to a
careless reading of the earlier pages, where the author complains of
something entirely different—of the law which compelled each department to furnish a certain percentage of its population as conscripts,
regardless of the statistical fact that the average height differed enormously in different departments. It may be that Dr. Jordan’s faults here
are only those of over-credulity in his colleague’s accuracy, and a loose
habit of mind with regard to the verification of references. But there is
another still more important matter in which we have had the curiosity
to check him, and in which the inaccuracies are evidently his alone. On
p. 86 he states his own theory that “in times of peace .... a premium is
placed on vigor and intelligence. The virile and self-reliant survive.”
For this he claims the authority of Mr. A. Knapp’s Feudal and Modern
Japan, writing “it is astonishing to [Mr. Knapp] that, after more than
six generations in which physical courage had not been demanded {in
Japan], this virile virtue should be found unimpaired.” As usual, he
gives no reference whatever, and the reader, who wonders how so distinguished a specialist as Mr. Knapp could really have given any excuse
for the nonsense which I have here italicised, is left to grope his way as
best he can through a two-volume book! It is only necessary, however,
to glance half through the first volume, in order to see what a mess Dr.
Jordan has made of the facts. Mr. Knapp does indeed note the obvious
truth that “the nation has remained extraordinarily virile through all the
enervating influences of the Long Peace” (p. 31); but he repeatedly
ascribes this to its true cause: the Samurai code “kept the virtues of
chivalry alive” (p. 47). For 1,000 years, until 30 years ago, the Samurai
had been instructed from his childhood “in the etiquette of self-immolation” (p. 66, where the author quotes a startling instance of a child who
ripped himself up to save his father’s life). Thus, all through the period
of external peace, the country always was full of “loyal clansmen of
feudal chieftains, ready on the instant to give the supreme proof of
knightly devotion” (p. 68). Neither the two centuries of peace, therefore, nor the pacific influence of the Buddhist gospel, could avail to
change the character of a people which had 1,000 years of this bloody
tradition behind it (pp. 25, 47, 73, 210).

When Dr. Jordan does this in the green tree, it may be imagined
what he does in the dry! Through by far the greater part of his book,
he attempts to prove his thesis by historical instances, chosen mainly
from the history of Rome. In the present redaction, while silently
eliminating one or two of the grosser blunders which had _ been
pointed out, he still shows the most childish and unconscious ignorance
of his chosen subject, even where the truth is told by the very authorities
290 EUGENICS REVIEW.

on whom he professes to rely. The authority to which he mainly appeals
is that of Otto Seeck. It would be difficult to find a better guide; only,
unfortunately, Seeck says the exact opposite to what Dr. Jordan makes
him say. According to Dr. Jordan, he attributed the fall of Rome to her
wars. Yet Seeck takes great pains to argue that wars raise the national
standard both of physique and of intellect, and that what ruined Rome
was (1) the habit of political murder, and (2) the voluntary system of
enlistment, which segregated and sterilised the most adventurous elements
of the population. Dr. Jordan has no excuse for this, since he was
publicly corrected two years ago. Speaking before a joint meeting of
the Eugenics Society and the War and Peace Society of Cambridge University, he based his arguments on these misrepresentations of Seeck.
In reply, I spent at least a quarter of an hour in a detailed exposure of
these misrepresentations, appealing for confirmation to classical scholars
there present. To this Dr. Jordan found nothing to reply; he made no
attempt either to justify or to excuse his misquotations. Nor, again, has
he answered my brief exposure of the facts in the Nineteenth Century and
After for October, 1914. He has just silently deleted a few of the more
obvious blunders, while still leading the reader to believe that one of the
greatest living historians is on his side. This will seem so incredible
that I must here justify it by actual quotations from Seeck (Untergang
a. Antiken Welt, vol. 1., ed. 1895, pp. 252, 253, 284, 287).

“It is true,” writes Seeck, “that a great war may swallow up many
thousand men; but it diminishes the national forces only by the actual
diminution of population; and this loss, under normal circumstances, is
restored in a few generations. .. . These must have been the consequences
of the Roman wars, so long as they were waged by citizens and peasants
who came back to family life when the fighting was over. . . . The loss
of numbers was made up for by the greater virility of the next generation;
and, in spite of all their losses, the Italians remained the foremost
military nation in the world at that time... . We may notice the same
kind of thing among the other civilised nations of Europe; it is the rule
that, two or three generations after a violent ravage [of war] has swept
over them, they enter upon the highest stage of their intellectual life....
{Among the ancient Germans] murderous tribal wars raged on and on,
and exercised their purifying influence from generation to generation.”
He goes on to speak of such wars as “ennobling ” the nation that wages
them. In the face of these, and many longer extracts which might be
given to the same purpose, it is quite inexplicable that Dr. Jordan should
so frequently claim Seeck’s authority in favour of his own theory that war
is among the strongest dysgenic influences. The mystery cannot even be
explained by Dr. Jordan’s very imperfect knowledge, of the German
language; an ignorance which leads to curious mistranslations, and to
elementary grammatical blunders when he ventures to print from the
German text. If he had read, with ordinary care, only that single chapter
of the book from which he professes to quote, the most elementary
acquaintance with the language would have shown him that his frequent
appeals to Seeck’s authority amount to a direct misrepresentation. The
fact is that here, as elsewhere, he has simply written at random. His
statements about Roman history are absolutely astounding in their
inaccuracy. He imagines that the early Romans had no slaves (p. 129);
Beloch has calculated that as a comparatively small state, in the fifth
century B.C., they had 250,000. Again, Dr. Jordan makes the period of
Roman domination and expansion begin with the battle of Philippi, and
asserts that “consuls” were invented about the same time as “ triumvirs ”
(p. 130). He imagines that, in the days of Marcus Aurelius, “the business
of the state was mainly war” (p. 128), and that “Augustulus Romulus ”
(stc), until his deposition enjoyed more than the ordinary imperial
reverence from “the mob” (p. 129). His history of other countries is
WAR AND THE BREED. 29!

almost equally faulty. He imagines “The Nation in Arms” to have been
invented by Prussia (p. 103); we owe it, of course, to the French Revolution; the Prussian King of those days refused to trust his whole people
with arms until the disaster of Jena produced a popular reaction which
forced his hand. Dr. Jordan shows ignorance of the common law of
England, and even of his own country, which takes its common law from
us (p. 102; again 190). It is entirely false, again, to assert “ Statistics
show that illegitimate births are always most numerous in states most
militarised.” Bavaria and Saxony have a far worse record than Prussia;
and, taking Germany as a whole, her average is not so bad as that of
Sweden or Denmark or Austria Hungary. France, again, can scarcely be
classed as less militarised than Austria proper; yet she has only half the
proportion of illegitimates: the figures are easily accessible in the
Statesman’s Year-Book. Again, by what extraordinary process of muddle
has Dr. Jordan got it into his head that the universities of Paris and
Oxford were founded “twelve hundred years ago”? (p. 148). We had
noted many more similar instances, but these will suffice. If our author
had set himself frankly to invent history out of his own head, like the
tavern-disputants of “ Janet’s Repentance,” he could scarcely have gone
more hopelessly astray than this. As an ichthyological expert, he would
be the first to protest against any historian who, attempting to prove a
thesis in eugenics by an appeal to fish-life, should base his arguments on
the supposition that the herring is the female of the mackerel, or that
whales are oviparous.

Moreover, a sentence on p. 166 is unpardonably misleading: “As to
the effects of the great wars of the past, the most important studies known
to us are those of Dr. Seeck and Dr. Karl G. Rendtorff.” Seeck is, of
course, an historian of world-wide reputation; so also was Seeley, from
whose study of the ruin of Rome Dr. Jordan repeatedly quotes, though
with his usual inaccuracy, ignoring essential points and even attributing
one of Seeley’s paragraphs to Seeck. But “ Dr. Karl G. Rendtorff,” when
we have looked him up in Minerva, turns out to be the gentleman who
teaches the German language at the Californian University of which Dr.
Jordan is Principal. And his one claim to “important study” in this
historical field is an appendix of 11 pages which is now “ printed for
the first time” in this book of Dr. Jordan’s, and which (it is not unfair
to add) is worthy of the company in which it now finds itself. It is
extremely superficial, dealing with only one period of medizval German
literature, contradicting the views of previous authorities, and ignoring
unfavourable or actually incompatible facts supplied by the contemporary
and subsequent history of other European literatures. To represent Dr.
Rendtorff as an historical authority, and to imply that he and Seeck are
anywhere near agreement, is to say the thing that is not.

This kind of thing cannot be excused even by the best anti-militarist
intentions. A scientist has no justification in treating a serious subject
unscientifically; nor can such random partisanship serve any useful
purpose in the long run. Dr. Jordan, by his own thesis, was bound to
face the broad evidence of the two greatest peace-periods known in
history. The last 300 years of the Roman Empire were years of far
profounder peace, over a far larger area of territory, than Europe has
ever enjoyed between the dawn of history and the nineteenth century.
During those 300 years the Romans decayed in vigour, while the outside
barbarians, among whom warfare was all this while endemic, maintained
a standard of virility which enabled them to destroy the Roman Empire
when once the struggle began in earnest. For the next example of long
and profound peace over a vast tract of territory, we must go to China.
Yet Chinese civilisation has marked time during these centuries; the
standard Chinese encyclopzdia of to-day was composed 150 years ago;
and the population is kept stationary, as in the Roman Empire, partly by
292 EUGENICS REVIEW.

the practice of infanticide. Both these problems, which await Dr. Jordan
on the very threshold of his subject, he persistently blinks; and, in his
attempt to support his thesis by other lines of historical argument, he
shows such disregard of the ordinary rules of reasoning and evidence
that it would be difficult to find a dozen consecutive pages free from
serious error. It is idle to spend more than 250 pages in proving what
few sane persons doubt, that war is in itself an evil thing. The real
task of science is to discover the mysterious laws of compensation which
history seems to indicate, and thus to give us that peace which we all
desire, while guaranteeing us from stagnation into which peaceful populations have so often allowed themselves to settle.
G. G. COULTON.
