HUMAN FERTILITY.
By J. A. Coss.

Eugenists agree that the rising generation is largely recruited
from the less fit. This is attributed partly to the fact that the
upper classes marry later and partly to the fact that apart from
the question of postponement of marriage the upper classes are
less prolific than the lower.

There can be no doubt that at the present time the smaller
fertility of the upper classes is almost entirely due to artificial
limitation, but there is another cause of their smaller fertility,
and it is to this I wish to direct attention. It is important
for the Eugenist to know to what cause he is to attribute this
smaller fertility of the upper classes; if it is entirely due
to artificial limitation, which is merely a temporary fashion, the
consequences are not likely to be very serious, since the fashion
for limiting the family is likely to take the usual course and
spread downwards in the community, eventually equalising the
fertility in all ranks of society; or the fashion may die out
altogether when its disastrous effect on the future of the race is
perceived. It seems also possible that the advantage of limiting
the family will appeal more to the poor than to the rich, for
an additional child is a greater burden to the poor, and perhaps eventually the artificial limitation of families will have a
beneficial effect on the race by reducing the size of the families
oi the less efficient.

If, however, as I shall try to show, there is a natural tendency under modern conditions for the more intelligent to
become less fertile, the problem is a more serious one.

If variations in fertility are inherited and the wealthier
classes have for generations been put through a process of
selection by which members of small families have been given
an advantage over members of large families, we should expect
380 EUGENICS REVIEW J. A. Cobb :

that the wealthier classes would, as a whole, be less fertile than
the poorer classes.

Now, there is some indication that variations in fertility are
inherited. Members of small families have themselves small
families. Galton found that 100 peers who had married
heiresses had by them 414 children, while another 100 peers
whose wives were not heiresses had 620 children.

There are two ways in which members of small families
are given the preference in the selection of parents for the
wealthier classes.

In the first place members of small families in the well-todo classes have a better chance of marrying whether they are
sons or daughters. An only son can afford to marry earlier,
and an only daughter can bring a better dowry.

In the second place a man or woman who has few brothers
or sisters is likely to be better educated and to inherit more
money, and therefore is likely to have a higher social position
than if he or she came of a larger family, and is therefore likely
to marry into a higher social class. So the higher social classes
get recruits from the less fertile families of the classes below,
and in exchange send down their more fertile members to
the lower social classes.

Society will tend therefore to become graded according
to fertility—the more fertile at the bottom and the less fertile
at the top. Any able man who rises by his ability into a
higher social class than that in which he was born will
naturally marry into that class, and will be likely to have a
less fertile wife and fewer children than his medium brother who
remained in the class into which he was born.

If there were no such selection of the less fertile as parents
of the upper classes, one might expect that their fertility would
increase from generation to generation. For the more fertile
in each generation would contribute a larger number to the next
generation than the less fertile, and as the offspring would inherit their parents’ fertility the average fertility of the second
generation would be greater than that of the first, the average
fertility of each generation would thus be greater than that
of the preceding one.
HUMAN FERTILITY 381

This would not apply to the same extent in the case of the
poorer classes, among whom large families usually suffer a
relatively large reduction in numbers from infant mortality.

If then there were no selection of the less fertile as parents
for the upper classes, we might expect the more able classes to
multiply more rapidly than the less able, their greater fertility
would probably outweigh the effect of the postponement of
marriage. |

But the contrary is certainly the case. That the wealthier
classes do not maintain their numbers has been noticed by
Polybius in Ancient Greece and by Tacitus in Ancient Rome.
It has been observed among the wealthier citizens of Venice
and Berne and in several English towns, and also in the English
peerage and baronetage. It does not seem likely that this is
due to deliberate limitation of the family. Attempts have been
made to account for it by Sadler and Doubleday on the ground
that abundance of food caused a reduction of fertility, and by
Herbert Spencer as an illustration of his somewhat mystical
doctrine of the antagonism of individuation and genesis, but
these authors wrote before the facts of variation and heredity
were familiar. Galton attributed the extinction of many British
peerages to marriages with heiresses, but did not consider the
wide reaching effects of such marriage selection. Alphonse de
Candolle observed that marriages with heiresses were by no
means confined to British peers, and considered that such marriages would be a cause of infertility among the upper classes.
I think that the matter may be carried further, for even if men
gave no deliberate preference to heiresses in selecting a wife,
the fact that members of small families are likely to be of a
higher social class would of itself cause the upper classes to be
less fertile.

There must be some general cause which prevents the
average intelligence in a civilised community from advancing
beyond a certain point. That cause seems to me to be the
grading of society according to a standard of wealth. This
puts in the same class the children of comparatively infertile
parents and the men of ability, and their intermarriage has the
result of uniting sterility and ability.
382 EUGENICS REVIEW J. A. Cobb:

When the parents are selected on account of the sexual
abnormality of partial sterility, it might be expected that the
children will be sexually abnormal in other ways. It seems
possible to account in this way for the immorality which accompanies great periods of national development. This immorality
is Sometimes said to be the cause of the decline of great nations.
It may be merely a symptom of the sterility which is the real
cause of the decline.
