RECEPTION FOR GENERAL FREDERICK
OSBORN

liest relations have existed between

the British and American Eugenics
Societies, both of which have changed their
philosophies in parallel ways.

The difficulties of each have been generally
similar. In a world which was becoming
ever more conscious of class differences, an
exposition of eugenics in terms of those differences provoked, on both sides of the
Atlantic, an increasingly passionate dissent.
The Nazi doctrines of racialism and the practices carried out in Nazi Germany did grave
harm to the movement—perhaps more here
than in America. Communistic doctrines
which disparage genetics and maximize the
role of nurture are now casting most unwelcome political shadows. These three
circumstances—the class formulation, the
racialism of Nazis, and the environmentalism
of Communists—have similarly affected the
American and British Societies. We were
therefore especially happy to seize an opportunity of welcoming General Osborn, the
president of the American Eugenics Society,
who has done more than anyone else to steer
American eugenics through the shoals of the
inter-war period. |

General Osborn was raised to high military
rank during the recent war when he was made
responsible for the education and information
of the American armies in all the theatres.
When hostilities ceased, he hoped to be in a
position to devote his main energies to
eugenics and population studies. But he
found it impossible to refuse a request to act
as the American Deputy on the United
Nations Atomic Energy Commission; and
his visit to this country was brought about
by the duties connected with this appointment.

A reception was held in the Soctety’s
Library at five o’clock on Tuesday, November 23rd, at which about forty Fellows and
Members were present. Tea was provided.
General and Mrs. Osborn were welcomed by

Fis the last twenty years the friend
Mr. Geoffrey Eley, the Soczety’s treasurer,
who, from the chair, expressed the Soctety’s
appreciation of General Osborn’s many acts
of friendship to us, including the gift of
numerous books to the library during the
war, when American books were unpurchasable. Among these books were several copies
of his Preface to Eugenics, for which there
had been a continuous demand.

General Osborn then gave an informal talk
on the development of eugenics in the
U.S.A. A large-scale inquiry, comprising
several thousand married couples and designed to elucidate problems of marriage and
parenthood, had been carried out at Indianapolis. The findings had been coded and
transferred to punch cards. A large volume
of information had been assembled and was
being published, in a series of articles, in the
Milbank Memorial Quarterly. Analysis of the
results was still continuing. Mass data had
also been obtained from the American
Army. General Osborn had been supported
by an able team of psychologists and
sociologists. From such large-scale inquiries
valuable information had been gathered on
what people were thinking, how they reacted
to propaganda, and their response to educational methods. As a result, we now know
better than before the war how to introduce
to the public eugenic ideas and policies. We
are also establishing these policies on solid
foundations. |

General Osborn then reviewed the development of demographic methods. Twenty-five
years ago problems of population were the
subject of armchair discussions. But a
series of books, among which Sir Alexander
Carr-Saunders’s World Population was noteworthy, had raised demography to a new
plane. There were now professional demographers. A widespread interest in population
problems had sprung to life in the U.S.A.
Two recent books, Fairfield Osborn’s Our
Plundered Planet and William Vogt’s The
Road to Survival had excited keen interest

air
212

and discussion. The old Malthusian controversy was being revived, and two schools
were discernible, one in effect declaring that
Malthus was right after all and the other continuing to sustain that he was wrong. None
denied that the population of the world,
which had probably doubled during General
Osborn’s lifetime, would continue to increase;
indeed, it might even double again in thirty
years. None doubted that the world’s foodproducing resources were being insufficiently
conserved. But there were differences of
opinion on how far improved agricultural
and other techniques could increase yields.

It was a matter of time only before the fact
was grasped that some adjustment was
necessary between the world’s food resources
and its population. Once the quantitative
_ aspect was duly appreciated, the qualitative
would emerge of its own accord. Then would
_the eugenic argument tell. General Osborn
concluded his talk by stressing the import
   

SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW

JOURNAL OF THE INSTITUTE OF SOCIOLOGY
Editorial Board: A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS, ALEXANDER FARQUHARSON and MORRIS GINSBERG
Assistant Editor: JULIAN BLACKBURN

This Review has now been in existence for over 30 years. It is the only British quarterly devoted

exclusively to sociology and is well known in all countries where sociology is studied. It publishes

papers read to the Institute and other papers embodying the results of original thought and research

in sociological matters. Population, race, social institutions, the relations between the social sciences,
and the sociological aspects of the social services fall within its scope.

Annual Subscription &1 1s. 0d., post free: Each Part 5s. 3d. post free; War-time issues (2 parts in 1) 10s. 6d. post free.

The Le Play bouse Press
LE PLAY HOUSE, ALBERT ROAD, MALVERN

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ance of appropriately timing propaganda. A
publicity campaign in favour of eugenics, if
launched at the wrong season, would encounter insurmountable prejudices and do
more harm than good. Further large-scale
sociological investigations, such as that reported by Professor Godfrey Thomson on the
intelligence of eleven-year-old Scottish children, were needed. The time for propaganda
would come later.

In the discussion which followed, General
Osborn dealt ably with miscellaneous questions about the activities to-day of the
American Eugenics Society, population
policies in Japan and Porto Rico, courses in
eugenics at American universities, the place
of birth control in eugenics, the lack of support for eugenics among geneticists, and the
Eugenics Society of Northern California.

A vote of thanks, proposed by Mr. Eley,
was warmly endorsed by an appreciative and
grateful audience. C. P. BLACKER.

  

        
   
     
   
   
   

PUBLICATIONS OF THE ROYAL ANTHROPOLOGICAL SOCIETY

21 BEDFORD SQUARE, W.C.1

JOURNAL OF THE ROYAL
ANTHROPOLOGICAL INSTITUTE
In Half-Yearly Parts Fifteen Shillings Each

HUXLEY MEMORIAL LECTURES
(Complete List on Application)

 

MAN
A MONTHLY JOURNAL OF
ANTHROPOLOGICAL SCIENCE :
Annual Subscription, £1; monthly numbers 2s. net

OCCASIONAL PAPERS
(Complete List on Application).
