134

... housing is undoubtedly the greatest
obstacle confronting young married couples
. to-day.— Sussex Daily News, July ist.

The ‘‘ Economist’s ’’ Verdict

_ In order to redress the perhaps unfavourable impression produced in the reader by
the parade of many critical remarks, I will
conclude with a quotation from the
Economist, whose article on the report, published on June 25th, opens with the following

paragraph :

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The report of the Royal Commission on
Population deserves to rank as one of the great
State papers of this generation. This does not
mean that it says anything very new or startling ;
on the contrary, its main principles have been
widely discussed and accepted for ten years or
more. But more, and more convincing, evidence
in support of these principles has been collected
than ever before, and they are set out with such
objectivity, with such lucidity and with such
human understanding that they must carry
conviction to all. The report closes a chapter
rather than opens one; but it closes it with
authority.

SOME BIOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS IN
SOCIAL EVOLUTION*

| By Professor H. J. FLEURE, D.Sce., M.A., F.R.S.

UMAN biology is difficult because
H we know so little about the genes we

carry and may pass on. Again, we
have very few remains of early man, and any
inferences as to the fleshy coverings of the
bones are inevitably indirect. Bearing in
mind these limiting conditions let us look
into a few very general biological characteristics.

Birthplace of Homo Sapiens

Nearly all mankind finds a temperature
of about 65° F. or 18° to 185° C. most
comfortable, but needs a certain amount of
variation, chiefly downwards, with a fresh
wind for example. Probably, therefore, some
important phase of human evolution, perhaps of the evolution of Homo sapiens rather
than of Homo in the broader sense, worked
itself out in a region with temperatures like
the above, varied by cool spells.

During the Pleistocene Ice Phases the
greater part of Europe and of Asia north of
the Himalayas was much colder than this,

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on May

24th, 1949, and subsequently revised.

but during interglacial phases this temperature may have been fairly common in Western
Europe. Equatorial latitudes apparently were
warm and wet even during ice phases. North
Africa, then much less desertic in the west
than it is now, and parts of South-West Asia
seem to have had a temperature not very far
from the one above-mentioned. It may
therefore be that North Africa, as Charles
Darwin long ago suggested, and South-West
Asia were deeply concerned in the evolution
of Homo sapiens.

We know that many hand-axes or coupsde-poing of the early part of the Pleistocene
Age have been found, especially in the
Western Sahara and near the Nile. They are
often finely chipped, and many may be called
works of art. It is difficult to think that they
were made by a being other than one very
near to modern man. The contrast between
these tools and the rough flakes used by other
groups in Eurasia at that time is very marked.
Unfortunately we lack fully established evidence about skeletons of the makers of these
coups-de-poing, though it is possible that the
Swanscombe skull fragment may be called
SOME BIOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS IN SOCIAL EVOLUTION

in here on the ground of the finding near it
of a hand-axe. The skull fragment is of the
hinderpart and is very thick, but from its
form it may belong to a sort of precursor of
Homo sapiens. Recent application to it of
the fluorine test supports its claim to a very
early date in the Pleistocene period.

The hand-axe, or coup-de-poing, with a few
types only, is distributed from North Africa
via Spain to France and Britain, which it
seems to have reached in mild interglacial
phases; and also from North Africa eastwards to South-West Asia and India, as well
as southwards via East Africa to the Cape
of Good Hope.

If we are justified in using this evidence
and in making the hypothesis, very tentatively, that North Africa and/or South-West
Asia was the home in which Homo sapiens
underwent some important, perhaps relatively late, stage of his evolution, we must,
at the same time, look at other ideas of the
evolution of man. Mathew long ago emphasized Asia as the birthplace of man, and
Central rather than South-West Asia. But
this was the idea of a birthplace of Homo in
the broader sense rather than of Homo
sapiens. Menghin at one time favoured India
as the primal home and probably was
thinking of Homo sapiens, but it is understood that he gave up this view which,
further, is not at all generally supported.
Giuffrida-Ruggeri held that Homo saptens
originated over a broad expanse, with considerable variation, a point to which I shall
return.

So far as it goes, and it goes only a little
way, the North Africa/South-West Asia
hypothesis is supported by another line of
argument. The men who made coups-depoting in North Africa apparently lived on a
poorish grassland, with antelopes of various
kinds as typical animals, and with very few
trees. If so, they were groundlings; they
had given up the forest glades and the habit
of holding on to trees with their front limbs.
All known specimens of Homo sapiens have
the erect posture, and Elliot Smith emphasized the high development of stereoscopic
vision in humanity. Both features are
obviously suitable to life in open country.

135

Objection is sometimes taken to the view
that a being closely related to Homo sapiens
can have lived in the early Pleistocene period,
and the objection is on the ground that such
specimens as we have from the Middle
Pleistocene are not Homo sapiens, but rather
the heavy boned types we can broadly call
Hominids, and that only in the late Pleistocene do we have direct evidence of Homo
sapiens, unless the Swanscombe case be
approved. That approval should now be
given.

On the archeological side Leakey in Kenya
has found evidence of the taking of animals in
pitfalls and of their use as food by men who
used hand-axes, i.e. the hand-axe men had
already become to some extent hunters,
though probably they were far below the
level of the master hunters of the late
Pleistocene. They were grading from a
vegetarian diet, perhaps with occasional
small animals, to an omnivorous one with
flesh playing an important part.

Social Consequences of Erect Posture and
Other New Factors

Whatever may be the truth about the
early home zone of Homo sapiens and about
the period of his emergence, the social consequences of the erect posture, improved
stereoscopic vision, the addition of hunting
to the primary collecting habit, and the
eating of flesh are all very important.

Every baby has to learn to walk and, by
reason of the erect attitude, this takes longer
than among animals. The human baby is
specially helpless for a long time, all the more
because of its almost hairless skin, a subject
I must not go into here, for it would take too
long. This helplessness implies dependence
upon its mother, with more opportunities of
learning sounds and gestures and of imitating
action—in other words, more opportunities
of education or the passing on of a heritage
of experience, a process which accelerated
social change as it developed.

The dependence of the baby would in any
case have hindered the mother from running
with the hunters, and some physiologists
think that the erect posture made a woman’s
rapid movements more difficult before the
136

birth of her child—more difficult, that is,
than they had been prior to the assumption
of the erect posture. Besides this, the long
strain involved in tracking down fast-running
animals, digging pitfalls, and carrying the
quarters of the animal killed would be a
heavy one for the female constitution. All in
all there came to be differentiation of work
according to sex. The women cared for the
children, collected vegetables and _ little
animals within a smallish radius, and -so
could develop a focus to which the men
might return. Fire is a very early item
of human equipment, in the limited sense
that people learned to keep a fire going long
before they learned reliable methods of
making one. The fire at the focus would be
maintained by the women and children.
Skins to wrap the baby in, clay lining a grass
net to make a basket and so to begin the
potter’s art, cooking flesh wrapped in clay to
protect it from the fire—these are but a few
of the many activities that the women at the
focus were able to develop.

The importance of womanly ingenuity in
devising new equipment and new ways needs
more recognition. The erect posture brought
the balancing of the head on the end of the
vertebral column and the reduction of neck
muscles to hold up the skull and jaw. The
freeing of the hands and, later, the development of cooking reduced the stimulus to jaw
growth, and this again promoted reduction of
neck muscles. As this was occurring when
the association between mother and child
was developing and lengthening, we have a
glimpse of a big factor in the development of
speech, which must have been helped by the
freeing of the larynx from pressure of powerful neck muscles. The differentiation of work
between the sexes and the consequent expansion of the mother’s opportunities may be
considered the most potent factor in social
evolution. On the men’s side we may argue
that hunting, or making pitfalls, encouraged
co-operation, between a certain number, with
need for communicating with one another
sometimes across a considerable distance,
another factor in the evolution of speech.
But there is more in the matter than this.

Some measure of rudimentary sociality no

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

doubt existed among the prehuman ancestors of mankind. Co-operation in hunting,
and in the development of a focus, raised that
sociality to a higher level with a certain
number of men and their women and children
gathered around the fire, communicating
with one another, evolving some custom of
marriage to reduce quarrels, even if sometimes it was little more than an analogue of
the ‘‘ pecking order’”’ among poultry.

Invention and Consequences of New Tools

Pitfalls, throwing of sticks and stones and
boomerangs all had their difficulties and
chances of failure, even after the development of the spear-thrower. After a long
period of dependence on coups-de-poing, no
doubt with wooden implements too, the
makers of these stone tools learned to use
their skill on flint chips or flakes and to
mount the flint points they made on to the
ends of wooden shafts. This gave a much
better weapon which they learned, still in
the Old Stone Age, to send swiftly to a long
distance ; they invented the bow and arrow.
It is interesting that this weapon was unknown to the Australian aborigines before
the recent arrival of Europeans, a proof of
the long isolation of those hunting folk. The
use of flakes, often mounted in wood, limited
interest in the coup-de-poing, and it became
scarce for a while, but I think survived in the
Iberian Peninsula and parts of Africa. But
there was a new outlet for ingenuity. Chips
could be diversely shaped for scraping, cutting and boring, besides being made into
points and mounted on wood to serve as
spearheads and arrowheads. The latter
could be shaped to promote straightness of
flight and irrevocable insertion in the victim.
Moreover it was easy, with small things, to
carry a supply of spare parts in a pouch. The
use of flakes thus liberated initiative and
made action at a distance more successful,
enlarging the scope of imagination as well as
of hunting.

Whereas the use as a chief tool of coups-depoing, of only a few types, lasted for perhaps
250,000 years, with only moderate variations
in time or in space, once the newer notions
come in there is regional differentiation and
SOME BIOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS IN SOCIAL EVOLUTION

change of fashion in perhaps one-tenth of
that time. The rate of change, still slow, has
begun to quicken, and the profit from
initiative is obvious. Language, ceremonial,
art, decoration, myth, must all have developed considerably. Groups were no doubt
still small and inbred. Before the newer
notions arose there were various Hominid
types mostly with heavy brows and jaws and
not all quite erect. After the change, men of
modern type, physically, spread far and
wide and the Hominids vanish, quite possibly
interbreeding with modern man ere they
disappeared. Many think that the so-called
Neanderthal type mingled with Homo sapiens
in the north-west quadrant of the Old
World, and that the so-called Peking type
mingled with him in the north-east. However this may be, the establishment of Homo
sapiens becomes quite clear and suggests that
Darwin’s old hypothesis of sexual selection
may have been active at a time when old
types were dying out. That this would apply
especially to women is very probable. They
mature earlier than men and have correspondingly less bony development, omitting
especially some of the ridges and roughnesses, so a woman with less ridged brows
would be more “womanly” and quite
probably more attractive to men.

Demographic Factors

This phase was one of differentiation as
well as of refinement of features. To appreciate this we should reflect upon an aspect of
the population question. It is likely that in
the later part of the Old Stone Age the
population of Britain was not more than a
few hundreds scattered over the country in
small groups. This meant that the desire for
sons to help in hunting would be likely to be
very strong, and also that close inbreeding
would be almost inevitable. Close inbreeding
may lead to rapidly repeated doubling of
some special character and even to its spread
to the whole group with the help of natural
selection. But it is not likely to spread over
large areas or across barriers to mating.
Isolational factors emphasize both change
within a group and differentiation between
groups. It would be valuable to have more

137

information about the fertility of matings
among hunters living in small groups to-day.
Not very well supported suggestions have
been made pointing to their limited fertility,
and of course mortality in infancy and childhood must be very high.

Of the desire for offspring, especially no
doubt sons to hunt and fight there is much
evidence from fertility figurines and some
rock drawings, as well as from social ceremonial. The widespread ancient notion is
still extant here and there that the leader or
king must have power to beget children if he
is to continue to rule. In several cases he has
been definable as the man who was husband
of the woman of royal descent.

And there is a further point here. A widespread fancy among farmers has been that
they should take a heifer to a specially good
bull, because the first fruitful mating of an
animal will affect all her subsequent offspring by other mates. This fancy of telegony
probably has nothing biological in it in the
strict sense. But the farmer who was careful
about the mating of his heifer was probably
careful about the heifer, too. There are many
indications that the fancy of telegony was
applied to our own race as well. A king or
leader might thereby, it was fancied, affect
the quality of a family a woman might thereafter bear to another man. As the leader was
often a superior individual and he probably
picked the more presentable mates, we need
not wonder that the fancy long maintained
itself. Its large and varied social and ritual
consequences need not be detailed.

Still one other point of wide social significance falls to be mentioned here. Among
many of the animals that man observes
closely, mating is almost universally followed
by the birth of offspring, often in a seasonal
cycle. But, in the case of our own race, a
marriage may not lead to a birth even for
years, and then births may occur in quick
succession. This has suggested to many
peoples that, amongst us at any rate, mating
is insufficient of itself to ensure offspring.
If we add to this the almost universal interest in family likenesses between children
and their forebears, we understand the
development of the ideas of reincarnation
138

and of the entry of a vital essence into the
prospective mother. Some _ head-hunting
groups practise that custom to get vital
essence into their village groups, and it is my
belief that the collective burial of skulls in
sO many great stone monuments of Western
Europe comes from the same idea of a vital
essence to be used again. The vital essence
or soul is stored in the dolmen, and fertility
rites nearby promote its emergence from the

monument and its entry into a woman for.

rebirth. The treasuring of vital essence of
ancestors would be likely to be specially
marked among colonists with the superiority
complex, such as no doubt were the builders
of our rough stone monuments.

Social Effects of Cultivation

The early stages of cultivation changed the
division of labour between the sexes. Men
would clear areas for cultivation, might do
preliminary hoeing in the case of difficult
soil, plant trees, build huts, hunt and fight.
Women would look after the children, the
fire and the cooking, do the routine work of
cultivation, fetch water, make pots, and do
scores of other things. It is noticeable that
women have traditionally used the digging
stick and hoe for cultivation, but that the
spade is almost solely a man’s implement.
Again women have made pots by hand, but,
when the idea of the wheel worked by the
foot came in, men took over the craft. This
probably unconscious abstention from stiffening and strengthening the thigh muscles
among women seems worth noting.

The fact of aggregation brought forward
the need for regulation, and with this an
intensification of the idea of good and evil, of
following the established routine or becoming
what is now called a Deviator. Numerous
groups of cultivators have in this way become
fixed in a routine which has so much power
over them that their social order crumbles
when it has to face a serious crisis.

Many intertropical African communities
fixed in a routine are now faced with the
danger of collapse of their social order, but
not, as is the case with hunter collectors and
a few of the isolated cultivator groups, with
extinction through decline of fertility. Some

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of the factors involved are biological. Intertropical Africa’s climate differs considerably
in many places from that which seems
basically suitable for mankind; and we
should look upon the peoples of intertropical
Africa as facing a difficult environment. Skin
colour may be very dark and so stop some of
the excess of ultra-violet radiation from
penetrating the skin and causing trouble.
Lips may be everted and broad and so promote evaporation. The nose may grow much
less prominently than in cold climates, and
so may reduce the warming of the air on the
way into the lungs, sweat glands and the
opening of hair follicles may be large and
loose, again promoting cooling. I think we
may look upon most of these as modifications of growth favoured by natural selection. But in spite of all this adaptation,
continuous thought and hard work is difficult. Routine, while thus often a safeguard
for a group, giving stability as long as conditions do not greatly change, becomes a
danger in a serious crisis.

Among cultivator groups with large villages, inbreeding is usually less marked than
in the lowlier groups previously discussed,
and thus the intensifying of special inheritances is likely to be less marked. Mankind
has passed from a phase of marked differentiation in small inbred isolated groups to a
phase of more general mixture and less
marked change of characters. Yet these do
change. The stimulus to growth of jaw
muscles is decreased as cooking improves and
implements for bringing the food in small
pieces to the mouth are invented. The
occurrence of very heavy jaws is a disfigurement that might be a matter for negative
sexual selection. In any case there was no
longer a high biological value in a heavy,
strong jaw. On the whole this tendency to
jaw reduction is a marked feature of the
transition to the better equipped cultivatorphase. It has gone on since then among
many peoples and notably among ourselves in
North-West Europe. It may be, when
natural selection ceases to act positively in
keeping a character up to standard, that this
character tends to decline. Whether it is
that growth energy tends to direct itself to
SOME BIOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS IN SOCIAL EVOLUTION

characters that matter most, or whether it is
that variants in the deficiency direction are
more numerous than those tending the other
way, one can hardly tell at present.

_ Figures for density of population are of
very limited value but, such as they are, we
‘may say that, among hunting and collecting
peoples, they are likely to give one person
per sO many square miles. Among hoe
cultivators without working animals or
manure, one may estimate from three or four
up to ten persons per square mile, where land
is used for two or three seasons and then left
to cover with bush perhaps for twenty years.
Where somewhat more intensive cultivation
is carried on one may find thirty or so persons
per square mile. With ploughs and an established routine the figures go up beyond fifty,
and, in special cases, very much _ higher
still.

Acceleration of Rate of Change

I have drawn attention to the fact that
men used a very few types of hand-axes
without much variation during a quarter of a
million years. Habit, routine, group ascendency over the individual are early animal-like
features. Later, in perhaps 25,000 years,
though one still finds group ascendency and
routine, there is more difference from place to
place and fashions do change and modes of
self-expression are multiplied.

Later again, in about 2,500 years, cultivators in Egypt and South-West Asia
undergo an apprenticeship in many crafts
accessory to cultivation, and this leads to the
prodigious development of the Early Egyptian Dynasties and of early Sumer and
Akkad. It also leads to a wide spread of ideas
from these early centres of grain cultivation
to the Mediterranean and India as well as to
the Steppe and Inner Asia, whence they
travelled to Danubia on the one hand and
China on the other. In Egypt and Mesopotamia, at any rate individuals begin to
emerge as historic figures, chiefly as kings
and sometimes as priests or nobles. The
change in 2,500 years is greater than in the
previous 25,000, just as that was more
varied than it had been in the previous
250,000. Deliberation, looking before and

139

after, individual initiative were counting for
a little more.

Less than 1,500 years later iron has come
into use, boats are better built, the potter’s
wheel is widespread, agriculture is more
varied. Athens imports wheat and uses more
of her own soil for olive and vine. Greek and
Phoenician colonies are planted around the
Mediterranean and olive cultivation and the
idea of the city spread to the western basin
of that sea. Most characteristic of all,
thinkers and teachers arise and are revered
not only during their lifetime but thereafter
by disciples: Lao Tsu and Confucius in
China, Mahavira and Buddha in India,
Zoroaster in Persia, the Hebrew prophets,
the Greek philosophers, the ill-fated
Akhnaton in Egypt who was before his
time.

Society and the Individual

It is very generally overlooked that the
period during which food production has
been carried on is but 1 per cent of the
duration of the human story, and that the
period since the idea of regular cultivation
(at any rate of cereals) began to spread from
its primary home in the South-West of Asia
and the North-East of Africa is much less
still. This means that for over 99 per cent of
its period on earth mankind has lived in small
groups bound together by many ties, even
if they fluctuated to some extent. Further,
even after the spread of cereal cultivation,
the social group long remained small and the
mentality accompanying traditional sociality
was not forced to change very radically.
Here and there large agglomerates appeared
—Babylon, Athens, Rome, and so on—and
began the atomization process, the individual
becoming liable to be a lonely unit in a crowd,
a condition not at all in keeping with the
mentality engendered by his history of
600,000 years. Prodigious technical experi-.
ments and prodigious flights of thought have
been crowded into a mere 4,000 years or less,
and this crowding has become intensified a
hundredfold since power-machinery became
available and gathered men into industrial
agglomerates that are called modern cities.
We are witnessing in the twentieth century
140

the result of this violent dislocation of traditional social psychology, a dislocation long
inadequately realized because men dealt with
a six-thousand-year-period since the creation
of the world. The nineteenth-century
abstraction called economic man, the religious abstraction called fallen man, and many
other ideas still in current use are very much
out of perspective, as is the notion that one
can remould man quickly by changing
environment.

As agglomerates have grown we find men
making efforts to create more intimate
societies, and it has been one of the greatest
advantages of British life that circumstances brought into existence a number of
groups of diverse beliefs, which quite early
had to give up the grosser and more sadistic
modes of persecution which persisted into the
nineteenth century in some countries where
orthodoxy claimed obedience. Of the revival
of gross persecution under the dictators of all
colours in the twentieth century, following
old ecclesiastical patterns, one might say a
great deal, but with little profit.

Agglomeration, and thinking in millions,
is a new thing for mankind. The industrial
revolution was a dangerous experiment with
very fractional success. Yet at the same time
it is important not to fall back into a static
condition, not to succumb to any one
orthodoxy as an ultimate social authority.
That way lies stagnation and degeneration.

SOCIETY

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Change and initiative are signs of health and
individuality is the fine flower of the social
garden.

But along with encouragement of individuality and initiative there is need of
cultivation of a common heritage of a group.
And that common heritage, until about 150
years ago, was for most people something
intimate, belonging to a small group, a
village perhaps, or a group of members of a
chapel, or a few farmers lending one another
help at harvest, and so on. It was vaguely
linked up through a social hierarchy so as to
create a national sentiment, at its best
linking men of diverse beliefs and outlook.
The common heritage, or common measure,
in a group, and the encouragement of
initiative and individuality in thought and
action are both important 1f on the one hand
anarchic atomization and on the other hand
routine mentality are not to be allowed to
have their evil influence. |

John Milton saw all this when he made his
great plea for toleration, and I shall conclude
by a typical quotation from the Aveopagitica :
“No man who hath tasted learning but will
confess the many ways of profiting by those
who, not content with stale receipts, are able
to manage and set forth new conditions to
the world. And were these but as the dust
and cinders at our feet, so long as in that
notion they may yet serve to polish and
brighten the armoury of truth.”

OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION

“* For the promotion of knowledge of the course of legislation in different countries, more particularly in the several
parts of His Majesty’s Dominions, and in the United States.”’
President: The Rt. Hon. Lord MACMILLAN, G.C.V.O.
Chairman of the Executive Committee: The Rt. Hon. Lord DU PARCQ

Editors: Sir ARNOLD MCNAIR, K.C.

Sir CECIL CARR, K.C.B., K.C.,

assisted by
Professor H. C. GUTTERIDGE, K.C., and F. H. LAWSON, Esq., D.C.L.
Honorary Secretary: C. E. A, BEDWELL, Esq.

Annual Subscription 
ONE GUINEA

Address : THE ROYAL EMPIRE SOCIETY, NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, LONDON, W.C.2

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLI, No. 3
