C. O. CARTER

B.A., B.M.,

M.R.C.P.

Three Surveys of Promising Families

Positive Eugenics

HE ESSENCE of positive eugenics is that

those parents who are likely to transmit

| an above average genetic endowment to
their children and to give them a good upbring
ing should have large families. It is eugenically
desirable that the size of their families should be

larger than the national average for the most
recent years of 2:2 children per married couple.

Whether any direct steps should be taken to
encourage such parents is a matter on which
-eugenists hold different views. Galton himself
favoured direct financial grants—at the turn of
the century he was thinking in terms of a family
allowance of one shilling a week, but others,
such as Mr. Frederick Osborn, Secretary of the
American Eugenics Society, think any form of
discrimination unwise. Mr. Osborn would
rather attempt to achieve a culture in which
eugenically desirable parents selected themselves to have large families. In either case it is
important to consider how parents who are
likely to transmit an above average genetic
endowment to their children and to rear them
well may be ascertained. It is also important to
try and discover the factors that influence them
in planning the number of children they will
have.

There are obvious technical difficulties in
ascertaining promising parents directly and any
such selection by an external agency would
certainly be unpopular. Discovering parents
through their children has many advantages. It
is sounder genetically, since if parents have been
handicapped by lack of educational opportunity
or other environmental misfortune this will not
affect the genetic constitution they transmit to
their children. It is technically simple and
perhaps more reliable since, apart from a small
minority in private schools, children in Great
Britain now undergo a remarkably, perhaps

* A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics
Society on May 2Ist, 1958.

undesirably, uniform system of education in the
primary schools. In these schools teachers are in
a position to compare children with differing
gifts in a way which is impossible later. Children’s intellectual promise and character traits
may change somewhat in adolscence and later,
but only in the infant and junior schools can
they be seen in the perspective of a nearly
random sample of their contemporaries. The
only children not attending these schools are
a small proportion in private schools and a
small proportion who are educationally subnormal or ineducable. Finally, in spite of all the
outcry about the selection of children for different types of secondary schools at age eleven,
selection of promising families by children
would be more acceptable to public opinion than
selection by adults.

The mechanism of the survey

Accordingly, on the initiative, primarily of Dr.
Blacker, your Council formed a sub-committee
to consider ways of ascertaining ‘Promising
Families” through schoolchildren. The method
adopted was to seek the permission of local
education authorities to ask the headmasters
and headmistresses of their schools to nominate
children. Heads of schools were asked to
nominate 5 to 10 per cent of children in an
age group who seemed most likely when they
grew up to lead lives of special value to the
community, on grounds of character as well as
ability. Having made their choice the heads of
schools then sent an explanatory letter from the
Society to the parents of the nominees together
with a slip which a parent could send back to
the Society saying whether they wished to
participate or not. If the parents were willing
they were either sent a questionnaire, or if they
preferred, the questionnaire was taken to them,
explained and left with them. This questionnaire
asked details of the marriage, educational
history, income, occupation and leisure time

159

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1958, 50, 3.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

activities of the parents; it asked details of their
children, the schools their children attended; it
also asked whether the parents were satisfied or
dissatisfied with the number of their children.
If the parents had fewer children than they
would have liked they were asked to state the
reasons for this and to indicate any social
policies which might have helped them to
achieve their wishes. Where there were other
children of school age in the family a letter was
sent to the heads of the schools these brothers
and sisters were attending asking for a report on
the child.

Three local authorities were found who were
willing to allow a survey to take place in their
schools and we are much indebted to them,
their education officers, and the headmasters
and headmistresses of their schools for their
help. They were all three in Southern England,
one being a county borough and two county
authorities.

The findings in general

There are obvious limitations to an inquiry by
questionnaire, even when supplemented by the
visits to the homes of those, about one-seventh
of the total, who wanted an explanation of the
questionnaire. It was possible, however, to get
partial answers to some of the questions which
are relevant to any plans for positive eugenics;
and more information will come in if further
investigations are made of these families in some
years’ time. The present results may be summarized in advance: they are all results one might
have predicted, but it is good to have them
established by inquiry.

' J. Parents of nominees came from all social
classes, though the upper middle class parents
are proportionately better represented than
lower middle class parents, who in turn are
better represented than working class parents.

2. The brothers and sisters of a child nominated
as promising are on the whole well above
average themselves on the same criteria,
though naturally not as promising as the
selected children. Since there is known to be
little or no relationship between order of birth
in a family and ability or character, this
suggests that further children born into these
families would also be well above average.

3. A considerable proportion, about a third of
all the parents of those nominated, would both

160

have liked a larger family than they actually
have. Their fertility is below replacement rate
and, if their wishes had been realized, would
have been just about at replacement rate and
above that of the population as a whole.

4. The main obstacles to parents realizing their
wishes for the size of their families have been
economic rather than medical.

5. Many parents have definite views on the social
measures needed to overcome these obstacles
and these agree well with the suggestions of the
Royal Commission on Population.

The findings in detail

Coming now to the details. The first survey was
of thirteen- to sixteen-year-old children at grammar schools in a county area. All but one of the
heads of grammar schools took part. It should
be remembered that children in secondary
grammar schools are already selected for intellectual ability and to some extent for character
traits. They comprise about 20 per cent of the
school population of this age, the remaining
eighty per cent going to secondary modern
schools. Accordingly, nominees from grammar
schools will comprise some of the most promising
children of the age group in their area; in fact
nomination of the most promising 5 to 10 per
cent in a grammar school will, if successful,
have been at the 1 to 2 per cent level of the
general school population. The parents of
eighty-six children co-operated fully and returned the questionnaire; these eighty-six were
70 per cent of the children nominated. The
second and third surveys were of eight- and
nine-year-old children from a sample of primary
schools in the two areas, one a county borough
and the other a county authority. Here the
selection, at the 5 to 10 per cent level is from
the whole age group. Selection at eight or nine
will be less reliable than at thirteen; this can be
checked by getting reports on these young
children in say seven years’ time. Selection at
this age, however, has the important practical
advantage that the parents are still young
enough to have more children. These two
primary school surveys resulted in full cooperation from 186 parents, 75 per cent of the
parents approached. The two primary school
surveys can conveniently be grouped together,
but the grammar schools survey is best distinguished in the analysis. There may well be
THREE SURVEYS OF PROMISING FAMILIES

some bias in the results, in both the grammar
school and the primary school surveys, from the
25-30 per cent failure to co-operate.

The parents

First the information about the parents of the
nominees. The Social Class of the parents is
shown in Table 1 and there compared with that
for the general population taken from the 1951
Census and also with that of the fathers of the
top 8 per cent of the Six Day Sample of 1,208
eleven-year-old children given the TermanMerrill test in the Scottish Mental Survey of
1947.1 The classification of the parental occupations is not fully accurate since there was not
always enough information on this, but it is
probably satisfactory for making broad com
parisons.
TABLE 1
SOCIAL CLASS OF FATHER

Grammar | Primary | High Scores
in Scottish
Survey
o

General

  

The striking feature of this table is perhaps the
very low proportion of unskilled and semiskilled manual workers among the fathers of the
nominees compared with the general population
and also to a lesser degree with the Scottish
Survey children selected purely on intelligence.
These Social Class IV and V parents may well
have been just those who were not willing to
co-operate. In addition, however, it is well known
that of two children of the same intelligence the
one from the higher social class tends to do
better in school. Another interesting feature is
the relatively higher proportion of Social Class
I parents among the parents of the grammar
school than of the primary school nominees. In
part this may be due to the practice of many
Social Class I parents of using private schools at
the primary level, but local authority grammar
schools at the secondary level where their
children had qualified for entry to a grammar

2—ER.

school; but in part too, it is probably due to the
stricter selection of the grammar school children.
The current gross income of the fathers varied
from £6,500 to £290 per annum. The detailed
percentage distribution is shown below.

TABLE 2
INCOME OF FATHER

Grammar School | Primary School
Survey
°

    
   
 

Not stated
Number

The grammar school nominees’ parents show
rather more in the higher income ranges paralleling the social class difference and probably due
to the same causes; they also show rather more
with incomes under £500. This is mostly, I
think, due to rising wages; the grammar school
survey was about a year and a half earlier.

The educational status of the parents is shown
in the next table, again as percentages.

TABLE 3
EDUCATION OF PARENTS

       
   

   
  

     

Education Grammar Primary
School School
Father Survey Survey

Mother

  

nmaamcadd

The distribution runs very much parallel to
that with social class. Roughly twice the proportion of parents of the grammar school nominees
had had a university education, while about
half the proportion had had an elementary
education. It is noteworthy that a quarter of the
fathers of the grammar school nominees had had
an elementary school education only and this

161
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

was true of over half the parents of the primary
school nominees. An elementary school education in the last generation corresponds roughly
to a primary followed by a secondary modern
education in this generation.

The finding that a considerable proportion of
promising children came from homes with
relatively low incomes and from parents who
had little schooling is, of course, common knowledge. In part this will be due to genetic segregation. For example, with respect to intelligence,
though parents of average intelligence will have
a very intelligent child only exceptionally, yet
there are relatively many parents of average
intelligence so that a considerable proportion of
all highly intelligent children are born to average
parents. In part too, however, promising
children will have manual working class parents
' because educational and socio-economic status
is only a rough guide to parental ability. Again,
taking intelligence as the illustration, though the
same is probably true of other qualities inherent
in our concept of promise, the follow-up studies
of Terman and of The Scottish Council for
Research in Education! show that a small but
significant proportion of children of good intellectual capacity end up in manual and even
unskilled occupations.

This is illustrated by some of the answers to
the section of the questionnaire on the parents’
life history. Fathers who were manual workers
usually had active and worthwhile hobbies.
Most too, had reached positions of responsibility in the Armed Services during the war, for
example, the turner who had been a sergeantmajor in a Rifle Regiment and the wireman
whose hobbies were electronics and music.
Sometimes too, it was the father’s father who
had shown distinction, for example, the Corporation labourer whose father had been awarded the
O.B.E. for trades union leadership. In two
instances at least men who were skilled had
deliberately taken semi-skilled and unskilled,
but safe, jobs because it gave greater security
for the family.

A noteworthy feature of the parents’ marriages
was that they were remarkably stable. Only one
of the 272 pairs of parents had been divorced
and none judicially separated. In two instances
the father was dead. One nominee was illegiti
162

mate, but living with his mother; the mother
later married a man not the father of the
nominee. One nominee was adopted, the
questionnaire being completed by the adopting
parents. It must be remembered however, that
parents who had had unsuccessful marriages
may have occurred in the 25-30 per cent who did
not co-operate, and the heads of schools may
to some extent have refrained from nominating
otherwise suitable children if they came from
broken homes.

A final, though subjective, point on the parents
is that a colleague and I who visited the forty-odd
parents who wished a questionnaire brought to
them, were left with a general impression of
energy, good sense and reliability.

The brothers and sisters

Iturn now to the second set of data, that about
the brothers and sisters of the nominees, whose
quality is the test whether nomination by a
single child has a reasonable probability of
leading to a family which is promising; their
quality is also the best indication of the promise
of any further children that might be born into
these families. It is important here to try and
allow for the bias from heads of schools nominating children in part because they know of
other promising children from the same family
in the school.

The heads of schools were asked to assess the
brothers and sisters in terms of the other children
in the school, to put them in the top 20 per cent,
middle 60 per cent or bottom 20 per cent of the
children in their school. In converting these to
the rough equivalents in terms of the general
population of children I have taken children as
being assessed in the top 20 per cent of a grammar school as being in the top 4 per cent of the
general population, a child classed in the middle
60 per cent of a grammar school as being in the
next 12 per cent of the population, the children
in the bottom 20 per cent of the grammar school
and the top 20 per cent of the secondary modern
school as being in the next 20 per cent of the
general population; the children in the middle
60 per cent of the secondary modern as being in
the next 48 per cent and finally the children in
the bottom 20 per cent of the secondary modern
as being in the bottom 16 per cent. The very few
THREE SURVEYS OF PROMISING FAMILIES

children attending technical schools were classed
with the grammar school children. There are still
some reports coming for the second primary
school survey.

The distribution of the brothers and sisters of
the children in the three series now attending
secondary schools is shown in Table 4.

TABLE 4
SIBS AT SECONDARY SCHOOLS

  
 

Grammar School Primary School 7
Survey Survey

Number % Number %

Top 4% 24 75 15 28

Next 12% 7 22 22 42

Next 20% 0 0 6 11

Next 48% 1 3 10 19

Bottom 16% 0 0 0 0
32 53
No report 6 13
Total 38 66

The top group may perhaps be regarded as of
outstanding promise, the next 12 per cent of
good promise, and only the bottom 16 per cent
as of poor promise.

The thirty-two brothers and sisters of the
grammar school nominees at secondary schools
on whom we have reports are clearly a most
promising group of children. Three-quarters are
outstanding and nearly all in the top 16 per cent.
In addition we know that all of thirty-one other
brothers and sisters who have left school
attended grammar schools and so academically
at least were above average. We have no teachers’ assessment on these children who have left
school, but the parents have volunteered information about nineteen of them and we know
that nine are now at Universities, three at
Teachers’ Training Colleges, two at the Royal
Aeronautical Establishment, two at the Royal
Academy of Music, one at the Royal Military
Academy, one is training as a nurse and one is
at an Art School. These brothers and sisters too
are clearly of exceptional promise. For all these
children, however, there may well be an element
of bias in that the headmasters were influenced
in their nomination by their knowledge of these
brothers and sisters, who often were or had. been
at the same school.

The fifty-four brothers and sisters of the
primary school nominees, who were attending
secondary schools on whom we have reports
are also clearly of unusual promise, but less so,
as one might expect, since the nominees were
less highly selected than those from the grammar
schools. Here too we have information, though
no head teachers’ reports on the further brothers
and sisters who have now left school. There are
seventeen of these and twelve attended grammar
or technical schools and so were academically
above average. The parents have given further
details of six; four are now at Universities, one
at a Teachers’ Training College and one at a
Technical College. These children too cannot
perhaps be taken altogether as a guide to the
probable quality of further children born into the
family since they may have passed through the
school of the primary school head teacher who
nominated their brother or sister.

Coming now to the brothers and sisters at
primary schools, these children may be taken as
representing a classification in terms of the
general child population. These assessments are
shown in Table 5.

TABLE 5
SIBS AT PRIMARY SCHOOLS

     
 

Primary School
Survey

Grammar School
Survey

   
  
  
    
  

Top 20% 64
Middle 60% 35
Bottom 20% 2

No report
Total

The assessments of the younger brothers and
sisters of the Grammar School series is of special
value. There will be no bias here because these
children will be quite unknown to the Grammar
School head teachers choosing the nominee, and
the distribution provides perhaps the most
reliable estimate of the promise of other children
in the nominee’s families. Not only were thirtythree out of forty-five on whom we have reports
estimated to be in the top 20 per cent, but
additional information given by the head teacher
indicated that many of these thirty-three were of

163
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

outstanding promise. There are a further fourteen children of this series not yet at school. One
of these children is a mongolian imbecile; such
biological accidents are bound to occur in these
families as in others and have no bearing on the
general promise of these families. The brothers
and sisters at primary schools of the second
series were of similar promise, but many of these
were at the same school as the nominee so
there was opportunity for the head of the school
to be influenced by them in making the nomination. There are, however, fifty-eight younger
children not yet at school, and in five years’
time an inquiry would provide information
about the promise of these children, which was
unbiassed, to supplement that which we already
have from the grammar school nominees’
brothers and sisters now at primary schools.

There are, however, I think, clear indications
from the reports we already have that nomination by headmasters of a single child in a family
is, in a most satisfactory proportion of instances,
a guide to families which are promising as a
whole.

Fertility of parents

Turning now to the third set of data we have
about the fertility of parents of nominees and the
factors affecting this fertility. The actual family
size distribution in the two groups is shown in
Table 6.

TABLE 6
FAMILY SIZE

Grammar School
Nominees

   
  

Primary School
Nominees

Family Size

    

   

Total families
Total children
Average family
size
Corrected

The distribution is similar in the two groups, with
the highest proportion of families having two

164

children, but many having more. There are only
nine large families with five or more children.

The uncorrected average fertility of these
parents, 2-6 in the grammar school series and
2-4 in the primary series, seems not unsatisfactory compared with the national average for
marriages in the same years, which is close to
2:0. In 1956 the average family size for marriages
occurring between 1932 and 1939 was 2:0 and for
those between 1940 and 1942, 1:9. Allowance
must be made, however, for the fact that, other
things being equal, a five-child family is five
times as likely to contain a nominee as a onechild family. To correct for this in estimating
fertility the number of families of each size
should be divided by the family size. One should
count, for instance, in the grammar school series
only nine three-child families and not twentyseven. The corrected average family size then
becomes 2:2. Similarly, for the parents of nominees from primary schools this correction makes
the family size 2-0. These estimates must further
be corrected for the fact that the series include
no childless families. Taking this figure at 15 per
cent, which is appropriate for a group of this
social class distribution, it reduces the average
family size to 1:9 and 1-7 respectively. In both
series the families were nearly complete. The
youngest mother of the eighty-six grammar
school nominees was thirty-four and only one
in eight of these mothers were under forty. Only
one mother intended to have more children and
she was thirty-six. The mothers of the 186
primary school nominees were naturally younger.
Just over two-thirds were under the age of forty
and included in this were forty-six mothers, a
quarter of the whole, under the age of thirtyfive. However, only seven mothers, aged from
thirty-one to thirty-nine, said that they intended
to have more children, in addition nineteen said
they were undecided. So the averages of 1-9 will
not be increased and that of 1-7 will not be much
increased. Both will just fall short of the national
average, and fall rather more short of the replacement of about 2-3, and of course be much
below the family size that eugenists would like
to see in these parents.

On the other hand in both series a significant
proportion of parents would have liked more
children than they have, in fact, had. In the
THREE SURVEYS OF PROMISING FAMILIES

grammar school series in twenty-four instances
(over a quarter) both parents would have liked
more children, and in a further nine instances
one parent only would have liked more children.
Similarly, in the primary school series in fortyseven instances, a quarter, both would have liked
more children, and in a further twenty-five
instances one parent only would have liked
more. In each series where the parents differed
it was the mother, twice as often as the father,
who would have liked more children. The distribution of the extra children wanted by both
parents by present family size is shown in Table
7. When parents said one or two more this was
counted as one more.

TABLE 7
ADDITIONAL CHILDREN WANTED BY PRESENT
FAMILY SIZE

ADDITIONAL CHILDREN WANTED

 

 

 

 

 

Family

Size Grammar School Primary School
Survey Survey

2 | 3 | 1 | 2| 3
1 1{ 1{u4f]af 2 6 - 10 4 3 - - 14 2 1
4 = _ - 1 _

 

 

 

 

It will be seen that in most instances,
irrespective of family size, parents wanted one
more child, but that a significant proportion
would have liked two more children. If these
wanted children had been born it would have had
an appreciable effect on the fertility of these
parents. For example, the parents of grammar
school nominees would have had an uncorrected
average family size of 3-0 and not 2-6 children,
the parents of primary school nominees 2-7 and
not 2-4 children. Correcting for ascertainment
according to family size, these family sizes
become 2-7 for the grammar school parents and
2°5 for primary school nominees. Making allowance for childless families the figures become
2:3 and 2:1 on the assumption that none of the
15 per cent of childless marriages wanted
children. In fact some of them would have
wanted children and this would further have
raised average family size. These average family

sizes are well above the average for marriages of
the same period and near replacement rate.

I have examined the distribution of the extra
children wanted in various ways. It has little to
do with mother’s age at marriage. It is noteworthy that only for mothers marrying after the
age of of thirty-five does the average size in this
series significantly decrease, and whatever the
age at marriage the number of extra children
parents would like to have had was approximately constant. It must be noted, however, that
these are all mothers who had at least one
child.

There are, however, significant differences
both in fertility and the extra children desired
according to income and educational status.
The 1951 Census indicated, I think for the first
time in this country, that there is developing a
positive relation between father’s occupation
and fertility for the non-manual occupations.
The Census shows that the major professional
and managerial class at ten years of marriage
have more children than the minor professions
and small employers, who in turn have more
children than the clerks. For the manual workers
there was still, however, a negative relationship;
skilled workers had fewer children than the semiskilled, who in turn had fewer children than the
unskilled. These differences represent, I think, a
positive relationship between fertility and socioeconomic status for planned children, but a
strongly negative relationship for unplanned
children. The latter relationship is now largely
affecting only the manual working classes, the
remainder having very few unplanned children.

The positive relationship shows in our series
clearly for both income and educational status.
I have used these indices rather than Social Class
by father’s occupation as the information on
them was more precise. The average family sizes
by income are shown in Table 8.

Some of the groups are small and there is
inevitably random fluctuation, but drawing a line
at income £1,000 per annum there is a significantly higher fertility for parents above this
level with an average of 2:72, than for those
below it with an average of 2-33. The standard
deviation of family size is about 1-0, so these
differences are most unlikely to be chance
differences.

166
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE 8
INCOME AND FERTILITY

Average

Income Family

£s Size
2,000+- 3-0

1,500+ 2:1 >2:72
1,000+- 2:8
750+ 2:3

500+- 2:4 >2:33
500— 2:5
Not stated 2-4
Total 2°5

 

The same relationship holds for education
and this is shown in Table 9.

TABLE 9
EDUCATION AND FERTILITY
! Average
Education Families Children Family
Size
U OU 15 39 2:6
U G ‘ .
G U 14 39 2°8 >2:69
G G 78 195 2:50
G at 70 160 2:3
El G | joa
El El 86 212 2:5
Not stated 3 5 a
Total 272 «| ~—(666 2:5

For parents, one of whom at least has had a
university education, average family size is 2-69.
The numbers here are small, but when corrected
to 2:3 for ascertainment proportional to family
size, then fertility agrees well with that found by
Mrs. Hubback? in her recent survey of graduate
wives, her estimate being 2:2. For parents who
both have had a grammar school education (I
have included central schools and technical
schools here) average family size is 2:50 and for
those of whom at least one has had an elementary
school education it is 2°38. The absence of any
strong indications of a rise in fertility at the
lowest income groups and educational levels in
this series in contrast to the general population
is, I think, what one would expect, since these
selected parents even if manual workers will not
have many children in excess of the number
planned.

166

If one now examines the extra children wanted
in relation to income and education it is interesting to see the position is reversed. The
higher income groups and the better educated
have, more nearly, had as many children as they
would have liked than the remainder. If one
adds the extra children wanted to the average
family size in each group any significant relationship with income and education disappears. If
one made corrections to these family sizes for
ascertainment according to family size the
differences would become smaller still.

TABLE 10
FAMILY SIZE WANTED
INCOME More children wanted Total
1,000-+- +°35 3-0
750+ +:57 2°82
750— +-42 2:8
EDUCATION
University +:23 2:92
G G +°37 2:87
G El
El G +-49 2°78
EI El +°50 2:96

 

The only comparable figures which I know
for “family size wanted” are those collected in
the Obstetrics Department of Aberdeen by Miss
Eileen Scott? from mothers attending there, who
were pregnant for the first time. She found that
the higher the husband’s occupational class the
more children the wife wanted. She also found,
however, that the higher the mother’s score on
an intelligence test the more children she
wanted. From additional data with which she
kindly supplied me it was possible to show that
intelligent mothers tended to want fairly large
families, whatever their husbands’ occupation.
This is very similar to what we see here. It is
clear, however, that the parents in the higher
socio-economic groups more often realize their
wishes.

Obstacles to reaching desired family size and
social policies to remove them

The next point to consider is the reasons given

by the parents to explain why they had had

fewer children than they would have liked.
THREE SURVEYS OF PROMISING FAMILIES

These are very similar in the two series. The
reasons are summarized in Table 11.

TABLE 11
LIMITING FACTORS

    

   
 

Grammar Primary
Reason given School School
Survey Survey

    
   
 
   

 

 

Economic difficulties
Housing ee ee
No domestic help
Educational costs
Wartime separation ..
Medical we ve

Age
Total ..

The difficulties and separation due to the war
are, one hopes, non-recurring; naturally they
bore more heavily on the older parents of the
grammar school nominees. Apart from these,
the striking feature of this Table is, I think, the
preponderance of socio-economic reasons over
medical and biological. Medical and advanced
age of parents were given as the main reason by
only about one-fifth of the parents.

The parents were asked to suggest what
general social policies might have overcome the
difficulties which prevented them from having
as many children as they would have liked. The
replies were consistent in both series and
followed the lines one might expect. They are
shown in Table 12.

TABLE 12
POLICIES
Family Allowances 27
Educational Grants 11
Housing 9
Income Tax Relief 7

The proposals substantiate the essential
correctness of the analysis of the Royal Commission on Population. You will remember that
they proposed that the Family Allowance should

be raised to 10s. per week at secondary school
age, double the allowance at that time, and
corresponding in terms of purchasing power to
14s. to-day; compared with the present allowances to-day of 8s. for the second child and 10s.
for subsequent children. For younger children
the Commission’s recommendation of an increase to 7s. a week has been substantially met
at present costs for the children on the 10s. a
week allowance. The demand for a larger allowance at age twelve has not been met, though
income tax relief has been increased at this age.

The Royal Commission also recommended
the introduction of special schemes of allowances
within the professions. Such schemes now
operate for the staffs of Universities and the
Government Research Councils. The allowances
are not large, £50 per annum per child, and an
increase is overdue, but they are most helpful.
An extension to other professions within the
sphere of public employment was regarded as
specially desirable by the Royal Commission
and would have been of great value to the
parents in our series, many of whom are in the
teaching profession, the Civil Service, the Armed
Services, or in Local Government Service.

It would appear that financial help of this
kind, either special family allowances or much
increased income tax rebates, would have had
only a small effect on those parents in our
survey who were in the highest income and
educational groups, their fertility is already
fairly high; such help might well, however, have
raised the fertility of the rest of these parents to
replacement rate and well above that of their
contemporaries in the general population.

REFERENCES
1 Macpherson, John S. 1958. Eleven- Year-Olds Grow
Up. University of London Press.

2 Hubback, Judith. 1955. The Fertility of Graduate
Women. Eugen. Rev., 47, 107.

3 Baird, D. and Scott, Eileen M. 1953. Intelligence and
Childbearing. Eugen. Rev., 45, 139.

167
