R. HARRIS,
B.Sc., M.D.

Infectious Diseases,
the ABO Blood Groups

and Human Evolution

possible way the future evolution of man

it is obviously useful to understand how
human evolution has occurred in the past.
Although man does not differ from other living
forms in being subject to the interaction of
heredity and environment, his long generation
time tends to obscure the reality of the processes
of selection. In addition many human characteristics such as stature, form and vigour though of
great evolutionary significance are influenced by
hereditary processes which involve the activity
of many genes. Such multifactorial inheritance
while it is undoubtedly of great importance is
difficult to study; consequently a few “‘simple”’
polymorphic systems have received an undue
degree of attention. Nevertheless it is in these
simple polymorphic systems that a great deal of
recent work has confirmed the classical statements
Fisher (1930) and Ford (1942). Fisher stressed
the rarity of genes of neutral selective value
while Ford suggested that the blood groups
were balanced polymorphic systems probably
associated with resistance to disease. Investigation into the truth of this hypothesis can
hardly fail to illuminate to some extent, the
process of human evolution by selection.

( INCE IT IS important to direct in the best

The ABO Blood Groups

The last few years have seen a tantalizing
extension of our knowledge of the evolutionary
significance of the human blood groups. Since
1953 several research teams, particularly those
led by Aird and by Clarke have firmly established
the association of the ABO polymorphism with
liability to diseases involving the function of

201

organs derived from the embryonic foregut.
Evidence, overwhelming in some cases and
strong in others has accumulated for associations
between the ABO blood groups and duodenal
ulcer, gastric ulcer, gastric carcinoma and
pernicious anaemia. These associations and
others less certain or certainly negative are
reviewed by Clarke (1961).

Potential sources of selection

Since most of the diseases which have been
associated with the ABO blood group system
exert their morbidity and mortality comparatively late in life, it has been suggested that the
principal selecting mechanisms acting on the
ABO polymorphism occur in foetal or in neonatal life. The protective effect first suggested
by Levine (1943) of ABO incompatibility
(between mother and foetus) on babies liable to
rhesus erythroblastosis foetalis is just such a
mechanism. However, in terms of the major
causes of premature death in human populations
and therefore of the great potential sources of
evolutionary selection, famine and pestilence
may be considered pre-eminent even to-day.
These factors have been reviewed by Motulsky
(1960) and as an example the effects of malaria
on human evolution may be quoted. There
can be little doubt that malignant tertian
malaria is operating at the present time as
a selecting agent maintaining at least two
genetic traits, sickle cell and glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, in high frequency in many areas of the world where this
form of malaria is common. Other infectious
diseases which are or have been associated with

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1963, 54, 4.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a high mortality, particularly amongst the young
and fertile must have been similarly potent factors selecting for survival individuals carrying
genes which protected against death from such
diseases. For the reasons which were discussed
earlier, it was inevitable that the blood groups
should be investigated in relation to infectious
diseases, and statistically significant associations
between the ABO groups and rheumatic heart
disease and with virus respiratory disease have
been reported. ,

Rheumatic Heart Disease

Streptococcal throat infections are followed
by damage to the heart only in a few cases and
the majority of infections are not followed by
this complication. Glynn et al. (1956) postulated.
that host variation was an important factor in
determining the occurrence of such rheumatic
carditis. Clarke et al. (1960) and Buckwalter et al.
(1962) have been able to demonstrate that
amongst these host factors were included the
ABO blood groups.

Amongst proven cases of rheumatic heart
disease there is a significant reduction in
the incidence of individuals of group O. This
may be interpreted as an increased liability
of patients who are non-O to develop heart
disease following infection with streptococci
and there is general agreement that as Glynn
et al. (1956) had suggested this tendency also
occurs in individuals who are non-secretors of
ABO (H) blood group substances.

Respiratory Viruses

McDonald and Zuckerman (1962) reported
the blood group frequencies in a group of 1,685
R.A.F. personnel who had been treated for
respiratory illness associated with identified
virus infection. In their series there was a highly
Significant excess of group O patients and a
corresponding deficiency of group A in the
influenza A, infections compared with 47,108
R.A.F. recruits used as controls. A reverse trend
but of lesser degree was noted with the adenovirus group. It was concluded that in the conditions prevailing persons of blood group A had
been at an advantage. The secretor status of
their patients was not quoted.

102

Methods and Controls

These studies of rheumatic fever and viral
respiratory infections are, like the earlier work,
dependent on comparing the ABO phenotype
frequencies in a disease group with those in controls. Quite complicated statistical manoeuvres
are necessary to avoid the gross errors potentially inherent in such a comparison. The most
obvious of these is ensuring that the disease
and the control groups are derived from the
same parent population which itself is of homogeneous blood group proportions. Penrose
(1959) pointed out again that patients with some
diseases might be of an inbreeding strain with
high susceptibility to the disease and with different blood group frequencies from the rest of the
population (incomplete miscegenation or stratification). Use of suitable statistical methods (e.g.
that of Woolf, 1955) largely avoids this error.
However, such methods are not infallible and
cannot compensate for bias (Buckwalter et al.
1962). Nevertheless the great care which has
been associated with much of this work has
made it virtually certain that the comparable
results which have been obtained from different
centres in fact represent a genuine relationship
between the blood groups and some diseases.

The meaning of the associations is quite
unknown. It is not clear for example whether
the physical presence of blood group substance
determines differential susceptibility or whether
the various phenotypic expressions of the ABO
polymorphism are merely indicative of a more
profound metabolic variability governing susceptibility to disease. The resolution of this problem is essential to our conception of the réle
played by the blood groups in the heritable
component of acquired disease.

Widespread occurrence of ABO (H) substances

In this connection it is interesting to note the
widespread occurrence of ABO (H) blood group
substances in animals and plants (Mourant 1956)
and in micro-organisms in particular (Springer
1961). Since some of these micro-organisms may
be pathogenic to man it is inevitable that those
interested in evolution will be intrigued by such
an occurrence of antigens common both to host
and parasite and will speculate upon its significance. It has occasionally been implied that the
INFECTIOUS DISEASES, THE ABO BLOOD GROUPS AND HUMAN EVOLUTION

coincidence is fortuitous and has no significance.
This argument is only likely to influence geneticists convinced of the existence of genes neutral
in selective value and several attempts have been
made to demonstrate a mechanism by which the
occurrence of ABO (H) substances in pathogens
could be a factor in the individual variation of
human resistance to infection.

Plague and Smallpox

Notable amongst these has been the work of
Pettenkofer and his colleagues (1960, 1961, 1962).
These workers were convinced that the global
variations in frequency of the ABO blood group
types (ABO polytypism) could depend on differential response to infection with potentially lethal
diseases, especially those that occurred previously
in major pandemics of very high mortality. They
studied two organisms of potential, and previously actual, pandemic lethality, Pasturella
pestis and variola—the agents of plague and
smallpox respectively. They claimed to have
detected material indistinguishable from human
blood group H substance in P. pestis and A substance in the strain of vaccinia (closely related to
variola) which they studied. The methods used
included the inoculation of suitable rabbits with
material prepared from cultures of the appropriate organisms, P. pestis on blood-groupsubstance-free agar medium and vaccinia on
chick chorio-allantois. The serum obtained after
inoculation with P. pestis material contained
antibody which agglutinated human OQ’ cells
(containing H substance) and was removed
(absorbed) by ““H”’ substance and by suspensions
of P. pestis. Similarly anti-A induced in rabbits
inoculated with vaccinia material agglutinated
human blood group A cells and was absorbed
by A substance and by preparations of vaccinia.
It was suggested that Anti-H “reacts” with P.
pestis and naturally occurring anti-A with
variola to produce a result favourable to the
host.

The inferences drawn from these findings
were that individuals of group O since they possessed the “H” antigen would be unable to
develop anti-H in response to infection with the
H-containing plague organism and would be
more likely to succumb than contacts of other
ABO groups. Similarly individuals of groups A

and AB lacking anti-A would be more susceptible to the A-containing smallpox virus.
Where both diseases were common a relative
preponderance of group B individuals would
eventually occur. Just such a preponderance, it
was pointed out, exists in the uniquely high
frequency of blood group B in Asia where both
plague and smallpox have caused frequent and
severe epidemics.

In support of their hypothesis Pettenkofer
and his colleagues claim to have demonstrated
that in India and Pakistan individuals of groups
O and B infected with smallpox may have a
slightly more mild attack than those of group A
and AB.

This work of Pettenkofer and his colleagues
has been subjected to much criticism. Harris
et al. (1962), although confirming the ability of
vaccinia preparations to induce anti-A antibody
formation in rabbits, demonstrated the presence
of a similar property in uninfected egg membranes. In addition they were able to show that
vaccinia virus grown on rabbit dermis and
uncontaminated with chick egg material did not
induce anti-A antibody formation, results which
appeared to remove the experimental basis for
the presence of blood group A substance in
vaccinia virus and probably variola. In addition
Harris and his colleagues failed to neutralize vaccinia virus with potent rabbit anti-A and a
further attempt to substantiate the relationship
between vaccinia virus and blood group A substance by growing the virus in the presence of A
or B blood group substances also failed. There
was no difference between A and B substances in
the degree of potentiation which occurred. Since
vaccinia virus probably does not contain blood
group A substance, is not neutralized by anti-A
serum and its growth is not selectivly enhanced
by blood group A substance, there is at present
no explanation for the results claimed by Pettenkofer and his colleagues (1962), that susceptibility to smallpox and response to vaccination are
statistically greater in humans of blood group A
and AB than of blood groups B and O. The
possibility remains that individuals of different
blood groups may have greater or lesser resistance to smallpox not because of any particular
attribute of their blood group but because they
have been derived from different stock. Thus the

203
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

apparent susceptibility of group A and AB
individuals may be due to an influx of A genes
into India from an area of low smallpox endemity. If, however, it is firmly established from a
number of different centres, that individuals of
group A and AB are more susceptible to smallpox (and vaccination) than are O and B then this
observation will be analogous to those relating
to rheumatic carditis and respiratory virus
infections, where the causative organisms have
not been shown to contain ABO (H) substances.
The presence of H substance in the epidemic
strains of plague bacilli has been questioned by
Springer and Wiener (1962) and since most
individuals irrespective of group are likely to
have some H-antigen these authors were unconvinced that group O individuals were less
likely to develop anti-H following infection with
plague.

Prospects

Thus the attractively simple immunological
relationship involving human blood group
antibodies and micro-organisms containing
blood group antigens has not been either proved
or disproved, although the weight of evidence
seems against it in smallpox and plague. On the
other hand Muschel and Osawa (1959) have
shown that anti-B sera exerts a bactericidal effect
against Escherichia coli 086, a bacillus containing
high group B activity. They conclude “*. . . Crossreactivity between blood group substance B and
E. coli 086 affords a model for the possible
influence of blood groups in resistance to
infection against those microbial agents which
may possess blood group antigens.”

204

There is little doubt that the controversial
nature of this subject will provoke many future
“alarums and excursions”. It is therefore
important to remember that the study of the
blood group systems in relation to diseases,
infectious and non-infectious, is merely an
imperfect tool with which we may hope to gain
some insight into the processes of human
development and evolution.

REFERENCES
Buckwalter, J. A., Naifeh, G. S., Aver. J. E. and Edwards
J. H. 1962. Brit. med. J., 2, 1023.
Clarke, C. A. 1961. In Progress in Medical Genetics.
Grune and Stratton. Pp. 81-119.

—— McConnell, R. B. and Sheppard, P. M. 1960. Brit.
med. J., 1, 21.

Fisher, R. A. 1930. The Genetic Theory of Natural
Selection. Oxford.
Ford, E. B. 1942. Genetics for Medical Students. Methuen.

Glynn, A. A., Glynn, L. E. and Holborow, E. J. 1956.
Lancet, 2, 759.

Harris, R., Harrison, G. A. and Rondle, C. J. M. (in
preparation).

Levine, P. 1943. J. Hered., 34, 71.

ee J. C. and Zuckerman, A. J. 1962. Brit. med.

Motulsky, A. G. 1960. Hum. Biol. 32, 28.

Mourant, A. E. 1956. The Distribution of the Human
Blood Groups. Blackwell.

Penrose, L. S. 1959. Outline of Human Genetics. Heineman.

Pettenkofer, H. J., 1961. Eighth Int. Cong. Soc. Blood
Transfusion, 154. S. Karger.

——., and Bickerich, R. 1960. Zbl. Bakt. Parasitol., { Orig.
179, 433.

—,, Stoss, B., Helmbold, W. and Vogel, F. 1962. Nature,
Lond. 193, 445.

Springer, G. F., Williamson, P. and Brandes, W. C. 1961.
J. exp. Med., 113, 1077.

——, and Wiener, A. S. 1962. Nature, Lond. 193, 444.

Woolf, B. 1955. Ann. hum. Genet. 19, 251.
