REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS 407

within outwards; no artificial system can be one of true eugenics. This
is sound teaching, such as we should expect from a psychologist.

The reader will realise that “things are not what they seem”; for
the author delights in making short work of current and conventional
opinions, and arriving at flatly contrary conclusions.

With the “ woman’s movement ” he has a deep-rooted sympathy; yet

his criticism of militancy is about the best we have seen. But if sympathetic with women’s political aspirations, he shows a still deeper
approval of the German “ emotional ” movement, whereby, he indicates,
women are seeking to alter their status by a practical revolt against the
conventional idea of marriage. While apparently regarding permanent
monogamous union as an ideal, he does not think it should be enforced
by the State; and he regards prostitution as the obverse of enforced
monogamy. With perfect logic he is ready to contemplate the withdrawal of the State from its position as regulating marriage, and is read
to face the confusion which would result. Such proposals make us rub
our eyes; they show up by contrast the true conservatism of the Majority
Report on Divorce.
A falling birth-rate he regards with no anxious eye; it is a necessary
and desirable accompaniment of civilisation. He makes out his case—
up to a point. Nor does he regard the greater fertility of the lower
classes, as compared with the higher, with regret; for “a civilised community is a lamp which burns at the top but is replenished from the
bottom.” | .

Early religious influence is commonly looked upon as of high importance; he views it as antagonistic to the true interests both of the child
and religion; the adolescent will be more deeply and truly religious
if the child’s religious instincts are allowed to mature with as little
artificial stimulus as possible.

Sexual attraction, he teaches, tends to bring like to like, not like to
unlike, as has been commonly held; in many respects, therefore, nature
and eugenics co-operate. . |

No kind of immorality should be regarded as criminal, unless it is
directly anti-social in its effect. The confusion of immorality with
crime he regards as a fundamental error whereby an enormous amount of
energy is wasted, or worse .

Such are a few of the conclusions. Whether the reader agree or disagree, the author is always instructive and suggestive, and carries to his
subject an exhaustive knowledge of the literature. His writings are not
to be neglected by any who wish to understand the significance of
eugenics.

Lofthouse, W. F. Ethics and the Family. Hodder and Stoughton;
7s. 6d. net.

Mr. LOFTHOUSE has written a book in which there is much to interest the
general reader. He considers the claim of the Christian church to be
the divine family and the persistence of the family as the true social unit
in all ages and civilisations to be two phenomena which should be investigated together. Anything which tends to destroy or break up the
one is a direct attack on the other. The conception of the family in
sociology corresponds with the conception of the atonement in theology.
Both are manifestations in different spheres of the same biological, lifepreserving, or spirit-informed instincts. The function of the institution
of the family is—like that of all institutions and social organisations—
to give freer play to the spirit which has called it into being. Such a
statement does not mean that the family has been invented in response to
an articulate demand. It is a growth, an organic part of the structure of
408 ' EUGENICS REVIEW

the social organism, which, when neglected or injured, leads to atrophy
and disease, when developed or modified, permits fresh extensions and
new conquests.

Mr. Lofthouse thinks that the family has always shown greater
stability in the conditions of agricultural and pastoral rather than of industrial communities. The “ petite culture ” system of the Continent consolidates (sometimes almost to a vanishing point!) the immediate household group; while the nomadic life or the large tribal settlement necessarily develops the clan feeling and the extended kinships.

Mr. Lofthouse points out—very rightly, in our opinion—that many
of the modern attacks on the family, both theoretical and practical, proceed from the substitution of efficiency, economic and industrial, as the
goal of society in place of the older ideals of the moral and spiritual
welfare of the individual. He questions the ethical grounds of this
change of objective; or rather, he calls our attention to the fact that the
change has been made to a great extent without any conscious realisation
of its far-reaching effects, and that no attempt is forthcoming to justify
the alteration from the moral or religious point of view.

As regards the ethical aspect of the so-called survival of the fit—
by which some men deem this efficiency will be attained—the real struggle
ts not to eliminate the unfit so much as to make them, if possible, more
fit, It is the less adaptable rather than the less adapted who are
removed. Nature is not working towards uniformity, but is endeavouring
to maintain plasticity. Thus it is that co-operation and social enterprise
among those who are physically weaker are able to triumph over the
muscular strength and domineering instincts of any one individual. The
ceaseless personal struggle to which the older economists and more
dogmatic evolutionists looked in order to maintain biological advance is
the very antithesis to the ideals enshrined in the family; while the conceptions of mutual interdependence and forbearing, which lie at the root
of all family affection, are becoming part of the economic and political
aspirations of the twentieth century. It is only within a group, constituted on lines similar to that of the family, that it is possible to
practice the maxim of “to each according to his needs, from each according
to his powers,” without fear of consequent demoralisation. It is only by
recognising the fundamental conditions involved in the existence of the
family that we are justified in preventing the individual accumulation of
wealth, which confers no benefits, and in regulating conditions of competition that compel men and women to strive beyond their allotted
strength. Hope and knowledge of better things—not necessarily material—must exist for all; fear of social catastrophe and extinction, from
unknown and alien causes, must be removed from the majority.

Mr. Lofthouse looks to the Christian church to declare anew her
rightful position as the natural guardian and purifier of all the instincts
and emotions on which the conceptions of the family are based. He
believes that one of the greatest dangers to modern society lies in the
destruction of natural ties of kinship by the development of the science
of organisation and the mobility of modern life. It is now possible for
an individual to live a life of selfish isolation in the midst of society
from the ages of sixteen to sixty, and to look to an impersonal
agency, devoid of the affections and claims which purify human existence,
to maintain him in his years of immaturity and decay. The isolated
woman in her hostel or garret, the isolated man in his club or model
lodging-house are the most dangerous anti-social forces of the present
day. The problem before us, Mr. Lofthouse seems to say, is, first, how
to reconstruct the families of men, and then—how to reconsecrate the
community as the family of God. D. WHETHAM.
