NOTES AND

Members’ Meetings

THURSDAY, January 25th, 1940, at 3 p.m.:
“The Health of Working Women and its
Significance in War-Time.”” Speaker: Mrs.
Margery Spring Rice, M.A. (Author of Working Class Wives).

Tuesday, March 19th, 1940: ‘ Abortion
—Right or Wrong?” Sheaker: Mrs.
Thurtle (Author of the Minority Statement
in the Report of the Inter-Departmental
Committee on Abortion).

Friday, April 19th, 1940: Arrangements
to be announced later.

Propaganda Department

It has not been possible to do much in the
Propaganda Department during the last
three months. Owing to the evacuation and
consequent dislocation of all existing health
services, the local authorities have discontinued much of their health publicity
work. But now, the National Council for

Maternity and Child Welfare and the

Central Council for Health Education—two
Societies to which this Society is affiliated—
are trying to arrange for health educational
work in the now crowded reception areas,
and it may be possible for the Propaganda
Department to co-operate.

Mrs. Tamplin went to South Wales at the
beginning of the war and was asked to speak
on Heredity at meetings of the local Left
Book Club and of the Rotary Club. From
this small beginning, there is a growing
demand for her to speak at other Clubs and
Societies, but the difficulties are the commandeering of local halls and meeting places
by the authorities, and the black-out. But
as the days get lighter, it will be possible to
increase the work both in London and other
parts of the country.

A few colleges and schools have shown the
film and the headmaster of one writes:
“ The films were shown to a group of VIth
Form Medical Students, one of the Doctors
working here for the Ministry of Health,
myself and a colleague. The films excited
much interest but there was no open

MEMORANDA

discussion, since these matters have been
mentioned and discussed many times during
this term’s work on genetics. The adult
members of the audience feel that it is most
valuable to make senior boys realize the
existence of grave social problems and how
Science helps to seek the causes and remedy
them. There was a general and obviously
sincere appreciation of the films.”

I spoke at a meeting of a Women’s
Institute in a small village in the home
counties at which the Vicar’s wife was present. Shortly after, the Vicar called at these
offices, bought three dozen copies of Sex
Education for Children and took away with
him Mating and the Birth of Children and
full particulars of the Soczety. He said that
these pamphlets are the best that he has
come across and will be invaluable to him
in dealing with the young people in his
parish.

HILDA Pocock.

Family Planning Association

ALTHOUGH the inevitable limitations caused
by the first few months of war have necessarily cancelled the plans made for further
development of the work in many directions
(and these include the usual autumn special
effort to raise a substantial sum of money)
it has, in spite of fears, been found possible
to keep the Headquarters of the Association
in being at 69 Eccleston Square, although
with only a very small staff. It is, among
other activities, fulfilling constantly the
functions of a central bureau for enquiries
from the medical profession and from others
interested in the objects of the Association,
such as chemists, nurses, parents, and
prospective parents. The latter include the
physically unfit, the very poor, and those
with a somewhat higher standard of living
who are anxious to plan their families.
Enquirers of this type who form a large
proportion are almost unanimous in stating
their desire to rear a family but also to plan
it intelligently.

211
212

A welcome extension of work this winter
is the possibility, through the co-operation
of the Queen’s Institute of District Nursing,
of providing County Superintendents, and
through them district nurses, with information as to clinics where patients may attend
for contraceptive advice. When the F.P.A.
can attain its object of enlarging the number
of gynecological clinics available this information to nurses should be of increasing
value.

Although at the outbreak of war a number
of clinics suspended their work the tendency
now is for these to re-open. It is hoped that
before very long only a few of the newer
clinics will remain closed.

One extension of the work which is being
in no way curtailed at present is organization
and propaganda in India. Mrs. Datta, the
F.P.A. organizer, airns at concentrating at
present on one area in order to experiment
and to develop something which may prove
a demonstration and an example as to the
type of contraceptive service which may be
possible in India, and on which other such
efforts may model themselves according to
their local conditions if it is successful.

The continuance of this work will, however, entirely depend on the provision of
funds. Only the generosity of subscribers
who have maintained their subscriptions,
a substantial donation from the Chairman,
Lady Denman, and a grant of £50 from the
Eugenics Society have made it possible to
continue the work of the Association at all.

W. HOLLAND.

News from Canada

THE Dominion Bureau of Statistics has
issued a preliminary annual report on the
Vital Statistics of Canada for 1938. The
population of Canada is given as I1,195,000.
The birth-rate is 20°5 per 1,000 of population.
For many years this rate has been falling.
For the period 1926-30 the rate was 24-1.
For the period 1931-5 it was 21-4. In
1936 it fell to 20-0 and in 1937 there was a
further drop to 19:8. The rate for 1938,
20:5, marks a halt to the long period of
decline. Whether that halt be permanent or
temporary, only the future can tell.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

A feature of the returns is the position of
Quebec in second place to New Brunswick
for the first time in history. In both provinces the rate increased, but in New Brunswick to an extent which gave her the highest
rate in the Dominion. The following table
compares the rates in these two provinces,
in Ontario, and in Canada as a whole:

BIRTHS PER THOUSAND OF POPULATION

New
Brunswick Quebec Ontario Canada
1926-30 25°8 30°5 21-0 24°I
1931-5 24°9 26°6 18°3 21°4
1936 24°2 24°3 16-9 20:0
1937 24°0 24°I 16°6 19°8
1938 25°7 24°6 17°6 20°5

The three provinces with lowest birthrates in 1938 were: Manitoba 18-7;
Ontario 17:6; and British Columbia 16:3.
But if Ontario is far behind in the matter of
births, it makes a satisfactory showing in
marriages. The Province’s marriage rate has
increased from 6:8 in 1931-5 to 8-1 in both
1937 and 1938. In Quebec the 1938 marriage
rate was 7°9.

Illegitimate births have, unfortunately,
increased in Canada from an average of
3:01 per hundred births in 1926-30 to 4:01
in 1938. Nova Scotia was highest in 1938
with 6-4 per cent illegitimate births; Ontario next with 4-7, Quebec lowest with 3-2.

* * *

As soon as the war is over, there will be
need in Canada for hospital accommodation
for at least 10,000 more mental patients.
This was the statement of Dr. C. M. Hincks,
General Director of the National Committee
for Mental Hygiene, before the Women’s
Division of the Health League of Canada.
In 1931 the number of beds in mental
institutions was 30,379. On December 31st,
1938, the number was 39,833. The present
total Canadian capital investment in mental
hospitals is around $65,000,000.

W. L. HuTToN.

Welfare of Adolescents

THE Board of Education has called attention
to a serious deficiency in our social services
in a circular issued to local education
authorities for higher education in England —
and Wales, and a similar circular has been
NOTES AND MEMORANDA

issued by the Secretary of State for Scotland.
These authorities are asked to set up local
Youth Committees in their areas, and
voluntary organizations and _ education
authorities are called upon to join forces in
making a reality of the provision for youth
in all parts of the country.

The circular deals with the provision for the
social and physical development of boys and
girls between the ages of 14 and 20 who have
ceased full-time attendance at school. This
has long been neglected in this country and,
notwithstanding the efforts of local authorities and voluntary organizations, less than
half the boys and girls concerned belong to
any organization which can cater for their
needs. The Board points out that the conditions produced by war, the blackout, and the
strain and disorganization of family life
constitute a serious menace to youth. “ The
Government,” it states, ‘‘ are determined to
prevent the recurrence during this war of
the social problems which arose in the last.”

The Board of Education has now undertaken a direct responsibility for youth
welfare. National Youth Committees have
been appointed to advise it and a special
branch has been organized to deal with
grants and other administrative duties.

The new Committees will place provision
for the welfare of young people on an equal
basis with the rest of education. It will be
their task to work out an ordered policy
which will provide for immediate needs and
indicate the lines upon which a real advance
may be made under more favourable conditions. They will have to plan future development and decide where the responsibility for
any new facilities will lie ; and in doing this
they are reminded by the Board that social
and economic questions cannot be ignored
and that when young people are living under
unsatisfactory conditions and are employed
for unduly long hours, often on work of a
dull and arduous character, they cannot be
expected to take full advantage of any
facilities offered for the use of such leisure as
is left to them.

The local education authorities can assist
financially by making grants towards the
rent of buildings and salaries of full-time

213

leaders and towards the upkeep and maintenance of premises and equipment. They
can also provide instructors in such subjects
as physical recreation and craft work for
classes in clubs and other centres. Such
approved expenditure by local authorities
will rank for grant at the rate of 50 per cent.

Professor William Washington Graves

AT a meeting of the St. Louis Medical
Society on October 24th, 1939, Dr. William
Washington Graves, Professor of Neuropsychiatry, St. Louis University School of
Medicine, was awarded a certificate of merit
and a gold medal for scientific accomplishment for his classification of scapule and
other inherited characters, and for his
discovery of “‘ The Age-Incidence Principle
of Investigation.’’ This certificate of merit for
scientific accomplishment having been given
on only two previous occasions, the award
to Dr. Graves was an outstanding event in
the St. Louis Medical Society.

The certificate reads as follows: This
Certificate of Merit presented by the St.
Louis Medical Society to William Washington Graves, M.D., in consideration of the
usefulness of his classification of scapule and
other inherited characters, and of his discovery of “‘ The Age-Incidence Principle of
Investigation,’ both of which resulted in
new approaches to the qualitative evaluation
of inherited variations in relation to the
inherited qualities of human constitution,
expressed in inherited predisposition to
health or disease, and in inherited capacity
for education, for adaptability, and for
longevity.

National Baby Welfare Council

THE Executive Committee of the National
Baby Week Council announces that the name
of the Council has been changed to NATIONAL
BABY WELFARE COUNCIL.

The National Baby Week Council came
into being during the last war, claiming the
nation’s better attention to its babies and
little children. In 1917 the first National
Baby Week was held, and 1918 saw the first
great triumph in the passing of the Maternity
214

and Child Welfare Act. Since that time the
Council has continuously pursued its labours
—keeping the welfare of mothers and children
before the public. Under its broader title
the National Baby Welfare Council will
expand its propaganda work and develop its
service to the nation. The Council’s address
is 29 Gordon Square, London, W.C.1.

Galton Anniversary Luncheon, 1940
OWING to the war, the usual Galton Dinner
will not take place this year, and the Galton
Lecture has been deferred.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

A luncheon will be held at St. Ermins
Restaurant (entrance in Broadway, St.
James’s Park, S.W.1), on February 17th, at
1.15 p.m. (for 1.30). Guests will be welcomed
by Lord Horder, who will say a few words
about the activities of the Soczety in war-time.
Tickets, price 4s. 6d., may be obtained from
the Business Secretary, The Eugenics Society,
69 Eccleston Square, London, S.W.1, and
should be purchased as early as possible as
it may not be easy to increase the numbers
arranged for at the last moment.. Fellows
and Members are invited to bring guests.

JOURNAL OF THE
ROYAL STATISTICAL SOCIETY

First Issued in 1838

The annual volume consists at present of four parts, each of which contains two papers read

at Meetings of the Society, with full reports of the discussions thereon; also Miscellaneous

statistical articles, Reviews of statistical and economic books, and .Notes on matters of
current interest to statisticians.

| Principal Contents of Part IV, 1939
THE CAPITAL MARKET OF TO-DAY: A Discussion, opened by

A. P. L. GORDON.

SOME ASPECTS OF THE TEACHING OF STATISTICS

By JOHN WISHART (With Discussion.)

STATISTICS RELATING TO THE DETERRENT ELEMENT IN FLOGGING

By E. LEWIS-FANING, Ph.D.

10/
PRICE
Each Part

Annual Subscription
(Post free to any part of the World)

41/
The JourNAL and SuPPLEMENT will be issued as usual during 1940

Obtainable through any Bookseller or direct from

THE ROYAL

STATISTICAL SOCIETY

4 PORTUGAL STREET, LONDON, W.C.2

 
