34 EUGENICS REVIEW.

RACIAL RESPONSIBILITY AS A FACTOR IN THE
FORMATION OF CHARACTER.

By Tue Rev. anp Hon. Epwarp LYTTELTON
(Headmaster of Eton).

Major Darwin, ladies and gentlemen, I find myself in some
difficulty in beginning to speak to you this afternoon, not having
been here this morning, and not feeling quite certain what are
the best topics, in this very large subject, to deal with on this
occasion. The subject of eugenics is still rather wide and indefinite in its connotation. I speak as one who has not been
able to follow very exactly the different activities of the movement, but who has taken a great interest in many aspects of it
from the beginning, and who has been able to form a certain
idea of what should be the chief aims and aspirations of those
who belong to the movement. I suppose we cannot be wrong
in saying one thing: that the spirit has come into a certain
number of English people enabling them to realise that the
welfare of the next generation is in our hands, and that that
truism, as it seems to us, is by no means a truism to
a large number of our countrymen. And__ indeed,
even among those who would hold it co be _ true,
there are a considerable proportion who are unable to
translate the idea into practice. And in the main we are
gathered together to help each other with counsel as to how
that particular zeal and determination can be quickened, how
to think of the welfare of the next generation in regard to some
of the most pertinent and vital facts, with the view to quickening
the zeal of those who are not indisposed to receive the truth, to
quicken it into practice. One of the most illuminating pieces
of information that I myself have received in regard to the
whole subject comes from the books of Professor Whetham and
his wife; and especially that one entitled ‘‘ The Family and the
Nation,’’ where the outcome of the facts which we sum up under
the name of the decline of the birth-rate is set out in one aspect
with great power, after a great deal of research, and with admirable skill. That is to say, the loss to England at the present
day of intellect, owing to the simple fact that in all sections of
EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE. 35

society a decline of the birth-rate has set in just where it does
most harm. Let me recall to those who may have partly forgotten what these facts are. In 1875 the decline began to be
noticed in England. It had been noticed a long time previously in France. From that year down to the present time,
it has been an accelerating decline, and it has been found to
operate in just those sections of society which have reached the
highest level of civilisation. It is a commonplace, no doubt,
to all of you here that the rich and most educated people, as
they are called, have been the earliest to exhibit this tendency.
I do not know whether it is so commonly known that it operates
also among the working people. Notice what happens when a
workman, by his skill and ability, raises himself above the level
of the ordinary wage-earner, and begins to earn 35s. to 40s. a
week. What happens then? This was told me by a man in
close contact with the working classes, who was able to make
friends ‘with a large number of the higher class of artisan in
a country district. Look at these men who are in that position,
having raised themselves to 35s. or 40s. per week, who are in
comparative prosperity, their position in life apparently
secured ; the young women talk about their prospects, and when
they are engaged to be married they all say the same thing :
“We cannot look forward to a family, and we do not intend
to.” “*Why not?’  ‘* Because I want to have a life with
some enjoyment in it, and some expansion in it; I am not
going to be tied to a cottage, where I have no servant, looking
after children.’’ One cannot help feeling that that expresses
a desire with which we have some sympathy; it is a desire for a
more complete life; a little travelling to the seaside, scenery,
knowledge, and one thing and the other, all of them quite
what they ought to expect, but inconsistent with the kind of
domestic life which seems to be a necessity for people in that
situation. But whatever the cause may be, the result is the
Same: the very cream of the working men in the country are
those who have ceased to multiply. And as soon as they raise
themselves into the class which we should call the upper
stratum of the men, that force, whatever it is, begins to operate.
And it is impossible to say exactly how you are to meet the
30 EUGENICS REVIEW.

difficulty which is there raised. So I think it is our business
this afternoon to tell each other, as far as we can, what the
difficulties are, because, as I have often been reminded, we must
first know the difficulties before we can attempt to solve them,
and it will take us a good many years to solve that particular
one.

But let me go on with a recital of the facts. We find that
according to Mr. Whetham’s calculations, based on Sir Francis
Galton’s calculations—and he has gone over the ground very
carefully—he reaches a statement which is alarming, perhaps
beyond anything that has ever been put into print. It is that
after making out the proportion of England to the community
who may be called ‘‘ eminent ’’—not talented, or merely able,
but those who not only have ability, but know how to make use
of the opportunities which fall to them of exhibiting that ability
to the utmost, and reach to quite the head of whatever business
or profession they are engaged in—taking certain rough tests
which everyone would agree to be sensible, he arrives at a
proportion of 250 out of every million men coming into the
class of eminent. Making that the basis of the calculation,
Professor Whetham reaches this result : that England, in every
year between now and 1880, when the decline set in in full
swing in England, has been producing 100 less eminent people
every year, and is going on doing so still. Combining that with
the fact that, look where we will, in spite of the evidence of a
large number of young men not knowing where to find employment—the fact is patent to everybody—every profession
is calling out loud and long for character, energy, and brain
power, and cannot get it. We are entering upon a period
when the men who ought to have been born between 1875 and
1880, and who would be reaching the age when they would
be having the effect upon society which they should have, and
when their talents would have been exercising their mature
powers, those men do not exist. And I am inclined to think
that whenever anyone speaks of the manifold problems which
are facing England at the present day, there can be none which
quite reach this in importance, because you may multiply as
much as you please the difficulties which face us, but they do
EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE. 37

not appear, even in their aggregate, to be too large or too
complex if only we had the requisite number of men with brain
power to grapple with them. But the men and the women are
not there. We are working with a diminishing force, with
an army which seems to be depleting itself just as the adversary,
in the shape of problems, is increasing. Then one looks to
other countries to see what may be gained in the way of consolation and guidance from them. And I do not think I am
wrong in stating that you have in history, in the cases of
Greece, Rome, Venice, Spain, Holland, France, and the old
British stock in America, in every single instance, a decline
which has been contemporaneous with the decline of the country. And in no single case does history record recovery. I
am afraid, too, the verdict is as strong and clear as possible
that the decline sets in coincidently with the increase of wealth.
It is, indeed, instructive, but not consoling, to hear that our
great rivals, the Germans, began to show this deadly symptom
20 years later than we did, and from 1895 the decline in the
birth-rate has set in there exactly as it did in England. Of
course, it 1s true that modern countries are self-conscious, and
know what is happening. But that does not seem to make it
at all more probable that they will know what to do to
counteract it. I have been told, but I have not been able to
verify it, that there are recoveries, or hopes of recovery, in
Holland. If so, it would be a cheering fact, and I hope there
is someone here this afternoon who can tell us whether that is
so. That is a subject which I know very well those connected
with the movement of eugenics have at heart, and the facts
have been brought forward under the stimulus of the movements, and I say we must face the facts first before we try to
solve the difficulties.

Then there is the great question of heredity, which has
been occupying some of the best minds in the country for many
years. And I rather think I am right in saying that as soon
as that subject began to take hold of those connected with
this movement, it naturally brought, as its outcome, certain
ideas, brought them to the fore—ideas connected with the whole
question of marriage. And perhaps the adversaries, or the
38 EUGENICS REVIEW.

critics, of the movement have got hold there of some slightly
incautious expressions which might have been used in past
times. And yet how can one doubt that those who have the
welfare of the country at heart are right in facing the question of
marriage in its ethical aspect, and asking themselves if something cannot be done to raise the tone among the younger
generation as to the meaning of marriage, its responsibilities,
the sacredness of its meaning? If that can be done by an
appeal to people with regard to the welfare of the coming
generation, let it be done. There are many who would say,
no doubt, that if the old idea of the sacredness of marriage has
been displaced from the minds of the English, it will not be
possible to replace it by any scientific appeal to the nation.
None the less, it seems to me that every kind of appeal that can
be made ought to be made, and that if science has a message
which the old-fashioned appeal missed, let science deliver that
message, let us know what we have learned about heredity, and
what marriage means in its scientific or racial aspect. I see no
reason why that attempt should not be made. I see no reason
why there should be the slightest antagonism between those
with whom I confess I deeply sympathise, who hold that the
old Christian idea of marriage, if it can be revived and strengthened, is the one thing that can save the country from the
dangers which lie before it. I confess I hold that opinion
most deeply, but none the less I should stretch out the hand of
welcome to anyone who tried to infuse into the minds of the
public anything like the truth in regard to this great and vital
question; and if that truth, in their minds, takes the form of
what we call scientific truth, let it be presented with all the power
and with all the persuasiveness that they can command. I take
it that we are in this position, that we cannot afford to neglect
any kind of appeal which has the remotest chance of being
listened to at the present day.

Then I think I am right in saying, also, that the eugenics
movement took the form of inquiry into facts. There has been
some admirable work done in inquiring into the complex and
obscure facts connected with these great subjects. And we
must not forget that practical activity has lately shown itself in
EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE. 39

the helping forward of legislation with regard to the mentally
deficient. There I think everybody must feel, who knows anything about these matters, that it does behove all citizens who
are patriotic to try and bring our practical legislators ‘‘ to the
scratch ’’ in regard to those subjects where legislation is, as we
all know in this room, absolutely indispensable. We have gone
beyond the time when counsels and information can any longer
be of value; we know the facts, and we know now that Government action is the one way in which they must be dealt with. I
hope that whatever stimulus and push can be given by this
society in the next twelve months in that direction will not be
spared.

Along with all these matters the society has been considering and taking counsel together on that most interesting
topic which has engaged your attention this morning, sex
instruction. There, I think I may say, from a long and rich
experience, that the difficulty which presents itself is quite
simple. It is this: that we have an increasing mass of opinion
in favour of instruction of children in regard to the laws of
sex, which has taken effect in certain portions of society with
the most admirable results, not, of course, results so cheering
that we can say that the problem is solved, for even where
this matter has been taken up, either by school teachers or by
parents, there has been a great deal of blundering, and I am
inclined to think that there will be a great deal more blundering
before we have done, because the matter rests upon laws which
are very deep and almost, one may say, sacred in regard to
the development of the child-mind and the relations of personalities one with another, laws which we cannot lay down
in black and white, or in any very clear way. None the less, I
should like to say this: that where the subject has been taken
up in a right-minded way by parents—and I know it was said
this morning, and I most cordially agree with it, that this is
their work in the first place, and only in the second place
the work of the schoolmasters and schoolmistresses—yet we
may be called upon to do what others will not do, but it
remains, and always will remain, a great law of Nature that
this instruction is a responsibility resting upon the parents.
40 EUGENICS REVIEW.

That I am sure we shall be agreed upon. Where it has been
done by parents who have spoken to me on the subject—and
I know a good many—I have been astonished at the ease with
which they have done it, and at the admirable results which
have been observed afterwards. And this is a matter of plain
observation. Nobody can have been a schoolmaster as long as
I have without seeing the difference between the boys who have
had this advantage and those who have not. Let me go on to
say this further: that for many years I was quite convinced of
this truth that we are now thinking about, but I was also inclined then, like a great many of my colleagues and others are
now, to isolate the question, and to imagine that if you take a
child and just give the necessary instruction, and leave the
matter alone, you have solved the practical problem. But you
have not. The practical problem is not to be solved by
isolating this question from the whole of the moral question.
And if that is clearly perceived, the difficulties in the way of
giving the instruction are greatly mitigated. |

I have not time to go into it deeply, but we may go from
point to point, from the earliest age onwards, teaching selfcontrol, and it leads naturally to the particular kind of selfcontrol which is needed in regard to the temptations of later
years. It leads naturally to it, and it can be given with all
the wealth of those influences which only home life can enforce.
And when it is done, it requires no genius, nothing but rightmindedness and common sense, and earnest and unfeigned love
for the child; that is all. And when it is done in that way, I
cannot exaggerate the strength of the safeguards with which
that child starts life. It is quite a beautiful thing to see. I
could give instances where boys have been exposed to temptations which one would think would be overwhelming in their
force, and yet not only have they not given way, but it has
never occurred to them for a single minute to give way to the
influence of vice and weakness and the sins of the body, which
work:such havoc still in the country. It comes into one’s experience to see cases in which one can compare the rightly broughtup child with the other, and you see that the lapses are unnatural, and when one is convinced of that, hopefulness springs
EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE. 4!

up in the mind. But this is what we have got to ask
ourselves this afternoon, and I know you have been thinking
of it this morning also: if it 1s a fact that parents cannot, or
will not, on a large scale all over the country, do their duty
in this respect, then it falls upon the schools. And then we
are faced with the appalling question of the elementary schools,
in regard to a mass of children, millions almost, about whom
I am afraid it must be said that home life, for them, does not
exist. None the less, looking at what the law of Nature is,
looking at what the parent is towards the child, I cannot help
feeling that before the schoolmasters and schoolmistresses look
upon it as a lost cause, they should first of all gather together
and take counsel with each other as to how they can deal with
those parents who will listen to what they say. In every elementary school there are children whose parents may be roughly
divided into those who will listen and those who will not.
Those who will not, I think, are in every community a very
small minority. What about the mass in the middle? For
at the other end are those who prefer that their children should
not be taught these things. What about the mass in the
middle? For remember they. are always the majority. With
regard to them, I| take it that there is a duty which rests upon
schoolmasters and schoolmistresses all over the land, and that
is, with such experience as they can command, to wake them
up to what is not only a duty but a privilege. And I am sure
that in some cases you will be listened to; but not in all. There
will remain, no doubt, those most complex and difficult problems as to what the teachers are to do in regard to teaching
these matters. Must it be done in class, or by individual instruction? I am sure of this, that practically the questions
resolve themselves into one or two. Granted that there is a
large residuum of children who will not be taught at home, is it
possible they can be taught at school individually? The
answer, I am afraid, will often be in the negative. And if
so, they must be taught in class. Then we come to an even
lower level than before, a level where the hopefulness is less
and less. Nevertheless, if it is the only way of doing it, it
must be done. And there I suggest that the teachers should
42 EUGENICS REVIEW.

take the greatest possible care to divide the children into such
classes as can be dealt with practically. If you allow children
whose minds are already poisoned to mix with those who are
innocent, and then try to teach them all together, you will
do more harm than good. But how to divide the less
innocent from the completely innocent I do not know. It
requires that practical experience which I do not possess,
though I am certain that there lies the only principle of action
which is likely to succeed.

And so we pass on, in thinking of those matters, to the
great questions of the ideals which lie before us. I would
only say in conclusion that I cannot help expressing the hope
that the eugenic ideal, which those who are listening to me,
and I think most of the public who know about it, will agree
is an ideal of action, is largely a scientific one, that it differs
from the ideals held by what one calls the old-fashioned and
patriotic people who still exist at the present day; it differs
from them in being not so definitely religious as definitely
scientific. But I do hope and trust that there will be nothing
said or done, as these movements make progress in the future,
to bring about the slightest antagonism between those two
classes of opinion. We ought not to be in any antagonism whatever. Supposing that, speaking for a moment
for those who believe that you must have religion at
the bottom of all teaching, is it not patently true that
we have failed to cover the ground—that whether it is that
there is something lacking in our programme, or, what is more
probable, something lacking in the forces at our command, we
have failed to cover the ground? We are in the position of
people in 1870, who were saying, ‘‘ We have the whole of
the machinery for the educating of the poor ready, we have the
principles of education in our mind,’’ but the fact remained
that there were thousands and thousands of children growing
up uneducated, not having been taken in hand, totally undisciplined, and the matter became pressing for others to join in
and say, ‘‘ We will help you to cover the ground.’’ There
ought not to have been antagonism, but there has been. And I
trust that the chequered history of the last forty years may
EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE. 43

enable us, who speak of religion as an indispensable necessity,
to work hand in hand with those whose principles may be
described as scientific, but who have a message full of truth and
hopefulness which they feel found to deliver, and which will
be for the permanent strengthening of what is a great and
promising cause. For it will be a weakening if we do not learn
to fight against this evil, and work, and grapple with all these
tremendous problems, hand in hand, perfectly free from
jealousy, and free from that narrowness which has done so
much to vitiate the hopeful movements of the past.

THE EUGENIC IDEAL AS A FACTOR IN THE FORMATION
OF CHARACTER.

By Miss TuKE
(Principal, Bedford College; University of London).

Mr. CHAIRMAN, ladies and gentlemen, I do not know whether
what I have to say has any very great relation with the title
on which I speak. And so before I begin upon my subject I
want to explain what I am meaning by ‘‘ the eugenic ideal.’’
I think it is a little different from the signification which some
speakers have attached to those words. By that term I mean the
ideal of a future race which is more fit in mind and body, and
has higher ideals than is the case with the present race, and
that this is an ideal which the present generation or generations can, to some extent at any rate, help to bring about.

I want to ask you to consider, for a moment, how extraordinarily different is our present attitude to the future race,
and to our responsibilities to the future race, from that which is
the eugenic ideal. It is one of the curious anomalies of our
very curious society that we leave the most important things
most to chance; at least, so it seems tome. And among these important things, I do not think many people here will disagree
that marriage is one which we leave very much to chance. I
shall give two illustrations of what I mean, and the illustrations
will, I think, have come into the experience of everybody. Very
often it happens that a young man is under discussion. It is
said that his character and conduct are very unsatisfactory, and
