REVIEWS OF BOOKS

INDIA

Gadgil, D. R. Women in the Working Force in
India. Kunda Datar Memorial Lectures 1964.
London, 1966. Asia Publishing House. Pp. 33.

THIS IS THE inaugural lecture under the
auspices of the Kunda Datar Memorial Lecture
Series instituted by the University of Delhi.

Very little is known about the extent and
pattern of the employment of women in India.
There was no uniform definition of worker in
the 1951 and 1961 censuses, so that intercensal
comparisons are not possible and hence for the
lecture the author has mainly drawn upon the
data of the 1961 census and the recent surveys
done in the country.

The 1961 census showed thirty-three million
women as cultivators. This figure was derived
from the definition of worker which would be open
to various interpretations in practice. In case of
seasonal work like cultivation a worker was
defined as one who “had some regular work of
more than one hour a day throughout the greater
part of the working season”. Keeping these
limitations of data in mind, we find that women’s
participation in economic activities varies a
great deal from state to state, there being 85
females to 100 male workers in cultivators’
families in Maharashtra and less than fifteen in
West Bengal. The social conventions relating to
outdoor work by women play an important role,
and non-participation of women in economic
activities and especially in manual work is
considered to add to social prestige among
cultivators. But social sentiments are not so
important as regards agricultural labour provided by women of the lower Hindu castes, the
scheduled castes and tribes. Moreover among
these groups there is also strong economic
pressure in favour of women seeking employment. The difference is noticed in the results that
taking the whole of India there were 50 female
workers per 100 male workers in cultivators’
families, whereas there were 82 female agricultural labourers per 100 male agricultural
labourers.

With regard to the employment of women in
urban areas, recent surveys in Kanpur and
Lucknow showed that most of the women
migrate to the cities with the head of their

ER—M

family or on marriage, and though a great
majority of them were employed in agriculture
in the villages they stopped working after
migrating to cities. The 1961 census also showed
that a very small proportion of women were
working in the cities, the percentages of female
workers among total workers being 8:6 in
Greater Bombay, 6:2 in Delhi, and 5-7 in
Calcutta.

In urban areas the women are generally in
relatively simple patterns of employment, work
in less skilled and technically less advanced
industries, or are in domestic service. Recently
there is some evidence of a growth of employment of women in government service, business
and professions, though all this affects only the
small minority of the educated and the middle
class women.

Our present understanding about the employment of women and the changes that are taking
place in it with economic development is not well
advanced due to lack of data. As Professor
Gadgil points out, the weight of evidence on
farm business and rural life and labour suggests
that in the last decade no changes in the structure
or in the magnitude of operation have taken
place on a scale that could bring about large
real changes in female workers’ participation
in agricultural business.

This lecture raises many thought-provoking
issues regarding employment of women in the
country, which deserve serious consideration
from all those interested in the policies of social
reconstruction.

SAVITRI THAPAR

Boute, Joseph. S.J. La Démographie de la
Branche Indo-Pakistanaise d’ Afrique. Société
d’Etudes Morales, Sociales et Juridiques.
Louvain-Paris, 1965. Nauwelaerts. Pp. 404.
Price FB.500. $10.

THE AUTHOR, WHO is a member of the select
group of those who are expert in demography
as well as theology, here analyses the vital
statistics of Indians and Pakistanis living in
Africa—and also in other areas overseas from
Asia. He has done so in the general expectation
that these overseas communities might represent
a form of demographic development which

165
