REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 371

to throw light on the general question of albinism. The seasonal changes
observed in the coat colour of the Norwegian variable hares kept in
Aberdeen are described week by week throughout the year, and illustrated
by a long series of photographs. It is interesting to note that some small
seasonal change in the pigmentation of the eye appears to occur, though
the statistics collected on this point are not sufficiently extensive to
establish it with certainty.

The experimental breeding of albino dogs forms the subject matter
of Chapter X. The pekinese spaniels which were largely used in these
experiments are particularly suitable for the purpose because the type
of albinism which they exhibit appears to resemble more closely that
found among human beings than does the albinism of other animals.
The ee of these dogs is shown on plate LVII. of the atlas to
Part IV. It is a remarkable specimen of drafting as thirteen generations are shown, among which, as is usual in pedigree stock, polygamy
and inbreeding were customary. The result is something very like a
maze, and would take hours of patient study to interpret.

The atlas of Part IV also contains the collection of 654 pedigrees of
human albinism which has been formed by the authors. The text of
this part provides careful descriptions of them, but their statistical reduction and analysis has been reserved for Part III., which has not yet
been issued. Part IV. also contains a valuable bibliography. The
printing and general get up of these volumes are of the highest quality.

EDGAR SCHUSTER.

Herbert, S.. M.D. The First Princifles of Evolution. A. and C.
Black; 7s. 6d. net; pp. 346.
THIS book is not a critical study of the theory of evolution, such as the
title rather suggests, but a summary of the facts and hypotheses on
which the idea of evolution, in the widest sense, rests. It deals with
all sides of the subject—evolution of stars and planetary systems, of the
atom as indicated by modern work on radio-activity, the geological
record, organic evolution in general, and finally that of man and his
societies. It is obvious that in the space available, much of which is
taken up by reproductions of good but well-known illustrations, these
subjects must be discussed very shortly, but the author knows how to
choose the salient points, and to give his readers a clear idea of the principles involved. When the small size of the book is considered, it is
really rather a remarkable achievement, for it is readable throughout, and
should give those who have little scientific training some idea of the
unity of science and of its purpose, the search for satisfying knowledge
of the nature and origin of the world in which we live. One of the most
interesting chapters is that on mental evolution, or, perhaps, we should
say, the evolution of behaviour, starting from the work of Jennings and
others on the Protozoa and tracing the increasing complexity through
the higher forms of life. The chapters on man are greatly condensed,
but there is a long bibliography, which will enable the reader to follow
up the questions which are raised if he wishes to pursue any particular
part of the subject further. It is a book to be recommended to a nonscientific reader who wishes to get a general idea of the subject.
L. DONCASTER.

Ward, PRoressor James, Sc.D. Heredity and Memory, being
the Henry Sidgwick Memorial Lecture, 1912. Cambridge
University Press; 1913; 1s. 6d. net; pp. 56.

In this lecture Professor Ward gives a concise and clear account of

the hypothesis that heredity is a form of memory. In his view, it is no

mere metaphor to speak of heredity as racial memory, but a statement
of literal fact. The principle of continuity demands that if the psychical
be admitted in man, it must exist in lower forms, and we know that
372 EUGENICS REVIEW.

even very lowly organisms profit by experience and by habit perfect
their structure. Similarly in development, the racial habit of developing
in a certain way enables the embryonic organism to pass through in a few
days or months stages which took zons to evolve, and the earlier stages,
in which the habit is most firmly fixed, are those which are passed
through most rapidly and regularly. Such a conception of heredity, of
course, involves the assumption of the inheritance of acquired characters,
but it is pointed out that direct evidence for the inheritance of such
characters would of necessity be extremely difficult to obtain, since “ we
should not expect any clear manifestation of such heredity till the functions that have led to structures have passed far beyond the initial stage
where conscious control is essential to their performance.” A considerable part of the lecture is devoted to a refutation of Weismann’s arguments, and it is unfortunate that such recent work as that of Kammerer
and Tower is not mentioned in this connexion. Nor is there any mention
of Mendel, a serious omission in a lecture which is in essence a protest
against the purely mechanical interpretation of inheritance so much in
vogue in recent Mendelian speculation. If the modern student of
heredity is to be convinced that organic inheritance is a process akin to
habit and memory, he must be shown how Mendelian segregation and its
probable relation to the pairing and separation of chromosomes fit into
the mnemic scheme. That they may so fit in is quite possible, but a
work dealing with the subject which does not even mention the problem
cannot fail to leave some sense of disappointment in the reader.
LEONARD DONCASTER.

Davenport, CuHartes B. State Laws Limiting Marriage Selection,
Examined in the Light of Eugenics. Eugenics Record Office.
Bulletin No. 9. Cold Spring Harbour. June, 1913; price

40 cents.; pp. 66.
THE author classes the laws limiting marriage selection under three
heads: (1) “ Laws limiting the mental and physical condition of the
consorts;” (2) “ Laws limiting consanguinity in marriage;” (3) “ Miscegenation.” His method of examining them “in the light of
eugenics ” is to describe the results of a few matings of the kind prohibited in one State or another. It is, of course, impossible to arrive at
a satisfactory answer to the question whether such marriages should be
permitted or not by such a method, and indeed no very definite conclusions are arrived at. On the whole, Mr. Davenport does not appear
to favour eugenic restrictions in marriage, but he opposes them principally on the ground that they are likely to be ineffective, even where
they are biologically justifiable. Nevertheless, he outlines an elaborate
and expensive scheme for State eugenic control of marriage which
involves the employment of three sets of officials: (1) A State Eugenics

Board, consisting of “a trained biologist, a general practising physician

of experience, and a general practitioner of law of broad experience.”

These should be whole-time officers. (2) State official physicians, of

whom in a State like New York there should’'be about 500. Marriage

licenses would be issued by these after an examination of the physical
condition and family history of the applicants. (3) The field workers,
whose duty would be to investigate family histories under the direction
of the physicians. The Bulletin concludes with a useful appendix,
which gives a digest of State laws limiting marriage selection up to
April, 1913.

Ponsonby, ARTHUR, M.P. The Decline of Aristocracy. T. Fisher
Unwin; 1913; 7s. 6d. net; pp. 320.

MR. PONSONBY has selected an interesting object for his latest book. His

treatment of the matter is thoughtful and suggestive; it is clearly the

result of wide experience and careful observation. The early chapters
