REVIEWS OF BOOKS

the human population by genetic means, Muller’s method (i.e. the use of artificial insemination) is the most likely to succeed. However, Crow emphasizes that it is not clear
what society or individuals want to do. Many geneticists feel that they can’t know what is
needed, they can’t decide what characters and in what direction to select and so they
will agree with Beadle that at least for the forseeable future, man should “‘concentrate on
improving our cultural heritage’.

Beadle in ““Mendelism, 1965” argues that as it is theoretically possible for our species
to “revert in a single generation to the barbaric state of a hundred thousand years ago”
it is easier and quicker to raise the general cultural level of our species than it is to change
its genetic composition. What is perhaps more important is that it is also safer. However
to accept Beadle’s view of the speed with which we could “ revert” one must ignore what
Beadle himself recognizes as the supplement to biological inheritance, cultural inheritance

Sonneborn, in a fascinating paper, clearly underlines this extraorganismic, second
genetic system of man with its potential for ‘“‘foresight and planned directiveness”. He
does not say what decisions man should take about his future but he does make the
important point that man’s genetic systems permit him to make decisions which will affect
man’s genetic make-up.

Perhaps this realization will be the important contribution from the study of genetics
in the first century of Mendelism. JOHN GIBSON

Spickett. S. G. and Shire. J. G. M. (Editors). Endocrine Genetics. (Memoirs of the Society
for Endocrinology, No. 15.) Cambridge, 1967. University Press. Pp. xv +325. Price 70s.

ENDOCRINE PHYSIOLOGISTS, BIOCHEMISTS and geneticists each have fields of study
which they can legitimately claim as their own, but there are other fields where progress
towards understanding can most effectively be made by the combined effort of their three
disciplines. The organizers of this symposium have recognized such a field and have mustered
a powerful multidisciplinary force with which to attack it.

The Proceedings are arranged in three sections of which the first is concerned with
the mode of action of hormones; the second with major gene variation in endocrine systems
and the third with quantitative variation in endocrine structure and functions, but a strong
interaction between the sections is obvious throughout the discussions, which are reported
as well as the formal papers and are just as valuable.

In the first section such topics as the mechanism of information transfer from genes
to proteins and the role of hormones in the biosynthesis of macromolecules are discussed,
together with the role of adrenal hormones in the complicated process of protein mobilization and gluconeogenesis in vertebrates. The action of hormones and other factors on the
activity of genes in insects forms the basis of three contributions which provide much food
for thought. .

In part two we look at the effect of genes on the endocrine system and see how complicated synthetic processes can be interrupted at various stages by genetic defects. Examples
of this occur in papers on the hereditary variation in the biosynthesis of adrenal hormones
in man and on the “coupling defect” in familial goitre although the exact enzymic basis
of the defects concerned remains obscure. We learn also that congenital goitre in sheep is
basically a defect in protein synthesis. Variations in the structure of the octapeptide hormones from the neurohypophysis in various species are discussed at some length. These
molecules, being relatively small and differing from each other by single amino acid
substitutions, provide excellent material for studying the genetic basis of variations in
hormonal structure. Genetic influences on the production of growth hormone and prolactin are discussed in relation to dwarf mice.

ER—O 197
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The theoretical basis of the techniques used to determine the role of heredity in the
control of growth and other quantifiable phenomena in mice and men is discussed in the
third part of the symposium. The author of the paper on mice makes the common mistake
of regarding body weight as a measure of growth when it may, in fact, indicate change in
body composition either with or without true growth. This however does not detract from
the value of his paper as a study in genetics. The genetic basis of variations in the neuroendocrine response to stress, in humans, is discussed in relation to the information which
can be obtained from the study of “inborn errors” of metabolism. The value of studying
inbred strains and poly-genetically determined characters in animals in relation to the
inheritance of stress responses and behavioural characteristics is also considered. Interesting
questions are raised in relation to gene-hormone interaction in the development of the
neuro-endocrine system.

The book’s main value does not lie in the factual information it provides about either
the genetic basis of endocrine phenomena or the endocrine basis of heredity because, as
is usual with symposia of this kind, no final answer is obtained to the basic questions
which are asked. The reader is however stimulated to ask new questions and he gains
information which will help him to frame them in a useful way. The non-geneticist will
learn about genetic techniques which can be applied to the study of endocrine physiology
and growth while the geneticist may be encouraged to use his techniques in this way.
Certainly they will both find parts of the book well worth reading.

Ww. A. MARSHALL

Green. E. L. (Editor). Biology of the Laboratory Mouse. Second Edition. New York and
London, 1966. McGraw-Hill. Pp. xii+ 706. Price 132s.

THIS IS THE second edition of a book first published in 1941 which has been widely read
especially by anybody interested in the house mouse as a laboratory animal. After being
reprinted in 1956 it has now been extensively revised and rewritten and twenty new chapters
added to the original thirteen. It follows the same general arrangement as the first edition
with a comprehensive bibliography at the end of each chapter. This leads inevitably to
some repetition, but it probably does not add appreciably to the overall bulk of the book.
An author index separate from the subject index would have been an advantage and
also some means of identifying those items which refer solely to topics mentioned in papers,
but not dealt with in the general text. Techniques connected with mouse husbandry and
genetics, including a catalogue of mutants with a brief description of each; anatomy,
development, physiology and biochemistry; responses to radiation, drugs and foreign
tissues; pathological conditions and immune reactions as well as behavioural traits are
all dealt with in detail. The editor states clearly in his introduction that there are still
certain aspects of the mouse which have been omitted (e.g. experimental embryology,
organogenesis, late responses to radiation, responses to stresses other than radiation and
drugs, and induced tumours). The printing and layout of the book are of a high standard
and it will undoubtedly have a long and valued existence wherever there is somebody
interested in the mouse both in sickness and in health. GILLIAN M. TRUSLOVE

SOCIOLOGY

Maccoby. Eleanor E. (Editor). The Development of Sex Differences. Stanford Studies in
Psychology. London, 1967. Tavistock. Pp. 351. Price 60s.

THIS BOOK CONSISTS of six contributions to a series of discussions held at Stanford
University, USA. The contributions are, broadly, from the point of view of pediatrics,

198
