EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES OF HEREDITARY:
INFLUENCES ON BEHAVIOUR* ;

By Professor ROGER W. RUSSELL, M.A., Ph.D.,
| Department of Psychology, University College, London.

Introduction

N 1883 Sir Francis Galton’s concern with
T eubetituting a planned selection for

natural selection in the interests of racial
improvement resulted in his definite proposals for an applied science of ‘ eugenics.”
The thinking and research which led to these
proposals and to the later development of
eugenics also created a “ new” psychology,
in which emphasis was upon the individual
differences rather than the central tendencies
in the behaviour of living organisms. Interest
in l’homme moyen shifted to interest in
the variations of behaviour in different
strains, breeds and species. The research
which followed this shift in interest demonstrated that the behaviour of living organisms — like their morphological, neurophysiological and biochemical characteristics
—is influenced by hereditary factors. In no
way did this deny that behaviour could be
modified by environmental factors. Recent
research has provided some grounds for the
belief that the limits of the capacity for such
modifications are themselves influenced by
inherited properties of the organism. The
intimate interactions of heredity and environment in the development of behaviour have
become topics of the gravest importance to
individuals and to social groups. It is with
certain problems arising from the systematic
study of such influences on behaviour that
this paper is concerned.

The approach which is most likely to produce satisfactory answers to many of these
problems is that of experimental genetics in
which hereditary and environmental factors
are controlled and systematically varied.
Because of the techniques employed in this
science man, with his cultural patterns of
social behaviour and his long life span, is not

* A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the
Eugenics Society on December 16th, 1952.

D

a suitable subject for research. The best one
can expect to do is to study the behaviour of
human subjects selected on the basis of
certain hereditary and environmental relationships. As Professor Penrose has
described it(30) :

“The data are provided by circumstances outside the control of the investi-.
gator and their study forms a descriptive
and inductive science with some resemblance to astronomy as opposed to
experimental physics.”

A number of techniques have been developed.
which may be applied to these ends, the
most popular in the past involving a comparison of the variation in behaviour of
monozygotic twins with that of dizygotic
twins. These techniques have been employed
in an impressive number of studies, but the’
results have not been entirely unequivocal.
Experimental ““ psychogenetics ’’¢ is limited
by the fact that man cannot be employed as
a subject for research, and human “‘psycho-.
genetics’’ by serious limitations of the
manner in which man, as a subject, can be
manipulated. The advantages of’ supplementing one approach by the other should
‘not be overlooked in the discussion to follow,
which is concerned primarily with the experimental approach and, therefore, will not
give human “ psychogenetics ”’ the attention
it deserves in a complete picture of the
genetics of behaviour.

The ultimate goals of the experimental
approach are to determine whether or not
specific behaviour patterns are influenced by
~genetic factors, and, if they are, to study the
number and nature of the genetic factors
involved, the location of the gene or genes
on the chromosome, and the manner in

 

is a term employed by Professor

t‘‘ Psychogenetics ”’
The Genetics of

C. S. Hall in his excellent review of ‘‘
Behavior ’’(21).

19
20 + +... ‘THE EUGENICS REVIEW

which the genes function in influencing the
behaviour pattern. By examining typical
attempts to reach these goals we shall see the
research procedures. which have been
employed and gain some insight into the
present state of knowledge concerning hereditary influences on behaviour. Of necessity
the examples chosen for this purpose can
represent only a small portion of the total
available.

Behaviour Patterns Influenced by Genetic
Factors

It is from the examination of differences in
the behaviour of various strains, breeds, or
species of animals that information concerning hereditary influences on behaviour is
obtained. The student of “ psychogenetics ”’
can, and, in a number of cases, has taken
advantage of the fact that different strains,
breeds, and species of animals, some highly
inbred, are already available for experimental observation. Such groups, differing
initially in certain genetic characteristics
other than the particular behaviour under
study, are exposed to a set of stimulus conditions which elicit this behaviour. When consistent differences are observed between the
responses of the various groups, conclusions
concerning hereditary influences on the
behaviour may be drawn. Similar compari
sons may be made by selectively breeding
animals of a heterogeneous parental popula
tion in which individuals differ in the particular pattern under study. A number of
studies have employed the first of these

general approaches, which I shall refer to as —

the comparison of strains. The particular
behaviour patterns studied have been very
diverse, but reference to a few may illustrate
the type of information which may be
provided by the application of this approach.

However, before we begin to examine this
information it is important that a point be
made regarding terms used to describe
behaviour patterns studied in “ psychogenetics.”” Terms such as “ general activity,”
‘“‘ savageness,”’ “learning,’’ and ‘‘ emotionality,’’ may appear to be vague and to lend
themselves to many different interpretations.
They need not be vague and difficult to

interpret if they are defined in terms of the
actual operations employed in observing and
measuring the behaviour they represent. An
experimenter does not study “ learning.”
He studies the behaviour of a particular
organism in a particular type of maze under a
particular set of circumstances. With practice the behaviour may show a progressive
change of such a nature as to justify its
inclusion in the class of phenomena called
“learning.” This class is a general one, containing many particular behaviour patterns,
all of which have certain characteristics in
common but which differ in other respects.
Because it can be established that behaviour
in a specific learning situation is influenced
by genetic factors, it does not necessarily

follow that ‘‘ learning ”’ as a class is likewise

influenced. Indeed it has been shown that
strains of animals bred for speed of learning
under one set of maze conditions are not
rapid learners in other maze situations(36),
and animals bred for the excessive emotionality of their behaviour when exposed to
certain forms of stimulation are not overemotional when exposed to others.(4) In
the following discussion it will be convenient
to use short descriptive terms for a number
of different behaviour patterns, but it should
be kept in mind that these expressions are
ultimately defined in terms of the actual
operations employed in observing and
measuring the behaviour they represent.
Anyone who has systematically observed
the behaviour of infrahuman animals knows
that striking inter-individual differences in
levels of general or ‘‘ spontaneous ”’ activity
occur even when such variables as age, sex
and environmental conditions are controlled.
It has been pointed out that such differences
appear to be correlated with speed of learning, characteristics of responses during
‘“ experimental neurosis ’’ and other complex
forms of behaviour, and it has been suggested that these differences are ‘ constitutional’ in nature. This latter hypothesis,
made on the basis of more or less casual
observation, needs specific verification before
it can be accepted as a valid statement of
the facts. Some favourable evidence has
come from comparisons of different breeds of
sens ess. Ss EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES | in eae

oe ee L

_dogs.(x) The activity of animals representing
-a number of different breeds-was measured
in terms of the number of movements made
during observational periods of twenty-four
hours, the movements being recorded automatically. Analysis of the records revealed
significant inter-breed differences of such a
nature as to. indicate the existence of three
activity groups : breeds such as the German
shepherd and cocker spaniel belonging to a
“high ” activity group ; the British bulldog,
dachshund and pekingese, to a ‘“‘ medium”
activity group ; and,’ the bassetthound to a
“low” activity group. The. records also
showed that these differences were reflected
primarily in the amount of nocturnal activity
shown by the three groups: activity of the
“active”? group being distributed fairly
uniformly during the twenty-four-hour test
periods, the ‘‘ medium ” group being most
active during the day, and the “ low ” group
showing scarcely any movement at night.
There is considerable evidence that this
general or “‘ spontaneous ”’ activity is aroused
by various types of internal stimuli, singly or
in combination, and it is interesting that
even such a non-specific form of behaviour
appears to show the influence of genetic
factors.

Comparisons of the “ savageness”’ and
“‘ wildness” of various strains of animals
have also revealed significant and consistent
differences. Mallard ducks can be tamed in
captivity while black ducks do not tame. (31)
Wild rats and half-breeds from them, even

though the latter were bred and reared in the |

laboratory, were significantly more “ wild ”’
and ‘‘ savage’ than quarter-breeds, yellowhooded animals and pure albino rats.(37)
These differences persisted throughout their
lives, even though they had spent most of the
time under the uniform environmental conditions of the laboratory, and the strains bred
true. This“. . . strongly suggests that the
differences arise from hereditary rather
than environmental factors.” *

Other forms of behaviour are elicited by
specific external stimulus conditions and
follow a very stereotyped course. Some of
these have been referred to as “ tropisms.”’
A very extensive series of experiments

‘. animals.

BE

(6, 7, 8) has indicated that one variety of
tropism, geotropism, as it appears in young
rats is significantly influenced by genetic
factors. Young rats when placed on an
inclined plane crawl up the plane ; they are
negatively geotropic. The angle at which
an animal crawls up the plane-is a function.
of the angle of inclination of the plane. The
angles of orientation of three different
strains of rats were measured, with the result
that members of each inbred strain showed
consistent functional relations between angle
of orientation and angle of inclination of the
plane, but different strains yielded characteristically different functions.

It should not be assumed because of the
emphasis in this paper on genetic factors
influencing behaviour that behaviour is not
altered by an organism’s life experiences.
“ Psychogenetics ’’ is concerned with the
nature of the genetic background upon which
are projected modifications of behaviour
during adjustment to environmental changes.
Evidence is available which indicates that
this capacity for modification—learning—is
itself an inborn characteristic of living
organisms. Some of this evidence comes
from comparisons of different strains of
For examplé, one study(2) of
albino, grey, agouti, chocolate and yellow
mice showed consistent differences in learning performance among the different strains.
Another study(3) compared the learning
performance of normal control rats. with.
that of a strain of inbred rats with less than
normal brain weight. The latter learned
more slowly than the former, and this difference consistently increased during the
three generations studied.

There is evidence for genetic differences in
the “ emotionality ’’ of animals. ‘‘ Emotionality ’’ was measured in terms of the number of defecations, urinations, attempts to escape,
and position changes when the animals were
placed individually for a standard period of
time in strange and stressful environments.

In one study(13) highly inbred grey Norway

fats gave significantly higher scores than
Wistar albino rats when members of each’
strain were exposed to the same test conditions. Another series of observations(4o)
22 ’ THE EUGENICS REVIEW ©:

showed consistent differences between two
strains of rats inbred for their maze-learning
performances. The faster learners were more
disturbed by non-maze situations than were
the slow learners.

One of the most interesting stories in the
present literature on experimental ‘‘ psychogenetics’ describes efforts to study the
genetic basis of a certain type of ‘‘ abnormal
behaviour ”’ usually referred to as *‘ audiogenic seizures.”” Rats and mice have-served ~
as subjects for most of the experimental
analysis, but the phenomenon has also been
demonstrated in other animals. When the

animal is confined and exposed to an audi
tory stimulus of relatively high frequency
and intensity it may respond by a period of
very violent running followed by apparent
coma or by an epileptic-type convulsion.
Not all animals respond in this manner, but
several investigators have shown(12, 15, 20,
26, 27, 28) that certain strains have a significantly higher percentage of susceptible
animals than do other strains. On the surface
this would seem to support the view that

genetic factors are operating. However,

closer examination of the several experiments reveals a number of complications.
One of these complications arises from apparently contradictory results obtained by two
researchers(1I2, 16), one of whom found that
wild grey Norway rats bred in captivity were
highly susceptible to audiogenic seizures
while the other obtained no seizures in a large
group of trapped wild Norway and Alexandrine rats. Part of the difficulty here lies in
the fact that little information was available
as to how inbred the strains really were, but
there are other difficulties, to which I shall
refer later. More adequate control of the
extent of inbreeding in the strains studied
has been achieved in a series of observations
on the susceptibility of mice to audiogenic
seizures.(20) Two pure strains of mice were
compared and one strain displayed significantly more hyperactivity, wall-jumping,
wild circling activity, convulsions and dying,
presumably from respiratory failure, than
did the other.

A few studies have been concerned with
the possibility that genetic factors may

influence the reactions of one animal to
another of ‘the same _ species — social
behaviour. In one rather typical study(35)
fighting between adult male animals was the
form of social behaviour observed. The
reactions of several strains of mice, all very
nearly pure-bred, were compared under conditions which enabled the researcher to discard possible environmental factors as
important variables. Indications of genetic

differences were found between all except

certain closely related strains, the basic
behavioural characteristics of the strains
showing “...wide differences, little variability, and no overlap under the conditions
tested.”

Such studies as these have capitalized on
the fact that different strains, breeds and
species of animals may differ in a number of
characteristics, including their typical behaviour pattern. The general procedure has
been to start with the different groups already
established and to examine them for intergroup variations in behaviour. In a sense
this procedure does not fulfill all the requirements of good experimental method. The
independent variable, genetic constitution,
has been varied by choice of subjects rather
than by actual manipulation of subjects.
However, the procedure has met other
requirements of experimental. method—systematic observation, control of variables
such as external environmental conditions
during observation, and measurement of
specific behaviour patterns—and, therefore,
greatly increases confidence in the interpretation of results. The casual observer of
animal behaviour may ask what is new about
the information obtained by application of
the procedure just discussed. He may say
that he has often “ seen ”’ differences in the
behaviour of different strains, breeds, or
species. By applying the procedures of
experimental “ psychogenetics ’’ it becomes
possible to go far beyond the general impressions of the casual observer by stating how
significant the observed differences are, that
they do in fact represent the influences of
genetic rather than extragenetic factors, and,
eventually, by learning a great deal more
about the nature of the genetic factors
 

involved than casual observation ‘could ever
divulge.

The second general procedure employed in
determining whether or not a particular
behaviour pattern is influenced by genetic
factors reverses the order of events characterizing the procedure we have just discussed.
It involves first measuring the behaviour
pattern as it appears in a heterogeneous
parental generation and then inbreeding
under uniform-environmental
those animals exhibiting the pattern and
those not exhibiting it. When the behaviour
can be measured along a continuum inbreeding may be carried on in family lines from
parents exhibiting the behaviour to different
degrees. If the behaviour is influenced by
heredity such selective breeding after a
number of generations results in strains that
breed’ more or less true for the behaviour
under examination. In order to produce
pure strains, the inbreeding frequently has
been limited to the particular family lines
initially selected from the parental generation.

‘A study. of two strains of rats selectively
bred, one for activity and the other for
inactivity, clearly illustrates the use of this
method and the necessity for precautions in
limiting inbreeding to selected family
lines.(33) Activity was measured in terms of
the number of revolutions turned by the
animals in a revolving drum during a standard test period before feeding time. Precautions were taken to feed the animals at
the same hour each day, to keep them in
darkness during the test period, and to
control extraneous stimuli in the observation
room. Inbreeding was carried out at both
extremes of the distribution of activity.
During the first four generations care was
not taken to breed within family lines, and
the results clearly show the effects, for not
until the fifth generation when ancestry did
become a consideration in the breeding was

the difference between active and inactive

sttains significant. With continued inbreed
ing of family lines two strains were finally

established which showed consistent differences in activity level—one being highly
active ; the other, highly inactive.

conditions

_ EXPERIMENTAL: STUBIES RS ESS

Some of the most “extensive selective
breeding experiments have involved the
maze-learning behaviour of rats: One of
these studies(39, 40) used a 17-unit multiple-T
maze as the problem to be learned. Throughout the eighteen filial generations during
which selective mating was continued, each
animal, at the time of test for speed of learn
ing, was given nineteen trials in the maze, the

total number of errors occurring during these
trials serving as the measure of behaviour.
The parental generation consisted of an
unselected, heterogeneous sample of rats..
Selective breeding was accomplished by

...mating together the brightest rats
within each of the brightest litters, the dullest
within each of the dullest.”” The separation
of two strains—‘‘ maze bright ’’ and “ maze
dull’”’—was definitely noticeable by the
second filial generation and, by the seventh
generation, there was practically no overlapping between them. Other studies, similarly conducted, have yielded comparable
results.

Another example of selective breeding for
a specific behaviour pattern appears to have
verified the conclusion arrived at by comparison of strains that susceptibility to audiogenic seizures in rats is affected by genetic
factors.(15) The parental generation was
divided into two groups, one of which consisted of animals having seizures in 50 per
cent or more of the standardized test trials
and a second with seizures in less than 50 per
cent of the trials. Matings between highly
susceptible animals and between animals of
low susceptibility as well as between animals
from both of these groups were carried on, for
six generations. By this time evidence of
consistent trends toward increases in high
and low susceptibility to seizures had become
apparent, suggesting that genetic sane
were involved.

A selective breeding experiment(18, x9) of
particular importance to those interested in
the study of behaviour disorders was designed to investigate the ‘ emotional ”’
behaviour of rats exposed to a mildly stressful situation, in which quantitative measures:
of ‘‘ emotionality ’’ could be obtained. . The
reactions of a heterogeneous parental generation were , measured and inbreeding carried
on for twelve filial generations by mating
together emotional ’’ animals to produce

‘‘emotional”’ strain and “non-emotional ”
““non-emotional’”

animals to produce a
strain. The magnitude of the difference
between these two strains increased until the
ninth generation, when it became relatively
stable.

Perhaps you have noted that, in illustrating the ways in which these two general
approaches have been applied, I have
Selected several behaviour patterns the
genetic bases of which have been examined
by both. In the vast majority of cases

information obtained by one approach has .

confirmed that obtained by the other. The
diversity of behaviour patterns studied and
theoretical considerations regarding the
nature of the behaviour lead us to believe that
hereditary factors influence all behaviour to
some degree. We have seen that such
influences are operating in general activity
and specific tropistic responses, in adjustment to external environment conditions
through learning, in ‘‘ emotional ’’ reactions
to environmental stresses, in the “ abnormal’’ behaviour of audiogenic seizures and
even in certain social acts involving two or
more members of the same species. The
application of experimental methods has
added objective support to our beliefs concerning the roles of genetic factors in
behaviour and has provided means of obtaining more precise information as to the way
in which these roles are played.

The Nature of Genetic Factors Involved

When, it is established that a specific
behaviour pattern is influenced by heredity
the question arises as to the number and
nature of the genetic factors involved. The
experimental methods which geneticists have
developed to answer this question require the
use of two or more pure strains differing in
the behaviour under study. By crossing two
inbred strains and later their first generation
hybrids, by backcrossing these hybrids to
either parental strain or by outcrossing them
to any other strain, variations in the behaviour of offspring may result which justify

So THE EUGENICS REVIEW —

conclusions concerning the nuniber of génetic
factors involved in the behaviour and the
nature, for instance dominant -or recessive,
of these genetic factors. To date relatively
few studies have reached this point in the
genetic analysis of behaviour and, of those
that have, only a few have presented
unequivocal results.

As you may recall, studies of geotropic
responses of young rats showed that different
strains of animals breed true for certain
geotropic constants but that these constants
differ in magnitude from strain to strain.
Crosses between two such strains have produced hybrids which, according to the
researchers(g, 10) are identical in their geotropic responses with the parents of one
strain. These results have been interpreted
as indicating that rather simple dominance
relations exist between homologous genetic
factors from the two strains.

It would not seem right to discuss “‘ psychogenetics ’’ without some reference to “ waltzing ”’ mice, for they provide some interesting
examples of the application of Mendelian
principles. In one very early investigation (11)
a pure line of Japanese waltzing mice was
mated with a pure line of European albino
mice. The first filial generation contained no
waltzers and breeding within this generation,
produced offspring in the ratio of four
normal to one waltzer (close to the 3:1
proportion expected with recessive inheritance). This picture of genetic factors
operating to influence behaviour, when, supported by subsequent studies, suggested that
waltzing was transmitted as a recessive unit
character.

Other neuromuscular abnormalities,
characterized by trembling of the limbs and
body and accompanied by deficient growth,
and death before five weeks of age, have been
observed in certain strains of deer mice.(24)
Since all affected individuals were produced
by related unaffected parents it appeared
that this syndrome was “ due to a recessive
mutation of a single gene locus... .”

One investigator(23) has described a strain
of what he called “clumsy” pigeons or
“homeless homers.”’ The behaviour of these
birds resembled that of a blind pigeon,
e+

EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES.

although i it was established that they could |
see. According to the investigator, ‘‘ Fhey
grope their way about, walk off precipices,
crash into walls during flight, fumble their
food, and would be quite incapable of surviving in the wild state.” This behaviour
appeared initially in the offspring of normal
pigeons, which suggested that its genetic
constitution was simple and recessive in
nature. This hypothesis was supported by
further breeding in which crosses between
“ clumsy ” animals produced only “ clumsy ”’
offspring, while outcrosses yielded only
normal offspring.

These are examples in which the number
and nature of the genetic factors influencing
behaviour patterns appear to be relatively
simple. But as we would anticipate, this is
not always the case. Let us return for the
moment to the mystery_of_the.audiogentc |
seizure. Genetic analyses of this behaviour
pattern as it appears in rats have led researchers to propose three different types of
genetic constitution, a result which appears
to be a function of the fact that impure
strains of animals were used. The observations of two investigators(27) indicated that
the seizure frequency of susceptible offspring
of two susceptible parents was only slightly
greater than that of susceptible offspring of
one non-susceptible and one susceptible
parent. From these results they concluded
that ‘susceptibility is transmitted as a
unitary character,” and that “it is transmitted as a dominant trait.’”” On the basis of
a later study(26) one of these researchers
altered his opinion and ‘ concluded that the
hereditary nature of the transmission of convulsive tendencies is complex in nature.”’
Observations by a third investigator led him
to postulate that two pairs of genetic factors
influence susceptibility to audiogenic seizures.
It appears from all this that genetic factors
are at work in the manifestations of this
behaviour pattern in rats, but, as regards the
number and nature of the factors involved,
*“ you pays your money and you takes your
choice.”” The best designed genetic analysis
of audiogenic seizures so far available (43).
employed as subjects two pure st
house mice which differed greatly in the

; 25
number and severity of seizures. All necessary crosses were carried out and, with one
exception, the results conform to what would
be expected were audiogenic seizures “‘ inherited as a single dominant gene.”” But the
story is still not complete, for another
investigator, using another genus of mouse,
has obtained results which strongly suggest
that susceptibility to audiogenic seizures is
inherited as a single recessive gene.(2I)
Since these two experiments on mice appear
to have been adequately designed and conducted, the differing results may mean that
the genetic constitution of the same behaviour pattern in different genera may be
different, a point of considerable potential
importance in “ psychogenetics.”’

The importance of starting a genetic
analysis of behaviour with pure strains of
animals becomes particularly apparent when
the literature is searched for examples in
which several sets of factors—multiple factors—act together in affecting the same
behaviour pattern. If pure lines are crossed
and multiple factors are involved the first
filial generation should show uniform behaviour and the second generation, a wide
variability in behaviour.(34) Several investigators ‘have advanced hypotheses that
behaviour patterns such as general
activity(5), maze learning(39) and “‘ emotionality ’’(21) are affected by multiple
genetic factors, but they have obtained inconclusive results when the hypotheses were
tested, primarily because impure strains. of
animals were used.

Other complications which may arise
during attempts to determine the nature of
genetic factors affecting behaviour are illustrated by two breeding experiments(41, 42)
involving selection in dogs of “ aptitudes ”’
useful in hunting and other kinds of work.
The behaviour patterns studied were those
least affected by training and which appeared
very early in the life of the dog. In one case
dogs of a breed which gives tongue on the
trail while pursuing game were mated with
dogs of a breed which trails mutely. All the
offspring gave tongue on the trail but had
the type of voice characteristic of the
parents who trailed mutely. In the other
- study. bodily appearance and ‘certain behaviour ‘patterns characteristic of hunting
were examined. The first crossing of pure
breeds revealed the operation of dominance
or partial dominance, but further generations
did not indicate any clear or simple Mendelian segregation of the behaviour patterns
involved. Second generation crosses produced offspring who, in some cases, resembled
one pure breed in appearance but showed the
behaviour patterns of the other parental
breed. |

From what has been said it is obvious that
those interested in the genetic analysis of
behaviour patterns have set about their task ’
by utilizing research designs already available in biogenetics. Presumably they will
continue this practice when they have
developed their field: of study to the point
where they can attack the problems of mapping chromosomes and of determining the
precise way in which genes influence particular behaviour patterns. As yet but little
information is available which even begins to
touch on these problems.

The exchange of homologous parts between
chromosome pairs during the development of
germ cells provides a means for locating
genes on chromosomes. This process of “ crossing over ’’ is evidenced by the separation of
“* linked ”’ characteristics which have consistently appeared together in past generations.
“With the exception of some of the neuromuscular disorders, e.g. waltzing, shaker, and
pirouetting, there is no information regarding
the location of the genes on the chromosomes
for behaviour characters.’’(21) Recent research(25) has shown that there are in a
number of animal species many cases where
behaviour patterns are associated with coat
colour genes, and it has been suggested that
“the associated coat colour genes may be
used as.genetic markers of such traits. When
so employed, it will be possible by manipulating the coat colour markers to synthesize new
combinational trends in morphology physiology, and resultant behaviour for psychological study.”

Any scientific approach to the study of
behaviour must recognize that all behaviour
patterns are dependent upon and limited by

THE EUGENICS REVIEW ©

the morphologiéal, neurophysiological and
biochemical characteristics of the organism.

It is through such characteristics that genetic
factors exert their influences on behaviour.
As yet there is very little information, available as to how such genetic factors function
in producing their effects. In one. study(3)
referred to earlier, significant differences were
found between the speed of learning of
normal control rats and of a strain of inbred
rats with less than normal brain weight.
Although it is not altogether surprising that
variations in the characteristics of the brain
are associated with variations in complex
behaviour patterns, the study does illustrate
one approach to the problem of how genetic
factors may produce their effects on behaviour. Another approach has involved
comparisons of various structures in animals
from strains differing in certain behaviour
patterns. Attention has been focused on
such structures as the endocrine glands in
emotional and non-emotional strains of rats
and brain weights of “maze bright” and
“maze-dull’’ animals. Comparisons of
physiological processes in different strains
also have been made, respiratory metabolism

-of active and inactive strains of rats being an

example. In other experiments(38) extensive
environmental variations have been introduced during tests of different strains for the
behaviour characteristics in which they
differed. If such environmental variations
had the effect of upsetting the differences
between strains some clue might be obtained
as to the mechanism by which the genetic
factors involved were influencing behaviour.

Interaction of Heredity and Environment

Early studies of eugenics have pointed to
the fact that individuals showing certain
types of behaviour patterns, i.e. low general
intelligence and neuro-psychiatric breakdown, often had family histories of similar
behaviour patterns in previous generations.
The tendency was to interpret such information as indicating an hereditary basis for the
behaviour in question. Studies of the interactions of heredity and environment in the
development of behaviour soon showed the
potential fallacy of such conclusions, for this
. EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES NSS aie

type of information is not adequate to rule

out the possibility that the family environ-—

ment is a major contributing cause.
In discussing methods for studying the
influences of genetic factors on behaviour the

necessity for controlling the environment in.

which the organism develops has been
emphasized. But this is not always as simple
as it may appear on the surface to be.(34) In
some instances important environmental
factors may not be recognized and, hence, go
uncontrolled. In other instances adequate
controls may be difficult to achieve.

Earlier in this paper it was remarked that
one of the most interesting series of studies
in ‘‘ psychogenetics ”’ has been that in which
possible genetic influences on audiogenic
seizures have been examined. From what has
been said So far it appears that the susceptibility of rats to such seizures does have
a genetic basis and that multiple genetic
factors are probably involved. But there are
two important considerations of an environmental nature which complicate any such
conclusions. Research(14) has shown that,
not only does susceptibility change with age,
but that the nature of the sound stimulus
used to induce the seizures has an effect on
the age of maximal susceptibility. If this is
true, as it seems to be, it is possible that the
number of animals in any particular generation of any particular strain which show the
behaviour may vary as a function of the
organismic variable of age and/or the
environmental variable of the nature of the
auditory stimulus. Apparently contradictory conclusions might be drawn from different genetic studies in which these two
variables were not subjected to identical
controls. It has also been shown(29) that in
one colony of rats the vast majority of those
susceptible to audiogenic seizures were suffering from purulent otitis media, while
those not susceptible very seldom showed
this form of middle-ear infection. I have
been informed by members of another laboratory that this relation between susceptibility
and infection approaches a perfect correlation when more refined methods of examining for infection than those used in the initial
study are employed. It is possible, if this
E

relation is a valid one, to account for results

obtained in certain genetic studies of susceptibility to audiogenic seizures in terms of
differential exposure to infection. Matings
between two susceptible animals might be
expected to provide greater exposure of
offspring to infection than matings between
non-susceptible animals and matings of susceptible with non-susceptible animals might
be expected to occupy an intermediate position between these extremes. In the earliest
genetic study of audiogenic seizures(27) the
rank order of percentages of susceptible
offspring resulting from these three types of
matings is exactly as would be predicted
from these assumptions. This does not establish the validity of the assumptions but it
does illustrate a type of complication that
may cause serious misinterpretations of
experimental results in which differences
between strains have been found.

Recent research has indicated how very
rapidly behaviour patterns may be learned in
the period immediately following birth. One’
writer on the subject(22) has suggested :
“Much that we attribute to instinct, because
no prolonged learning is evident, might thus
be due to learning that needs only a few
seconds for completion.’’ In many species
one of the most important environmental
influences during early development is the
interaction between parents and offspring.
It is very probable that much of the early
behaviour of the offspring is affected by
learning resulting from this interaction. If
parents have behaviour patterns differing
significantly from those of other parents it is
perfectly possible that the young of these
parents may also differ in their behaviour,
not because of genetic differences but because
they have been exposed to different learning.
situations. Let me give a -hypothetical
example to make this point more specific.
If we are interested in searching for possible
genetic factors influencing susceptibility to
breakdown under stress referred to as
“experimental neurosis ’’’ in the early research literature, we might decide to breed
selectively animals breaking down easily
and those very resistant to breakdown. The
offspring of these two lines would at some
28 oe

stage in their development be tested for susceptibility. The results of several generations
of such inbreeding might, and I predict
would, be two strains of animals, one very
susceptible to stress and the other very
resistant. We might then be inclined to say
that susceptibility to breakdown under-stress
is influenced by genetic factors. In so doing
we would be overlooking a_ potentially
important environmental variable had we
not taken the precaution to examine the
effects which rearing by a susceptible mother
as compared with rearing by a resistant
mother might have on the behaviour of the
various offspring during the tests for susceptibility. Significant differences in the
behaviour of offspring from the two lines
might be accounted for partially or wholly in
terms of environmental differences resulting
from interaction with the two types of
mother rather than in terms of genetic differences. On the basis of his own observations one writer(32) has suggested that
environmental factors of this order are operative in the appearance of “‘ wildness ”’ in rats,
which depends to some extent upon whether
or not the offspring are reared by a wild
mother and whether or not they are reared
with other wild rats.

These interactions of genetic and environmental factors may be summarized in terms
of an analysis of the general courses of phenotypic variation.(34) There appear to be
three main paths by which genetic and environmental factors can influence a specific
behaviour pattern. The first is that deriving
from the genetic characteristics of the
organism showing the behaviour. A behaviour pattern, at least in certain species, can
also be affected by the maternal environment, which in itself is determined partly by
the genetic constitution of the mother and
partly by the mother’s previous reactions to
her. physical environment. This constitutes
a second path. The remaining path consists
of environmental influences which are entirely
independent of the genetic constitution of
the stock to which the individual belongs. It
is because all these paths may be involved
to some extent in the manifestation of any
behaviour pattern that the interaction of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

heredity and environment is a major concern
in experimental “ psychogenetics.”” As Professor Haldane has written(17) : ‘“‘ The interaction of nature and nurture is one of the

_central problems of genetics. We can only

determine the differences between the different genotypes by putting each of them
into a number of different environments.
We compare two pure lines of mice not only
as regards colour, hair form, and other
characteristics which are little affected by
nurture, but for such characters as resistance
to different bacterial and virus infections,
each of which must be tested by appropriate
changes of environment.”

There are other reasons for being interested in the interactions of heredity and
environment. Investigators responsible for
most of the studies already discussed were
motivated by a desire to understand the
basic principles underlying genetic influences
on behaviour, but there are those whose main
concern is with the practical problems of
developing strains with characteristics of
adjusting to particular environments. Breeding in this latter case is for genotypes that
are suitable for particular types of environment and not for a “ super ’-genotype most
effective in all environments. The wide
diversity of physical and social environments in which infrahuman animals
and man must live and work may
not be at all consistent with concepts of a
super-race or a@ super-man. From _ the
research point of view this suggests the practical value of studying the interactions of
heredity and environment in influencing the
behaviour of different strains, breeds, and
species of animals under a variety of different environmental conditions.

Conclusion

If time and your indulgence permitted,
this discussion could be made much more
complete, but I doubt that increasing the
number of examples of behaviour influenced
by genetic factors would alter very much the
general impression which this brief examination of contemporary experimental “‘ psychogenetics ’’ conveys. Certainly knowledge in
this area is fragmentary and in need of much
re _ EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES 29

supplementation. There is no doubt in my
mind that the importance of this field of
experimentation warrants the effort necessary to develop it as a systematic and reliable
discipline. There are many important principles of behaviour which can only be discovered and clarified by research of this kind.
During several years of investigation into
problems of experimental psychopathology

I have been particularly impressed with the |

importance of this point of view. There is a
wealth of circumstantial evidence suggesting
that the development of ‘‘ abnormal” behaviour patterns under the stresses of environmental circumstances is to some extent
influenced by genetic factors. Since behaviour disorders analogous to those in
man can be produced in infrahuman animals
under controlled conditions there seems to
be no reason why application of the methods
of experimental ‘‘ psychogenetics ’? cannot
help greatly in clarifying and extending our
knowledge of psychopathology. Selective
breeding of infrahuman animals for susceptibility to breakdown under stress might
well result in the development of susceptible
and resistant strains. Once such strains were
available it would be possible to proceed to
the genetic analysis of the behaviour, to
examine the relations between it and other
psychological characteristics of the animals,
and to determine the effects of varying the
environmental stress conditions on the differences of behaviour between the two strains.
Since these differences in reactions to stress
are undoubtedly reflected in morphological,
neurophysiological, and biochemical differences between the strains, it also would be
possible to compare various organs and
processes within the animals, thus obtaining
valuable information concerning the physical
correlates of behaviour disorders. ‘Such an
approach to these very important problems
of adjustment could not employ man as its
subject. It is illustrative of the valuable
roles which the methods of experimental
“ psychogenetics ”’ can play in understanding
the influences of heredity on behaviour.

By now you may have suspected that Iam
somewhat enthusiastic about~the promise
experimental ‘“‘ psychogenetics’’ gives for

future contributions of importance to the
understanding of the behaviour of man and
his infrahuman relatives. If I have not conveyed this enthusiasm to you the failure is
on my part and cannot be attributed to any
lack of inherent interest or importance in
the experimental study of hereditary influences on behaviour.

REFERENCES

1. Anderson, O. D. (1939). ‘‘ The spontaneous neuromuscular activity of various pure breeds of dog and
of inter-breed hybrids of the first and second
generation.”’ Amer. J. Physiol., 126, 422-3.

2. Bagg, H. (1920). ‘“‘ Individual differences and
family resemblances in animal behavior.’’ Arch.
Psychol., 6, 1-58.

3. Bassett, G. C. (1914). ‘‘ Habit formation in a strain

‘of albino rats of less than normal brain weight.”
Behav. Monogr., 2, 1-46. :

4. Billingslea, F. Y. (1941). ‘“‘ The relationship
between emotionality and various other salients of
behavior in the rat.’’ J. comp. Psychol., 31, 69-77.

5. Brody, E. G. (1942). ‘‘ Genetic basis of spontaneous
activity in the albino rat.’’ Comp. Psychol. Monogr.,
17, No. 5.

6. Crozier, W. J., and Pincus, G. (1929). ‘‘ Analysis

- of the geotropic orientation of young rats.’”’ I and
Il. J. gen. Physiol., 13, 57-119.

7. Crozier, W. J., and Pincus, G. (1931). ‘‘ Analysis
of the geotropic orientation of young rats.’”’ III.
Parts 1 and 2. J. gen. Physiol., 15, 201-42.

8. Crozier, W. J., and Pincus, G. (1931). ‘‘ Analysis
of the geotropic orientation of young rats.’”’ IV.
J. gen. Physiol., 15, 243-56.

g. Crozier, W. J., and Pincus, G. (1935). ‘‘ Analysis
of the geotropic orientation of young rats.” IX.
J. gen. Physiol., 19, 211-20.

10. Crozier, W. J., and Pincus, G. (1936). “‘ Analysis
of the geotropic orientation of young rats.” X.
J. gen. Physiol., 20, 111-44.

11. Derbyshire, A. D. (1902). ‘‘ Note on the results of
crossing Japanese waltzing mice with European
albino races.”’ Biometrika, 2, 101-4, 165-74, 282-5.

12. Farris, E. J., and Yeakel, E. H. (1943). ‘ The
susceptibility of albino and grey Norway rats to
audiogenic seizures.” J. comp. Psychol., 35, 73-80.

13. Farris, E. J.,and Yeakel, E. H. (1945). ‘“‘ Emotional
behavior of grey Norway and Wistar albino rats.”
J. comp. Psychol., 38, 109-18.

14. Finger, F. W. (1943). ‘‘ Factors influencing audiogenic seizures in the rat. II. Heredity and age.”
J. comp. Psychol., 35, 227-32.

15. Griffiths, W. J. (1942). ‘‘ Transmission of convulsions in the white rat.” J. comp. Psychol., 34,
263-77. ~

16. Griffiths, W. J. (1944). “‘ Absence of audiogenic
seizures in wild Norway and Alexandrine rats.’”
Science, 99, 62-3.

17. Haldane, J. B. S. (1946). ‘‘ The interaction of
nature and nurture.” Ann. Eugen. Camb., 18,
197-205.

18. Hall, C. S. (1938). ‘‘ The inheritance of emotionality.”” Sigma Xi Quart., 26, 17-27, 37.

19. Hall, C. S. (1941). “Temperament: A survey of
animal studies.”’ Psychol. Bull., 38, 909-43.
 

20. Hall, C. S. - (2947).
- audiogenic seizures between two inbred strains of

(21.
22.
23.
24.

25.

26.

27.

29.
30.
31.
32.

28.

“Genetic differences ‘in fatal

house mice.”’ /. Hered., 38, 3-6.
Hall, C. S. (1951). “ The genetics of behavior.”’ In
Stevens, S.S. (Ed.) Handbook of experimental

‘psychology. New York: Wiley & Sons.

ebb, D. O. (1949). The organization of behavior.
New York : Wiley & Sons.
Hollander, W. F. (1938).
J. Hered., 29, 65-6.
Huestis, R. R, and Barto, E. (1936). ‘‘ An inherited
tremor in Peromyscus.” Jj. Hered., 27, 436-8.
Keeler, C. E. (1948). ‘‘ Materials for the synthesis
of hereditary behavior trends in mammals.”
Jj. comp. physiol. Psychol., 41, 75-81.
Maier, N. R. F. (1943). ‘‘ Studies of abnormal
behavior in the rat : XIV. Strain differences in the
inheritance of susceptibility to convulsions.”
J. comp. Psychol., 35, 327-35.
Maier, N. R. F., and Glaser, N. M. (1940). ‘‘ Studies
of abnormal behavior in the rat : V. The inheritance
of the ‘neurotic pattern.’” J. comp. Psychol.,
30, 413-18. .
Martin, R. F., and Hall, C. S. (1941). ‘‘ Emotional
behavior in the rat. V. The incidence of behavior
derangements resulting from air-blast stimulation
in emotional and non-emotional strains of rats.”
J. comp. Psychol., 32, 191-204.
Patton, R. A. (1947). ‘‘ Purulent otitis media in
albino rats susceptible to sound-induced seizures.”
J. Psychol., 24, 313-17.
Penrose, L. S. (7949).
London : Sedgwick & Jackson.
Phillips, J. C. (1912). ‘‘ Note on wildness in ducklings.”’ J. Anim. Behav., 2, 363-4.
Rasmussen, E. W. (1939). ‘“‘ Wildness in rats.”
Acta Psychol. (Hague), 4, 295-304.

‘““* Clumsy’ pigeons.’’

The biology of mental deféct.

TEE EUGENICS: REVIEW,”

33.

34.

35:

36.

37:

38.

39.
40.
41.
42.

43.

 

—

Rundquist, E. E. (1933). Inheritance of peas
taneous activity in-rats.’’ * J. comp. Psychol., 16,.
415-38. —

Russell, W. L. (1941). ‘‘ Inbred and hybrid animals
and their value in research.”’ In: Snell, G. D. (Ed.)
Biology of the laboratory mouse. Philadelphia:
Blakiston. :
Scott, J. P. (1942).
social behavior of inbred strains of mice.
33, II-15.

Searle, L. V. (1949).
ditary maze-brightness and maze-dullness.”’
Psychol. Monogr., 39, 279-325.

Stone, C. P. (1932). ‘‘ Wildness and savageness in
rats of different strains.’’ In Lashley, K. S. (Ed.)
Studies in the dynamics of behavior. Chicago:
Univ. of Chicago Press.

Tryon, R. C. (1931). ‘‘ Studies in individual differences in maze ability. V. Luminosity and visual
acuity as systematic causes of individual differences
and an hypothesis of maze ability.’”’ J. comp.

Psychol., 12, 401-20.
““ Genetic differences in maze
Tryon, R. C. (1940).
earning ability in rats.’”” Yearbook Nat. Soc. Study
In

Educa., 39 (I), 111-19.
Tryon, R. C. (1942). ‘‘ Individual differences.”
Moss, F. A. (Ed.) Comparative psychology. New
York : Prentice-Hall.

Whitney, L. F. (1929).
barking propensity in dogs.”
561-2.

Whitney, L. F. (1932). ‘Inheritance of mental
aptitudes in dogs.’’ Proc. 6th int. Congr. Genet.
(Ithaca, N.Y.], 2, 211-12.

Witt, G. M., and ‘Hall, C. S. (1949).
of audiogenic seizures in the house mouse.’
physiol. Psychol., 42, 58-63.

‘‘ Genetic differences in the
” j«. Hered.,

“The organization of hereGenet.

“ Heredity of the trailJ. Hered., 20,

“The genetics

> [.comp.

Eugenies Review, Vol. XLV, No. Ll
