SCAPULAR TYPES AND HUMAN FITNESS’
A Study of an Outward Sign of Biological Efficiency

By WILLIAM WASHINGTON GRAVES, M.D., F.A.C.P.

(Director, Department of Neuro-Psychiatry, Saint Louis University School of
Medicine.)

To be a good animal is the first requisite to success in life, and to be a nation of good
animals is the first condition to national prosperity.—HERBERT SPENCER.

UMAN beings differ innately in

their physical, mental, and total

make-up. ‘They differ innately in
capacity for health, disease, duration of life,
and adaptation in general. Fitness is a convenient term to express the biological fact
of relative capacity for adaptation and survival. No one is wholly fit, no one is wholly
unfit. Fitness is the very foundation of
family and community health, disease, and
of national survival. The problem of
human fitness is vital and enduring. It has
many phases, but none is more worthy of
intensive investigation by this and future
generations than its relation to the health
and disease of a people.

Among the differences and similarities
having fitness values and common to human
stocks, are those discernible in shoulder
blades. Having found some of these in a
family study in 1906, I was led to investigate them in living, skeletal, and fetal
material, and to classify scapule into
readily recognizable types. I was further
led to investigate the origin and distribution of scapular types in human and other
mammalian stocks, and these investigations
have revealed rather definite relations of
scapular types to the vital and enduring
problems of human fitness.

BASES FOR SCAPULAR CLASSIFICATION

An intimate study of the human scapula
reveals at least forty morphological and
architectural characters. It may be safely
said that no other bone discloses so many of

* Prepared in 1930 for the Committee on Growth
and Development, White House Conference on
Child Health and Protection.

these. Each character shows a range in
variation, but none a wider range than the
vertebral border from its mergence with the
scapular spine to the inferior angle. The
variation range of this part of the bone is
from extremely convex to straight, and
from straight to extremely concave. Consideration of this fact enabled me to classify
scapule of human stocks and some other
mammals into convex, straight, and concave types.

The classification of scapule in skeletal,
fetal, and living human material is
based primarily on the character (convex,
straight, concave) of the greater portion of
the vertebral-border contour below the
scapular spine in its relation to a straight
line. If the ‘‘ greater portion ’’ of this part
of the border, beginning at its point of mergence with the scapular spine, is convex,
straight, or concave, it is so classified. The
contour of this part of the bone may be
regularly, irregularly, slightly, moderately,
or markedly convex or concave, or it may
be straight or nearly so, tending rather to
concavity than to convexity. (Fig. 1.)

The classification is based secondarily on
an assemblage of variations peculiar to, or
more frequently found, in each type. Thus
one type of scapula is brought into more or
less sharp contrast with other types, not
only by the character of the vertebral-border
contour (convex, straight, concave), but also
by a number of correlated characters.
While each scapular type embodies a variable constellation of correlated characters,
it is nevertheless the relation of the contour
of the great portion of the vertebral border
below the scapular spine to a straight line

215
216 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

that establishes a firm foundation for scapular classification in skeletal, fcetal, and
living material.

In a recent comparative study (1) of
approximately 1,200 mature scapule, it
has been clearly shown that the concave and
straight types have twelve or more features
in common; therefore they constitute
variant types, contrasting vividly with convex types. These comparative studies have
justified me in combining the straight and
concave forms and in designating them the
scaphoid types. Further justification is
found in the fact that persons in whom the
vertebral border is classified straight often
disclose characteristics in total make-up
similar to, although as a rule less marked
than, those in whom it is found to be concave. Figure 1 illustrates the primary basis
of scapular classification and suggests useful
symbols for recording the types and the
varying degrees of convexity and concavity.

OTHER BIOLOGICAL PROBLEMS

Classification brought the scapula, for the
first time, into definite relations with a
number of biological problems, and among
these may be mentioned: phylogenesis;
ontogenesis and morphogenesis in general ;
bone growth; bone form and variation in
man and other mammals; the modification
of bone form by muscle attachments, muscle
pull, and various environmental influences
in pre- and post-natal periods; age changes
in bones and other tissues; the origin and
distribution of scapular types ; human heredity, longevity, morbidity, and adaptability
in general. The relations of scapular classification to the foregoing problems and some
of the results of investigations thus far may
be summarized as follows :

(x1) Similar scapular types are present
in varying degrees and percentages in the
skeletal remains of all accessible human

Figure 1.—Scapular classification—convex, straight, concave—based primarily on
character of greater portion of vertebral-border contour below scapular spine in its

relation to a straight line.

(A)

The Convex type:
may be regularly or irregularly, slightly : Cvl1,
moderately: Cv2, or
markedly : Cv3 convex.

(B)

The Straight type:
straight or nearly so,
neither convex nor concave, tending rather to
concavity than to convexity.

I.

(C)

The Concave type:
may be regularly or irregularly, slightly : Ccl,
moderately: Cc2, of
markedly : Cc3 concave.

Figure 1 illustrates the primary basis of scapular classification and gives useful symbols in recording the types. A, convex type, (Cv2); B, straight scaphoid type (St), and C, concave scaphoid type
_(Cc3). The scaphoid type (straight or concave) combines twelve or more anatomical and architectural
features common to straight and concave which contrast vividly with similar features in the convex.
SCAPULAR TYPES AND HUMAN FITNESS

stocks, both ancient and modern, and of
some other mammals (gorilla, orang,
chimpanzee, lemur, armadillo, bat, etc.).

(2) Scapular types are inherited morphological features, and, with the exception of definite racial marks of inheritance, in no accessible morphological
feature common to ‘ normal’ human inheritance thus far known do the members of a given generation more closely
and more frequently resemble each other
and at the same time one or both parents
than they do in scapular types.

(3) By the twelfth foetal week the
human scapula has attained the general
form it apparently ever after retains, and
in this early period of development the
same scapular types are found, as in all
subsequent periods of pre- and post-natal
existence.

(4) In pre- and post-natal periods, one
finds both symmetry and asymmetry in
scapular types. More or less symmetry
in type is found in approximately 80 to 9o
per cent., but definite asymmetry in type
is found in Io to 20 per cent. of humans.
The more or less symmetrical types are
called ‘‘ pure,’? and the asymmetrical
types are called ‘‘ mixed ”’ scaphoids, because such types have scaphoid components. The same person may have convex
on the one side and on the other concave,
or convex on the one side and straight on
the other, or straight on the one side and
convex on the other (fig. 2). Asymmetries
in type, as well as asymmetries in degree
of type, are independent of handedness,
occupation, disease, or other environmental influences. Moreover, both asymmetries in type and in degree of type are
found in some other mammals (anthropoids, bats, armadillos, etc.).

(5) Particular variations of scapular
muscles or of their attachments are not
found to be associated exclusively with
any particular scapular type in any period
of life. Inherited variations of bones,
muscles, and other morphological features generally have heretofore been considered expressions of the Anlage peculiar to the individual in which they are

217

found. The influence of muscles or their
attachments, or of muscle variation, or of
muscle pull either on scapular-type formation, alteration, or modification throughout the life cycle must be considered negligible when we remember that as early
as the twelfth foetal week each scapular
type (convex, straight, concave) is found.

(6) Regardless of race, stock, sex,
social level, occupation, or environment,
each scapular type (convex, straight, concave) is found in varying degrees and percentages in the tall, the short, the fat,
and the lean; the ‘ broad backs’ and the
‘narrow backs,’ the strong, the weak, the
healthy, and the sick; the near to, and
remote from, an ideal in development ; the
mentally brilliant, average, and defective ;
the well and poorly muscled ; the well and
poorly nourished; the ‘ excellent,’ the
“ good,’ and the ‘ poor’ types, and in all
heretofore-described human types.

(7) It is among persons disclosing
innate defectiveness in adaptation, characterized mainly by definite asymmetries,
disproportions and disharmonies in total
make-up that straight, concave, and
““ mixed ’’ (scaphoid) types are most frequently found.

THE AGE INCIDENCE OF SCAPULAR TYPES
—ITS BIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE

In 1907 while investigating the possible
inheritance of scapular types, the observation was made that scaphoid types seemed
to predominate in the young; whereas, convex types seemed to predominate in the
old. This observation led me to make statistical investigations in comparable numbers
of the living and the dead in successive age
periods. These investigations and those of
many others have confirmed my observations
of 1907, and thereby disclosed a finding of
unusual biological significance—the age
incidence of scapular types—a finding as yet
unparalleled by any other inherited,
morphological, or functional feature, trait,
or character. From personal statistical investigations and from those of many others,
one could at this time tabulate the scapular
classification of approximately 60,000 per218 |

sons, representing supposedly-healthy and
known-to-be-sick groups of white stocks in
various age periods from the fifth year to
old age. The results of these investigations
clearly demonstrate the great biological significance of the age incidence of scapular
types and are summarized in part as
follows :

(a) The scaphoid types (straight, concave, and mixed) predominate in frequency of occurrence in the young and
relatively young, and the convex types
predominate in frequency of occurrence in
the old and relatively old, regardless of
the nature of the material (excellently,
well, or poorly adapted).

(b) The relative percentages of convex
and of scaphoid (straight, concave, and
mixed) types in all age periods are dependent primarily upon the age and secondarily on the nature of the material.

(c) The percentages of the convex types
increase while the percentages of the scaphoid types (straight, concave, and mixed)
decrease in successive age periods from
childhood to old age, regardless of the
nature of the material (excellently, well,
or poorly adapted).

(d) The percentages of the concave and
mixed (scaphoid) types decrease more
rapidly than the straight (scaphoid) types
from childhood to old age, regardless of
the nature of the material (excellently,
well, or poorly adapted).

(e) In poorly adapted groups, in similar age periods, there are more scaphoid
types and fewer convex types than in welladapted groups.

(f) Investigations in explanation of the
age incidence of scapular types in the
various directions herein outlined, including follow-up observations on a relatively
large number of individuals during
periods of growth, maturity, and senescence, have disclosed no process or circumstance capable of changing one type
of scapula into another; hence there
remains but one explanation of the age
incidence of scapular types: the scaphoid
types (straight, concave, and mixed) are

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

more frequently found than the convex
types in the unduly disease susceptible,
the plus-potentially sick, the shorter-lived
of the race.

It is not possible at this time to state the
exact percentages of convex and scaphoid
types in the young and in the old represented in any population, even in so-called
‘normal’ groups. Scapular classification
by me in earlier years and by others since
then doubtless contained considerable error,
because of failure to adopt uniform methods
in recognizing scapular types in the living
and because of the inherent difficulties in
this phase of the physical examination—a
phase, which, prior to scapular classification, had never been attempted. I have
elsewhere stated (2, 3, 5) that, choosing at
random in our population, the percentages
of scaphoid types from the twelfth fcetal
week to the tenth year of life are approximately 80: the convex types 20; whereas,
in the old (seventy and over) the percentages
are approximately, scaphoid 20 and convex
80. Personal investigations during the past
two years of approximately 10,o00 persons—
Grammar School pupils, Boy Scouts,
orphan-asylum inmates—ranging in age
from six to fifteen years, and comparable
numbers of persons over sixty years of age
disclose the following approximate percentages :

Six to fifteen years: scaphoid types 65
per cent., convex types 35 per cent. Sixty
years and over : scaphoid types 35 per cent. ;
convex types 65 per cent.

THE ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE

The variations of the greater portion of
the vertebral border below the scapular
spine, on which scapular classification is
primarily based, are inherited variations.
Since they are common to all accessible
human stocks and some lower forms, the
inference is tenable that they are primeval
with man and other mammals disclosing
them. Many other features common to
shoulder blades and other parts of man and
of other mammals are doubtless of similar
nature and origin.
GC) CV.

  
 

 

463-mwm. 54. | or . 468-mw.5l.

ST. oT. Sf.

  

—-253-mw.5B. 13 20-mw. 54.

CC.I.

  

1203-mw.58.

1217-mw. 59.

FIGURE 2.

Photographs of six pairs of scapule from white males in the age period 50-59, derived from
dissecting-room material, Laboratory of Anatomy, Western Reserve University Medical School,
Cleveland, Ohio. The three pairs on the left (convex, straight and concave types) in the order named
from top to bottom are typical ‘‘ pure ”’ types, 1.e. each bone of each pair is of the same type. ‘The

three pairs on the right are mixed (scaphoid) types (concave+convex, straight+convex, concave+
straight) in the order named from top to bottom.

To face page 218
SCAPULAR TYPES AND HUMAN FITNESS

Inherited variations are everywhere apparent in the world of life, and nowhere more
so than in the differences, resemblances,
similarities, and inequalities abounding in
structure, function, and total make-up of
human beings. They are the foundations of
our ability to distinguish one individual,
one stock, one race from another, the fundamentals of individual constitution and the
raw materials for observation, classification,
correlation, and evaluation in the problem
of individual adaptability.

Present-day knowledge of heredity and
the relations of heredity to environment
clearly shows that the evaluation of individual adaptability is to-day, and must for
ever remain, a fundamental and universal
problem. Individual adaptability is not
only a problem for the biological scientist,
the teacher, and the jurist, but also for all
laymen capable of manifesting interest in
science, popular education, and social improvement. If we would determine who are
. the excellently well, or poorly adapted
physically, mentally, or morally; who are
the relatively fit or the relatively unfit ; who
are the plus-potentially healthy or pluspotentially sick; who are the longer and
who are the shorter lived of the race—if we
would do this, we must not only evaluate
the factors of individual inheritance and individual environment, but we must recognize, classify, correlate, and evaluate man’s
inherited variations, and apply the results
to the study of the whole individual.

COMMENT

From the foregoing brief summary of
some of the results of investigations based
on scapular classification, it becomes apparent that new and dependable approaches to
_ the vital and enduring problems of human
fitness have been found.

The striking differences in scapular-type
percentages in the young and the old not
only justify the inference of greater morbidity and mortality among the possessors
of the scaphoid than among the possessors
of the convex, but they also justify the inference of good adaptations and decreased
morbidity and mortality in many possessors

219

of the convex types. Just who they are and
how many there are in each direction is a |
problem for continued research.

We have long known that all human
beings are, in the broadest sense, disease
susceptible, some more, some less, but as
yet we have not studied the apparently
healthy as intensively as the definitely sick.
Therefore, the questions are pertinent:
Who among us are the excellently, well or
poorly adapted ; who are the plus-potentially
healthy or sick ; who are the more, who are
the less, susceptible to disease in the broadest
sense? The general recognition of scapular
types and co-existent inherited variations in
routine physical examinations will be
helpful in answering these questions. Just
so long as we fail to recognize and evaluate
the innate differences and similarities in
human beings, just so long shall we fail to
recognize and evaluate the innate capacities
underlying individual health, disease, and
adaptability in general and fall short of the
possibilities in health promotion, disease
recognition, prevention, and cure.

The only tenable explanation of the age
incidence of scapular types is in full accord
with previously existing conceptions of
hereditary predisposition to health and
disease in the broadest sense, and in full
accord with previously existing conceptions
of the relations of human heredity to environment and these, in turn, to morbidity,
longevity, and adaptability in general. The
first morphological proof of these conceptions is found in the application of scapular
classification to the study of human beings.

The age incidence of scapular types is, as
yet, unparalleled by a similar finding in
connection with the types of other inherited
variations common to human beings, because the principle of investigation which
led to this finding had not been recognized
prior to scapular classification and its application to the study of human beings.
Application of this principle, now under
way, to the study of well and poorly adapted
groups representing successive age periods
in various human stocks gives promise of
finding other types of inherited variations
with age incidences of similar import to
220

those of scapular types. However, until
these shall have been found, we have in
scapular classification and the age-incidence
principle of investigation dependable means
for assessing the biological worth (excellent,
good, or poor) of a given population and of
segregated population groups.

I would here emphasize the fact that a
particular scapular type is not the measure
of the individual. Some of the best adaptable are possessors of scaphoid, and some of
the least adaptable are possessors of convex
types. The part is never greater than the
whole, nor the whole greater than the sum
of all its parts. Therefore the presence of a
particular scapular type in any person indicates but one thing, one sign of his inheritance. ‘To determine the individual’s capacities for health or disease requires an
evaluation of all other structural and functional variations—nothing less than a study
of the whole individual in relation to his
heredity and environment. When, through
further investigations, we shall have recognized and evaluated other inherited variations co-existent with scapular types, we
shall then be able to form better judgments
of an individual’s capacities for health,
disease, and adaptation in general than we
are to-day.

While it cannot be too strongly emphasized that a particular scapular type or any
other inherited variation is not the measure
of an individual’s fitness ; scapular types are
nevertheless firm bases for correlating all
other inherited variations, anthropometric
measurements, and indices co-existent with
them, and for correlating these in turn with
various aptitudes and morbidities. Moreover, scapular classification and the ageincidence principle of investigation are useful means for assessing the relative fitness
of populations and of segregated population
groups.

The application of the age-incidence principle of investigation, first found and used
by me, will enable future workers to determine the fitness value of any inherited variation, anthropometric measurement, or index
after its fixation or maturity. The rich
promise of the investigations, which began

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

with scapular classification, is that the
physician of the future will be able to make
a rather accurate assessment of the constitution peculiar to the individual, obviously not
on a particular scapular type alone, but on
the constellation of coexistent inherited
variations having fitness values similar to
scapular types. Until that time arrives we
have in scapular classification, when accurately made, dependable indications of the
biological worth of any community or population. I say this because the age incidence
of scapular types points unerringly to two
groups in any community or population:
(1) the bearers of the convex types, among
whom will be found the larger number of
the better adaptable—the plus-potentially
healthy, the longer lived; (2) the bearers
of the scaphoid types, among whom will be
found the larger number of the poorer adaptable—the plus-potentially sick, the shorter
lived of the race; and (3) because investigations of supposedly healthy groups (highschool and university students and graduates and A.E.F. men) and of segregated sick
groups (tuberculous, insane, feeble-minded,
and prison) in comparable numbers in
similar age periods show approximately
from 1% to 2% times as many convex
scapular types in the supposedly healthy as
in the known-to-be-sick groups.

PROMISE OF CONTINUOUS RESEARCH

Through continuous research, based upon
scapular types and the age-incidence principle of investigation, may we not reasonably expect more general appreciation of
that basic pathology, which is inherent in
every human being to a greater or lesser
degree? Just as we are now able to prevent
epidemics of communicable diseases by
accurate knowledge of the conditions underlying them, may we not reasonably expect
that, with better knowledge of individuals,
we may often prevent disease in them?
With fuller appreciation of the nature of the
soil, particularly in childhood and adolescence, may we not better strengthen the
weak ; through well-directed effort render
the inherent soil more resistant and thus
advance a bit nearer the highest ideals of
SCAPULAR TYPES AND HUMAN FITNESS

the medical profession—health promotion
and disease prevention ?

Continuous application of scapular classification to the study of individuals, families,
populations, and segregated population
groups gives promise of clearer recognition
and evaluation of heredity and environment,
the ever-present factors underlying individual health and disease, physical, and
mental adaptability, family, stock, and racial
betterment : family, stock, and racial deterioration.

REFERENCES

1. The Types of Scapule: A Comparative
Study of Some Correlated Characters in Human
Scapuleé (AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL
ANTHROPOLOGY, Vol. iv, No. 2, 1921).

221

2. The Age Incidence of Scapular Types: Its
Possible Relation to Longevity (TRANSACTION,
American Association of Life Insurance Medical
Directors, 1924).

3. The Relations of Scapular Types to Problems of Human Heredity, Longevity, Morbidity,
and Adaptability in General (ARCHIVES OF
INTERNAL MEDICINE, July, 1924, Vol. xxxiv, pp.
I-25).

4. Methods of Recognizing Scapular Types in
the Living (ARCHIVES OF INTERNAL MEDICINE,
July, 1925, Vol. xxxvi, pp. 51-61).

5. The Plus-potentially Sick of the Race (GLASGow MEDICAL JOURNAL, December, 1925).

6. The Relations of Shoulder Blade Types to
Problems of Mental and Physical Adaptability
(The Henderson Trust Lecture, No. IV, delivered
at the University of Edinburgh, October 16th,
1925, Oliver & Boyd, Edinburgh).

SS

International Congress of Eugenics
New York, Aug. 20-23, 1932.

International Genetics Congress
Ithaca, N.Y., Aug. 24-31, 1932.
*

OWHERE can the glamour and romance
of a transatlantic voyage be more
fully realised than in one of the giant
Cunard express liners. You will save time,
and enjoy real ocean luxury, by taking
advantage of this world-famous service.

SO ein Cexamouna) YORK
(via CHERBOURG)

MAURETANIA . . . August 6th
BERENGARIA . . . August 13th

HoMEWARD FROM NEw YORK
Mauretania, Sept.7; Berengaria, Sept. 14

Apply Cunarp Ling, 26/27 Cockspur Street,
London, S.W.1, or local offices and agencies.

Cuvard

GENETIC PRINCIPLES

IN MEDICINE AND SOCIAL SCIENCE

By LANCELOT T. HOGBEN, MN,,A., D.Sc.
Professor of Social Biology University of London

15s.

Professor Hogben indicates the methods
which are being introduced to make the
study of human inheritance an exact
science. He discusses the place of
genetics in preventive medicine, the
bearing of modern biological concepts
on racial and other social questions together with an analysis of the problem
of population growth. The book contains a great deal of material published
for the first time and is invaluable alike
to medical men, to students of sociology
and to all who are interested in the
eugenic standpoint.

WILLIAMS & NORGATE LTD.
38 Gt. Ormond &St., W.C.1

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 3.
