316

lection of excerpts which E. B. Reuter and
Jessie R. Runner have brought together and
entitled The Family: Source Materials for
the Study of Family and Personality. Dr.
Reuter is a sociologist with a bias against
eugenics, and has allowed this bias to interfere with his fairness in this case. Aside
from a casual kick en passant once in a
while, the only discussion of eugenics is a
few pages borrowed from W. S. Thompson,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

another hostile sociologist, who naturally
makes it out to be a poor and mean thing
indeed. In a compendium of this sort, it
would seem that room might have been
found for a fair statement of the case from
someone who knew something about the
subject. The book is also criticized as
showing a bias against the family in
general, radical and pessimistic writers
having been given free rein.

9, ey”

THE INSUFFICIENCY OF EDUCATION

A summary of the paper by C. Wicksteed Armstrong in Section L of the Centenary
Meeting (1931) of the British Association,

practical results in the betterment of the

race from educational efforts alone, not,
at least, if we take the word education in
its narrow sense—since we have not only
first to convince the educational world that
eugenics is a fit and necessary subject in
which to instruct the rising generation, but,
even if knowledge could be immediately and
universally imparted, we should still, to a
certain extent, have to change human nature
itself before we could expect the instructed
people to act in the interests of posterity,
instead of, as heretofore, in those of self or
of class.

But if we can educate public opinion by
means of concrete example, rather than by
precept alone, in the meaning of far-sighted
charity (which is eugenics), we may perhaps
attain our ultimate goal more rapidly.

Such an attempt at education by practice
I have just visited at Strasbourg, where, last
week, I saw the Jardins Ungemach, whose
founder and administrator, Monsieur Alfred
Dachert, showed me, with justifiable pride,
his Garden City.* He has there succeeded

—.

| T would be a mistake to expect very great

* See Monsieur Dachert’s article in the REvirew of
last April and the further figures which here appear
in ‘‘ Notes and Memoranda.”’

in demonstrating, to a very large extent,
that the differential birth rate is not due to
any sinister and mysterious natural law,
but is, rather, simply a result of our manmade laws and conventions, and more especially of our false economic theories and
practice, which involve the progressive
penalizing of procreation among the more
energetic and useful sections of the population, for the benefit of parasites.

Now, the most important results to be
noticed at the Jardins Ungemach are to be
found in the birth rate and in the health and
beauty of the children there being raised,
results which, as years go by, must become
more and more pronounced. ‘The incidence
of disease was nil, and the anthropometric
statistics among the school children were incomparably superior to those of any other
school in Strasbourg, or even, I believe, in
France.

That Distress tends to press upon Relief
I believe to be an economic and psychological
law as regards the present, and a biological
law as regards the future. Its firm foundation in truth and its very grave significance
to Humanity I have been at pains to demonstrate in my book The Survival of the
Unfittest ; and once this law is recognized
THE INSUFFICIENCY OF EDUCATION

we shall see that, with our present methods,
practically all our philanthropic endeavour
is destined to defeat its own ends. Education
in eugenics must eventually cause us to
realize this. But can we wait so long, if,
meanwhile, racial decay proceeds apace?
The pioneer work of the New Charity has
been left to a Frenchman to do, and, moreover, France has stolen a march on us in her
really eugenic system of family allowances,
and in refusing to demoralize her people with
doles; while we, some of us, still cry out
against the bogey of ‘ stockyard methods ’

317

and others say solemnly that nothing positive or practical can be done yet toward the
eugenic ideal, because, forsooth, the science
of genetics (like all other sciences) has still
very much to learn. Let me conclude my
remarks by quoting some words of Major
Leonard Darwin :

‘Woe betide the nation which sees
other nations advancing in racial qualities,
whilst allowing itself to become so degenerate as to be unable to defend itself when
the pinch does come.’’

™~e

SAAN
= JOURNAL OF THE INSTITUTE OF SOCIOLOGY =
= Acting Editor: ALEXANDER FARQUHARSON Assistant Editor: K. E. BARLOW =
= Vol. XXIII. OCTOBER, 1931 No. 3 =
= CONTENTS =
= of the Third Part of the 23rd Volume, October, 1931 =
= Sociology and Mathematies : II. Arthur F. Bentley =
= The Processes of Regional Balance R. Mukerjee =
= An Educational Synthesis =
= Modern Geography and its Relation to Sociology W. 8. Brown =
= Tributes to the Memory of Victor Branford : II. =
= Communication Book Reviews Books and Periodicals Received =
= =
= Annual Subseription £1 Is. Od., post free. 5/- per copy. =
= The Leplay house Press, =
= 65 BELGRAVE ROAD, WESTMINSTER, S.W.1 =
SIM NUTT ETT WET
