ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION 
Memorandum submitted by the Eugenics Society

(x) Object of the Memorandum

The object of this memorandum is to
put before the Royal Commission the
importance of taking qualitative, i.e.
eugenic, considerations into account when
devising a positive population policy. The
word eugenics (eu—good, gen—race or
stock), first used by Sir Francis Galton in
1883, was defined by him as ‘ The science
which deals with all influences that improve
the inborn qualities of the race; also with
those that develop them to the utmost
advantage.” |

This memorandum also seeks to draw the
Royal Commission’s attention to a restatement, in terms of the demographic and
social trends of to-day, of how the aims of
eugenics can be realized in what we. believe
to be an acceptable social policy.

(2) The Standpoint of Galton
Galton’s conception of what eugenics is
and what it aims at has been partially lost
sight of in the controversies of later years.
Two short quotations will show that his
outlook is apposite to-day.
(a) Let us for a moment suppose that the practice of eugenics should hereafter raise the
average quality of our nation to that of its

better moiety at the present day, and consider the gain. The general tone of domestic

and social life would be higher. The race asa

whole would be less foolish, less frivolous,
less excitable, and politically more provident
than now. Its demagogues who “ played to
the gallery ’’ would play to a more sensible
gallery than at present. We should be better
fitted to fulfil our vast imperial opportunities. Lastly, men of an order of ability which
is now very rare, would become more frequent, because the level out of which they
rose would itself have risen.

The faculties of future generations will necessarily be distributed according to laws of
heredity, whose statistical effects are no
longer vague, for they are measured and expressed in formule. We cannot doubt the
existence of a great power ready to hand, and
capable of being directed with vast benefit as
soon as we shall have learnt to understand

(6

~~

92

and apply it. To no nation is a high human
breed more necessary than to our own, for
we plant our stock all over the world and lay
the foundations of the dispositions and
capacities of future millions of the human
race.

_. There are two essential ideas in the above
quotations: that the inborn qualities of
future generations should resemble the better
rather than the worse moiety of the nation
to-day ; and that our imperial and world
responsibilities impose on us a special obligation to foster the valuable inborn qualities
of our people.

Galton was a cousin of Charles Darwin and
his outlook was much influenced by the
evolution theory. ‘‘ Evolution,’ he wrote,
“is in any case a grand phantasmagoria, but
it assumes an infinitely more interesting
aspect under the knowledge that the intelligent action of the human will is, in some
small measure, capable of guiding its course.”’
And in another context: ‘‘ What nature
does blindly, slowly and ruthlessly, man may
do -providently, quickly and kindly.”

Though much has changed since Galton’s
time, his principles are as apposite to-day as
they were sixty years ago. But they need
to be re-stated in terms of the present demographic situation and of current social
standards.

(3) Eugenics and Differential Fertility
‘Though clearly aware of their importance,
Galton was less preoccupied by problems
of differential fertility than later writers
such as Karl Pearson. Indeed, the word
“‘ eugenics ’’ unescapably implies a challenge
—to define what we mean by “ eu ”’ in terms
of human values and human types. In the
period before the last war, some people found
their definition ready-made for them in the
Registrar-General’s figures. Appended is a
diagram from the report of the 1911 census,
published after Galton’s death, showing
trends in fertility between 1851 and I9gII in
eight social classes (Vol. XIII, part II,
 
 
  
        
 

   

Class
Class
Class
Class
Class
Class
Class

ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION 93

STANDARDIZED TOTAL FERTILITY OF EACH SOCIAL CLASS

PER CENT. OF THAT OF THE GENERAL POPULATION

FOR MARRIAGES OF VARYING DATES

Census of England and Wales, 1911. Vol. XIII, p. xciii (Diagram 16)

1861-7)
1871-8!
188)- 86
1886-9)
189)-96
$896 901
1901-1906
1906-191)

     

“H0d |
4

  
   

U

  

+ HdeE te oe or

Se mmc cecere-s\ececeeceee

en

  

I. Upper and Middle Classes.
II. Intermediate between Middle and Skilled Working Classes (Includes Shop-keeping Trades).
III. Skilled Workers.
IV. Intermediate between Class III and V (Includes some Skilled and Unskilled Workers).
V. Unskilled Workers.
VI. Textile Workers.
VII. Miners.

Class VIII. Agricultural Workers.
94 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

p. xciii), A striking difference is seen
between these classes: class I, which comprises the upper and middle classes, has
throughout the period the lowest fertility.
This class was widely regarded as the main
repository of cultural values, and its low
reproductive achievement was looked upon
by many people as an ominous sign, portending racial decay. Such a view was
readily taken by persons who were nurtured
in a classical tradition. In ancient Greek
valuations of humanity, the existence of
slaves and barbarians played an essential
part ; Plato’s ‘‘ Republic ’’ was organized on
a caste system. The biological attenuation
of the Registrar-General’s Class I is widely
regarded as an exaggeration. While we hold
it desirable that our population should be
more largely recruited from the first four of
the Registrar-General’s classes than at present, his classes are not regarded by us as
rigid castes and the reversal of the present
trends is not the sole aim of eugenics. One
of its aims is to secure the largest number of
births from the most intelligent families in
every social and economic class (intelligence
being the most important differential about
which exact knowledge is attainable). Careful surveys—e.g. by Dr. J. A. Fraser Roberts
at Bristol—have shown that the least intelligent families have on the average some
three times as many children as the most
intelligent, fertility declining evenly from
one extreme to the other. The reversal of
this adverse trend in differential fertility
(the persistence of which must result in a
steady fall in the general level of intelligence)
must be among the primary objectives of
any eugenic demographic policy.

(4) Perversions of Eugenics

Galton regarded eugenics as a means by
which persons with valuable inborn qualities
could make a larger contribution to posterity
than persons less well endowed. He thought
of the members of any community or race
as varying in respect of valuable inborn
qualities. While he believed that the different branches of the human race were
unequally equipped with the inborn characters that produce and _ sustain highly

organized civilizations, it was no part of his
outlook that biologically inferior races should
be persecuted or suppressed But this standpoint has been adopted by a later generation
and has done great harm to the cause of
eugenics. Under the title of ‘‘ race hygiene,”
the dogma of race superiority has been
espoused in Germany, where, in recent years,
the young have been indoctrinated with.
“aryanism,’’ anti-semitism and aggressive
nationalism. Analogous views have been
put forward in America by writers who were
actuated by colour prejudice. Eugenics is
also regarded by some as a preoccupation of
cranks who wish to control human matings

_by stockyard methods.

Because of these perversions, eugenics has
come to be regarded in certain quarters as
politically and biologically suspect. Galton’s
simple and dispassionate statement has been
forgotten. It is our aim to re-direct attention to Galton’s standpoint which, fortified
by advances in the science of genetics, has
gained in cogency and in relevance to affairs
of the present day. The word ‘ eugenics’
needs to be rehabilitated.

(5) Eugenics and the Expert

The contrast between the liberal and the
authoritarian application of eugenic principles turns much on the use made of the
expert. The authoritarian system employs
compulsion and invests the expert with
powers. At one end of the scale is compulsory restriction of births; at the other,
quasi-compulsory child-bearing. Or, if
actual compulsion is ruled out, there are
severe penalties at one extreme and valuable
economic and other incentives at the other,
whose application is highly discriminative.
The whole machinery depends on experts,
from whose certificates result abhorrent
vetoes or coveted privileges. Thus, a German
can be compulsorily sterilized by order of a
eugenic court. And his marriage can be
vetoed. Such methods are contrary to a
social philosophy which concedes freedom of
choice and independence of action to the

individual. A liberal system of eugenics

would make use of the expert; but his
function should be advisory only. He should
ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION 95

be readily accessible to everyone. His
existence should be widely advertised ; but
he should not be invested with powers.

(6) Five Standards of Eugenic Value

As remarked above, the word “‘ eugenics ”’
implies a challenge—to define what we mean
by ‘“‘eu.”’ “‘ Aconsiderable list of qualities,”’
wrote Galton, “‘ can be easily compiled that
nearly everyone would take into account
when picking out the best specimens of his
class. It would include health, energy, manliness and courteous disposition.’’ The list
might be extended by each of us in accordance with our system of private values.
There are, however, five characteristics as
to the excellence of which nearly everyone
will agree.

(a2) Sound physical and mental health and
good physique.
(b) Intelligence. |
(c) Social usefulness: the individual
should be a valuable and co-operative
member of his community with moral
qualities which make him a good
citizen.
The individual should be free from
genetic taints, i.e. unlikely to carry or
transmit familial diseases and defects.
(e) It is desirable that he should be a
member of a big, united, and well
(4)

adjusted family and that he should be.

fond of children.

Let us briefly consider these qualities.
There can be little disagreement about the

first two. A community of sound and robust |

people is preferable to one of physical weaklings, and intelligent people are preferable
to morons. But the first two qualities do
not necessarily connote the third. A man
can be a fine physical specimen and intelligent ; but he can also be an idler, a parasite
or a criminal. The first three qualities do
not connote the fourth. A woman physically
and mentally above the average who plays
a useful part in her community can also be
a carrier of hemophilia; or she may have
near relatives suffering from hereditary
physical and mental illnesses of which she
may be a probable carrier. So may a man.

.cambinations of qualities,

The fifth attribute has figured prominently
in discussions of differential fertility. There
are good reasons for thinking that certain
physical and
psychological, produce infertility and that
other combinations produce fertility.
Through several generations, infertile connexions produce diminishing numbers of
children ; childless couples or couples producing a single child become increasingly
frequent. If the connexion as a whole is
wealthy, the wealth becomes concentrated
on a small number of persons or on a single
person. The heiress is often the product of
such a connexion, and a case has been made
out by Galton that, as a result of the tendency of peers to marry heiresses, the former
“marry ’’ not only wealth but infertility,
thus hastening the extinction of their lines ;
and R. A. Fisher has argued that the “ social
promotion of infertility ’’ occurs widely in
all strata of society, resulting in a tendency
for strains containing ability to mix with
those marked by infertility, thus leading to
the sterilization of ability. Biologically
harmful social fashions are also set.

But if there are psychological traits which
lead to infertility, there are converse traits
which do the opposite. Philoprogenitiveness,* when combined with the first four
qualities above enumerated, is an attribute
which all must agree to be desirable. Families

* Dr. Spencer Paterson has proposed four new words
—two nouns and two adjectives—genophilia, genophobia, genophilic, genophobic. He writes: “‘ I think
that these words should be defined as follows. Genophilia : Love for children ; an attitude of mind which
welcomes large families. Genophobia: A dislike or
shunning of children; an attitude of mind which fears
or shuns the advent of children. Similarly, genophilic
and genophobic, used of persons, policies, legislation,
etc.”

Examples of the use of these words are as follows :

The policy of building four-roomed houses is definitely
genophobic.

A eugenic policy is one which seeks to make good
stocks genophilic and bad stocks genophobic.

Genophobia is spreading from urban to rural areas.

Madame de Sévigné, that arch-genophobe!

The nearest current word to “‘ genophilic ”’ is “* philoprogenitive ”’; but this has no obvious converse and
it cannot be applied to policies, legislation, etc. The
two adjectives epitomize phrases thus facilitating the
processes of thought. They focus attention upon
important tendencies and implications in any population
policy. They may be found useful by the Royal
Commission.
96 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in which the five qualities are combined are
big, united and well adjusted. Their members are successful in life, with little or
nothing in the way of inherited wealth.
They make good in a variety of callings, and
often spread themselves throughout the
world. They take a pride in their name and
in their “‘ clan ’’ and periodically have large
reunions where people belonging to three or
four generations assemble. This faith and
belief in one’s stock has important psychological corollaries. It connotes biological
vitality, a philosophical optimism, a positive attitude to life. It adds something
important, though less easily definable than
the others, to the four characteristics first
described.

Other qualities could be added to these
five and, as Galton remarked, each of us
could compile his own private list. It is in
terms of these five, however, that we mainly
understand the meaning of the particle
“eu.”

Only the fourth of the above-listed
characteristics is concerned solely with
genetic qualities. By definition, environmental factors are excluded. In the others
—i.e. physical health, intelligence, moral
qualities and a positive attitude to children
—both genetic and environmental influences
are concerned. Since Galton first wrote
about eugenics, enormous advances have
been made in our knowledge of plant and
animal genetics. The principles of Mendelism
have been discovered and the gene has been
demonstrated to have a locus on the chromosome. Mendelian principles have been shown
to operate in man; but the human being is
a bad subject for investigation partly because
of the length of the human generation and
partly because human matings cannot be
experimentally controlled. Nevertheless, the
occurrence in successive generations of certain defects and diseases—most of them rare
—has been shown to conform closely with
expectations based on simple Mendelian
hypotheses, and in some cases an accurate
estimate can be made of the probability of
such abnormalities being further handed on.
Of such widely distributed conditions, however, as physical robustness, intelligence,

moral qualities and philoprogenitiveness it
can be said that they are in considerable
measure determined by heredity, though not
in accordance with simple Mendelian principles shown in the transmission of a single
gene. The best scientific evidence in the
human field relates to intelligence; that
general physical and temperamental qualities
are also inherited is a matter of common
observation rather than of scientific demonstration in humans, though in experimental
and domesticated animals the importance of
heredity is unquestioned by every investigator and breeder.

That environment produces important
effects in man is obvious ; nevertheless, considerable differences between people would
continue to be seen even if the environment
were uniform for everyone. In other words,
people who are to-day remarkable for
physical, mental and moral qualities are the
ones who are most likely to transmit a
favourable hereditary endowment of these
qualities; but where the environment is
bad, deficiencies are not in themselves proof
that the hereditary endowment is poor.

(7) A Eugenic Policy Which is Socially

, Acceptable.

Let us consider from other aspects the
five qualities mentioned in the preceding
paragraph. How accurately can they be
estimated ? How much are they correlated ?
Is there any simple and observable social
index of their joint occurrence which could
be made the basis of a practical eugenic
policy ? | .

(2) How accurately can eugenically valuable qualities be estimated? Let us take
them in the order above given.

(i) Physical Health or fitness can be
estimated for certain specific purposes. Life
insurance companies have learned how to
take into account a miscellaneous assortment of factors in calculating risks. The
family history, the different physical systems
of the body, and the individual’s habits are
surveyed : all bear on the probable length
of life. Minor abnormalities, some of them,
perhaps, of congenital origin, such as errors
of refraction or deafness, have here little
ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION

relevance except in so far as they may predispose to accidents.

The fighting services have evolved a very
complicated system of grading and assessment, and during this war the number of
categories has been much increased. Minor
impairments of the sense-organs, whether
congenital or the results of disease or accident, are here important. A man may be
put into a low. category for reasons which
have nothing to do with his’ genetic fitness,
such as the loss of an eye or of two or three
fingers in an industrial accident.

Physical grading and assessment are being
increasingly used in industry, again for the
specific purpose of fitting the man to the
right job. The fact, however, remains that,
for genetic purposes, there is no accurate or
generally accepted method of assessing
physical health and fitness. There is no
physical quotient.

(ii) Intelligence is the only one of the
five characteristics which is quantitatively
measurable. The intelligence quotient tells
us something of importance about the child
or the adult, though critics are not lacking
to point out that general intelligence tests
take little account of character and that
they may miss special aptitudes and
abilities.

(ii) Social usefulness is difficult to predict
and impossible to express in a quotient.
Character is here an important factor. This
can only be assessed by personal knowledge
of the individual. As a leading psychiatrist
now working in the Navy recently remarked
of psychological tests in general: ‘‘ Unfortunately we have no tests for guts.”

(iv) Genetic qualities of relatives, valuable
and harmful, call for an assessment of the
individual’s pedigree. In at least one
authoritarian country the subject’s pedigree
is investigated as a preliminary to deciding
whether or not he should be allowed to get
married. But there is as yet no scale of
quantitative measurement.

(v) Lastly, philoprogenitiveness.can be recognized when obvious ; but large families
are all too often the result of improvidence
rather than of this attribute.

97

Thus, for eugenic purposes, only one of
these five qualities can at present be quantitatively estimated, namely, intelligence.

(5) How much are desirable traits correlated ?

There is a big literature dealing with
genius and it has been widely, though by
no means unanimously, contended that
geniuses are often mentally unstable or
physically defective. Accurate studies have
been made of children of high and of very
high intelligence. It has been generally found
that such children are above the average in
physique. But this may be partly due to the
fact that they probably come from homes
which are better than the average and have
been well nourished and cared for.

Yet there is a certain amount of evidence
pointing to the conclusion that desirable
traits are positively associated—i.e. tend to
occur in the same persons. What is certain,
however, is that these correlations are at
best small. Thus, in many individuals some
desirable qualities will be present and others
absent. There is little likelihood of any
single scientifically controllable test being
devised which would provide a single index
of an individual’s eugenic value.

Eugenic merit is thus a difficult matter to
evaluate accurately. Different qualities,
some valuable, others neutral, others harmful, have to be balanced against each other.
There is no simple biological index.

(c) Is there a simple social index of the
joint occurrence of eugenically desirable
traits which could be made the basis of an
acceptable social policy ?.

We think there is. The five qualities above
considered have as their confluent and resultant
expression the couple who, in a community
which provides good prospects for the future
welfare of children, which encourages family
life and inculcates a sense of tts responsibilities,
produce by intention and design a large family
and provide for tt a happy and a healthy home.

Let us consider what is implied in this
achievement.

To plan the births of a well-spaced family
demands intelligence, foresight and restraint ;
to produce deliberately a family large enough
98 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

for, or in excess of, replacement implies a
love of children, a sense of duty to the community and a belief that it is worth preserving, a desire to perpetuate family traditions, and an optimistic or positive attitude
towards life ; to provide a good home calls
for the power to make a success of marriage
and of life outside the home. All these are
desirable qualities, and the emphasis is on
the moral ones. But the choice here freely
exercised, of producing a large family, should
be made tn the full light of all relevant medical
and genetic factors.. When these factors are
seriously adverse, children will not be
wanted by morally responsible parents ; and
they should be discouraged by precept and
public opinion when moral and prudential
qualities are absent in the parents.

This statement brings out the importance
of the environment in a properly considered
eugenic policy. In an unfavourable environment wherein parenthood is attended
by serious economic handicaps, wherein the
prospects for children are bad, and wherein
birth control is widely practised, it is next
to impossible to effect replacement in
eugenically desirable ways. Because the
potential parent loves children, he will
shrink from bringing them into a world
which holds for them poor promise. His
philoprogenitive instincts turn in upon
themselves and are stifled. Sir William
Beveridge’s five “‘ giants ’’—Disease, Ignorance, Squalor, Idleness and Want—sterilize
parenthood in large masses of the population.
Where these evils prevail, the improvident
and feckless contribute freely to the next
generation ; those who cannot use the prevailing birth control. methods beget large
families; and sexual, dissociated from
parental, instincts determine the course of
reproduction. A voluntary system of
eugenics cannot work successfully, under
conditions of extreme poverty, malnutrition,
ill-health and isolation. A community which
desires to encourage philoprogenitive instincts must provide good prospects for
parents and for children in all classes. These
views have been well put by Mr. Frederick
Osborn in his book, Preface to Eugenics.*

* Harper & Brothers, New York, 1940.

Upon the argument here put forward the
American and British Eugenic Societies are
at one. Both stress the need for a favourable
environment wherein eugensc selection can
operate.

(8) Four Characteristics of a “ Favourable
Environment ” |

(a) The removal of social and economic
deterrents from parenthood.- This subject is
further discussed in section 10 below. At
this point, however, we would make one
observation. It has been contended by
some that conditions should be created
wherein a married couple would say: ‘‘ We
cannot afford not to have children.” In
other words, the bachelor, the spinster, the

‘childless couple should be so penalized as to

make their economic position worse than

that of parents with numerous children.

We do not support this extreme view. Some
people are temperamentally or genetically
unfitted for parenthood. These are behaving in a praiseworthy manner by refraining from having children. They should not
be penalized. The sexes may be numerically
unequal; women may continue to_outnumber men after this war. As long as the
prevailing sexual mores continue, marriage
for some women may be impossible, however
much desired. Such women should not be
penalized. We advocate equalizing as far
as possible the social and economic status
of parents and non-parents ; not the favouring of the one beyond the other. ‘

(b) The tnculcation of a eugentc conscience.
Every adolescent should be taught and
every parent should realize that he has a
social and a national obligation to have
enough children to replace the generation to
which he belongs, provided (the eugenist’s
proviso to the demographer’s purely quantitative formula) that the children are likely
to be normal, healthy and useful members of
the community. The teaching we have in
mind includes the elements of British and
world demography. We would like to see
these made common ground in all forms of
secondary education, and covered by the
County Colleges of the future.

(c) The establishment of facilities by which.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION | 99

every engaged or maryted couple can obtain
the most up-to-date scientific guidance on
genetic problems. To the question: “In
view of such-and-such a family history,
ought we to have children? ”’ a careful and
informed answer should be available for all,
free. The provision of an answer demands
an examination of the individual concerned,
of his family pedigree in respect of the distribution not only of abnormal but also of
normal persons, and of the actual or proposed
partner and his pedigree. The information
required is usually both voluminous and
complicated. If the health services of the
future are organized to meet the needs of
the family as a unit rather than of the
individual as a unit, the provision of guidance
on these matters should become a function
of the health services. At present the
Eugenics Society undertakes this work, but
perforce within narrow limits. (See Section
Ir (3) below.)

(2) Universal accessibtlity of knowledge as
to how pregnancies can be regulated—whether
by the treatment of subfertility to promote
births or by the dissemination of contraceptive knowledge to space or even prevent
them. Without this knowledge and power,
the family is often unplanned, couples failing
to secure desired pregnancies or, the more
usual event, having children whose birth is
unwanted or eugenically undesirable. Information about birth-control should be in
accordance with the family’s religious beliefs,
and these should be taken into account by
those who advise. The Royal Commission
will have received evidence about the “ safe
period.”” We have given this matter some
consideration. While we do not believe
that conception is impossible at any stage
of the cycle (or supposed cycle), we hold
that the chances are so much reduced during
certain days as to provide a large measure of
protection against unwanted pregnancies.
Women for whom “‘ appliance methods ”’ are
forbidden on religious grounds should, if

they want it, be given information on the .
safe period and the guidance necessary for:

its effective application.
We also think that it should be possible
for persons who suffer from, or probably

“carry’’ hereditary diseases or defects, to
be voluntarily sterilized. We support the
recommendations of the Brock Report on
sterilization.* Though not yet implemented,
the Brock Committee’s recommendations
have received very widespread support.
There are reasons, as yet unpublished, for
supposing that the legal risks run by a surgeon in sterilizing, at his request, a genuine
sufferer from hereditary disease are less than
have been supposed. The operation has, in
fact, been frequently done without legal
mishaps and has been warmly welcomed by
the subject concerned. Sterilization is a
complex subject upon which we could supply
further written or oral evidence if desired.
The principle of voluntary sterilization in
appropriate cases has been approved by the
Royal College of Physicians. We would like
to see the College specify in greater detail
than is given by the Brock Committee in
what medical and genetic conditions it
regards sterilization appropriate.

(9) How Far Could Parental Instincts, Dissociated from Sexual, Effect Replacement ?

It is argued by some that the perpetuation
of the species primarily depends on the
sexual functions by which animals are impelled to mate when they are entirely
unconscious of parental feelings; that,
through physiological sequences, the parental
instincts only reveal themselves when they
are called for—i.e. when the young are born ;
and that these instincts are not continuously
present and operative in the human being to
a sufficient degree to ensure perpetuation of
the species after contraception has severed
them from their sexual precursors. In other
words, it has been contended that philoprogenitive instincts are alone too weak to

*A copy of the Report (minus appendices) was
attached to the Memorandum. The other documents
attached were (1) a list of authorities, associations, etc.,
which have passed resolutions in favour of giving legal
effect to the recommendations of the Report; (2)
Better Unborn, a pamphlet describing “ forty-two
families which could be said to belong to the C3 element of our population’; and (3) a letter to the Week-end
Review by a hereditarily deformed man whose sterilization had been secured through the * help of the Eugenics

octety.
I0o

effect racial survival and that a universalized
knowledge of how to prevent pregnancy will
cause race suicide.

This argument cannot at present be disproved. Nevertheless, we believe that the
philoprogenitive instincts of normal men and
women are powerful and operative impulses,
much influenced by precept and example,
whose alleged weakness has been falsely
deduced from the fact that their free expression is restricted by a host of social impediments and economic deterrents. Indeed,
these deterrents have caused an aberration
of philoprogenitive instincts. A love of
children has resulted in a restriction of their
number, good prospects for a few being
preferred to poverty or only modest prospects for many. Even if conditions were
favourable to unrestricted voluntary parenthood, some selfish couples would deliberately
avoid having children as they do to-day. In
time, however, the processes of natural
selection, which determine survival, would
change; the emphasis would be displaced
from the sexual functions, where it has
rested up to now, to the parental.

But would parental instincts, un-reinforced by considerations of self-interest, be
strong or widespread enough to effect replacement? As previously remarked, we
favour the equalization of the economic. and
social’ conditions of parents and childless
couples. Under these conditions, the valuable philoprogenitive instincts would mainly
determine reproduction and would have the
best chance of spreading throughout posterity. But if it were to turn out that,
against such a background, reproduction fell
short of requirements, it might prove necessary to attach positive incentives to parenthood, while at the same time penalizing the
childless. It has been argued that the high
birth rates which have been recorded during
this war are in part attributable to the fact
that pregnant women and mothers of young
children are not called up for national service.
It is difficult to assess how much truth there
is in this contention. But if it has any
basis, it provides an illustration of how
motives which have nothing to do with
philoprogenitiveness can result in the in
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ce

crease of planned and “ wanted”’ pregnancies. Children were an economic asset in
the past, both in field and factory. A recent
Russian law confers marks of very high
prestige as well as substantial economic
benefits on parents of very large families.*

May it prove necessary to supplement
philoprogenitive impulses with others based
on economic or social self-interest? The
question cannot be answered, though light
might be thrown on it. by detailed studies of
differential fertility.

Is any social, economic, religious or occupational sub-class of the population in this
or in any other country replacing itself by
means of pregnancies which are for the most
part planned and wanted? We do not
know the answer ; research in this direction
would be welcome.

(10) Social and Economic Changes Needed to
Equalize the Position of Parents and
Childless Persons

To equalize the position of the parent
(irrespective of the number of children) and
the childless adult, many changes and adjustments are called for. The Royal Commission
will have taken evidence from many sources
on these subjects. As to several, it will
receive from its expert committees better
information than we can supply. We add
a few brief notes.

Family Allowances. These are desirable
for many reasons other than eugenic. If
the positions of parents and non-parents are
to be genuinely equalized, allowances should
begin with the first child and an equal
additional allowance be given for every subsequent child. We would stress, however,
the need that allowances should be in some
considerable measure proportional to the
income of the family, and if a flat-rate scheme
be adopted, it should be supplemented by
an additional allowance proportional to income up to a certain level beyond which

* We are inclined to predict that the Russian
Government will be led by experience to take eugenic

‘ considerations into account in administering this law.

The Order of ‘‘ Heroine Mother ’’ would hardly be
appropriate for a moronic mother of ten or more mentally subnormal children, some of which have to be
reared at the expense of the State.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION

further increments should not be necessary.
The flat-rate scheme would satisfy minimum
standards and would have no eugenic effects.
Indeed, if not supplemented as suggested,
its effect in some directions might be
dysgenic. The size of a Civil Servant’s
family, for instance, is not affected by the
fact that he may earn £3,000 at the age of
60, but by the income he receives between
the ages of 25 and 4o. If his income at
that period is to be further taxed to provide
for the flat-rate scheme, it is highly probable
that his family will be even smaller than at
present. But the supplementary scheme we
have suggested will avoid this danger.
Different views are held as to whether
allowances are best paid in cash, in kind, or
partly in cash and partly in kind. These
must be largely speculative as we have no
experience on which to base our judgment.
It is still more difficult to say whether any
one of these three ways would be eugenically
preferable to the others.

The supplementary and graded allowance,
over and above the flat rate, might be supplied as part of a system of income-tax liabilities and rebates, or as a compulsory insurance
scheme, wherein payments and benefits
would be stratified according to income levels
up to a certain maximum. Towards such a

supplementary scheme, the state would not .

make any contribution whatsoever. What,
in effect, would be involved would be a redistribution of the collective income of individuals and families between certain income
levels. We wish to point out, however, that
while identical re-distribution could be
effected either by insurance schemes or by
income-tax rebates, the former method possesses an important advantage, for it would
be obvious to all that contributions were
derived solely from the groups benefiting—
contributions and benefits being in proportion. On the other hand it would be impossible to convince many people, even some of
considerable intelligence, that the income-tax
rebates were not a gift to the rich from the
state.

_ Encouragement of early marriage. We
favour such encouragement, though we have
no special views as to how it should be given.

IOI

The war interrupted an investigation of the
subject promoted by the Society. The removal of arbitrary restrictions on early
marriage in certain occupations and professions (including the Civil Services, Local
Government Authorities, peace-time establishments of the armed forces) might be a
matter for legislation, central and local.

Child-bearing. The cost of maternity ser
vices should be madeas low as possible or even

provided free in all income groups ; and the

worries and stresses of childbirth should, as

far as possible, be removed. Home-helps
should be provided during confinement and
at times of family crisis, and pregnant and
nursing mothers in employment should be
financially helped on a generous scale. We
support the recommendations of the Royal

College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists

on this subject.

Education. ~We welcome the Education
Act (1944), having recognized in the costs of
what has been called a ‘‘ good education ”’

‘one of the main deterrents from parenthood.

Housing. Schemes for housing and town
planning should provide adequate variation
in size of house to accommodate families of
varying numbers. Schemes should offer
facilities for the care, recreation and upbringing of children and should help large
families by providing créches, nursery
schools and similar services. We favour
schemes for facilitating the residential mobility of families as the number of children
augments, without increase in rent charges.
The subject of housing is intricate and technical. We have'no special knowledge of it,
but stress its important demographic aspects.

Ir. Miscellaneeus

We would like to be allowed to submit

observations on four other subjects ¢

(a) The Social Problem Group.

(3) The'type of person who. to-day seeks
genetic advice (note by Dr. C. P.
Blacker).

(c) Health examinations before marriage.

(d) The establishment of an Imperial Institute of Demographic Studies.
I02

(a) The Soctal Problem Group. This term
was first used by the Wood Committee (1929)
which had been asked to investigate the
incidence of Mental Defect in England and
Wales and to make recommendations as to
how the problem could best be dealt with.
Six areas were carefully examined by Dr.
E. O. Lewis from whom, we understand, the
Royal Commission has received evidence.
Here are two passages from the Wood Report:

There is yet a further reason which renders it
essential for us to consider this marginal group.
The two groups of mentally defective and retarded children are not merely contiguous
groups; there is scientific ground for thinking
that a causal relation exists between them. The
findings of our investigation ... point to the
conclusion that the majority of the feebleminded are to be found within a relatively small
social group, a group which may be described as
the subnormal or social problem group, representing approximately 10 per cent of the whole
population. Most of the parents in this subnormal group are themselves of poor mental
endowment and would no doubt have been
classed, when children, among the dull or retarded. Similarly, the dull children of the
present generation, who form a large majority
amongst children in this subnormal group, are
the potential parents of many feeble-minded in
the next generation. Therefore, from the standpoint of the prevention of many social evils it is
of the utmost importance that the problem of the
education and social care of the borderline retarded child should be effectively tackled.

Let us assume that we could segregate as a
separate community all the families in this
country containing mental defectives of the
primary amentia type. We should find that we
had collected among them a most interesting
social group. It would include, as everyone who
has extensive practical experience of social service would readily admit, a much larger proportion of insane persons, epileptics, paupers,
criminals (especially recidivists), unemployables,
habitual slum dwellers, prostitutes, inebriates
and other social inefficients than would a group
of families not containing mental defectives.
The overwhelming majority of the families thus
collected will belong to that section of the community which we propose to term the “ social
problem ’”’ or ‘‘ subnormal’”’ group. This group
comprises approximately the lowest ro per cent
in the social scale of most communities.

The Wood Report was published in 1929.
Fourteen years later, the social problem
group was again brought before the public
eye by problems arising from the evacuation

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of children from bombed areas. Here is an
extract from a report* on the subject :

The effect of evacuation was to flood the dark
‘places with light and bring home to the national
consciousness that the ‘‘ submerged tenth”’
described by Charles Booth still exists in our
towns like a hidden sore, poor, dirty, crude in
its habits, and an intolerable and degrading
burden to decent people forced by poverty to
neighbour it. Within this group are the “ problem families ’’ always on the edge of pauperism
and crime, riddled with mental and physical
defect, in and out of the courts for child neglect,
a menace to the community, of which the gravity
is out of all proportion to their numbers.

The social problem group has, we think,
interest for the Royal Commission because of
another feature not mentioned above, namely
an abnormally high fertility. ‘“‘ Two common
types in this group,” say the Wood Committee, ‘‘ are the unmarried women of childbearing age admitted two, three or more
times to the maternity ward of the workhouse, and the recidivist of the criminal
classes. Those two types alone are the
parents of a not inconsiderable number of the
mental defectives who become social dangers
and economic burdens; and probably this
is the most serious offence of these parents
against the community.”

It is uncertain whether the social problem
group is primarily the lower end of a continuous curve of distribution or a distinct
sub-population with features that differentiate it biologically from those of the rest of
the population. If the ro per cent of the
population which is lowest from the point of
view of intelligence or any other socially
desirable quality is arbitrarily cut off and
studied in isolation, it will inevitably present
many of the features of the social problem
group. Furthermore, natural selection will
promote the combination of socially desirable
or socially undesirable qualities in the same
persons. On the other hand, it is possible
that genetic factors interacting with b4d
environmental conditions have, owing to a
kind of vicious circle, more or less isolated a
sub-population.

We do not feel that existing evidence as
yet permits a decision in favour of either

* Our Towns: A Close-up. Oxford University Press,

1943.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION

hypothesis. This indecision makes careful
research all the more necessary. In either
event, however, it is inevitable that the
group should be one of high fertility.

The Government’s proposals (Cmd. 6550)
for National Insurance suggest how further
light could be thrown on this subject. It is
proposed to appoint a Minister of National
Insurance, and (para. 157) ‘“‘ Under the new
scheme a wide network of local offices will
be established at which the public may lodge
claims, seek information or guidance, and
obtain payments of certain benefits.”’ It is
also proposed to draw up a Register of Insured Persons. Paragraph 37 reads :

Under the new scheme it will be necessary to
obtain and classify information about the whole
population so as.to enable every person to be
placed in his or her appropriate insurance class.
After that it will be necessary to compile and
maintain one or more central registers, in which
the insurance record and status of every insured
person will be entered and kept up to date. The
register will be an essential feature of the scheme
for several reasons, first to record classification

_ and transfer between classes, second to facilitate
enforcement of the payment of contributions,
and third so that the record of any insured person
in relation to contributions and benefits can be
ascertained when necessary. The task of organization involved in compiling and maintaining
the register is obviously one of the first magnitude, but it is an unavoidable step and one
which must ultimately promote efficiency and
economy. (Our italics.)

This register should yield valuable information about the Social Problem Group.
Machinery will have to be created to check
the careless admission of claims and the
irresponsible distribution of benefits. If the
people in question do, in fact, present mul
tiple social problems, the fact should show up.

in the records of the national register. It
would be a good thing if the Royal Commission could recommend that special attention be devoted to this matter by the Ministry concerned with National Insurance, so
that information which would enable us to
form a true estimate of the nature of this
group is not ignored or buried in files.

(6) The type of person who to-day seeks
genetic advice. The following is submitted by
Dr. C. P. Blacker, Honorary Secretary of the
Eugenics Society :

103

“During the last fourteen years, I have
been much consulted by people who write to
the Society for guidance on genetic problems
affecting marriage and parenthood. Many
factors have to be taken into account in giving
an opinion. Not only must a careful pedigree
be obtained ; the individual should also be
seen and examined. For obvious reasons,
the Society cannot undertake to give these
elaborate services free to all comers, but I
undertake to provide them for persons who
are members of the Society.

“The Society has produced a Schedule of
instructions about how a pedigree should be
drawn up. I am in the habit of sending this
document to persons wanting genetic advice,
at the same time asking them to carry out
the contained instructions. Recipients are
asked to return the schedule to me when
completed. I then arrange for the inquirer
to come to see me with his married or
betrothed partner.

‘“‘T would here like to be allowed to make
some general remarks about the people I
have seen in this way.

‘“‘The average person who seeks guidance
in this sphere is a morally responsible and
conscientious individual who generally comes
from the middle class. His family history
often exhibits qualities markedly above the
average as well as the black spots which
cause the misgivings. In the maj jority of
cases, the good qualities have, in my opinion,
outweighed the bad and after pointing out
that it is impossible to guarantee of any
mating that the children will be normal, I
have advised them to take the risk and have
children.

‘In most cases, the abnormality which is
causing concern, while generally recognized
as hereditary, does not conform in its incidence to the simple Mendelian hypotheses of
dominance, recessiveness and sex-linkage.
In some instances, the hereditary nature of
the abnormality is doubtful. (Not all fits are
the expression of idiopathic epilepsy ; not
all forms of amentia are primary.) In many
cases the couple are obviously of good type,
capable of making good parents.

‘‘The predominance of socially valuable
persons among those who to-day seek guid104

ance on eugenic questions provides an
example of the differential effects of propaganda. In the last twenty-five years the
population of this country has heard much
about the functions of parenthood. Much
has been said about birth control, about
over-population, about threatened depopulation, about hereditary. diseases, about the
health of mothers and children. The first to
be reached by such propaganda are the
scrupulous, conscientious and _ intelligent
elements of the population ; the last to be
touched are the feckless, improvident and
stupid. The last-named are the people at
whom the propaganda is aimed; yet they
are the last to respond.

‘Two lessons, it seems to me, are to be
learned from the above. The first is that
great care must be taken in giving genetic
advice. If the good qualities shown by the
inquirer himself and discernible among his
relatives are not taken carefully into account
and balanced against the bad, ifin other words
the problem is hastily or cursorily surveyed
and pronounced upon, there is a danger of
the community being deprived of children
who would be valuable assets to posterity.

‘‘ The second lesson is that the principles of
negative eugenics should be known by those
who administer the social services. If it is
true that large families (often decimated by
high wastages) are born to subnormal and
irresponsible parents, it is also true that
many of their pregnancies are unplanned and
unwanted. Such parents are grateful for
guidance and help; but they often lack the
qualities to help themselves. Hence the need
of eugenically enlightened social services.’

(c) Health examinations before marriage.
Various proposals have been made about
health examinations before marriage, and in
certain countries such examinations are com
pulsory. The question has been discussed in 
the House of Lords (November 17th, 1934:
Speech by Lord Kilmaine).

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

We do not believe that compulsory
examinations are yet practicable in this
country. Nor. do we believe that. it is
feasible to ask doctors to produce certificates
of fitness for marriage. (The most that is
possible for a doctor is to give a declaration
that, to the best of his knowledge, the individual is free from certain diseases such as
venereal diseases and tuberculosis.) But we
do believe that, without asking for certificates, people should get themselves examined
before marriage. Many doctors, however,
are in doubt as to how they should conduct
such examinations, and very delicate questions are raised.

To help the medical profession in this
matter, the Soczety has.» produced a Prenuptial Health Schedule which provides the
necessary guidance. The documents have
been in fairly continuous demand since they
were prepared in 1936, and the British
Medical Association is in the habit of
referring inquirers to us.

(d) An Imperial Institute of Demographic
Studies. We regard the collection of comprehensive and accurate data on human
reproductive trends as a vital task of the
future. This need would, in our view, be best
achieved by the creation of an Imperial
Institute of Demographic Studies with
ample funds and staff. We would like to see
such an Institute established on a high level
—perhaps depending from the Privy Council
as does the Medical Research Council.
Demographic methods throughout the empire
could then be co-ordinated by frequent
conferences with representatives of the
Dominions and Crown Colonies; and research could be promoted and collated. The
Institute might well bring this country into
a position of world leadership in the matter
of demographic methods. Such a creation
would be a really worthy legacy of the Royal
Commission, and would give it unquestioned
historical importance.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXVI, No. 8.
