A NOTE ON THE CALCULATION OF
THE NET REPRODUCTION RATE FOR
MARRIED WOMEN

By K. T.

HE measure of the balance of births

and deaths now generally accepted

is the net reproduction rate usually
associated with the name of Dr. Kuczynski.
This rate shows how many girls—future
potential mothers—might be expected in due
course to be born to 1,000 infant girls born
at a given place and time, according to
fertility and mortality experienced at that
place and time. To get a better understanding of the balance it is possible to compute
separate reproduction rates for married and
for single women. Dr. Kuczynski has worked

out examples to illustrate the procedure to

be followed, and the purpose of the present
note is to consider the validity of the method
at one point in the computation.

In order to bring out the nature of the
point that is in doubt it may be well to begin
by attempting to define the rates that are
relevant to the discussion, in so far as the
writer understands Dr. Kuczynski’s work.
The first two of the four definitions which
follow are included merely to show the
parallel between the determination of the
reproduction rates of women in general and
of married women in particular. It is
desirable to recall them because Dr. Kuczynski himself, in his book The Measurement
of Population Growth,* offers no precise
definition of the rates applicable to married
women. The reader is left to infer the meanings to be attached to the latter from the
illustrative examples he gives.

Definition of Gross Reproduction Rate

If we suppose that 1,000 randomly chosen
newly-born girls could live to be 50 years of
age (I5 and 50 assumed to be the limiting

* Sidgwick & Jackson Ltd., 1935 Edition. Price

12s. 6d.

LIM, Ph.D.

ages of reproduction for this purpose) unaffected by mortality, but subject to the
constant specific fertility rates appropriate
to a given place and date, and if we suppose
that by the time they are 50 they have given
birth to g, new girls, the gross reproduction
vate of the given place at the given date is
defined as g,/1,000.

1,000 1,000 By 1,000
O 15 50

Defimition of Net Reproduction Rate

If, now, we suppose that the original 1,000
newly-born girls are subject also to the
specific mortality rates appropriate to the
same place at the same date, by the time the
survivors reach the age of 50 the total
number of girls to which the original 1,000
will have given birth will be g., where gy is
less than g,, because x of the original 1,000
baby girls will not even live to be 15 and
x+y will not live to be 50. The net reproduction rate of the given place at the given
date is accordingly defined as g,/1,000.

O 15 50

Definition of Gross Reproduction Rate for
Married Women

If, next, we suppose that of the 1,000
original newly-born girls not subject to
mortality, m, marry once or oftener, and
that they give birth to /, legitimately-born
baby girls before they reach the age of 50,
assuming the specific nuptiality and fertility
rates proper to the given place and date, the
gross reproduction rate for married women of
that place at that date may be defined as
L,/m,.

179
180

Definition of Net Reproduction Rate for
Married Women

Finally, if we suppose that the original
1,000 newly-born girls are also subject to the
specific mortality rates proper to the given
place and date, it is clear that both /, and
m, will on that account be reduced to, say,
i, and m,, because a number of the 1,000
girl babies will not live to be married or,
having married, will die before they produce
their full complement of children. Thus the
net reproduction rate for married women of
the given place and date may be defined as
L,/msg.

Criticism of Kuczynskt’s Method

It should be observed that the first three
of these definitions are strictly in line with
Dr. Kuczynski’s own definitions as inferred
from his calculations of the rates concerned.
It is only in regard to the fourth that there
is a difference of opinion.

We proceed now to give, largely in his
own words, the results of Dr. Kuczynski’s
calculation of the gross and net reproduction
rates for married women in Denmark,
1926-30. (See The Measurement of Population
Growth, pp. 156-9 and 220-1.) The gross
reproduction rate computed on the basis of
fertility and nuptiality in 1926-30 is found
to be 1-175. But of the 1,175 girls borne by
1,000 females passing through the ages 15
to 50, only 1,060 were legitimate. And,
since according to the nuptiality table 837
out of 1,000 females reaching the age of 50
years had married (while 163 had remained
single), the gross reproduction rate of women
who married (once or oftener), measured by
1,060

837

No exception need be taken to the procedure up to this point. It is true that we
cannot be sure that, in the purely hypothetical event of 1,000 girl infants being born
and all escaping death until after they had
passed the age of 50, 837 of them would have
married. On the other hand, no better
assumption can be made than that if, out
of 1,000 women living at the age of 50 (at the
place and date under discussion), 837 are or

legitimate births only, is = 1-267.

 

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

have been married, this is the appropriate
number to take as the denominator in the
calculation of the gross reproduction rate for
married women.

When, in the same country at the same
period, mortality is also taken into account,
it is found that 1,019 girls are born to I,000
females, 918 being legitimate. Dr. Kuczynski then proceeds thus: ‘“ Since accord- |
ing to the nuptiality table 837 out of 1,000
females reaching the age of 50 years had
married (while 163 had remained single) the
net reproduction rate of women who married
(once or oftener), if measured by legitimate

births only, was O-g18 __

0 °837
words, reverting to the notation of the definitions already given, accepting his /, and /, as
correct, he appears to have taken both m,
and m, to be equal to 837; whereas, if the
proposed definitions are acknowledged to be
reasonable, m, must be less than m,. The
births in each case should in short be related
to the appropriate number of mothers, and
since mortality is taken into account in the
one case and not in the other, the number of
mothers in the former case must be less than
in the latter.

1-097.” In other

NotTE By D. CARADOG JONES

My late tutor, Mr. D. Caradog Jones of the
University of Liverpool, to whom I submitted this note before venturing to publish
it, has sent me the following communication
and I have his permission to add it to my

paper.

“While I agree with your criticism of Dr.
Kuczynski’s method, as to the measurement
of the reproduction rates of married and unmarried women, I am disposed to go farther
and to suggest other definitions which appear
to me to conform more closely to the
accepted definitions of the gross and net
reproduction rates for all women. Alternative definitions, A and B, might in fact be
proposed, both of which I think have something to commend them.

A. Adopting your notation, and starting
as you do with 1,000 girl babies who are
REPRODUCTION RATE FOR MARRIED WOMEN

replaced in effect a generation hence (assuming certain constant fertility conditions) by
£, new girl babies, it would not be unreasonable to break up g, into /,, legitimate girls
and 7,, illegitimate girls, and to define the
gross legitimate rate (mortality neglected)
as 1,/1,000 and the gross illegitimate rate as
1,/1,000, where |
£,/1,000 = 1,/1,000 + 12,/1,000

Similarly, with an obvious extension of
your notation, the net legitimate and
illegitimate rates, taking mortality into
account, could be defined as /,/1,000 and
7,/I1,000 respectively, where

£2/1,000 = 1,/1,000 + 7,/1,000

B. But a definition which follows more
strictly along the lines of that accepted for
all women (as opposed to married women)
can be formulated by breaking up the original
1,000 girl babies in A into J, legitimate and
2) illegitimate girls, who in effect are replaced
a generation hence (neglecting mortality
and assuming certain constant fertility and
nuptiality conditions) by /, legitimate and
2, illegitimate girls. Hence it would be a
natural development to define the gross

r8r

legitimate rate as /,/l, and the gross illegitimate rate as 1,/% .

Again, by an obvious extension of your
notation, the net legitimate and illegitimate
rates, taking mortality into account, could
be defined as /,/J, and 1/19, respectively.

The point I wish to emphasize is that it
seems to me unnecessary and somewhat
confusing to bring the potential mothers of
the legitimate (or illegitimate) babies into
the picture, as Dr. Kuczynski does. I mean
by ‘ potential’ mothers the married women
(m) who are available to give birth to the
legitimate babies (though they may not all
function effectively) and the unmarried
women (“)—or the married who consort with
men who are not their husbands—who are
available to give birth to illegitimate babies.
But, zf it be considered desirable to relate
the babies to their potential mothers, I fail
to see how the m, that is relevant to /,, when
mortality has had free play, could equal the
m, that is relevant to /, when mortality is
neglected. That, put quite simply, is why
I think your criticism of Dr. Kuczynski’s
method is justified.”’

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXI, No. 3.
