OTHER NOTICES

Bonner, John Tyler. Size and Cycle: An essay
on the structure of biology. Princeton, N. J.,
1965. Princeton University Press. (London,
Oxford University Press.) Pp. viii+219. Price 60s.

THIS BOOK HAS real interest as well as too much
of the transatlantic wordiness. Its copperplates
have a certain fascination. The contents have no
special relation to eugenic thought, but they may
remind the geneticist that it is living whole
organisms which must make their way in the
world and survive despite the hazards of the
environment at all stages. One may fairly quote
from Bonner’s Introduction:

The life cycle is the central unit in biology. The
notion of the organism is used in this sense, rather
than that of an individual at a moment in time, such
as the adult at maturity. Evolution then becomes the
alteration of life cycles through time; genetics the
inheritance mechanisms between cycles, and development all the changes in structure that take place
during one life cycle. . . . Therefore the life cycle is
quality, and size is quantity . . . everything lies
within its firm grip [i.e. of natural selection], but
now instead of saying that merely structure is the
object of selection, we add that quantity or size is
also. Before we said that adults were adapted, and
now we add that all the other stages of the life cycle
are adapted too. . . . Before we said that phylogeny
was at the center of all systematic considerations,
but in our new systematics the immediate existence
of a life cycle, with its functional adaptation to its
surroundings and its corresponding structural
changes, is of prime importance.

The author seeks clarity but I do not think he

has succeeded in providing it. In conclusion he
remarks:
If this could all be done for the biological colligative
properties, we might really be closer to the kind of
connecting laws that we yearn for, and that the
physicist is so fortunate in possessing. . . . The
population geneticists . . . began the process some
years ago, but now it is time to look beyond their
restricted task and try to pull all of biology into one
system. G. C. L. B.

Clarke, C. A. Genética Practica. Trs. M. Ribas
Mundo. Barcelona, 1965. Ediciones Toray. Pp.
xix-+383.

Genetics for the Clinician was first published by
Blackwell in 1962 and was soon followed by a

ER—H 2

second, enlarged, edition; these were both
reviewed in our pages (55, 45; 57, 36).

It is gratifying to find that the second (1964)
edition has now been translated into Spanish and
published in a well-printed and well-produced
volume. Eugenists will consider it of particular
importance that the chapter on heredity clinics
and genetic counselling should be in circulation
in a predominantly Roman Catholic country.

Park, C. W. The Population Explosion. London,
1965. Heinemann Educational. Pp. 110. Price 6s.

THE BOOK SETS out with the admirable idea of
containing within 100 pages simplified statistics,
statements, policies and achievements. Unfortunately in the effort to supply “‘statistics
moulded into emotive language to provide easy
assimilation’ it has become sometimes florid and
often confusing.

There are a number of inaccuracies. For
instance “‘carbohydrates”’ include “‘milk, cereals,
peas and beans” (p. 49); “trachoma resulting
from a deficiency of Vitamin A” (p. 56);
““Goitres signify a deficiency of iron in the diet”
(p. 56); “buffalo milk clarified into a sickly oil
(ghee)”’ (p. 61); “Apparently luxurious but often
sterile soils’ (p. 45); while such expressions as
“gaping sores in the path of progress” (p. 68)
are to be deprecated.

Food shortage is not the only cause of
malnutrition. Hunger is a sensation and not a
deficiency disease.

The idea of the book is excellent. It needs
careful revision.

CICELY D. WILLIAMS

Tietze, Christopher (Editor). Bibliography of
Fertility Control 1950-1965. Publication No. 23.
New York, 1965. National Committee on
Maternal Health. Pp. iv+198.

THE FIRST 167 pages of this bibliography
contain 1,935 numbered entries, followed by an
alphabetical list of authors. The subject matter is

107
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

divided into nineteen sections: each publication
on intra-uterine, oral and vaginal contraception,
for instance, is listed under its appropriate
heading; sterilization and abortion are both
similarly subdivided and there are sections on
the psychological, the social and demographic,
the historical, and the legal and administrative
aspects of contraception.

108

In his introduction, the Editor asks readers to
bring errors and omissions to his notice, as the
intention is to publish supplementary lists at
appropriate intervals.

It is hardly necessary to say that this is a most
useful reference book; its value will obviously be
much enhanced if it is kept up to date by the
proposed supplements.
