C. P. BLACKER

BARBARA BOSANQUET

The Family in Contemporary
Society

The Family in Contemporary Society. The
Report of a Group convened by the Church of
England Moral Welfare Council, at the behest of
the Archbishop of Canterbury with Appended
Reports from the U.S.A., Canada and India. The
material in the Report and its four Appendices
is for the use of the Lambeth Conference, July,
1958. London, 1958. S.P.C.K. Pp. viii + 229.
Price 10s. 6d.

MRS. BARBARA BOSANQUET
THIS IS an exceedingly interesting work, and
may prove to have great influence. It is by a
group of eighteen people—seven clergymen, seven
sociologists, two educators and two demographers. The Chairman was Canon Max Warren,
the Secretary the Rev. G. R. Dunstan, and
Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders and Dr. Sherwin
Bailey were members of the group. The Report
itself takes up only some thirty pages, and is
signed unanimously. The remaining two hundred
pages consist of four Appendices, containing a
miscellaneous assortment of facts and considerations, focused on family planning, particularly in
India, and on problems in Africa, the West Indies
and the Middle East. Dr. Gertrude Willoughby
who, as Research Assistant drafted seven chapters of the chief Appendix, is to be congratulated
on an able compilation of statistics bearing on
family problems in these areas—problems such
as urbanisation, racial conflicts, “bride price’
and polygamy. It is safe to say that if the facts in
this volume are digested, and its recommendations acted upon by the assembled Bishops, it will
mark a great forward stride in religious thinking.
The Report proper limits itself to discussion
of three demographic factors which impinge on
our western concept of “‘the family”, and on the
interplay between rapid social change, the family
and the Church — meaning in this context,
presumably, the Anglican Communion. Being
limited by time and space, and showing evidences
of haste, it does not try to deal with such vital

questions as pre-marital education, conditions
of marriage, divorce and re-marriage, working
mothers and delinquency, though some of these
questions are raised in the Appendices which
deal with the family in the United States and
Canada. (These last give fresh information on
such topics as urbanisation, shift work, mobility,
immigration and housing.)

The three factors in the population problem
with which the Report does deal are: increase of
resources, reduction of mortality and family
planning. As regards the first two, the Church is
urged to increase its understanding of industrial
and scientific advance:

To-day, as asecond industrial revolution gathers

speed, the Church... if it will but run in har
ness with those whose profession is to observe

objectively what is happening in society ...

need not be left behind.
Fiscal and trade policies must be liberalized, so
that the underdeveloped countries can begin to
pay their way; new resources must be developed,
and help from the “have’’ countries in the form
of expert assistance and gifts, must be stepped
up. With a wholly praiseworthy juxtaposition of
ecclesiastical and scientific language—refreshingly
visible throughout the report—citizens of richer
countries are urged to “interpret the divine
precept to give to those in need” and Professor
Blackett is quoted (in his Presidential address to
the British Association): “. . . the sending of
experts to poor countries without the capital to
carry out their plans could be as irritating as to
send a trained cook to a family unable to pay
the baker.’’ Modern medicine and hygiene have
removed the natural checks to population, and
this process cannot but be praised and helped by
the Church; but the stark fact is faced that in
many parts of the world numbers are increasing
to a point where they will soon press dangerously
against resources. Perhaps not enough weight is
given to exponents of views such as Colin

125

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1958, 50, 2.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Clark’s*, nor is mention made of the work of
F.A.O.¢t However, the dilemma is there, and in
this slender paper-bound volume it is honestly
faced. The third factor—family planning suitably
used—is, by implication in the Report and by
direct advocacy in the Appendix{—approved as
compatible with Christianity.

The operative words are “suitably used’’, and
at this point we cannot do better than quote from
the leading article in the Manchester Guardian
of April 15th, 1958:

The classical Christian attitude [disapproval]§

was formulated at a time when natural checks

like war and disease seemed to guarantee the
world against over-population. The advance
of medical science has transformed the moral
problem. As the report says:
‘If our conscience will not tolerate, when
we know how to prevent it, a torrent of
infant deaths, no more should we, with the
knowledge we have, encourage an ungoverned spate of unwanted births. If
fatalism has given place to upholding the
sanctity of life for the living, should it not
also yield to a responsibility for those whom
we cause to be born?’

and again,

‘Family Planning” represents an extension
of the responsible use of science into the
realm of procreation, in the immediate
interest of the family and the more remote
but no less real interest of society...’

If the Lambeth Conference of 1958 accepts

this point of view, one may expect it to lead to

a resolution more positive and less cautious

than that of 1930 [grudging approval].§ Less

cautious, but not thereby less moral.||

But one’s attitude towards family planning

and contraceptive practices must be drawn

also, and perhaps more fundamentally, from
one’s attitude towards marriage itself and the

* Director of Institute for Research in Agricultural
Economics, Oxford, who points to the acceleration of
invention and new resources, and thinks the main problem is distribution.

t Food and Agriculture Organisation of the U.N. which
is doing much to increase food production.

tA prudent prefatory note states that individual signers
are not committed to all details in the Appendix.

§ Brackets mine. B.B.

|| Italics mine. B.B.

126

place of sexual intercourse in it. This is the
ground on which the Lambeth theologians
may be expected to join battle. The 1930 conference went so far as to declare that intercourse between husband and wife has a value
of its own, in that “‘married love is enhanced
and its character strengthened’’; but it confirmed the traditional view that procreation
is the primary purpose. The present report
seeks to reconcile instead of distinguishing
these purposes. The end of Christian marriage
(or most such marriages, for a possible vocation for childless marriage is not excluded) is
to bring children into the world—but not that
only; it is no less to bring them up to maturity
as good and healthy citizens. This purpose will
not be fulfilled if the children are more numerous than the parents can sustain, or if the
parents themselves are out of harmony with
each other, as long-continued abstinence may
make them. (“The fathers have eaten sour
grapes, and the children’s teeth are set on
edge.’’) The best family (from a Christian and
not merely a humanist point of view) is not
that in which there are most children but that
in which children grow up in an atmosphere
of confidence and affection, fed by the ‘‘mutual
endearment” of parents who engage in regular
intercourse without thereby producing more
children than they can manage to rear. This is
a powerful case to meet, unless, as the report
puts it
‘the nature of coition is “given’’ in every
particular and for ever, in all its physical
and metaphysical aspects, and so placed
outside the realm of human decision.’
Many Christians would still say that it was so
‘“‘siven’’. But an increasing number, both in this
country and in the churches overseas within
the Anglican communion, would reject so
absolute a doctrine.
The term“‘given”’ presupposes belief in, and belief
that we can understand the will of God. Whether
we feel, with the agnostics, that the will of God
is unknowable, or whether we believe these
words have a real meaning (though not universally expressed by Church formulations), we
should follow the Lambeth deliberations on this
Report most carefully. It is a realistic effort to
break new ground (the “prophetic role’’), comTHE FAMILY IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY

bined with a respect for but not an undue
leaning on authority.

There is an understanding of marriage and
sex in the Guardian’s leading article which reflects
the admirably frank insights of the Report. The
concept of the family as a whole—parents,
children, perhaps even grandparents !—benefiting
from the atmosphere of “endearment” engendered by what we must suppose Dr. Kinsey
would call “a healthy sex life’? has seldom been
put more plainly.*

But surely, if we are discussing morality, the
concept of family welfare must be based on an
even deeper level, namely on love and loyalty.
To a simple mind, unversed in philosophy, the
morality of sexual intercourse depends not on
whether contraceptives are used, but on whether
there is a true relation between husband and wife.
That is primary, and, combined with sexual
harmony, is what theologians say the Bible
means by “one flesh’’. Given that, the decision
to use contraceptives is secondary. If the use of
contraceptives prevents abortion, adultery, or
unwanted children, that is a good thing, but
secondary. The primary good which must be
guarded, or where it is weak, built up, is the true
relationship between persons. In theological
terms this could be called a reflection of the love
of God. Where it is present the decision to use or
not to use contraception can be left to the couple.
This decision will be a moral act, and should be
recognized as such. Perhaps eventually the
Church will provide a form for such recognition.

One of the two most penetrating requests to
the Bishops which the Appendix to the Report
makes bears directly on this:

Where there is the clearly felt moral obligation
to limit or avoid parenthood, that relational
intercourse, which cements and deepens their
mutual love and contributes to [the couple’s]
well-being and that of the family, must take
place with the use of some method of contraception. Complete abstinence from intercourse
might well cause strains and repressions that
would be harmful.

* The leader must refer to the words of Dr. Sherwin
Bailey, quoted in Appendix 4: “‘ It cannot too strongly be
stressed that the well-being of the family depends to a
greater extent than has perhaps been recognised hitherto,
on the well-being of the one flesh — and to that well-being
regular coitus makes a profound contribution.”

In recognizing that there are times when the
relational purpose of coitus has a value apart
from the conceptional purpose, it follows that
a limited use of contraceptives is permissible.
The Committee is however in complete agreement that there is no justification for the use of
contraceptives:

(1) for purely selfish motives, or in the
attempts to avoid the proper and necessary self-control; or

(2) to avoid parenthood altogether.

. . . We would request that authoritative
guidance be given by the 1958 Lambeth Conference on whether the relational act of coitus
is morally justifiable where there are sound
moral reasons for limiting parenthood.

The second request which would break new
ground if acted upon is that the Bishops should
provide “opportunities for . . . discussion [of
theological and practical problems] in which
churchmen would join others, not all of whom
would necessarily profess the Christian faith”
(Appendix 1, Chapter 8). This request is linked
with a plea for an “entirely fresh approach to
women’s work in the church’’. It is a little surprising that not more is said, in this study of the
family in contemporary society, about the
changing status of women. Apart from calling
the education of women and girls the “most
disruptive force of all in matters of family life’,
little more is said, though there is so much discussion of family planning. This is no doubt due
to the short time in which the report had to be
drawn up. But the call for a new approach by the
Church, in which the clergy and laity and
professional workers not necessarily of the same
faith would discuss the problems of family life
here and abroad is a real challenge. It should
lead to fresh thinking about the whole work of
the Church.

To sum up in a sentence: this Report is proof
that the Anglican Church is concerned with
family and population problems on a realistic
basis. Also, it narrows the gulf between reverent
agnostics and believers.

DR. C. P. BLACKER

THE IMMEDIATE IMPORTANCE of this noteworthy statement will be decided in July. There
will then take place at Lambeth the conference of

127
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

bishops for which it has been prepared. But its
long-term importance is assured whatever
happens at Lambeth.

Credit is due to the Archbishop of Canterbury
for having provided the initial stimulus: we are
told that the group which produced the booklet
was convened at his “behest”. The Church of
England (and a fortiori the Church of Rome) is
rather like an enormous raft lying in a harbour:
its bulk and inertia make it difficult to move.
Momentum is generated by a complex interaction of tugs, pulleys, levers and winches —
forces operated from both land and water. The
initial problem is to decide how best to start the
movement. The method here adopted is to produce an authoritative report, containing an
appropriate amount of factual material and
advancing recommendations which are by design
vague and general, and then to blanket the
startling character of the recommendations by
the dullest possible prose. The report acknowledges that its theme may be repellent to some;
but the authors say that responsibilities imposed
on them by Christianity

oblige us to offer some things which the Bis
hops might understandably not have chosen

for themselves, some from which their first
inclination might have been to turn away; but
things which, in our judgment their Lordships
may properly be asked to receive and inwardly
to digest.
The report in fact flies a kite: it presents facts
which it declares should no longer be neglected
and poses questions which should claim the
Church’s attention. Episcopal inertia displayed
during half a century in the matter of the ethics
of family planning is acknowledged in the
following words:

The resolutions of the Lambeth Conference of

1908 and 1920 denounced contraception out
right; that of 1930, carried by a three to one

majority, was grudgingly permissive.
If the Conference in 1958 is cautiously but benignly permissive, the Church of England will
have shown a commendable receptivity and
realism. Indeed the English bishops will have displayed an agility which a few Roman cardinals
could almost bring themselves to envy. Would
that the Roman Pope could, by the indirect
method of a behest to a group, exercise the same

128

power of manceuvre in this matter as the English
Archbishop.

The responsible group consists of 19 persons of
whom seven (perhaps eight) are theologians. Of
the booklet’s 229 pages, 31 only contain the
report proper, signed by the 19 members of the
group (including Canon Max Warren, the Chair
‘man, the Rev. G. R. Dunstan, secretary, and Dr.

Gertrude Willoughby, research assistant); the
remaining 198 pages consist of four rather
curiously assorted appendices. The second deals
with the family in the United States, the third
with the family and modern society in Canada,
and the fourth with family planning in India. The
first and longest Appendix is entitled An Assessment and Theological Consideration of the Facts
upon which the Report is based. It thus contains
two quite different parts, namely an assessment
of the facts and a theological consideration of the
facts. The facts assessed include those presented
by certain countries such as India, the West
Indies and Mauritius, Africa, Egypt and the
Middle East, Europe and Great Britain. (Comprised in a review of conditions in the West
Indies is an appreciative notice of Lord Simon’s
Population and Resources in Barbados, 1954). This
“‘assessment”’ takes up 84 pages, and we are told
that Dr. Gertrude Willoughby (well known to
members of the Eugenics Society) worked hard
to write them in a short time. A most creditable
performance.

The theological consideration of the facts
occupies 40 pages and is partly (or perhaps
wholly: the matter is not made clear) written by
the theologians in the group. Here is included a
23-page discussion (illustrated by three different
hypothethical “‘examples” of possible attitudes)
of the significance in marriage of coitus and of
the consequent permissibility of contraception.
The conclusion is reached that coitus has, in
addition to its procreative purpose, a further
(relational) significance in consolidating the bond
between two married people; and that hence contraception is permissible provided that it is used
with a due awareness and sense of responsibility.
The arguments and language employed by the
theologians responsible for this part of Appendix
I could strike the laymen as about as obscure as
the language of lawyers: stress is laid'on the
Incarnation by which the world and the flesh
THE FAMILY IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY

(belittled in Gnostic and Manichzan heresies) |
were sanctified; and St. Paul’s views (that
“marriage is undoubtedly second best with
celibacy and virginity as ideal courses’) are
treated with respect (despite the fact that when
he wrote the epistle to the Corinthians Paul
“considered that the end of the world was at
hand and a time of great tribulation . .
imminent’’).

But the theologians in the group certainly
know their business; there can be no doubt that
their contentions are skilfully developed for the
purpose in view, namely presentation to the
bishops attending the Lambeth conference in
July.

A leavening feature of the report — which adds
to the heterogeneity of Appendix I — is An Essay
in Crusoe Economics. Here are allegorically described the vicissitudes which befall two families
occupying neighbouring islands, both of which
subsist on coconuts: one family discovers that it
can improve its harvest of coconuts by using
coconut fibre to make ladders. The possible
sequels provide the text of the essay in Crusoe
economics.

We are told that the group was asked to report
on two things, namely problems of population and
the effects of rapid social change on family life.
In effect, the group finds that many of the changes
now taking place are for the worse: what the
Church needs is both knowledge and goodwill.
It needs a better intelligence service before it can
act for the best. No action without information:
the two should go hand-in-hand. If full knowledge of the range of man’s psychological and
cultural diversity were to be coupled with goodwill two needed things would emerge: universality
and tolerance. The report speaks of a universal
church:

When the most staggering differences of wealth

are no longer between persons and persons but

between nations and nations, problems raised
by material development are problems for
which a Christian solution will need a far
greater emphasis on the concept of the Church
Universal.

But universality, unless imposed by force, calls
for tolerance:
Distinctive and unique though Christianity be,
we need not deny all significance to other
religions nor need we condemn in toto the
institutional, doctrinal, cultural pattem to
which they have given rise.

. The argument in favour of tolerance is applied

(in a manner which the sympathetic but unsophisticated layman hopes will not put too heavy a
strain on the bishops) in favour of African polygamy. In many parts of Africa the disruption of
ordered polygamy, which has strict sanctions of
its own, has resulted in a “sordid pursuit of
promiscuous relationships, with a mounting toll
of illegitimacy and social delinquency”. The
theologians in the group appear to declare that
the Christian Church betrays Christ if, in certain
cultural conditions, it insists too legalistically on
monogamy:
A Church which is not a fellowship so strong
that it can hold men and women, and their
new family life, in its continually strengthening
and forgiving embrace, and serve as a mutual
benefit society in times of stress—such a
Church is a very sad betrayal of its Lord. In
the context of that betrayal, wherever it occurs,
a legalistic insistence on monogamy and the
penalty of excommunication for any lapse,
come very near to the repudiation of a trust.
The following passage forcibly conveys the
group’s position on family planning:
To produce children without regard to consequences is to use procreative power irresponsibly, the more so when there is involved the
imposition of one partner’s will upon the
other. If our conscience will not tolerate, when
we know how to prevent it, a torrent of infant
deaths, no more should we, with the knowledge
we have, encourage an ungoverned spate of
unwanted births. If fatalism has given place to
upholding the sanctity of life for the living,
should it not yield also to a responsibility for
those whom we cause to be born?
This passage, which might almost have been
written by Galton, could well be used as a text by
eugenists.

129
