BIRTH CONTROL WINS*
By HANNAH M. STONE

Medical Director, Birth Control Clinical Research Bureau, New York

of 1936 may signify a turning-point in

the birth-control movement in
America. Together they denote the closing
of one era—the era of pioneering, of preparation, of laying the foundation—and the beginning of another—an era of extensive
research and clinical accomplishments.

The first event was the decision of the
United States Circuit Court of Appeals in the
case of the Japanese pessaries. In 1933 a
package containing some 120 pessaries was
sent to me from Japan for certain clinical and
experimental tests. The package was seized
at the Customs with a view to confiscation
and forfeiture on the grounds that it violated
Section 305-a of the Tariff Act of 1930, which,
originating from the so-called Comstock Act
of 1873, provides that “‘ all persons are prohibited from importing into the United States
from any foreign country .. . any article
whatever for the prevention of conception.
... We felt that this action of the Customs
officials offered a sufficiently clear-cut test
case for a legal determination as to whether
the blanket prohibition of the laws applied to
contraceptive articles sent to physicians and
intended for use in the legitimate practice of
medicine.

On the initiative of Margaret Sanger, and
with Morris L. Ernst and his associates acting
in our behalf, the seizure of the articles was
contested. On December roth, 1935, the case
came up for trial before Federal Judge
Grover M. Moscowitz of the United States
District Court. At the trial Drs. Frederick C.
Holden, Foster Kennedy, Robert L. Dickinson, Ira S. Wile, Alfred M. Hellman, and
Louis I. Harris testified as distinguished
medical authorities that there were many
medical conditions which necessitated the

| 'WO events which occurred at the end

* This article originally appeared in the New York
Nation. We are indebted to the Editor for permission
to republish it here.

prescription of contraceptive measures for
the preservation of the health of the mother
and the family; and Mr. Ernst, in turn,
argued that in view of this testimony and in
view of the fact that the confiscated materials
had been sent to a physician and were intended for lawful use, they did not come
under the ban contained in the Tariff Act and
should therefore be released.

Judge Moscowitz, in a very lucid decision,
upheld the point of view that the Tariff Act
could not reasonably be construed so as to
prevent the importation by physicians of
articles for the prevention of conception when
intended for lawful use. He ruled that the
articles in question did not come within the
condemnation of the statute and directed
their return. The federal government, not
satisfied with this decision, appealed the case,
and in November 1936 it came up for another
hearing. This time the case was tried in the
United States Circuit Court of Appeals, the
bench consisting of Justices Augustus N.
Hand, Learned Hand, and Thomas W. Swan.

In a historical statement which will undoubtedly have very wide and important
influence upon the future progress of birth
control in America, the United States Court
of Appeals reaffirmed the decision of the
lower court. In speaking of the Comstock
Act generally, the court held that “its
design, in our opinion, was not to prevent the
importation, sale, or carriage by mail of
things which might intelligently be employed
by conscientious and competent physicians
for the purpose of saving life or promoting
the well-being of their patients.”” It amplified
this opinion with the statement that “it is
going far beyond such a policy [of Congress]
to hold that abortions, which destroy incipient life, may be allowed in proper cases,
and yet that no measures may be taken to
prevent conception even though a likely
result should be to require the termination of

113
1I4

pregnancy by means of an operation. It
seems unreasonable to suppose that the
national scheme of legislation would involve
such inconsistencies and should require the
complete suppression of articles the use of
which in many cases is advocated by such a
weight of authority in the medical world.”

Unless the government appeals to the
United States Supreme Court, the decision
of the United States Circuit Court of Appeals
will remain as the final interpretation of the
laws affecting the importation or distribution
of contraceptive materials by the medical
profession. Actually it means the passing of
the Comstock laws, at least as far as contraception is concerned. These laws, enacted in
1873, long since became archaic and obsolete,
altogether out of tune with present-day conditions and needs. Laws which define moral
behaviour cannot remain static. They must
be swept aside from time to time by the
newer currents of thoughts which spring
from changing human needs.

For a number of years now the National
Committee on Federal Legislation for Birth
Control, under the leadership of Margaret
Sanger, has been endeavouring to procure an
amendment to the birth-control laws which
would free the medical profession from the
existing legal restrictions and prohibitions.
The decision of the United States Circuit
Court of Appeals-accomplishes this very fact.
It once and for all establishes contraception
as a recognized part of medical practice and
removes the legal barriers to the dissemination of contraceptive knowledge. From now
on hospitals, clinics, and public-health centres
will have to face frankly the responsibility
and opportunity of including information on
contraception as a part of their health services to the community, and we may well
expect that clinical contraception will make
rapid progress within the coming years.
Quite rightly Margaret Sanger considers the
decision to be “‘ the greatest victory in the
history of the birth-control movement.”’

The second significant event to take place
last month was the Conference on Contraceptive Research and Clinical Practice which
was held in New York on December 29th and
30th. Men and women from: universities,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

laboratories, and birth-control centres in
many parts of the country came together at
the invitation of Margaret Sanger and the
Birth Control Clinical Research Bureau of
New York to discuss the scientific aspects of
contraception, to evaluate techniques and
procedures, and to formulate plans and programmes for future clinical and laboratory
research.

The first day of the conference was devoted
to the medical and biological investigations in
contraception. During the morning session
Dr. Bayard Carter of the Duke University
School of Medicine spoke of the relationship
of contraception to maternal health and
outlined the various conditions which make
contraceptive advice essential on medical
grounds. Dr. J. Paul Pratt of the Henry
Ford Hospital of Detroit presented a survey
of our present knowledge of the endocrine
factors that influence and control human
fertility. Dr. Raphael Kurzrock of the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia
University spoke of the prospects of rendering
the woman temporarily sterile by means of
hormones. He mentioned several types of
glandular products which may be used to
inhibit the ovulatory function, that is, the
ripening and discharge of the egg cell from the
ovary, and induce temporary sterility without changing the character of the menstrual
cycle or permanently affecting the reproductive functions. At the same session Dr.
Werner Henle of the University of Pennsy]lvania surveyed the possibilities of rendering
the female immune to conception by injections of the spermatozoa of the male. While
the potentialities of hormonal sterilization or
spermatoxic immunization have as yet been
superficially explored, they nevertheless offer
a wide field for future biological research.

An entire session was given over to a discussion of the “ safe period ’’—a subject of
intriguing interest. Carl G. Hartman of the
Department of Embryology of the Carnegie
Institute of Baltimore, who has done pioneer
work in the reproductive physiology of apes,
spoke on the Facts and Fallacies of the Safe
Period. All present studies, in his opinion,
point to the fact that a sterile period does
exist during the menstrual cycle of the
BIRTH CONTROL WINS

woman, but our knowledge to-day does not
justify an unqualified indorsement of the
““ safe-period ”’ theory, or clinical reliance
upon it when it is a question of the health or
life of the mother.

In the course of his address Dr. Hartman
mentioned the recent work of Allen, Burr,
and Hill, who are able to determine the time
of ovulation in animals by means of an electrical device. It should be possible in the
near future, he said, to find out the ovulation
time of a woman by attaching two electrodes
to her, setting the machine going, and
““ when the storm of electrical discharge that
accompanies ovulation occurs, amplifying
this so as to light a lamp or ring a bell.”’ This
statement, of course; caught the fancy of the
newspapermen present and was recorded in
large type in the daily Press. The possibility
of such a development, however, actually lies
within the bounds of reality and may be
attained within the near future. An exact
method of determining the ovulation time
in the individual woman will greatly facilitate
the study of reproductive physiology generally, and should help to place the “ safe
period’ on a more concrete and practical
basis.

The general opinion during the discussion
that followed Dr. Hartman’s paper was that
clinically, at least, we are in no position as
yet to advise any woman to rely upon the
computation of the sterile period for the prevention of conception. The very marked
variations of the menstrual cycles in women,
which we have found at the Birth Control
Clinical Research Bureau from a special
study of the recorded menstrual cycles of a
large number of women, and the absence of
a positive method for determining the fertile
and sterile periods of the month render this
method unsuitable for clinical use. More
exact data and simpler methods of calculation have to be available before the “‘ safe
period ’’ can become suitable for practical
application.

II5

The second day of the conference was
devoted to a consideration of the technical
aspects of contraceptive practice. Dr. Norman E. Himes of Colgate University, an
authority on the medical history of contraception, Dr. Leo Shedlovsky, a biochemist at
New York University, Dr. Eric M. Matsner
of the American Birth Control League, Dr.
Bessie Moses of the Johns Hopkins Clinic,
Dr. Clarence Gamble of Philadelphia, and
many other representatives of laboratories
and clinics in different parts of the country
participated in the discussion. Surveys of the
present-day chemical and mechanical
methods of contraception and the means of
evaluating their suitability and efficacy were
presented, and the importance of formulating
standards and developing new methods and
techniques were stressed. The urgent need
for a simple, inexpensive, and safe contraceptive, one that would be especially suitable
for the women in outlying rural districts and
on farms who cannot avail themselves of
modern clinical methods, was especially
emphasized by Margaret Sanger, and she
called for more intensive investigation in this
field on the part of the scientists. Similarly,
Dr. Robert L. Dickinson, the doyen of medical
contraception in this country, stressed the
need for more and more research. Eager and
active at seventy-six, Dr. Dickinson illuminated many of the conference discussions
with his rich and varied experiences and his
broad knowledge.

Altogether the conference marked a turning-point. The number of universities, hospitals, and birth-control centres represented
and the calibre of the men and women who
participated in the proceedings marked the
removal of birth-control from the field of controversy to that of scientific consideration,
from the platform and the pulpit to the
laboratory and the clinic. It marked the
beginning of an era of extensive practical
service.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIX, No. 2.
