THE BIOLOGY OF SUPERIORITY

Being a reply to an article with that title by Professor Raymond Pearl
in the American Mercury, November, 1927

By W. T. J. GUN, F.R.Hist.S., F.S.G.

to show, that, speaking generally, great

men have sprung from families who
may be considered as otherwise undistinguished. He has, it appears, looked
through all those whose biographies occupy
more than a page of the Encyclopedia
Britannica, and from these he specially
selects for further consideration sixty-three
philosophers and eighty-five poets. He has
examined the general positions of the
fathers and the children in these cases, and
stamps them as on the whole mediocre.
Seeing that Professor Pearl does not give
the names of these selected philosophers and
poets, it is not possible to criticise his
results in detail. We can do no more here
than put forward certain general considerations which seem to have escaped the
Professor’s notice.

In the first place, it is not very wise to
base any conclusions as to the biological
inheritance of an eminent man from a consideration of his father and children alone.
If only one group is to be taken into
consideration, this should clearly be that of
the brothers and sisters, as these alone
completely share descent with the great
man, A. A’s father and children share only
half his descent, and several other groups
equally share half the descent, viz., A’s
uncles and aunts, both on the paternal and

| N his article Professor Pearl endeavours

maternal sides; nephews and _ nieces,
children of both brothers and sisters; and
first cousins. All these groups are biologically as closely akin to A as are his father
and his own children. Moreover, some
account should certainly be taken of the
somewhat more remote groups who share
one-quarter of A’s descent.

The writer is at present engaged on
an examination of the relatives of two
hundred eminent men of British origin.
These eminent men have been selected on
much the same principle as that adopted by
Professor Pearl; but the conclusions, which
it is hoped will be set out later in full detail,
are very different from those arrived at by
him. Here it need only be mentioned that
in many cases where neither the father nor
the children have achieved any special note,
one or more eminent uncles, nephews or first
cousins may be found, and these, it must be
repeated again, are biologically as near akin
as are the father and the children.

Secondly, the question arises whether
these fathers and children, whom Professor
Pearl has noted, were really so mediocre as
he seems to think? He appears to hold the
opinion, that if a man fails to reach the
eminence of a separate memoir in the Encyclopedia, that he must therefore be quite
common-place. The truth, of course, is

(Continued overleaf.)

 

Notes OF THE QUARTER (Continued.)

fore our going to press. Other important
works not noticed for the same reason are
Professor Pearl’s The Rate of Living (University of London Press), the Proceedings of
the World Population Conference (Arnold),
and William Bateson, F.R.S.: His Essays
and Addresses (Cambridge University
Press). All will be fully reviewed in our
July issue. |

Dr. Crew’s Organic Inheritance in Man

(here reviewed under ‘‘ Popular Biology ’’)

is worth the attention of medical men. Himself one of them, as well as a biologist, he
deals specially with those problems of
human heredity that face the practising
doctor. Also here reviewed is Mr. Ludovici’s gay, slashing attack upon  birthcontrol. Whether or not one agrees with it
all, The Night-Hoers is coherent, non-religious, and written chiefly from the eugenic
aspect.
4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

that there are many grades _ between
supreme eminence and mediocrity.

Professor Pearl lumps together merchants, clergymen, college professors, etc.,
in one undistinguished heap. In effect, they
must differ widely, and some would unquestionably be men of ability, who met
with considerable success in their respective
callings. This applies more particularly to
the business men. All through history very
able men have applied their talents to
commercial pursuits, a course which leads
more to present profit than to future fame.

One instance may be noted which, not
being that of a philosopher or a poet, would
not occur in either of Professor Pearl’s
special lists. James Watt, the inventor of
the steam engine, was the son of a successful merchant, who rose to be Provost of
Glasgow, and. the nephew, on his mother’s
side, of George Muirhead, who has a
separate memoir in D.N.B.* Professor Pearl
would ignore the uncle altogether and would
classify the father, clearly a man of ability
in his own line, merely as a merchant.
Watt, according to the Professor, would
have sprung from quite undistinguished
stock.

Again, Robert Blake and William
Harvey had no relatives with separate
memoirs in D.N.B. But both the great
admiral and the great physician had several
brothers, who, in each case without exception, achieved success in their respective
callings; and, as has been said, brothers
stand the nearest of all in _ biological
relationship.

*D.N.B. = Dictionary of National Biography.

In effect, out of the two hundred examples
at present being examined by the writer,
more than half the number actually have
relatives in D.N.B. within the groups delineated. In other words, their cases are
therefore stronger than those of Blake and
Harvey.

Even from the rather fragmentary information that we have of the Professor’s researches, we find scarcely any mention of
actual degeneracy on the part of the fathers
and children. Mediocrity is the worst that
can be urged against them. This being so,
his statement that eugenists would have
segregated or sterilized the parents of some
of the great men of history, is positively
amazing. For these cases we should like,
we should like’ very much, to have absolute
chapter and verse. The writer has certainly
not come across a single such instance.

In conclusion reference should be made
to the Professor’s further surprising statement, ascribed to eugenists, that ‘‘ only
superior people should be allowed to breed
freely.’’ What eugenist has ever made
such a statement? Restrictions have never
been proposed, except in the case of the
hopelessly inferior. The mediocre are
obviously as necessary for the world’s work
as the superior. A too great increase in the
supply of the latter might indeed result in a
lack of employment worthy of their
capacity; but, on the other hand, any
absolute decrease in their number would be
a real calamity. The supply can only be
obtained from thoroughly sound stocks ; and
it is from such stocks, and such stocks only,
that real greatness, as opposed to a flashy
imitation thereof, will be found to arise.
