THE EUGENICS REVIEW.

RACE DETERIORATION AND
PRACTICAL POLITICS.

Masor Leronarp Darwriy, Sc.D.

On one or two previous occasions we have devoted the time
available at our annual Meetings to the discussion of some subject of
eugenic importance ; and, following these precedents, to-day we propose
to deal with the question whether the society had better move in the
direction of drawing up a more definite programme. I do not propose
to say much myself on this topic; because what I want to do is to elicit
the opinions of others. What I mainly wish to do is to point to the
questions which it is especially necessary to consider, and to draw
attention to some of the general advantages and the disadvantages of
such a move.

In attacking any position our aim should obviously be to advance
in the greatest numbers and with the greatest coherence. As long as
our programme remains vague and general, then those with doubts in
their minds will be little likely to be frightened away from our ranks,
whilst our strength will not be wasted in internal dissentions. In our
earlier stages we were on these grounds, I am sure, wise to be contented
with a mere definition of eugenics as the flag under which to fight ; but
now we must consider whether the time has or has not come for some
more definite pronouncement. Must it not now be recognised that, to
be successful, we should make it clear what are to be the main points of
attack, and why their capture is essential? In fact to create the
highest pitch of enthusiasm in our forces, ought we not to be clear and
specific in our declared aims ?

In answering these questions there are opposing considerations to be
held in view. The clearer and more definite the programme, on the
one hand the more enthusiasm will it create amongst those who accept
it wholeheartedly, whilst, on the other hand, the greater will be the
number of those who desert because they hold that the attack is being
wrongly directed. Neither of these points of view can be neglected,
because certainly we are not unanimous in the views we hold.

On one point I myself am, however, clear, and that is that in any
statements we may issue we ought to avoid definite statements in regard
to all disputable points of secondary eugenic importance. On certain
questions, which seem to me not in the very first rank of importance,
we are probably all in agreement; as, for instance, (1) in regard to the
need for a periodical stocktaking or ascertainment of the qualities,
mental and physical, of the people, (2) for further abatements in the
142 EUGENICS REVIEW.

income tax on account of children, (8) for reforms in our system of
registration and census taking, (4) for certain amendments in the
Mental Deficiency Act, (5) for the ascertainment of the family history
of the inmates of lunatic asylums, and (6) perhaps for the permanent
detention of all confirmed habitual criminals, and it may well be
urged that if we do go somewhat beyond these limits, and if clear
statements on vital points do frighten away some existing adherents,
it is possible that the gain may be greater than the loss.

It may be instructive here to consider for a moment what has
occurred in the past in connection with programmes or definitions.
Our definition of eugenics we inherit from its founder, Francis Galton,
and with it we may be content to abide, even if we are sometimes
inclined to criticise. In 1917 the Council of the Society passed a
number of resolutions concerning the directions in which social reconstruction ought to be promoted after the war; and these resolutions,
taken together, nearly amounted to an entire programme.

Recently I have reconsidered this pronouncement with some care;
with the result that some of the proposals seem to be quite disputable
as regards their probable racial effects, or even likely to be definitely
harmful; whilst others I hold to be outside the sphere of eugenics
proper. The whole document now gives me the impression of having
been inadequately considered, whilst it quite fails to make the more
important points stand not in comparison with the less important.
And this is the pronouncement which I then helped to promulgate!

Since 1917 there has been nothing in the nature of an official programme of aims and objects issued by the Society. But if I may allude
to a personal statement, not in any way officially sanctioned, there did
appear in our REVIEW last year* a series of replies given by me to a series
of questions on eugenics. This pronouncement was somewhat erroneously entitled ‘‘a programme of Eugenics’’; though as the whole
ground was not fully covered by the questions, the same was equally
true as regards the answers. Certainly if at this moment I was called
to frame a eugenic programme, I should in certain respects take what
I then wrote as a basis on which to work. It occupied less than two
pages of the REviEw, and dealt briefly with segregation, sterilization,
family limitation, and family allowance; these being, in my opinion,
the vital points in practical eugenics. Perhaps you will allow me
briefly to point out where in my opinion it now seems to me to need
strengthening.

Conception Control now is, I believe, from the racial point of view,
and looking to the future, by far the most important social agency both
for evil and for good, and there ought to be a definite campaign against
conception control where it is producing evil results, and for it where
likely to be beneficial. As to its evil results, it is now reducing the
size of families amongst the better types in such a way as to threaten
the very foundations of our civilization. The campaign against its use
must be mainly a moral campaign; from which great results might be
obtained.

Turning to the beneficial effects of conception control, and con
*EKUGENICS REview: Vol. XV., pp. 595-6,
RACE DETERIORATION AND PRACTICAL POLITICS. 143

sidering only racial questions, what is needed is not only that all
married women desirous of obtaining the necessary information should
be enabled to do so, but that definite and effective pressure should be
applied to large numbers of persons who are living in our midst a life
below a certain standard of civilization to mduce them to produce no
more children. It ‘would, of course, be open to those to whom pressure
was applied to employ either contraceptive methods or continence.
It should, moreover, be recognised that mere pressure would often fail;
and that it would most often fail where most needed. To save the
race, compulsion would be necessary in many cases, and where needed
it must be fearlessly adopted. If by compulsion is meant the actual
use of physical force, compulsion should only be employed to enforce
imprisonment or segregation ; the latter term meaning confinement in
comfort. Compulsion is now permitted if applied to criminals,
lunatics, and mental defectives; and this principle must be extended
to all who, by having offspring, would seriously damage future generations. But sterilization should be regarded both as a legitimate and a
humane alternative; provided that the operation is only performed on
those who finally give their consent, or who are incapable of understanding the nature of the operation. This is how I should now like to
modify my so-called programme; but in stating these conclusions I
must again emphasise the fact that they only represent my individual
opinions.
