THE MEANING AND ASSESSMENT
OF IN TELLIGENCE*

By PROFESSOR SIR CYRIL BURT, D.Lit., L1LD., D.Sc., F.B.A.

Current Criticisms

URING the last two or three decades
| the use of intelligence tests has spread

with a rapidity that would have seemed
incredible fifty years ago. It is therefore not
surprising that many people have begun to
ask how far the evidence really justifies these
widespread applications. Some of the more
vigorous criticisms have come from ‘psychologists themselves. Unfortunately, however,
neither critics nor supporters seem to have
a very clear notion of what intelligence
implies or what are the limitations to which
the tests in current use are subject.

Most of them apparently suppose that
there is a distinct mental quality which
every man of the world can recognize and
identify as intelligence, but that no one
can say precisely in what that quality
consists. Dr. Blackburn, for example,
declares (and probably many teachers and
doctors would agree with him) that “ we
all have some idea of what we mean by
‘intelligence’; it 1s when one comes to
define it that the difficulties arise.’’ Others,
however, flatly deny that there is any such
thing : the concept of “ general intelligence,”’
they say, was invented by a small group of
statistical psychologists (Dr. Kirman mentions Pearson, Spearman and myself), who
derived the idea from a mathematical
analysis of test-data by a fallacious method
of deduction that has since been exploded.
Dr. Heim, in her recent book on The
Appraisal of Intelligence, seeks to combine
both these views. ‘‘ The supporters of
factor analysis,’ she writes, “‘ treating their
technique as an end in itself,’ have “ taken
a popular and relatively unambiguous word,
and tried to restrict its meaning’: they
equate it with an abstract “ factor”’.

* The Galton Lecture delivered on May 4th, 1955.

81

When pressed to say in what this factor
consists, every psychologist gives a different
reply. And, she adds, during the last few years
the statistical proofs on which the factorist
has relied have been ‘“ publicly ‘discussed and discredited ’’.f

The Meaning of Intelligence

Now all these criticisms rest on a mass of
confusions, and entirely overlook the true
history of the subject. A mere glance at the
relevant literature will quickly show that
intelligence is not a conception “ introduced
by a small group of statistical psychologists.”
Nor is the term itself “a word of popular
speech ’’ whose meaning has recently been
restricted and distorted by psychological
specialists. It is, and always has been, a
technical term introduced to designate a
technical concept. And the concept itself.
has been reached and clarified by inquirers
working along half a dozen different lines.
Observational psychology, introspective psychology, experimental psychology, the speculations of the biologist, the theories of the
neurologist, and finally the objective study
of individual differences, each has contributed valuable evidence. The application of
statistical methods has come only at the
very end ; their function has mainly been to
decide between alternative explanations of
certain observable facts, and so to clinch and
confirm what had been provisionally inferred
on far more concrete grounds.

 

+ J. Blackburn, Psychology and the Social Pattern,
1945, chap. V, “ Intelligence and Ability ’’; B. Kirman,
This Matter of Mind, 1952, pp. 67 f.; Dr. Heim, like
many other critics, quotes the American symposium
in which fourteen psychologists were asked to explain
‘““ what I conceive intelligence to be ”’ (not, be it noted,
to define the word), and gave ‘‘ fourteen different
replies’’ (J. Educ. Psychol., 1921, 12, pp. 123-147,
195-216). But this was a quarter of a century ago,
when (owing largely to the war) very little research
had been attempted.
82 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

May I therefore begin by briefly tracing
_the history of the concept ?

1. Observation and Introspection

The basic notion goes back to the days
when the human mind first became the
subject of philosophic curiosity. Plato, a
shrewd observer of individuals, was, as
Galton has so often reminded us, the first
to recognize the social implications of
mental heredity and to advocate something
very like a eugenic policy.* His psychological disquisitions are incidental and
sporadic ; but they had a profound influence
on later thought. :

He draws a clear contrast between
“nature” and “nurture” (vo. and
tpop%}) ; and he then goes on to distinguish
three “‘ parts’ of the soul—the “ rational ”’
or intellectual (7d Aoywrixdv) having its
seat in the brain, and “ appetite ”’ (ér:6upia)
and ‘spirit’ (@yds) located respectively
in the belly and chest. This threefold
distinction has often been compared with
the modern distinction between “‘ cognition,”
“affection,” and ‘‘ conation ’’—the intellectual, emotional, and moral elements in
human behaviour. But none of these
modern terms accurately expresses what
Plato was trying to convey. In a.famous
passage (Phaedrus, 253D) he uses an analogy
which gives a better notion of the difference :
the first element he compares to the charioteer who holds the reins, and the others to a
pair of horses who draw it : the former guides,
the latter provide the power ; the former is
the cybernetic element, the latter the dynamic.

And, says Plato, since men differ so
widely in their innate characteristics, they
should, from childhood upwards, be subjected to tests, so that each can be eduéated,
and eventually employed, as his native
gifts require. The rulers are to be men
pre-eminent for their intellectual capacity
or “‘ wisdom ’’—‘‘men of gold rather than
of silver, iron, or brass ’’.

Thus, for Plato the natural inequality of

* Cf. Republic, 435a f., 5090c f.; and R. L. Nettleship,
Lectures on the Republic of Plato, chap. XI.

t The word eéyéverca 18 actually used towards the
end of the Republic, 618p.

man is itself one of the most profound and
ill-recognized of all political problems. It
threatened the democracy of Athens, and
it threatens the democratic state today:
“it 1s the source at once of the injustice
that we must seek to correct and of the
justice or civic harmony that will enable
us to correct it’’.t Plato would have his
citizens believe, “as though an oracle had
foretold it, that the city will perish when
men of iron or brass take over its control ”’
(loc. ctt., 415C) : or, as he puts it elsewhere,
“ the ship of state is bound to founder if the
unruly crew, whose job it is to manage the
sails, but who are in no way ‘cybernetic ’
(i.e. good at finding and steering a course),
selfishly. seize the helm ”’ (loc. czt., 4888).
Aristotle’s discussion is more methodical,
and issues in a more systematic classification. Here for the first time§ we meet a
clear distinction between actual process and
mere capacity or “ power’’||" (Sévayus).
While lecturing I am actually talking ;
when asleep, I have the power to talk ; when
newborn, “‘ with no language but a cry’, I
have the power to acquire the power to
talk. The distinction is of course applicable
in non-psychological fields as well as psychological: as applied to the latter it is the
basis of our concept of mental capacity.
In what is virtually the first textbook of
psychology Aristotle substitutes a twofold
classification for Plato’s threefold ; and his
main contrast is drawn between what he
calls the “ dianoetic ’’§ (cognitive or intellectual) capacities of the mind and the
“orectic ’’ (emotional and moral). The
cognitive capacities manifest themselves at
four successive levels—sensation, imagina- .
tion, memory, and reasoning. All have the

t Walter Pater, Plato and Platonism, p. 242 (the
alternative title of the Republic is ‘‘ On Justice ’’).

§ Aristotle, Metaphysics, Bk. VIII, passim.

|| The regular translation ‘‘ power’’ is perhaps a
little unfortunate: Sivauis (from divaua, “I can’’)
is ‘‘ power ’’ in the sense of “ability ’’ or “ potentiality ’’, not of “‘force’’. It denotes what Professor

' Broad has called a ‘‘ dispositional property ”’.

q Liddell and Scott’s Dictionary gives “ intelligence ”’
as the obvious rendering of this word in Plato and
Aristotle. The preposition dia- has something of the
force of the Latin dis-; and Aristotle notes that ‘‘ sensation ’’ discriminates between the qualities of things.
THE MEANING AND ASSESSMENT OF INTELLIGENCE 83

common quality of 73 Savonrixdv*. There
is, however, no sharp separation between the
various levels or the different parts or
faculties. ‘‘ Soul in fact is homoeo-merous,
like a tissue ’’ (i.e. it is not a collection of
distinct organs) : “‘ with Aristotle sensation is
regarded as itself a discriminative capacity
from which the higher acts of cognition are
reached by a continuous development ’’.t
Throughout, it will be noted, Aristotle
formulates his classification of mental activities in terms of conscious contents, and so
gives it an introspective rather than a
behaviouristic character—a bias which has
only recently been corrected.

Cicero, in his endeavour to provide a
Latin terminology for Greek philosophy,
translates Sivays by facultas, dpeEs by
appetitio or sometimes conatus, and to
designate Savénors he coins a new word,
rendering the Greek term almost literally by
the compound “ intellegentia’’ (i.e. interlegentia). His definition is: “‘ Intellegentia
est, per quam animus ea perspicit que
sunt’’.f |

Here then we have the origin of both the
concept and the term. From Aristotle and
Cicero they descended to the medieval
schoolmen ; and the scholastic theories in
turn developed into the _ cut-and-dried
schemes of the faculty psychologists and
their phrenological followers.§ All of them
continued to contrast intellectual capacities,
which they termed abilities or ‘ faculties,’’
with emotional or moral capacities, which
1102b 30, where human excellencies are classified as
‘ethical’? and ‘‘ dianoetic’’.

t W.D. Ross, Arzstotle, 1923, pp. 133, 136; De Anima,
I, v, 411b 5. .

+ Cicero, Inv. Rhet., II, 53. The word is sometimes
coupled with cognitio as a synonym (Cic., Tusc. Disp.,
V, 24). But it is used of the humblest forms of “ discernment ”’ (e.g., taste and smell) and of ‘‘ discernment ”’
involved in practical activities (cf. Acad. Quest., IV, 7,
and Inv. Rhet., I, 29).

§ The leader of this school—the ‘“‘ systematizers ”’
as they are sometimes called—was the German philosopher, Christian Wolff (1734: for his scheme, see
Wundt, Grundzige, p. 97). In Britain its chief representatives were the Scottish philosophers, Reid
(1780) and Stewart (1827). The inventories of ‘‘ mental
powers ”’ drawn up by these last two writers form the

basis of the phrenological lists published by Gall,
Spurzheim, and George Combe (Lectures on Phrenology,

1847).

they termed “ propensities’’; but none
recognized any “‘ general ”’ ability over and
above the more specific faculties. And
according to the phrenologists each distinguishable mental function was due to the
activity of a separate “‘ organ’ or “‘ centre ”’
in the brain. The whole picture is one that
Plato would instantly have repudiated, since
he himself ridicules those who thought of
the mind as a sort of ‘‘ Trojan horse ’’, containing within itself a collection of active
homunculi, each with its own special task
(Theetetus, 184D). Although the later psychologists of the nineteenth century, including
both associationists and their critics, were
united in rejecting it, the traditional theory
of faculties continued to enjoy a considerable
vogue among medical and _ educational
writers. To this day, indeed, teachers,
educational officials, school medical officers
and psychiatrists constantly drop into the
vocabulary of the faculty school when they
attempt a character-sketch of any child or
patient ; and contemporary critics of the
concept of “intelligence ’’ regularly assume
that its sponsors intend it as yet another
“faculty ’’ in the sense defined by the
Scottish philosophers and their physiological
interpreters.

2. Biological

In this country the conversion of psychology from a branch of philosophy into a
branch of natural science was the work not
of the physiologists but of the biologists,
particularly the leaders of the evolutionary
school—Spencer, Darwin and their disciples.
Spencer, following Aristotle and the Thomists
rather than Plato and Kant, recognized only
two main aspects of mental life—the cognitive and the affective. All cognition (he
explains) ‘involves both an analytic or
discriminative and a synthetic or integrative
process ; and its essential function is to
enable the organism to adjust itself more
effectively to a complex and ever-changing
environment. During the evolution of the
animal kingdom, and during the growth of
the individual child (which, he assumes,
briefly recapitulates the evolution of the
race), the fundamental capacity of cognition
84 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

becomes progressively more and more speciallized and more and more comprehensive, and
so differentiates into a hierarchy of cognitive
abilities—sensory, perceptual, associative,
and relational, much as the trunk of a tree
sprouts into boughs, branches, and twigs.
To designate the basic quality common to
all these more specific forms he adopts the
term “ intelligence.’’*

Spencer’s evolutionary theories were at
first taken up with keener enthusiasm’ on the
Continent than in this country. Taine, the
leader of the new empirical school in France,
expounded them in his monograph De
Vintelligence (1870) ; Ribot amplified them
still further in L’heredité psychologique (1873) ;
and their version provided the starting
point for the work of their more celebrated
disciple, Alfred Binet (L’étude expérimentale
de Vintelligence, 1903, and later papers).
In Switzerland Spencer’s views inspired the
genetic studies of Claparéde and of his
pupil, Jean Piaget. Both these adopt a
standpoint that is frankly biological. Piaget,
in language reminiscent of Plato, contrasts
the “ directive ’”’ and “ dynamic ”’ elements
in mental life: ‘‘every action,” he says,
“involves an energetic or affective aspect,
and a structural, regulative, or cognitive
aspect.... Intelligence is not a faculty:
it is the generic term indicating the
organism’s relative efficiency in organizing
or structuring mental activity in order to
adjust itself to changing circumstances ”’
And he propounds, as a result of first-hand
observations of the developing child, a
hierarchical theory of ‘“‘levels”’, less schematic and more exact, yet on the whole
strikingly . similar to that of Herbert
Spencer. t

3. Physiological
While in France and Britain scientific
psychology was regarded as a branch of

*H. Spencer, Principles of Psychology, 1870, I,
esp. Pt. iv, chaps. 1 and 3, “‘ The Nature of Intelligence ’’ and “‘ The Growth of Intelligence.’’ Spencer’s
account was admittedly somewhat speculative; but it
has in some measure been confirmed by the work of
later experimentalists (like Lloyd Morgan) and contemporary child psychologists (like C. W. Valentine).

+ J. Piaget, The Psychology of Intelligence (1950),
and The Origin of Intelligence in the Child (1953).

biology, in Germany it was treated as a
branch of physiology. The earliest experiments on cerebral localization seemed to
indicate something rather like a modified
phrenological theory—the functions localized
in the various cortical areas being of a
somewhat simpler kind than the traditional
faculties. Wundt quotes with approval
Spencer’s principle that mental organization
merely reflects the underlying neurological
organization, and consequently regards Intelligenz as a property of the central nervous
system. There is, however, no localized
“Organ der Intelligenz’’: Jntelligenz is
“simply a name for the varying degrees of
efficiency in the fundamental cognitive.
process ’’—a process which he prefers to
call “‘apperception ’’—i.e. “attention regarded as a process of synthesis ’’. It operates
on various levels ; and he too gives a schematic diagram of the way the nervous
system is organized, plainly suggested by
Spencer’s description.{

Wundt’s scheme is avowedly hypothetical.
But later studies of the structure and
functions of the nervous system went far to
confirm the general accuracy of these views.
The clinical work of Hughlings Jackson and
the experimental investigations of Sherrington lent strong support to the theory of a
“neural hierarchy ’’,§ with a definite order
of evolution for the various levels. Within
the adult brain there are marked differences
in the architecture of different parts and of
the different cell layers clearly discernible
under the microscope ; and these differences
or specializations emerge progressively during
the earliest months of infant life.|| At the
same time, the examination of the cortex
in mental defectives and in normal persons:
indicates that the quality of the nervous
tissue in any given individual tends to
be predominantly the same throughout.

t Grundziige der Physiologische Psychologie (1874),
I, pp. 380 f.

§ The phrase is Sherrington’s: cf. The Integrative
Action of the Nervous System, 1906, pp. 314 f., and
Hughlings Jackson, Brain, 1899, 22, pp. 621 f.

|| Cf. M.. de Crinis, Die Entwickelung der Grosshirnrinde in ihren Beziehungen zur intellektuellen
Ausreifung des Kindes, Wiener Klinische Wochenschrift,
1932, 45, pp. 1163 f. J. L. Conel, The Postnatal Development of the Human Cerebral Cortex, 1941.
THE MEANING AND ASSESSMENT OF INTELLIGENCE . - 85

¢

Defectives, for example, exhibit a “ general
cerebral immaturity,’ and their nerve-cells
tend to be “ visibly deficient in number,
branching, and regularity of arrangement
in every part of the cortex ’’.* After all, as
Sherrington points out, much the same is
true of almost every tissue of which the
human frame is composed—of a man’s skin,
bones, hair, or muscles: each is of the same
general character all over the body, although
minor local variations are usually discernible.

4. Individual Psychology

Most of the writers I have so far mentioned
were interested chiefly in problems of general
psychology. The first to apply scientific
methods to the study of zndividual psychology was Galton himself.t Spencer had maintained that the basic characteristics of the
human mind were innate—transmitted as
part of the common racial endowment.
Galton went farther and maintained that
individual differences in these characteristics
might also be inherited or at least inborn.
When he first commenced his inquiries on
mental inheritance, the prevailing hypothesis
among those who attempted to describe
individual differences was, as we have seen,
that of the faculty school. Galton quickly
became convinced that a theory of wholly
specific faculties was of itself quite inadequate to account for the facts he had
accumulated.

As a corrective, he introduced the distinction between what he termed “ general
ability ’’ and “ special aptitudes.’’ He recog
* J.S. Bolton, The Brain in Health and Disease, 1914,
pp. 79 f. and Figs. 52, 53. R. J. A. Berry and R. G.
Gordon, The Mental Defective, 1931 and refs.

t Galton founded an anthropometric laboratory “‘ for
the measurement of human form and faculty ”’ as early
as 1884. At first the measurements included were
chiefly physical: but psychological assessments (to be
obtained with tests of discrimination, reaction-time,
and the like, a questionnaire on mental imagery, and
rating scales for more specific qualities) were later
added to his scheme: cf., for example, Inquiries into
Human Faculty, 1883, and J. M. Cattell’s paper on
“Mental Tests and Measurements ’’ with a note by
Galton in Mind, 1890, 15, pp. 373-380. Galton’s
preference for the term ‘‘ anthropometric ’’ has led
many to suppose that his scheme was limited to
bodily measurements; but he makes it clear that he

uses the word to cover all human characteristics,
‘psychological and physiological as well as anatomical.

nizes three main sources of individual
achievement — cognitive capacities (or
“abilities ’), emotional.or affective characteristics (such as “interest ’’ or “ zeal’’),
and moral or conative_ characteristics
(notably “‘a will to work’’). He focuses
attention mainly on the first, since
“natural’’ ability must inevitably set a
limit to what interest or industry, even in
the most favourable circumstances, can
possibly achieve. Most writers, he argues,
“lay too much stress upon apparent specjalities, thinking that, because a man is
devoted to some particular pursuit, he could
not have succeeded in anything else ; they
might as well say that, because a youth has
fallen in love with a brunette, he could not
possibly have fallen in love with a blonde.
He may or may not have had more natural
liking for the former type of beauty than
for the latter ; but it is as probable as not
that the affair was mainly or wholly due to a
general amorousness. It is just the same with
intellectual pursuits ”’.

Galton does not deny the existence of
special capacities. Indeed, he cites instances
in which memory, literary ability, musical
ability, and artistic talent, run through
several members of the same family. In
some cases the specialization may be due
to family tradition or to home environment,
though this could scarcely explain the
‘‘ prodigies of memory ”’ ; but, in the main,
he says, the pedigrees and case-studies given
in his book demonstrate “in how small a
degree intellectual eminence can be considered as due to purely special powers”’.
His data suggest that individual differences
in ‘“‘natural ability’ are distributed in
accordance with the normal curve, i.e. much
like differences in other human characteristics which are mainly innate, such as bodily
size or stature; and he prints a tabular
classification of frequencies, which, he holds,
“may apply to special just as truly as to
general ability ’’.{ |

Binet was greatly influenced by Galton’s
theories. Like Galton he distinguishes between acquired knowledge or skill (to be

{ F. Galton, Hereditary Genius, 1869, pp. 23 f., 35 f.
86 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

assessed by a “ pedagogical scale’’) and
native abilities (to be assessed by a ‘‘ psychological scale ’’). Like Galton, too, he firmly
believes in the notion of general ability, which
he contrasts with “ partial aptitudes ’’. To
designate this native general ability, he
prefers the simple Spencerian name, “ intelligence ’’’. He gives ‘us a popular but fairly
clear account of “ the meaning to be given
to that word, so wide and comprehensive,
intelligence. ... Nearly all the phenomena
with which psychology is concerned are
phenomena of intelligence—sensation, perception, as much as reasoning.... And it
would seem that in the phenomena of intelligence there is a fundamental faculty,
deficiency in which is of the utmost importance for practical life: this faculty’’, he
continues, ‘1s variously described as common sense, judgment, the capacity of adjusting oneself to circumstances ’”’ (the last is
Spencer’s definition). Since it enters into
every cognitive process, tests of any such
process might in theory be used to assess it.
But, he adds, “it is neither necessary nor
possible to test all the child’s psychological
processes ’’. There is “‘ a hierarchy among the
diverse manifestations of intelligence ”’ ; the
more complex and more specialized mature
at later stages in a progressive order that is
relatively fixed. Hence the crucial test for
an individual at any given stage of development will be the hardest cognitive processes
of which he is capable.*

Such views did not escape criticism. A
hypothesis which postulated both a general
ability and a number of “partial” or
““ special ’’ aptitudes seemed to assume two
types of capacity where one would suffice.
Writers on applied psychology, including
the compilers of the more popular educa
* A. Binet, La mesure en: psychologie individuelle,
Rev. Philos., 1898, 46, pp. 113-123. L’étude expénimentale de l’intelligence (1903); (with T. Simon)
Methodes nouvelles pour le diagnostic du niveau
intellectuel des anormaux, L’Année Psychologique, 1905,
11, pp. 191 f., 245 f. To a French psychologist the
phrase ‘‘ common sense ”’ is reminiscent of the scholastic
doctrine (inherited from Aristotle) of a sensus communis,
i.e., a ‘‘ general perceptive faculty ”’ (as Ross translates
it). ‘‘ Judgement ” is the term which Binet proposes in
place of the term ‘“‘ discrimination,’’ used by most

other contemporary psychologists to designate the
essential cognitive element.

tional and psychiatric textbooks, usually
rejected the notion of a central cognitive
activity as a needless philosophical abstraction, and contended that a collection of
special abilities or faculties accorded best
with their practical experience. On the
other hand, most of the writers on pure
psychology treated the doctrine of special
faculties as obsolete. There was, they held,
and there could be, only one form of cognitive
activity, though they failed to agree about
its actual nature. The older associationists,
such as Mill and his followers, maintained
that it was “ association ’’—the “ process
by which we learn ”’ ; the younger members
of the school, like Bain and Sully, maintained
that it was “sensory discrimination ’’. Of
their various .opponents, both the neoKantian philosophers like Ward and the
Herbartian psychologists. like Stout and
Adams, argued that it was “ apperception ”’
or ‘“‘attention’”’: ‘‘ when we feel, perceive,
or remember a thing [says Ward] common
sense thinks the object is the same, while
the mental faculty differs ; actually there is
only a single subjective activity—attention,
and what we attend to are different presentations of the object’. Finally, several of
Ward’s disciples, like Maxwell Garnett,
insisted that attention was essentially a
conative process, and concluded that the
apparent differences in “ intelligence ’’ were
really differences in “ will’’. Similar divergences appeared in the writings of American
psychologists ; and it is these alternative
interpretations that account for the discrepant opinions cropping up in the 1928
Symposium to which Dr. Heim refers.

5. Statistical

Down to the beginning of the present
century the arguments put forward by the
various disputants were largely based on
everyday impressions or deductions from
physiological and biological principles. What
was manifestly needed, therefore, was -a
more direct and rigorous method of deciding
between the rival views. The obvious
procedure consisted in a combination of the
two novel techniques which Galton himself
had devised ; in other words, the application
THE MEANING AND ASSESSMENT OF INTELLIGENCE 87

of the statistical method of correlation to
results obtained with experimental tests.

The first to plan a systematic research
on this twofold basis was J. M. Cattell.
On his way back from his studies under
Wundt at Leipzig, he spent some time
working as Galton’s assistant in the anthropometric laboratory, and the two collaborated in compiling a programme of mental
tests. When Cattell returned to take up the
first Chair of Psychology in the United States,
he organized a scheme for testing freshmen
entering Columbia and other colleges. The
data thus collected were eventually analysed
by one of Cattell’s research students, Clark
Wissler, and his investigation proved to be
the first of the long series of inquiries in
which correlational techniques were applied
to test-results.

The primary object, so Wissler explains,
was to “find a means whereby the fundamental elements of general and _ specific
ability could be isolated and valued ’’. The
correlations, however, proved to be rather
low. On the whole they appeared to indicate
that “‘ whatever it is that makes for correlation in class standing seems to hold good
generally ’’. But in Wissler’s view the main
lesson of the inquiry was ‘“‘ the need for a
thorough correlation of tests of all kinds ”
based on “an exhaustive canvas of the
whole field of human activity ’’.*

Verification by Factorial Techniques

Here we are concerned, not with the
presence or absence of “special abilities ”’
(the subject of the long controversy between
Spearman and his opponents), but solely with
that of the “ general factor ’’. Taken together,
the foregoing considerations—introspective,
biological, physiological, and experimental
—appeared to furnish strong presumptive
evidence for a definite hypothesis which we
can now formulate in the following terms:
the efficiency of an individual depends
~ * C. Wissler, The Correlation of Mental and Physical
Tests, Psychol. Rev. Mon. Sup., 1901, 3. It is now
clear that the research was wrongly planned. First,
students are already selected for intelligence; and this
must tend to eliminate any correlation resulting from
differences in intelligence. Secondly, the processes
tested were relatively simple (chiefly sensory discrim
ination, motor reaction, and memory), and _ these
depend far less on intelligence than the more complex.

 

 

largely on an abstract component or factor,
termed for convenience “intelligence ’’, which
may be defined in terms of a trio of distinctions : it is (i) cognitive (in the sense already
explained), and not affective or conative ;
(11) it is general, i.e. common to all cognitive
activities, and not limited to a particular
group ; (ill) it is innate, 1.e. due to the
individual’s genetic constitution, not acquired as a result of opportunity or training.
However, since each of these assumptions
had been challenged, it seemed urgently
desirable to procure, if possible, some direct
empirical verification of each one.

(1) General. From the very start the point
most often attacked was the assumption of an
ability entering into all forms of cognitive
process. To settle this question it seemed
necessary to collect or construct tests of every
aspect and level—i.e. motor as well as sensory, practical as well as intellectual, ranging
from the simplest sensory or motor reaction
to those of logical thought in its most developed forms. If, as some writers believed,
the mind includes nothing but independent
faculties or “‘group factors’’, such as “‘ practical ability’’, “intellectual ability’’, and the
like, the correlations between the practical
tests should be positive, and the correlations
between the intellectual tests should be
positive, but the cross correlations between
the first set and the second should be zero ;
and similarly for other special abilities :
if what Thorndike called the “theory of
natural compensation ’”’ (or “ intellectual
types ’’) was correct, then the cross correlations should be negative, because the
“intellectual ’’ type would be poor at the
‘practical’ tests, and the “practical’”’ type
poor at the “intellectual ’’ tests. What we
actually found were fposztive correlations
between all the processes tested. This at
once put out of court the hypothesis of
independent faculties or compensatory capacities, and confirmed the hypothesis of a
general factor.t

+ Cf. C. Burt, Experimental Tests of General
Intelligence, Brit. J. Psychol., 1909, 3, Pp. 94-177;
Experimental Tests of High Mental Processes and
their Relation to General Intelligence, /. Exp. Ped.,

1911, 1, pp. 93-112. The Distribution and Relations of
Educational Abilities (1917).
88 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(22) Cognitive. The evidence I have summarized so far, however, does not of itself
prove that the factor is a specifically cognitive factor ; it might be a factor common to
other mental processes as well as cognitive.
As we have seen, Maxwell Garnett, Pearsons’
assistant and one of his ablest disciples, held
that the general factor was far wider, and was
in fact essentially a matter of Will, entering
into moral as well as intellectual behaviour.
This was at one time an extremely popular
interpretation. After all, both teachers and
parents have frequently doubted the existence of wide differences in sheer ability,
and have assumed that, when a child makes
little progress in his lessons, the cause is not
so much lack of intellectual capacity as a
lack of interest or effort. |

In later experiments, therefore, we correlated assessments for intellectual performances with assessments for temperamental
and moral qualities. This time the cross
correlations, though small, were positive.
But two points seemed clear : first, the correlations of intellectual performances with
moral assessments were far too low to
account for the high correlations within
the intellectual performances themselves ;
and secondly the small positive cross correlations were largely the result of a one-way
influence : if the child shows no interest and
exerts no effort, he naturally will not
succeed ; but many a child may be keenly
interested and exert himself to the utmost
and yet fail to achieve success. It seems
therefore that the general factor is mainly,
though not perhaps wholly, cognitive.

(022) Innate. How far the cognitive
element in this factor depends on the individual’s genetic constitution, and is therefore
part of his unalterable endowment, is a

problem about which there is far less agree
ment. Our ignorance of the genetic basis
of mental characteristics is so great that
any direct answer is scarcely practicable. We
have therefore to be content with speculative
inferences and indiréct statistical verification.* But, after all, from a practical standpoint the crucial issue is that of prediction.
Can we, when Tom enters the junior school

at seven, or when at eleven plus it is time to
allocate him to an appropriate secondary
school—can we by the aid of our. tests
predict, not merely his intellectual efficiency
during the coming years in the classroom,
but his ultimate efficiency as an adult
citizen? And can we, as eugenists, go still
farther, and predict the kind of children he
is likely to have ?

To answer these questions we need
“longitudinal studies ’’—case histories not
merely of the same individuals but of the
same families. I have myself been able to
keep in touch, for nearly thirty years, with
over 400 persons whom I first tested as
children between 1915 and 1925, reassessing
them from time to time, and even testing
their own sons and daughters and other
relatives. But before we examine the data
so obtained, it is necessary to decide what
precisely we wish to predict and what we are
to take as the basis of our prediction.

There are in fact half a dozen varying
quantities that we might seek to compare,
and all are apt to be dubbed “‘intelligence’”’.
Much confusion would be avoided if, as I
have ‘suggested elsewhere, we extended
Professor Spearman’s practice and labelled
each with a distinctive letter. We may
perhaps distinguish them as follows: —

(i) First, intelligence in the strict technical
sense—i.e. the amount of innate general
cognitive efficiency possessed by any given
individual—a purely hypothetical quantity :
following Fisher’s convention (using Greek
letters to denote hypothetical quantities
and Roman to denote the empirical
estimates), let us call it y: by definition it
cannot be altered by any post-natal
influences, though of course its observable
manifestations may be.

(ii) The actual measurement furnished by a
single test or battery of tests, applied on a
single occasion ; let us call it g, : this is the
quantity which critics evidently have in
mind when they complain that measure
* In the first lecture I was invited to give to this
Society (The Inheritance of Mental Characters, EUGEN.
REv., 1912, 4, pp. 168-200) I attempted to summarize
the results then obtained by these newer methods
and urged the adoption of what was then a still
newer approach, namely, the application of Mendelian
principles to problems of mental heredity.
THE MEANING AND ASSESSMENT OF INTELLIGENCE 89

ments of intelligence are affected by
coaching, by education, or the like.

(iii) The adjusted assessment of the child’s
intelligence, reached after checking the
initial test result first by the teacher’s
judgment and then when necessary by a
different test applied on a different occasion,
&-, say ; this is what the psychologist uses
(or should use) in diagnosing mental
deficiency, and generally in predicting a
child’s future development.

The all-round ability of adults, assessed
by tests and other means, regardless of how
much is due to innate or acquired components respectively, g,, say; it is this
broader concept that is important in
vocational guidance, and it was this that
“intelligence tests ’’ were used to measure
among recruits during the recent war.*

(v) The statistical “general factor”’, 1.e., “‘ the
factor common to all tests of a given
battery’’,t gs, Say; it is this more abstract
quantity with which Thomson and Thurstone are concerned in their controversies
with Spearman.

(vi) “‘ Intelligence as the layman understands

the word”’, g;.t

Which are we to choose? Most investigators§ simply compare an initial set of testmeasurements with a later set, each derived
from written tests applied on a single occasion
only, i.e. g,. But the correlation between
two such tests, even applied with only a
minimal time interval, is still never more
than about 0-85 or 0-90. Hence, much of the
imperfection shown by such correlations
must be due to defects in the methods of
assessment ; they throw no light (as is so
often alleged) on the supposed instability of
y. After all, no experienced psychologist
would diagnose a child as feebleminded on
such a basis. He would invariably check the
crude test-results by the child’s case-history

*Cf. P. E. Vernon and J. B. Parry, Personnel
Selection in the British Forces (1949). Psychologists
who are concerned chiefly with adult “ intelligence ”’
are, as a rule, sceptical of the measurability, and even
of the existence, of a ‘‘ pure innate g.” But with
adults assessments of “‘ pure innate g’’ are almost
impossible, and nearly always irrelevant.

+ I take this definition from R. B. Cattell, Factor
Analysis (1952), Pp. 424.

{ This is the conception preferred by Dr. Heim
(loc. cit., pp. 30 f.).

§ For an impartial summary, see L. Carmichael (Ed.),
Manual of Child Psychology (1946), pp. 586 f.

and the teacher’s report, and in case of
doubt retest him on a different day with
one or more individual tests. Hence in what
follows I shall be concerned chiefly with
measurements of the third kind, g,, i.e.
assessments checked and corrected in this
way. With these adjusted measurements the
correlations are appreciably higher than
those commonly reported for the unadjusted g,.

For the cases I have been able to follow
up, the correlations during the school period
diminish progressively from 0-93 after one
year to 0-74 after six years. The correlations
with assessments secured in early adult
life (i.e. after ten or fifteen years) average
o-61 ; and with assessments for the children
of the original testees they average 0-32.

Correlations between parents and children
are apt to vary somewhat erratically, in part
no doubt because assessments of adult
intelligence are bound to be more or less
inaccurate. Let us _ therefore compare
measurements for brothers and sisters who
are all of school age. Miss Howard and I
took a batch of 268 ten-year-olds each of
whom had at least one sib attending school
(1.6. aged eight to twelve) and who were
so chosen as to be fairly representative of the
total school population (excluding pathological defectives). They were divided into
four equal groups: (i) bright, (iia) bright
average, (11b) dull average, (ii) dull; and
the middle groups were pooled. When any
child had more than one sib, the sibs’
assessments were averaged. The bivariate
frequency-distribution so obtained, ex
pressed in the form of percentages, is

shown in the table below.

TABLE I
FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTION OF BRIGHT, AVERAGE, AND

DULL S1BS

SELECTED SIBS
CHILDREN | Bright Average Dull Total
Bright .. . | 12°8 10:0 2:2 25°0
Average .+| 112 29°6 9:2 50°0
Dull .-| 13 8-9 14'8 25°0

po

Total | 25°3 48°5 26°2 100-0
go THE EUGENICS REVIEW

On Mendelian principles, it is easy to
show* that, assuming variations in intelligence are produced by a large number of
genes, then the expected proportions in the
several rows would be 4: 4: 1, 3:8: 3, and
I: 4:4 respectively; 1.e., with subgroups
of 25 and 50 we should expect the figures
to read II-I, III, 2°8 ; 10-7, 28-6, 10-7 ; and
2°8, III, rrr. In the middle row the
observed figures conform quite closely with
expectation. The excess of bright sibs in
the top row and of dull sibs in the bottom
row is probably due to the fact that like
tends to marry like. Assortative mating
would obviously raise the apparent correlation. On the other hand, the inaccuracies
in the assessments would tend to lower it.
Allowing for such minor disturbances, the
frequencies clearly suggest that we are
dealing with a trait that is, in the main,
the effect of multi-factor or ‘ polygenic ”’
inheritance. :

Figures like the foregoing cannot of
themselves provide conclusive proof that
the characteristic we are seeking to assess
is an innate and therefore permanent charac
 

* The mechanism assumed is that (except for
pathological cases) intelligence, like stature, is the effect
of many pairs of genes (z let us suppose), such that one
in each pair, D,, Dz, Dy, say, makes a small
addition to the individual’s intelligence, while the
alternative member of the pair, d,, d,, ...dn, produces
a small reduction. With random mating, and no onesided dominance, the grades that could exist, and their
several frequencies, would be given by the product cf
(D, + @,)? (Dz + d,)?. . . (Dn + dy)?; omitting subscripts, the most intelligent would be represented by
D*», the next by D22-! qd, ...and the least by d?.. If
nm in large, the distribution will evidently tend towards
that given by the normal curve. From the above
formulation it also follows that, if we reclassify the
total distribution, sot that the proportionate frequencies
are expressed by the expansion of (A 4+ 4)’, ie.,
TA® + 2A6 + 167, then the expected results of further
random matings can be deduced from a simplified
model involving only a single gene pair. Cf. R. A. Fisher,
Trans. Roy. Soc. Edin., 52, pp. 399-433. Somewhat
similar results have been reported by Dr. Fraser
Roberts, starting with different proportions (An
Introduction to Medical Statistics, 1940, pp. 233-238).

It should be added that my own figures suggest some
small degree of one-sided dominance, much as has been
noted in stature. But this, if present, does not disturb
the main conclusion. Had the uncorrected testmeasurements been used, the apparent correlation
would have been higher, presumably because the
uncorrected test-results are to some small extent
influenced by the cultural environment.

teristic. But they plainly offer strong corroboration for what is, on antecedent grounds,
a highly plausible hypothesis. As with most
generalizations in the field of individual
psychology, our acceptance of such a conclusion must rest, not on any one decisive
inquiry, but on inferences reached by half a
dozen different lines of approach and set forth
in numerous independent researches. The
evidence so far available I have summarized
in some detail in other publications,t and
accordingly I -need not repeat it here.
Roughly speaking, an impartial analysis
would seem to indicate that very nearly
go per cent of the variance exhibited
by assessments for a complete age-group is
attributable to the genetic constitution of
the various individuals and that approximately half of this (i.e. 45 per cent of the
variance) is attributable to what is loosely
called heredity (i.e. predictable from characteristics of near relatives).

Finally, what is the actual distribution of
“intelligence ’’’ as we have defined it?
Like variations in stature, variations in
intelligence (y), as Galton himself believed,
follow to a close approximation the normal
curve. But, what is much more important,
not only is there “a continuity of natural
ability,” but “the range of mental power
between the greatest and least of English
intellects is enormous.’{ Surveys carried
out in London and elsewhere show that, if
we take a random sample of 1,000 children
aged ten by the calendar, and exclude all
pathological cases, the dullest will have a
mental age of only five, the brightest a
mental age of approximately fifteen, and
between these two extremes every intermediate grade will be found. There is a
larger proportion of bright children in the
upper classes and a smaller proportion in
the lower, but the several classes exhibit a
wide overlapping. Moreover, were we to
divide the total population into the nonprofessional and professional classes, then,
simply because the former are far more

 

+ Cf. Intelligence and Fertility, Occasional Papers on Eugenics (1946), pp. 36 f., and Ability and Income,
Brit. J. Educ. Psychol., 1943, 13. Pp. 88 f.

t Hereditary Genius, pp. 26 f.
“THE MEANING AND ASSESSMENT OF INTELLIGENCE ot

‘numerous, I calculate that, in the former,
we should find approximately three times
‘as many “very bright” children (say,
- sufficiently able to pass an honours examination) as in the latter.*

If the views that I have put forward are
correct, it is clear that these inequalities in

native ability, as Plato long ago foresaw,.

present the democratic state with profound
and far-reaching problems—problems which
even today are scarcely recognized and
which have been attacked only in the most

* For actual figures see Ability and Income, loc. cit.
sup., pp. 84 f.

tentative fashion. So far as the child is

concerned, it is plainly imperative that the

education authority should seek to determine as accurately as possible the natural
potentialities of each one, and, having done
so, provide him with the education best
suited to his needs, and finally, before it
leaves him, help to select that kind of
vocation for which his gifts may seem to have
marked him out. In this way, and in this
way alone, can we hope to realize “ that
ideal polity in which the apparent injustices
of nature are reconciled and harmonized
by the wisdom and justice of man.”

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLVI, No. 2
