THE ANDERSONS OF PETERHEAD
By B.S, BRAMWELL

“7 HAT are valuable social qualities ?
-\ / The question is often asked and is
¥ not easy to answer tersely. It is
possible sometimes to point to a group of
persons and to say, without fear of contradiction, ‘‘ These people have valuable social
qualities.”

  

DESCENDANTS OF ALEXANDER ANDERSON

A man died in 1794. His name was
Alexander Anderson. He was a miller, at
Inverugie, Aberdeenshire, as his ancestors
had been for two hundred years before him.
His descendants during the past twenty
years* have included, a chief of the Imperial
General Staff, a First Lord of the Admiralty,
an Ambassador to the United States, a
President of the Royal Society of Water
Colour Painters, a Chairman of the South
Wales Coalowners Association, a Principal
Woman Factory Inspector, a Master of
Caius, a Fellow and Tutor of Balliol, a
Fellow of Trinity, Cambridge, a Regius
Professor of Botany, one of the earlier women
M.P’s, an M.P. for the City of London and
a Colonel-Commandant of the Engineers.
In. finance, commerce and industry, the
record has also been noteworthy. The Orient
Line is the creation of his family ; two of the
descendants already mentioned have been
chairmen of very important companies such
as Imperial Airways, Dunlop Rubber Co.,
and the Rio Tinto. One of rather earlier
date not mentioned before died a millionaire, ¢
and another a multi-millionaire.t The honours
won include two G.C.B’s, two K.C.B’s, two
C.B’s, two G.C.M.G’s, one K.C.M.G. and
three C.M.G’s; two G.B.E’s, one D.B.E.,
two C.B.E’s, four O.B.E’s and one M.B.E. ;

* Lord Milne; Sir Eric Geddes, Sir Auckland Geddes,
Sir Kenneth Anderson,. E. A. Walton, H. Bramwell,
Dame Adelaidé Anderson, Sir Hugh Anderson, D. C.
Macgregor, J. C. S. Runciman, John Walton, Lady
Runciman, Sir Alan: Anderson, Major-General A. G.

Stevenson. j=. |

oN

247

one C.S.I., one C.I.E., four D.S.O’s, and
two M.C’s; also three foreign orders. One
descendant has been raised to the peerage,
another created a baronet, and three have
become knights bachelor; five have been
awarded honorary degrees, one has been a
fellow of the Royal Society and four have
been M.P’s. Finally fifteen of the younger
generations were killed in the war, 1914-18.

This wonderful history is befittingly recorded in a private compilation, admirably
produced by Mrs. A. D. Ferguson and Lt.-Col.
C. F. Anderson, of which the present writer
was privileged to obtain a copy.

Early history of Anderson family

A further question is often put to eugenists.
How does one account for valuable qualities
suddenly appearing when, if they existed at
all in previous generations, they were
apparently masked? Part of the answer may
be supplied by the study of such families as
this.

It cannot be said that there is here any
history of humble origin. The great-greatgrandfather of the Alexander Anderson who
died in 1794 was the skipper and probably
the owner of the ship that took the fifth
Earl Marischal to Denmark to conclude the |
marriage by proxy of James VI and Anne
of Denmark. :

The bride was detained at Oslo by
storms. It will be remembered how the
ardent bridegroom became impatient and
dared the dangers of the tempest, which he
attributed to the wiles of the North Berwick
witches at whose subsequent trial he presided
with zest. On the arrival of his Royal Master
the Earl Marischal was sent home. He
appears to have had warm feelings of
gratitude towards Anderson, with whom he
had been associated for several months. He
rewarded him with the grant of the Mill at
Inverugie. On a large feudal estate this was
a valuable bequest as all the peasantry were
thirled to the Mill and the dues for grinding
248

their corn were onerous. This Mill remained |

in the occupation of the family from 1590
till 1857. For four generations there is no
record of its members straying far from
Peterhead. But then they began to wander.
The tenth Earl Marischal and his brother
had been concerned in the rising of 1715 and
had fled to the Continent, where James
Keith won fame as Frederick the Great’s
Marshal. How this affected the Andersons,
if at all, is not clear. James Anderson, born
in 1746, the eldest of his generation, and his
fourth and fifth brothers took to farming in
Sutherland a far from Jacobite country.
The second brother became a naval
surgeon and the Mill was left to the sixth
son. James settled at Rispond on Loch
Erriboll and became factor to Lord Reay, in
which post he was succeeded by his son, also
James, and a man of note. Walter Scott
spent two days with him at Rispond in
August 1814. Characteristically of- the
family, James was then building a ship
there. He combined sheep farming with
shipping and traded with Germany and

Ireland, whence he brought soil for his
garden at Rispond as ballast. The family
were now branching out into the world. One
of this James’s brothers also became a naval
surgeon and died in India. Another died in
the West Indies. Five others received
commissions in the Army; one of whom
became a Major-General and another of
whom, a Lieutenant-Colonel, took up property of 85,000 acres near Melbourne. One other
of this generation should be mentioned.
Alexander was a Naval Lieutenant from
1807-15. At the end of the war, with the
help of some relatives, he bought a French
prize and captained it himself in the West
Indies trade. His London agents were
James Thomson and Co. His nephew, James,
joined this firm and became a partner. It
amalgamated with another firm and in 1878
founded the Orient Company.

Professions followed by family —
So much for past history. What occupations have the men of the family followed ?

I have made a rough note so far as s particulars are available :

Architect eee, OO LCS... ean wee
Army. _- ss ee 2 Lawn we _
Artist 33 Medicine oe 12
Business. abroad. of Merchant Service ... 4

many kinds -- 49 Navy. eee ese
Chartered Accountant 2 Shipping... ese QT
Church wee 4 Stock Exchange... ,
Engineering .. we. «=I6. Teaching ees eee IQ
Farming... woe «63

The original family pursuits, shipping and
farming, continue. Business abroad of many
natures has made the greatest call; the
services, engineering and medicine are also
strongly represented. A striking feature of
this list is that the Church and the Law
appear to have made little appeal.

Women of the connection |

The women of the connection have been
notable for their public work. In looking
through the book I found that at least forty
had followed some’ profession or engaged in
public work. Three were doctors of medicine.
One family had founded and run a girls’
school in Edinburgh ; another family had
done the same in Glasgow. Besides the
principal lady factory inspector and the
member of parliament, already mentioned,
there were headmistresses of Birkenhead and
Manchester High Schools, H.M. inspectors of
physical training at home and of schools in
Ceylon, a professor of economics, a chief
controller of the W.A.A.C. in the war, the
secretary of the council of Bedford College,
the honorary general secretary of the
National Federation of Women’s Institutes,
the holder of an air pilot’s A licence, the
president of. the Scottish Women’s Hockey
Association, a member of the. Royal Society
of Water Colour Painters, an Edinburgh
town councillor, four justices of the peace,

and a well-known actress who unfortunately

met her death by drowning in a shipping
disaster together with her distinguished
husband. Many of those had been able to
combine a public career with matrimony

_ and the cares of a family. One of the younger

generations has just been married to a
Prince of a ruling German house (if such
term has now any meaning). ‘Though there
have been foreign marriages before and
marriage into the nobility, this is a new
THE ANDERSONS OF PETERHEAD

departure. The strength of family tradition
is shown very strongly in some of the
Christian names. For instance, the second
wife of James Anderson, the first of Rispond,
was called Fairlie Gordon. She died in
1790. The name Fairlie has been borne by
eleven of. her descendants of very varied
surnames.

Longevity |

We can learn something from the record
regarding vital statistics and physical attributes. Let us take age at death: this is
recorded where known. (I have omitted the
two younger generations, most of whose
members are alive and where death has
occurred it is often attributable to the war.)

Bearing in mind how frequently the
members of the family spent their life
abroad, one must regard them as a long-lived
race. More died between 70 and 8o than in
any other decade and the deaths between
80 and go exceed those between 50 and 60.

Fecundity

Coming now to marriage, I have constructed a table based on the number of
children born in each marriage. In the
combined column for both sexes, I have
shown the youngest generation separately as
many of the families will not yet be complete.

Omitting the last generation, the unmarried seem to come to about 40 per cent.,

AGE AT

Died Mar |
Young] 20/30 | 30/40 | 40/50 | 50/60 60/70

 

 

 

 

25

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a 6 13 | 17
— —_ — oe I 5
25. 7 6 10 22
FEMAL'
16 6. 6 II 12 13
—_—- j—- — _ 5 II
| 6 | 6 6 II 17 24 |
40 | 3 [x2 |. ar | ar | 46

 

ES |
70/80 | 80/90 | 90/100 | Over | Total | Unknown Total

(eee

249

sterile marriages amount to under ro per
cent. of all marriages, and the average size
of a family in 146 marriages is 4°7. This
suggests virility. Cousin marriages are not
infrequent. The most interesting perhaps is
in the Geddes family. Their mother was an
Anderson. So also was their paternal
grandmother, but two generations senior to
their mother.

Physique

There are certain references to physique
in the records. For instance James Anderson,
first of Rispond, was said at the age of 80 to
be as active as a man of 30; his brother
Alexander, the naval surgeon, was 6 ft. 3 in.
in height and weighed 22 stone. James
(second of Rispond) was a “‘ very big man.’’
Joseph, one of his soldier brothers, who owned
the Mangalore Estate and called his dwelling
at Melbourne “‘ Fairlie” House, was 6 ft.
2 in. in height. A cousin of James Anderson,
a Presbyterian minister at Morpeth, was so
tall that he was known as the “ High Priest
of Morpeth.” There is a note of exceptional
height in the case of two of the younger
generation, one of whom is 6 ft. 44 in.
References to physique or athletic prowess
are scarce, though one person is referred to
as a Scottish Rugby International. No
reference is made to another having been
captain of the Scottish team; his brother
played in the Scottish Trials. I think we may

DEATH

     

I0oo

24

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

250 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
NUMBER OF MARRIAGES
Combined less Youngest Total
Number of Children Males Females youngest generation marriages
| generation
1. Unmarried ... 7O 105 59 164
2. Married
No Children ... 14 13 14 27
x Child 18 13 18 31
2 Children ... 24 21 35 56
3 . | *e 30 32 24 56
4 Py 17 16 It 27
5 99 6 Io 4 14
6 » 2 8 I 9
7 » 6 IO J Ir
8 » I 4 tI 5
9 a9 3 4 —a 4
10 - I 2 — 2
11 » 3 5 — 3
12 - 2 5 — 5
13 » — — — 5
14 99 — _ — —
15 » I I — I
16 99 a — — —
17 9 ~— _— — —
18 i — — — —
19 99 _— — —_— —
20 + — — — —
21 » 2 2 — I
Children but number unknown 3 2 4 I 5
Total 203 221 255 169 424
oan = can ALERT ssn cage a
3. Marriage State
Unknown 41 44 43 42 85

take it that good physique continues; in
a group of first cousins, for instance, of
whom I know some particulars, one girl is
a lady golf champion of the West of England ;
one man was a well-known long-distance
runner in the army ; another was chosen for
the Irish Fifteen ; another was a double blue
at Cambridge and yet another is a wellknown polo player. These are all first cousins
of each other and suggest a well-distributed
and satisfactory physique. So, alas, do the
fifteen deaths on active service in the war.

Some Conclusions

To conclude, it is not suggested that we
have here that eugenic *‘ Will o’ the Wisp,”’

genius. We have undoubtedly very desirable
qualities. These have persisted for at least
ten generations. They may have been masked
in the earlier days but this is only relatively.
In the limited northern environment, the
members of the family appear to have
achieved the highest positions attainable ;
though to southern ears, to be miller of
Inverugie, factor on the Reay estates, or
Provost of. Peterhead may not sound very
grand. The stock exhibits very high administrative ability which seems to be based on
splendidly sound intellectual qualities and
great physical vigour. Coming south to an
environment of greater opportunities and
certainly not greater intellectual competition,
they achieved more patent success. At a
Mik at a «

still later date , the flux created by the war

gave rise to the very conditions which suited |

their abilities. oo

The compilers of the Record point out that
the late J. M. Wood of Aberdeen, a learned
genealogist, was of opinion that all the
Andersons of Ross, Sutherland, Elgin, Banff
and Aberdeen sprang from the same ancestor.
This raises a very interesting point. Galton,
in Hereditary Genius, speaking of James
Gregory, the inventor of the reflecting
telescope, says: ‘‘ He was the most important member of a very important scientific
family, partly eminent. as mathematicians
and largely as physicians. The annexed
pedigree (p. 207) is necessary to explain their
relationships but I should add (although it
comprises nine generations and mentions
eighteen persons of note) that I know it does

251

not do full justice to the family.’”’ He continues : ‘‘ The talent came from the Andersons of whom I wish I knew more.” One
wishes one knew Galton’s source of information. James Gregory’s mother was an
Anderson; he was born at Aberdeen in
1635. It is probable that the original
Peterhead Anderson came from Aberdeen,
which is only thirty miles distant. He would
be a contemporary of James Gregory’s
grandfather. If Wood is right the Peterhead
Andersons are certainly connected distantly
to the Gregorys and Alisons. It seems
highly probable, however, that they were
more nearly connected. Sir Archibald Alison’s
autobiography does not help. He mentions
with pride his Gregory ancestry but says
nothing of the Andersons. Can any genealogist assist ? |

 

 

BIRTH CONTROL

If you wish to be we

ll informed as to the

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL and POLITICAL
aspects of Birth Control read the

NEW GENERATION

It is the principal monthly
with this
close touch with evety
throughout the World.

Europe dealing
subject, and is in
similar movement

| Journal in
important

 

WHY WAR?

Three Theories

See current issue. S pecimen Copy on application to

THE PUBLISHER, 17/19 FINSBURY STREET, LONDON, E.C.2
