TEMPERAMENT

AND SOCIAL CLASS

By F. C. BARTLETT, M.A.

“Intelligence ’ tests and the apparent differences they reveal between social class

and social class have for some time occupied an important part in eugenic studies. Mr.
F.C. Bartlett, the writer of the following article, does not attach much value to them,
chiefly on the ground that they demand “ reactions which are now regarded as a
part of the necessary equipment of all civilized people irrespective of their social
status.’’ He has recently been engaged with other psychologists in devising a technique
for accurately assessing that deeper and probably more important human quality, ‘ temperament.’ The following article, extracted from an address he gave to the Society on
January 19, indicates the eugenic field opened by this work, further articles on
which we hope to print from time to time.—Ed.

ment’ has no agreed connotation. By

it I mean that ‘group of predisposing
tendencies and feelings which may be used
to characterize one person in contrast to
another, and which seems to come to expression independently of special training due
to the repetition of specific situations.

Thus I would regard timidity, carefulness, capacity for foresight, executive
ability, recklessness as possible examples of
temperamental tendencies or qualities. No
complete list of such qualities and tendencies is possible at present or perhaps ever
will be. But those I have named determine
a man’s attitude and responses towards any
one of an indefinite number of situations
rather than to any single specific situation.
Some people lack them, some have them.
They begin to find expression extraordinarily early in individual mental life, and
they appear to be capable of singular persistence from generation to generation ; they
may thus be regarded as innate in the wide

sense of the term.

Certain common expressions: ‘ The
Governing Class,’ ‘Our Betters,’ ‘ The
Inarticulate Class,’ might be held to indicate that they differentiate one social class
from another. But these expressions may
refer rather to persistent social institutions
and traditions than to any endowment of
relatively constant temperamental qualities
and tendencies peculiar to a given social
class. There is some definite basis for
maintaining the existence of certain broad

E contemporary psychology ‘ tempera
but important temperamental racial differences, but at present very little, if any
genuinely sound evidence for maintaining
constant temperamental differences between
social classes within the social groups.

Nevertheless, I believe that if only we had
a good way of determining temperamental
qualities such evidence could be found. In
any complex society a person is, as we
accurately say, ‘‘ born into”’ a particular
social class. Now it is perhaps unlikely,
though not impossible, that this fact itself
tends to give him a certain characteristic
temperamental endowment. But the
mobility of modern society makes possible
a considerable amount of shifting about from
class to class in every generation. I wish
we knew more about how this ‘ shifting’
is effected. It ought to be a primary
problem of the social psychologist to find
out more about this. I believe that far
the most important psychological factors are
a man’s endowment of temperament and
“interests.” I will come to the second. in
a moment or two.

Here is a man assertive, energetic,
ardent, critical and questioning, optimistic
so far as his own powers are concerned, dissatisfied, moderately pessimistic about the
stability of his immediate social relations
with other people. He will, unless external
conditions are very overwhelmingly against
him, inevitably gravitate towards high
social rank. He will move towards the
governing class. But in which particular
direction he will go, in industry, in science,
26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in art, in religion, in the practical handling
of men, in any one of a large variety of
other special directions will depend psychologically in the main upon his interests.
Not entirely, however, for his temperament
must still play its part. For example,
whether he is a staff or an executive officer,
and if the latter what type of men he will
handle best, are themselves primarily a
matter of his temperament.

I am prepared to maintain that if we had
a sufficiently accurate method of investigation we should find a significant statistical
consistency of temperament among the
members of a given social class, that this
would be the more marked the more important the functions of the class in the general
community, and that this temperamental
consistency most certainly has an innate
basis. How temperamental endowment is
determined is a question to which I will
presently return.

If this holds good of temperament it probably holds good equally or even more
markedly with ‘ interests.’ Here again is
a term for which psychology has developed
no universally accepted connotation. I
must provide my own definition. An
interest is, [ think, a bias towards noticing
certain things, thinking about certain
things, acquiring certain skills. In it cognitive factors are always prominent. Temperament mainly determines how we face the
varied situations of life; interest what we
select from these situations to deal with, or
with what class of situation among the many
that life presents to us we shall be specially
pre-occupied. Although psychologists dispute whether interests are innate even in the
wide sense, I am myself strongly of the
opinion that they are. We can see a bias
towards the numerical, the esthetic, or the
mechanical aspects of things coming out
very early indeed in the individual mental
life. We seem to be able to trace them as
appearing and re-appearing again and again
in the history of particular families. They
often seem to have a highly specialized
form, as in interest in musical sound, in
words, in architectural design, in executive
management, in public affairs, in money.

It is true that every psychologist now
knows that interests may appear to fluctuate considerably up to fairly late periods of
individual growth. This is, I think, mainly
because fleeting interests can be very easily
manufactured by accident of environment.
A boy will want to be now a carpenter, now
an engine driver, now a motor mechanic,
now a wireless operator. But there are
always limits within which he revolves
around from one interest to another, and if
occasionally he breaks out of these limits he
displays the most evanescent of all his
interests. Nobody has seriously studied
what determines the range of these fluctuations, but it is obvious that temperament
and interest are closely related, and very
likely it is the more persistent and stable
temperament that sets the range of variation
from one to another of the more volatile
interests.

A very deep-seated broad difference of
interest indeed is that between an interest in
life, plant, animal, or human, and an
interest in inanimate things. I do not know
how, psychologically, to derive these from
anything else. They are, however, profoundly important in shaping a man’s career
and his social status. Take our man of the
ardent, critical, inquiring, analysing, somewhat assertive temperament. Let him be
endowed with an interest in life but lack any
keen bent towards the acquirement of
wealth. He will move towards biological
science of the academic type. Add to him
an interest in money: he will be deflected
towards biological application in industry,
or to one of the humane professions. Let
him have also the temperament that can
understand or control men. He will push
towards public administration and affairs,
business executive, some technical branch of
his country’s Army or Navy services, politics. An unfriendly society may thrust
upon him a life pre-occupied with things,
with lifeless figures, paper schemes, inanimate material. He will remain unhappy,
restless, and relatively inefficient because he
cannot have his proper pleasure even in
what he does well.

The combination of temperamental enTEMPERAMENT AND SOCIAL CLASS 27

dowment and innate interests may be an exceedingly complex matter in any man. But
I am persuaded that more than any other
psychological factors of individual constitution, this combination determines a man’s
social status and class. And I think it certain that owing to this if we compare the
members of a given social class one with
another, we may discover a uniformity of
temperament and interest that are ‘not to be
found if we compare them with those belonging to any other class. If this is true
we can certainly maintain that there are
innate differences between social classes.

Perhaps we can get our best working
notion of social class by considering that
every fairly large community develops subgroups which are arranged in a more or less
orderly hierarchy of rank or of authority
in the whole community. ‘The basis of any
group belonging to this hierarchy is always
a social institution, and the latter is itself,
of course, founded upon some deep-seated
individual human tendency, such as marriage customs, or property, or traditions of
governing, of professional or trade arrangements. Such sub-groups form the social
classes. That they may be infinitely varied
goes without saying. That they overlap in
function and membership is equally obvious,
and at the same time a matter for us of
great importance. That they are not merely
the possessors of certain institutions but the
active guardians of relatively special functions must also not be overlooked for a
moment.

There are two very striking things about
all such social classes. ‘The first is the
remarkable permanence of the institutions

which they possess, the customs which they

practise, the traditions which they uphold.
It 1s a permanence which goes far beyond
any limits of individual length of life,
and even withstands for a long time changes
of individual opinion. The second is that
nevertheless this permanence is not the
fixed pose of profound torpor. It is dynamic. If we take any social class at any
stage of its history we can see that its
institutions, traditions, and customs display
a certain trend or direction by consequence

of which the life of the group from one time
to another can be seen to be internally consistent and to possess a definite continuity.

Turn to the psychological side of this. It
means that the individuals who belong to a
given class in society are in some way predisposed to understand and accept the social
possessions of that class. It means that
they are predisposed also to assimilate
readily the direction towards which those
possessions are trending and to carry them
further in the same line without abrupt
break.

Of what nature are these predispositions ?
No doubt every normal man has a fairly
strong endowment of social instincts. These
help to make him ready to accept the institutions and traditions of his immediate
group in society. But it is hard indeed to
believe that they are all. In the first place
the prized possessions of different social
classes differ so radically and so widely that
it seems extraordinarily unlikely that a mere
common instinctive endowment should predispose men to assimilate them all with
equal readiness. It seems impossible that
it should be a common stock of social
interests which causes men to rise to appreciation and partisanship of the social usages
of a working miner’s class, of a small shopowning class, of a plutocratic financial class,
and of a leisurely zsthetic class. And
secondly there is the fact that the man
‘born into’ a social class and with a long
tradition behind him of related members of
that class tends to espouse and comprehend
its possessions and functions with a loyalty
and serenity unknown to the newcomer.

This may be due to longer individual
experience: I cannot believe that it is.
Everywhere in psychology we see that mere
length or repetition of experience has very
little to do with stability or genuine adaptiveness of reaction. Here is another matter
that needs research. A man, by force of
individual temperament, pushes into a social
class and remains there, unhappy perhaps,
a bit defiant, at best a little homesick for the
social usages of the class from which he has
emerged. His immediate descendants remain where he has set them, living upon his
28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

prestige, or more often in the world we
know, upon his money. But the third or
fourth generation returns home again, and
in them the interloper is back in his original
class. We need to learn more about these
social reversions. In Lancashire they say
‘‘ Three generations from clogs to clogs.’’
I think it highly likely that if we knew
more about it we should find that the shifting from one social class to another—particularly the shifting upwards—is in the
long run less marked than may appear if we
study only a single generation or two
generations.

Now if we have to push beyond the notion
of a mere common stock of instinctive endowment, what are the hypotheses that we
must use? In the first place it is highly
probable that in different social groups the
majority of the individuals concerned
possess a different common arrangement of
instinctive endowment. In one group one
set of instinctive tendencies is relatively predominant ; in another group a different set.
This appears to be certainly the case in some
instances. For example, if we study the
various versions of popular stories current
in different related groups of North American Indians we find some persistent and
significant variations. The versions current in the northernmost part of the coast
area tend to be dominantly concerned with
greed or voraciousness, those of Vancouver
Island and the delta of the Fraser river
with sex, and those of the south-western
interior of British Columbia with vaingloriousness or boasting.

I believe that this principle of predominant tendency is capable of great extension.
These factors, actively discriminating one
group from another I wish to call ‘‘ group
difference tendencies.’”? I have attempted
to work out a part of their psychological
implications in my book on Psychology and
Primitive Culture.* I believe that they are

* Cambridge : at the University Press. 1923. 8s. 6d.
net.

not merely group factors objectively discoverable by a study of the institutions and
traditions of a group, but that in some way
they may actually work into individual
mental life, and produce innate predispositions favouring the maintenance and
development of specific class possessions.
In one class, for long periods social governing tendencies are predominant, even in
individual endowment; in another, submissive, accepting tendencies; in a third,
manipulative tendencies specialized for particular crafts; in a fourth, bartering,
trading, specialized acquisitive tendencies.

More than this; because, in any social
group institutions and traditions grow very
strong and very permanent, and pervade a
great proportion of the social activities of
its members, they, also, in some manner,
pass into the mental constitution of the
members and develop in them specialized
interests which are innate in the sense in
which I am using this term. So the persons
born into that class are predisposed towards
certain occupations, certain skills, a certain
outlook upon life. I cannot at present prove
this to be so, but I firmly believe that it is,
and that it has much to do with that permanence of the social functions of different
classes which is an undoubted fact of the
life of groups as we find it in all ages.

We have then a double-sided process. In
every generation and at every age individuals with an innate temperamental endowment and a fundamental bias towards
certain interests gravitate towards certain
special social classes. And then the very
existence of these classes for long periods
stamps into the individual mental life an
innate arrangement of instinctive responses,
an innate temperamental outlook, an innate
group of interests. The first fact largely
accounts for the diversity of social grouping
as we find it, the second for the striking
persistence of social classes.
