THE GROWTH OF EDUCATION IN ENGLAND
AND ITS INFLUENCE ON THE SIZE OF THE
FAMILY*

By GRACE G. LEYBOURNE, ™.A., B.Sc., Ph.D.

(Research Associate, Population Investigation Committee)

Introduction

HE task of isolating the forces responsible for the collapse of the birth-rate

is not an easy one. The forces analysable into biological, religious, psychological,
social and economic are to-day merged in a
broad river of almost universal influence, and
the observer finds it hard to assess the
strength of each without tracing the river to
that source where its streams have not yet
combined or lost their identity. Even then
he must proceed with caution, for the headwaters of this river are found in the ’seventies
of the last century, years which formed a
watershed for every field of England’s social
and economic life and, moreover, a watershed
of the most complex geography. Nevertheless, a study of developments during last
century yields much evidence which is conclusive, and more that is suggestive, in
determining why our birth-rate began to fall
so noticeably in the eighteen-seventies and
continued to fall with ever increasing momentum. Evidently costs of education,
whose influence forms the present study, are
only part of the wider category of economic
causes, and it will often be essential to comprehend the latter in their entirety in order
to gauge the particular contribution of the
smaller element.

Education 1n Early Nineteenth Century

At the beginning of the nineteenth century,
education in England was decadent as never
before. As for the Universities of Oxford and
Cambridge, “‘ although they were the only
universities in England and Wales, Protestant Dissenters and Roman Catholics were

* A paper by Dr. Leybourne, entitled ‘“‘ A Declining
Birth-rate and Cost of Education,’’ was published in
Tur EuGEnics Review, April 1938, p. 33.

excluded from them by law. Instead of being
the national centres of learning and instruction, they were little more than comfortable
monastic establishments for clerical sinecurists with a tinge of letters.’’*

A similar slumber sat upon the schools,
once the nurseries of Newton, Milton and
Gibbon. “‘It has been estimated that the
condition of our ‘ public’ or higher schools
was worse between 1750 and 1840 than at
any time since King Alfred. The grammar
schools were largely derelict, often scandalous. Sometimes for half a century or more
only half a dozen boys might have attended
the school at some large centre of population.
In 1734 there were no boys at all in the
Birmingham school. From 1832 to 1836
one boy at Chesterfield made up the school.
A do-nothing clerical master, sometimes
absentee, absorbed what endowment there
was. The master of Berkhamsted School in
1835 lived in Derbyshire and took the endowment, while the school was entirely
empty.’’t Boarding houses in the public
schools were so ill-regulated that members of
the upper class bold enough to entrust their
sons to them were decidedly in the minority.
Most of these families preferred their boys
taught either in their homes or else as day
pupils in grammar schools or private
academies.

As the century advanced, however, great
changes in the educational institutions
accompanied those in the whole national life.
A new class of men was emerging to express
an interest in education for their children.
With the disappearance of home industries
and the spread of steam-driven mechanized

* George Macaulay Trevelyan, British History in the
Nineteenth Century, 1782-1901, 1922, p. 27.
+ F. S. Marvin, The Century of Hope, 1919, p. 204.

175
176

factories, wealth had increased as if by magic
in some hands. From a negligible capital
able artisans rose from the ranks to be millowners and captains of industry. New trades
appeared—builders to erect the modern
factories and towns, contractors to dig
canals, coal merchants to furnish the new
centres, and shop-keepers to supply the new
race of town-dwellers.* England became
“ the workshop of the world, the forge of the
world, the banker of the world, and the
world’s greatest carrier.” Society now
acquired a new and powerful group of
leaders. As these entrepreneurs acceded
to political power in 1832, and in 1846
wrested economic power from the landed,
they became impatient to inherit every
sort of privilege. Education did not escape
their attention. Relying on the power of
wealth, they were prepared to penetrate
institutions hitherto closed to them. When,
therefore, the development of railways in
the third decade brought rural shires to the
doors of the towns, they began sending their
sons to public schools as well as to the local
endowed grammar schools. Numbers in the
public schools increased and the education
they provided steadily improved under able
headmasters led by Thomas Arnold of Rugby.
The work of regeneration in the grammar
schools was begun by Brougham’s Commission of 1818, but the recovery here had to
wait for several decades, since the railway
network which assisted in the resuscitation
of the public schools ruined some and
jeopardized others of the grammar schools.

New Business Needs

It was railway development also which
in a more roundabout but altogether profounder fashion reached to the heart of
education. The inauguration of the age of
speed flung an ever wider and closer mesh
of communications over Great Britain, over
Europe, over the world. The Industrial

*See L. C. A. Knowles—The Industrial and Commercial Revolution in Great Britain during the Nineteenth
Century, 1921, p. 99.

¢ Knowles, op. cti., p. 102.

t See G. A. N. Lowndes, The Silent Social Revolution.
An Account of the Expansion of Public Education in
England and Wales, 1895-1935, 1937, p. 46.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Revolution was converted from a movement
into a landslide. Producers launched unparalleled expansions in response to an
unparalleled clamour from new sources of
demand. Great Britain’s labour and technical force put her in a position to secure for
her entrepreneurs the lion’s share of new
enterprise. “‘ It is scarcely an exaggeration
to say that in the middle of the century the
five continents consisted of a number of
countries, all chiefly and some entirely
agricultural, grouped for commercial purposes round the manufacturing centre of
England.’’* The great sweep towards largescale production began. Conditions were ripe
for the unleashing of tremendous technological forces which have left a profound
mark upon the laws and life of this country.

As business outgrew the scope of the old
family concerns, two trends came to fulfilment. The first was to grant-companies in
the 1862 Act general privileges of joint-stock
with limited liability. The effect of this
legislation was to sanction and facilitate a
new specialization of function in business,
that of management in separation from
ownership of capital. It was now open for
almost any type of company to grow without
limit upon capital gathered from shareholders
in all corners of the globe. In the second
place, business managers ceased typically to
be mechanics or investors and became
financial experts intent to work out scientific
principles of management and accounting in
order to squeeze the last penny of profit out
of the difference between costs and revenue.
The figure of the new type of business leader
naturally bulked increasingly large with the
growth of business units and the consequent
intensification of competition and the bureaucratization of enterprise. The day of the selfmade capitalists, ignorant of formal education and despising it for their sons, was past.
The scope, competitiveness and specialization of economic life, demanded new capacities, not acknowledged in this country as
soon as they should have been. “ At the
Great Exhibition of 1851, out of a hundred
different departments in which goods were

* Trevelyan, op. ctt., p. 276.
GROWTH OF EDUCATION IN ENGLAND AND SIZE OF FAMILY

displayed, Great Britain had won the palm
of excellence in nearly all. But at the Paris
Exhibition of 1867 she excelled her competitors in only 10 per cent. Lyon Playfair,
who had been a juror at Paris, wrote a letter
ascribing England’s loss of ground to the
fact that her competitors possessed ‘ good
systems of industrial education for the
masters and managers of factories and workshops,’ whereas England possessed none.’’*

The Examination System

There were other events at home working
a conversion about education in the minds
of these new industrialists. The most important of these was undoubtedly reform in
the Civil Service. The Civil Service Commission, instituted in 1855, suggested the
Order in Council of 1870 abolishing patronage
and making public competitive examinations
for the first time compulsory for entrance to
most branches of the Service. Careers in
the Service were now open to sons of the
new men, but these had to face the rigours
of a competitive examination, often to test
all-round scholarship. Consequently, an adequate schooling or university training for the
upper branches of the Service became
essential. Before long it was equally necessary for most professions, as these, following
the example set by the Civil Service, instituted entrance examinations requiring extensive and thorough knowledge, theoretical as
well as practical. Now, indeed, education
must have finally cast off the cloak of privilege and appeared nothing short of a rigid
necessity. ‘‘ To select men for practical
careers on the report of examiners showed
also a belief in higher education, which was
something new in England. . . . The universities and the cause of higher teaching benefited greatly by the change.’’}

New Life in the Universittes

As late as 1870 Oxford and Cambridge still
remained closed to half the nation by the
religious tests. In addition, restrictions on
fellowships, the dominance of the universi
 

4 R. C. K. Ensor, Oxford History of England, 1870
1914, 1936, p. 319. _
+ Trevelyan, op. cit., p. 358.

B

177

ties by its component colleges, and a still
persistent prevalence of absenteeism and
sinecurism, rendered them useless to meet
the demands of the new age. Reform was
urgent. It was finally achieved by legislation
spread over the years 1871 to 1882. Men ofall
religions were now eligible for these universities. In addition, there existed two modern
universities—London and Durham—founded
in the thirties. London, however, apart from
the teaching organization of two colleges,
was little more than an examining and
degree-giving board; Durham remained
small. But as demands for higher education
became urgent, Univerity Extension, spreading from Cambridge in 1873, finally led to
the formation of new universities in great
industrial centres.* There the doors were
always open to all classes and all religions.
Science and modern studies were always
iucluded among the subjects taught.

Emergence of New Stimuls

At first, education undoubtedly stood for
greater competing efficiency in the minds of
the industrialists. As a group they had a
tradition of their own, one of rugged independence, modelling itself on nothing but
their individualism. Of this they were proud.
They “ stood four-square to the world witha
certain self-respect. They may have wanted
money, to enjoy or to hoard, but they did
not dream of using it to buy themselves out
of their class. Being respectable why should
they aspire to be genteel? ’f But about
1870 a change began to be apparent.
These new producers began to lose their
sturdy pride and the self-importance at
which Matthew Arnold and other of their
critics have pointed. The acute observation
of Dickens was quick to sense this change.t
In more than thirty years, Dickens had
poured out a wealth of stories and articles
portraying the middle class of the day, when
in 1865 he published Our Mutual Friend, his
last completed novel. But here the middle

* Victoria University (Manchester, Liverpool, Leeds),
1884; University of Wales, 1893; Birmingham University, 1900.

+ Esmé Wingfield-Stratford, The Victorian Sunset,
1932, p. 48.

+ Wingfield-Stratford, op. ctt., p. 47.
178

class represented by the Veneerings, contrasts with his earlier characterisation of it.
“Mr. and Mrs. Veneering were bran-new
people in a bran-new house in a bran-new
quarter of London. Everything about the
Veneerings was spick-and-span new. All
their furniture was new, all their friends were
new, all their servants were new, their plate
was new, their carriage was new, their harness
was new, their horses were new, their pictures
were new, they themselves were new.’’*
Dickens’s shrewd pen had discerned, and hit
off, a new generation among the middle
classes, ashamed of their rugged origins, and
anxious above all else to lose that mark and
to secure recognition in the ranks of the
traditional landowners. The forces contributing to this changed attitude are no doubt
manifold, but among them the evolution towards ‘‘ Big Business’’ must occupy a
prominent place. “‘ There was not the same
pride to be derived from such service as from
the pettiest autocracy. ... The very success
of British business had its effect on the business man.”’t Intent now on securing recognition as gentlemen, they desired for their
children the education of gentlemen and
gentlewomen, in contrast to their own.
Education now took on a new desirability—
not only for rising in the economic world, but
in the social world, too. For his sons, a public
school, followed perhaps by a university, and
even for his daughters something more than
a governess at home, had to be contemplated.
From the middle of the century, Miss Buss
at the North London Collegiate School and
Miss Beale at the Cheltenham Ladies’ College,
had done pioneer work in schools for girls,
while Bedford College, London, was also providing university education for a select few.
The current really began to flow strongly,
however, when the Girls’ Public Day School
Trust was launched in 1870 and Girton
College was founded in Cambridge in 1869.
New schools and universities followed one
another in rapid succession, and from this
time education for women never faltered in
its forward stride. Masculine monopoly of
the professions was soon challenged; and

* Charles Dickens, Our Mutual Friend, 1865, ch. 2.
+ Esmé Wingfield-Stratford, op. ci#., p. 49.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

it is highly significant that in 1872 a woman
was for the first time appointed to a post of
importance in the Civil Service. Mrs. Nassau
Senior (daughter-in-law of the economist)
became a poor-law inspector. An early
marriage was no longer the only successful
career for girls.

Education and Business Leaders

By the early ‘seventies, then, everything
conspired to leave no shadow of doubt in the
minds of business leaders and those who
accepted their ethics, that for each child
brought into the world an extensive education must be provided. This was the first
generation of parents to be so generally convinced of this need. If education was
essential, however, it was no less certain to
be expensive. To the previous generations
of business men, children, after infancy was
passed, were economically an asset—they
could work and swell the family income ;
but for the generation of the ’seventies, asset
had undoubtedly turned into a liability of
no mean proportions. Here were men of
wealth and responsibility, accustomed in
their business dealings to applying the touchstone of utility to every undertaking, used
to considering the likely profit from investments, weighing cost and depreciation
against possible dividends. Virtually Benthamite principles had been applied, however
unselfconsciously, by rising men in England
for centuries. The leaders of the ’seventies
came as heirs to a long tradition rooted in
that pervasive form of realism which tended
to conceive of all things in terms of matterof-fact profit and loss. They were nurtured
in that way of thought. Evangelicalism was
the religion of men who made it their basic
assumption for conduct ; the creed of J. S.
Mill converted political sovereignty from the
glamorous plaything of princes and lords it
had seemed, into a prosy branch of blue-book
utilitarianism ; art, a thing of adornment
and little practical use, achieved its nadir in
England and sank to the level of railway
stations. The attitude of “ enlightened selfinterest,’’ to which the Victorians owed their
unparalleled advance in material civilisation,
had proved to their satisfaction its validity
GROWTH OF EDUCATION IN ENGLAND AND SIZE OF FAMILY

for every department of thought and action.
How could their mentality, triumphant in
business, fail to extend its victories to other
spheres ? Education became one of them. In
1862 the Newcastle Commission which had
sat from 1858 “ to inquire into the present
state of popular education in England, and
to consider and report what measures, if any,
are required for the extension of sound and
cheap elementary instruction to all classes
of the people,” reported, to a House of
Commons dominated by the new philosophy,
that in spite of the money that Parliament
was paying to these schools—{30,000 a year
since 1839—children were being badly taught
and results were correspondingly poor. The
pupils never mastered reading, writing and
arithmetic. In Parliament this caused an
uproar, and from the ensuing battle there
emerged a system of “‘ payment by results.”’
“ The new arrangements allowed one grant
only, paid to the managers, and not exceeding twelve shillings a year for each child.
Four shillings were to be paid on the average
attendance, and the other eight shillings on
the results of an annual examination in
reading, writing and arithmetic ; one-third
of it being withheld for each subject in which
a child failed.’’*

The educationists who supported the
scheme saw in it a means of facilitating the
task of administration grown cumbersome
through excessive centralization in Whitehall.t For before 1862 grants were made not
to schools but to individuals ; the army of
schoolmasters and pupil-teachers making
direct personal claims upon the State was
growing. An accumulation of evidence remains, however, to show that the scheme
appealed to Parliament for quite other
reasons than to educationists. Members “saw
in his [Lord Lingen’s] proposals the means to
satisfy their demands for some such annual
stocktaking as their business experience and
habits of thought could appreciate.’’ Thus,
“the blind demand of mid-Victorian parliamentary thought for a visible demonstration

* Helen Wodehouse, 4 Survey of the History of Education, 1930, p. 184.
¢t See Lowndes, op. cté., p. 9.

179

of value received for money expended ’’*
played a substantial part in the inauguration
of a scheme bearing all the stamps of commercialism.

Cost of New Education and Size of Family

How then would these same gentlemen
regard domestic expenditure, with children
as an important part of it ? Children could
hardly be regarded as profitable investments
from any point of view. Their cost, particularly with the new educational demands in
view, was excessive, the return which might
be expected on this outlay, most uncertain.
What investment could be more unsatisfactory than one not transferable, likely to
depreciate in value, and of a maturity much
delayed ? This is precisely the risk a prudent
investor must guard against. Is it possible
that the same reasoning was applied in some
measure to investment in the shape of a large
family ? But then, if it had been, would
parents have found themselves in a position
to follow out the logic of their argument,
i.e. to curtail the size of their families?

‘Methods of contraception had been avail
able for some time, and no doubt: some
use had been made of them. They had still,
however, to be popularized. In 1876, the
Bradlaugh-Besant trial gave them just such
popular advertisement. Sensational litigation always found space in the newspapers of
the day, and this celebrated trial was fully
paraded in all its shocking detail. No doubt,
many influences were playing upon men’s
minds inducing them to explore some way to
escape from the trammels of a large family.
But the trial had a decisive effect in pointing
a definite path of action to unfulfilled and
often vaguely formulated urges. It pointed
to a way of escape by contraception. Subsequently, sales of tracts and books on contraceptive methods leapt into hundreds of
thousands. To the industrialist, no longer
able to shirk the responsibility of providing a
reputable education for every child, boy or
girl, and of paying highly for the privilege,
the relevance of the trial must have appeared
immediate. To many, the expense of properly

* Lowndes, op. cit., pp. 8 and ro.
180

educating twelve or thirteen children would
no doubt have been more than their finances
could bear, and they would be glad enough
to avail themselves of the opportunity of
limiting their liability to five or six children.
For others, the attitude to children as the
unprofitable investments they were, no doubt
supplied a potent enough argument for
limiting their families. A new fashion was
coming in.

Education of Landowners

Meanwhile, the ‘seventies were years of
challenge and crisis for the landed proprietors. Between 1875 and 1879, agriculture
suffered a succession of bad harvests, while
prices instead of being stimulated by scarcity
fell ruinously under the flood of American
exports. In addition, the world monetary
crisis dragged the prices of meat and dairy
produce on the same downward course.
There settled upon British agriculture a
depression from which it never recovered.
“Farmers themselves sank into ever increasing embarrassments ; bankruptcies and
auctions followed each other; the countryside lost its most respected figures... . AdJustments, as time went on, were made ; but
always upon the basis of withdrawing both
capital and men from the land. . . . So was
consummated the urbanizing of a nation,
which till the century before had possessed
only one great city. ... England, being now
“the workshop of the world,’ staked her
future upon continuing to be.’’* Collapse of
rural rents and land values in the ’seventies
involved an economic dethronement of the
landowners of which another ten years saw
the final consummation. Income depending
on ownership of broad acres gradually contracted and estates passed into the hands of
commercial wealth, which thereby achieved
a coveted social distinction. In the face of
much opposition, the old values of an aristocracy went into general retreat before the
commercial, especially when, later, the fate
of agriculture was finally sealed by a second
collapse of prices in 1893.

Evidently the repercussions of this reversal

* Ensor, op. ctt., p. 118.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of the relative importance of industrial and
landed wealth were numerous. The tide of
events which by the ’seventies had revolutionized the attitude to education in the
middle ranks of society, were not without
their significance in the upper ranks. Education above a standard of mere literacy had
long remained a prerogative of the gentry.
Great as it was, however, it had not always
been given to all the sons of the family and
certainly not to its daughters. Sinecurism
had often rendered superfluous more than a
superficial education for the younger sons
and a home governess usually provided all
the accomplishments a girl would need. But
gradually, patronage and sinecurism had
been swept away from the parliamentary and
municipal systems, from schools and universities, and at last, from the Civil Service.
“* Since the privileged families were especially
anxious to provide maintenance at the public
expense for those of their members who were
least likely to make their own way in life, the
reputation of Whitehall for laziness and incompetence was proverbial.”’* ‘ Politicians
dealt in ‘ reversions ’ (i.e. ‘ futures ’) to office,
buying and selling them for young children,
who when old enough to be inducted into
office, often drew the salary but employed
some agent at a pittance to do the job.’’t
But under Gladstone’s reforms, unless the
new men were to be allowed to move in and
occupy all the seats of power, the old families
no less than their new rivals had to consider
educating all their children in schools and
universities now transformed by the new
spirit of urgency. Within their ranks as well
as outside, education now became no less
than a bare necessity. At first, while wealth
still flowed on the land and old traditions
were still enthroned, these new demands of
education can have had little effect on the
number of children born in these families.
But when agriculture collapsed, landowners
found themselves confronted by new alterna-_
tives. Education had by now established
itself and the only acceptable economy was
the limitation of the number of children for
whom education must be provided.

* Trevelyan, op. cit., p. 357.
+ Herman Finer, The Brbich Civil Service, 1937, p- 33.
GROWTH OF EDUCATION IN ENGLAND AND SIZE OF FAMILY

The second half of the century therefore,
icularly from the ‘seventies onwards,
found the lists growing shorter in the bibles
of upper and middle class families. To every
hundred of such couples married between
1851 and 1861, 625 children were born on the
average. The quota dropped to 593 for those
married ten years later, as low as 497 for
matriages in the decade 1871 to 1881, and
422 for marriages between 1881 and 1886.*
Family limitation had evidently been widely
adopted, and whatever other influences
played a part in this revolution in social habit
among these classes, the new onus of paying
for a substantial education for all children
must have been assigned a heavy role.

Universal Elementary Education |

England had thus ensured the education
of all “‘ her masters.’”’ By 1870, however, it
was further realized that the nation could
ill-afford to delay any longer the beginnings
of at least an elementary education for all.
It had not been important in the past for the
working class to be literate, but the requirements of industry by this time demanded
that even the mass of the workers should
acquire at least the rudiments of reading,
writing and arithmetic. “It is seen that an
uneducated people is handicapped in the
industrial competition with educated
nations,” wrote an economist of that age.f
By this time, moreover, England was no
doubt beginning to know the reality of industrial competition, in particular from
Germany and the United States where
general education was already much superior
to anything England could boast. Voluntary societies, particularly the National
Schools of Bell and Lancaster, directed the
only education provided for the lower classes
and, as we have seen, that was often all too
inadequate. The State had done no more
than make an annual grant to these voluntary societies. As late as 1870 therefore, only
about half the children of the country were
educated at all and most of these very indifferently. By an Act of 1870 the State for

* Census for England and Wales, 1911, Vol. 13.
Fertthty of Marriage.

+ James E. Thorold Rogers, An Economic Introduction to History, 1891, p. 495.

181

the first time shouldered the burden of
education. “‘ England had obtained, better
late than never, a system of education, without which she must soon have fallen to the
rear among modern nations.’* Improvement in school standards was naturally not
the product of a moment, and compulsory
education was not enforced until six years
later, but by the end of the century illiteracy
had been practically banished from the cottage.

State Secondary Education

In the meantime, however, a new urgency
had arisen. It has been shown how individual
ownership of industry was giving place,
especially after the Companies Act of 1862,
to company ownership, and by the end of the
century this movement was becoming rapid.
In addition, from the late eighties onwards,
the formation of monopolistic trusts and
combines made much headway, in spite of
the obstacles offered by England’s free-trade
policy. Encouraged by the protection of
tariffs, the movement was much more
prominent in the United States and
Germany; but even in this country from
1888 onwards combinations of as many as
fifty small firms promoted a growing tendency towards large-scale undertakings.f
Following these developments, Civil Service
methods were invading every precinct of business, banking, trading and manufacturing.
“The profession of accountancy acquired a
totally new importance ; and the invention of
the typewriter (adopted by English business in
the ‘nineties although patented in America in
1867) was one of many mechanical devices
helping in the same general direction.’’{
At an early date it had been acknowledged
that such a radical transformation of business methods required a new and educated
man at the head of affairs. The realization
dawned only much later that it demanded no
less a system of education adapted to train
up a new army of clerical workers. The Board
Schools were providing the elements of

* Trevelyan, op. cit., p. 354.
t See Ensor, op. cit., p. 283.
ft Ensor, op. ctt., p. 114.
182

literacy ; but something more was required
for even humble members of the new bureaucracy. Some of these gaps were filled by
recruits from the grammar schools, rescued
and revolutionized by the successful intervention of the Endowed Schools Commission between 1868 and 1874, and later by
the diversion to them of a substantial amount
of ‘whisky money” which the county
boroughs and new county councils received
for disposal in 1890. But the numbers so
schooled were pitifully inadequate. Thus the
Bryce Commission on Secondary Education
had to report in 1895 that, in the Manchester
area, “out of a population of five or six
millions, some twelve hundred boys are enjoying an efficient secondary education. If
that were a district in Germany there would
be at least one good school for every hundred
thousand inhabitants.’’* Similarly, although
the fifteen new secondary schools under the
Welsh Intermediate Act of 1889 and the
seventeen secondary schools set up in
England by the county and county borough
councils were a success, they were unable to
supply more than the merest fraction of the
clerks everywhere in demand. Consequently,
“the government and local government
services of those days (1895) must have found
it a difficult matter to recruit an adequate
supply of efficient clerks [and] this difficulty
was clearly in Lord Lingen’s mind when he
gave evidence to the Cross Commission some
years previously (1886-9).”’t

Thus by 1902 “‘ everywhere business men
were regretting that city offices were forced
to employ so many thousands of wellgrounded and industrious German clerks for
want of a home-grown substitute ;} and the
Board of Education mentioned this difficulty
in its report for 1904 (p. 45). Here indeed
was the rub. Not only was this country failing to supply her own clerks, but that deficit
was being made good largely by Germany,
the very country which, with the United
States, was now recognized as our most
dangerous competitor. In fact, the major

* Lowndes, op. ctt., p. 51.
t+ Lowndes, oP. cit., p. 49.
t Lowndes, op. cit., p. 89.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

reason why, from about 1870, these countries
began to steal our markets was their superior
training among men as well as masters.
Germany was considered educationally to be
sixty years ahead of us.

At a late hour, England had learned from
foreigners that an industrial nation could illafford to be content with general illiteracy.
Once again, as the century drew to a close,
foreigners had to teach her that a mature
commercialism needed a more advanced
education to equip her clerks. English higher
education for the upper strata of society
might have borne comparison with that in
Germany or the United States, but for the
majority of her people it was virtually nonexistent. There was little conception yet of
a secondary, to follow an elementary, education. Grammar schools were regarded as
catering for a social class quite distinct from
that in the Board Schools. At last, legislation to provide national secondary schools
was passed in the Education Act of 1902,
which among its various clauses included
one permitting secondary education to be a
charge of twopence on local rates. Its inclusion did much to ensure the successful
passage of a controversial Act. During the
debates on the Bill, voices from all parties
were raised to emphasize the national
urgency attaching to increased secondary
education—notably from Haldane, a leader
of the Parliamentary Opposition, from
Asquith, the Liberal, and from the Radical,
Charles Trevelyan. In 1902, then, the
foundations of State secondary education
were laid in England; its growth, though
not spectacular, was notable. (Table I.)

TABLE I
PUPILS IN SECONDARY SCHOOLS ON THE GRANT
List*

1913-14 ... 187,207 1929 ... 386,993
1920 ... 308,266 1930 ... 394,105
1921 ... 336,836 1931 ... 411,309
1922... 354,956 1932 ... 432,061
1923... 354,165 1933... 441,883
1924 ... 349,141 1934 ... 448,421
1925 ... 352,605 1935 «+» 456,783 _
1926... 360,503 1936 ... 463,906
1927 --. 371,493 1937 -.. 466,245
1928 ... 377,540

 

* From the Annual Reports of the Board of Education.
GROWTH OF EDUCATION IN ENGLAND AND SIZE OF FAMILY

Famultes of Clerical Workers

_ Theobjective of building up a clerical force,
sO prominent in the minds of the Act’s promoters, has undoubtedly been achieved. A
new and distinct stratum has been added to
society, neither lower nor upper, nor belonging to the middle class of new industrialists,
although they have tended to join forces
with these latter more recently.

The comparatively few clerical workers
who had already appeared before the nineteenth century closed had begun to create
the phenomenon of a “‘ suburban ”’ residential
class, but soon these districts were to sprawl
over vast areas and their populations to leap
into thousands as clerical occupations grew.
From the outset, these occupations conferred
a social status dignified above that of artisans, even though the latter, equipped with
valuable skill, not infrequently earned more
money. ‘‘ The secondary schools seemed
more respectable than attendance at the
elementary school till fourteen, followed by
day or evening classes (to acquire a technical
skill).”’* Education of a non-practical nature
beyond the primary stage had always been
the sole privilege of the wealthier classes and
it was therefore inevitable that education of
this type should be irrevocably linked to
gentility, even where wealth was lacking.
The nature of clerical work in itself helped to
classify the white-collared with leaders rather
than masses. Not unnaturally, therefore, the
ambition of a business bureaucracy was to
live up to the standard hitherto associated
with their education—the standard of life
entertained by the well-to-do.

But this was a standard of life to which
with their moderate incomes they could
never fully attain. They willingly subjected
themselves to a tyranny of gentile standards,
and withit toa gratuitous and lifelong need for
“pecuniary prudence.’’+ “‘ He (the suburban
dweller) is proud when he is identifying his interests with those of Kensington, and indignant when his interests are identified with
those of Poplar. He possesses in full the progressive desires which are said to be the secret

 

* Lowndes, op. ctt., p. 194.
t See Bernard Shaw, Preface to Three Plays by
Brieux, 1909.

183

of advance. He wants a little more than he
can afford, and is almost always living beyond his income.”* Nevertheless, however
full the balance sheet of family expenditure,
the cost of educating their children in the new
secondary schools could never be crowded
out. Without it, their very existence as a
suburban class was jeopardized. But at the
beginning of the century, there was little or
no chance of a parent’s being given any
financial assistance towards his child’s
secondary education. Only a few scholarships were ever given and these of short
duration and doubtful value. The general
provision of assistance had to wait for the
Free Place System in 1907.t In that year,
more liberal regulations came into force,t
but it remained true that the great majority
of children were a direct financial burden to
their parents during secondary education.
The latter could help themselves in one way
only—by reducing the size of their families.
And would not such a policy receive additional sanction because their masters and
patterns were pursuing a precisely similar
one ? Contraception was soon in general use,
its cost being small sacrifice to be rid of the
incomparably heavier expenses of education.

This class, then, grown at last to represent
one of the most important of our social
groups, is characterized by its determination
to attain a high standard of living on relatively small income, and by its appreciation
of secondary education. This education has
made many appeals—including those untinged by the ethics of materialism—but
educationists are not unaware that “ a widespread popular desire for those better opportunities in life to which higher education is

*C. F. G. Masterman, The Condition of England,
1909, Pp. 74.

+ Cf. Lowndes, op. ctt., pp. 110-11.

t Up to 1907, the State was far from defraying the
whole cost of secondary education, the grants payable
for each scholar taking an approved course amounting
to not more than two pounds or three pounds according
to the scholar’s age. In 1907, the grant was raised to
five pounds on each pupil between the ages of twelve
and eighteen in secondary schools satisfying certain
conditions. Only those secondary schools could qualify
for a grant where a proportion of school places (at least
25 per cent. of the total admissions of the previous year)
were held as “* free places’’ for scholars from public
elementary schools.
184

. .. supposed to be the gateway has definitely
played a substantial part in the growth of
secondary schools.”* Parents dissatisfied
with their own position in society have increasingly seen in this education a medium
for their children’s progress to something
better, and new strata of society have
claimed places in the schools. Other parents
have known that without a secondary education their children must lose ground that they
themselves have won. And in this respect
Alfred Marshall’s words, in his Principles of
Economics, have proved abundantly true.
‘‘ Most parents are willing enough to do for
their children what their own parents did
for them ; and perhaps even to go a little
beyond it if they find themselves among
neighbours who happen to have a rather
higher standard.’’+ The numbers have indeed increased of parents desiring a secondary education and, although voices may be
raised to lament the smaller families necessitated by such ambitions we can hardly fail,
with a prominent educationist, to “ recognize
this new appetite for secondary education for
what it usually is, a perfectly legitimate and
praiseworthy attempt on the part of the
sensible citizen to endow his child with a
good education as the best, perhaps the only,
capital asset which he can hope to pass on to
him.” + From the national point of view, also,
the new striving after education has not been
found undeserving of praise. In the words of
Leonard Darwin, ‘‘ we should also recognize
that we can best serve our country by bringing healthy and intelligent children into the
world, provided that we can give them a
sound education and a fair chance of winning a good livelihood.’’§

Families of Professional Workers

Such words of commendation must also be
held to apply to another group similarly
striving after an education rather more expensive than they find it easy to finance.
Here are found many of the lower ranks of the

 

* Lowndes, op. ctt., p. 127.

t Alfred Marshall, Principles of Economics, bk. 4,
ch. 6, para. 7.

¢ Lowndes, op. cit., p. 128.

§ Spoken at a Conference of Eugenists, New York,
1921.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

professional occupations and those with incomes well under a thousand pounds a year—
a class which has been much swollen in
recent years as numbers required in professions have grown so rapidly. Even on such
limited resources they aim at educating their
children in the public and other self-governing schools outside the State system with the
full knowledge that these schools *‘ confer a
prestige and open the doors to many desirable
occupations.”* But on a son resident in one
of these schools, they must expend at least
two hundred pounds each year, often three.
A daughter can be rather less expensive,
although in well-known schools the total
annual cost is rarely less than a hundred and
seventy-five pounds. Many of these parents
will not be content for education to end with
school days, their standards more often
embracing university and professional training. In each of three or four years at Oxford
or Cambridge, university expenses alone may
amount to two hundred pounds in addition
to which six months of vacation must be
financed. As many years of study must also
be undertaken at the new universities, although the annual budget there can be cut as
low as one hundred pounds. Subsequent professional training may add another three or
four years and cost several hundred pounds,
especially in the most eminent professions
where pupilage costs are high and partnerships must be bought. Evidently, on incomes
under a thousand pounds a year, such costs
cannot be met for more than one or two
children. Yet the ambition to train their
children for a professional status can hardly
be questioned.

Education and Working Classes

Meanwhile, what of the lower rungs of the
social ladder ? How did the claims of education rest on them? For half a century and
more their children had been growing increasingly unprofitable to labourers. Under
the system of home industries, each additional pair of hands and feet could be used to
increase the total family output and to swell
the family income. Later, however, as we

*A. M. Carr-Saunders, World Population, 1936,
p. 251.
GROWTH OF EDUCATION IN ENGLAND AND SIZE OF FAMILY

have seen, Parliament accepted the principle
of universal education—i.e. in 1870—but
this achievement only gained its full significance when compulsory education to the age
of 10 years was enforced in 1876. Small sums
could still be earned out of school hours, but
parents could no longer expect their children
to contribute substantially to the family
income until their tenth birthdays were
passed. With the spread of the factories,
moreover, family earning disappeared as
such, “‘ When the family broke up into
independent units, and the boys kept their
money to themselves and married when they
chose and when the girls were mistresses,
too, of their own earnings the loss of the
family wage tended to lessen the stability of
life.’* The return which parents might
expect from a child could no longer be relied
upon. Later, when factory acts removed
young children from the sphere of industry
and placed restrictions upon the employment of young persons and of women, the
economic value of children was steadily curtailed. Last came the Education Acts, as
culmination to these well-established forces.
Not only did they advance by an extra year
the lowest age at which children could secure
full-time employment, but also, through
School Boards and School Attendance Committees, they made evasion of the law a much
more difficult task.

The sacrifices of earnings necessitated was
not, however, the only hardship imposed on
working-class parents by the new education.
Money for school fees had also to be provided.
Such fees often amounted to no more than
ten shillings a year for each child ; none the
less, their burden fell heavily on many
families and only the very poor could hope
for exemption or assistance. Some years
later, in 1891, fees below ten shillings were
at last abolished, but such relief was offset
only two years later by a raising of the schoolleaving age to II years, and by further advances to 12 years in 1899 and in some areas
to I4 years in 1900. a

For the working man, financial incentives
to invest in a large family had thus grown

* Knowles, op. ctt., p. 90.

185

steadily fainter. Other types of incentive,
also, were weakened by influences bound up
with the spread of urbanization. It is not
surprising, then, that the working man contemplated with equanimity, a family circle
smaller than his father’s. Statistics show
how such families grew smaller from the
’sixties onwards. (Table II.)

TABLE II

NUMBER OF CHILDREN BORN PER I00 COUPLES

WHERE THE WIFE WAS 45 OR OVER AT THE TIME

OF THE CENSUS, ENGLAND AND WALES, I9gQII
(151, PART 2, P. XCvIII, TABLE 44)

Date of Duration Social Class

Marriage of I 2 3 4 5 6
Marriage
25-30
30-40

1881-86 632

1871-81
1861-71 40-50 679
1851-61 50-60 707
1851 or Over 60 681
earlier

1. Skilled artisans 4. Textile workers
2. Intermediate between 2 5. Miners
and 3 6. Agricultural
3. Unskilled workers workers

Other forces were not lacking in the same
direction. In the first place, the inconvenience both of bearing and rearing children had
greatly increased when women had to leave
the home to work in factories if they were to
assist in earning the family income. Secondly,
as industry developed, men skilled in its
processes became increasingly valuable since
they were always scarce. Workers were thus
furnished with a substantial motive for
ambition to rise to join the ranks of this
aristocracy of labour. But the requisite
training could by no means be secured by all ;
to many, its costs were prohibitive. ‘‘ The
industrial revolution upset this old traditional system (of training under craftsmen) ;
. . . the increasing discoveries of science far
out-stripped the teaching powers of any
individual craftsman. The work of training
for industry on scientific lines became infinitely complex and.costly.’’{ Nevertheless,
the prizes offered and the additional support
given by working-class societies, such as the

562 609
616 652 567 717
673 698 633 760
7oo 718 654 759
740f 698f * *

556 513 684
615
702
738

740

t Rates based on less than 100 couples.
* Rates based on less than ro couples.
t Marvin, op. cit., p. 209.
186

co-operative movement, to desire for selfimprovement and education, were together
sufficient to encourage many men to acquire
the new training at whatever cost. They
attended the Mechanics’ Institutes established throughout the country, securing certificates of the Department of Science and Art
in South Kensington, and later, attended the
technical schools and colleges when these
began to appear. There is, in fact, ample
evidence that up to a date as late as 1930
“the impulse towards technical education
came principally from the ambition of the
individual student . . . from those who
[were] ambitious to rise to better paid, more
secure, Or more congenial positions; from
parents who [were] sufficiently ambitious for
their children’s future [to make serious efforts]
to launch them into a skilled career.’’*
Already at the beginning of the century,
many contended that technical education
should be a vital concern of the State itself.
Our deficiency of skilled workmen, compared
with Germany and the United States, was
already evident, especially in the chemical
and then in the electrical trades. Consequently, there was “‘ a reiterated demand by
members of all parties, during the debate
upon the Act of 1902, for technical education
to bring this country to the level of her industrial competitors.”} Funds were limited,
however, and secondary education was given

* Lowndes, op. cit., pp. 196-7.
* Lowndes, op. cit., p. 192.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

prior claim. In addition, the majority of employers remained apathetic in their attitude
to technical education so that, until quite
recently, it has usually proved the distinction of those among manual workers who
relied on their own or their parents’ initiative
to acquire the extra accomplishments. But
among these no less than among the whitecollar workers, such ambitions for their
children would often be unrealizable where
the size of the family was large. There can be
little question, then, that the desire for advancement through technical training has
taken its toll of large families among the
working classes.

Conclusion

There seems to be, then, no group in the
social hierarchy for which the cost of education has not been and does not still remain
a factor of some importance in causing the
collapse of the birth-rate. Here is an economic influence, pressing powerfully upon the
size of families. It is difficult to assess its
relative weight among the many and varied
influences which must be operating, but the
very fact that it is susceptible to such
straightforward classification suggests a
simple means, should that be desired, of
counteracting its effects. The burden of
educational costs could be offset by a policy
of grants or scholarships, a wide extension,
that is, of what has already been undertaken
on a scale which is ineffectual, because too
restricted.

SCIENTIFIC BOOKS

Current and Standard ENGLISH, FRENCH and GERMAN Literature
in MEDICAL, CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL and PHYSICAL SCIENCE

supplied from stock, or obtained promptly to order. .

A visit to this Department is respectfully suagested.
Please write for CATALOGUES, mentioning interests.

H. K. LEWIS & Co. Ltd.,

 

136 GOWER STREET
LONDON W.C.1

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXX, No. 3.
