JAN A.

BOOK,

M.D., Ph.D.,
Institute for Medical Genetics, University of Uppsala, Sweden.

Some Mechanisms of Chromosome
Variations and their Relation to
Human Maltormations

Introduction
N MEDICAL GENETICS we are concerned
| vit genetical material that can be transmitted
from parents to children and cause individual
deviations of development, differentiation and
function of sucha significance that conventionally
we would call them diseases or defects.

This common denominator in basic etiology,
very broadly speaking, exerts its important
influence on the individual as well as on the
population. Phrased differently, the two foci of
interest and concern are the patient with his
personal medical problem and the population
with its epidemiological problems presented as a
broad spectrum of genetical diseases or defects.

Scientific inquiry into a field of such enormous
diversity and complexity, has necessarily to rely
on a large number of special techniques and, of
course, on longitudinal as well as cross-sectional
collaborative efforts of human minds.

Emphasis and interest with respect to the
manifold problems in human genetics has shifted
from time to time and will continue to do so. Up
to about fifteen years ago the important, and
frequently the only, tool used by human geneticists was statistics, eminently introduced by
Francis Galton in the nineteenth century and
further developed by several British scientists,
such as Karl Pearson, R. A. Fisher, J. B. S.
Haldane and L. S. Penrose. |

The prime importance of statistics and mathe
* The Galton Lecture delivered in London on May
20th, 1964.

This paper was based on observations made by several
staff-members who participated in our research programme “‘Clinical Cytogenetics” during 1957-64.

matics will remain and many other methods and
special techniques will be more or less subsidiary.
This might be useful to remember each time a
new approach or a new wonderful technical
device, ‘‘once and for all, is going to solve all our
genetical problems’’, be it biochemistry, chromosomes, electronic computer systems or something else.

The improvement of cytological techniques
since the early 1950s has increased significantly
the efficiency of human chromosome analysis.
Pioneered in Sweden, England and France by the
teams of Albert Levan in Lund, Charles Ford at
Harwell, and Jér6me Lejeune in Paris, this field
of inquiry into human variability was raised from
a somewhat speculative stage to the level of exact
observation.

In human pathology and clinical medicine the
associations between new cytological facts and
deviations from normal development and function, correctly interpreted, will increase our
understanding of a large number of hitherto
obscure pathogenetic events.

The facts which have been established up to
the present moment have less.importance in
terms of general biological principles because the
types of chromosome variations, now observed
in man, have been well known to geneticists for
decades. However, the fact that it is now possible
to demonstrate that man is subject to the same
type of variation represents a significant achievement.

The main part of the data which have
accumulated since 1959 are related to mental
defects and physical malformations. From this

II

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1964, 56, 3.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

field of research it is now possible to give a series
of examples of the correspondence between
chromosome abnormalities in man and those
previously known in a multitude of other organisms. The developmental effects of a change of
the chromosome constitution, on the other
hand, will vary greatly between different species.

In the past five years, a very large number of
papers on human chromosomes have been published. This makes necessary a drastic reduction
of the examples in this presentation. Moreover,
I will mainly rely on examples drawn from work

in our own laboratories, and variations of the

sex chromosomes will not be included.

Heteroploidy and Aneuploidy

The addition of one or several chromosomes to
the normal diploid set—in man twenty-two pairs
of autosomes plus the XX or XY sex chromosomes—will generally have significant effects.
With the exception of polyploidy in many plants,
viability and fertility suffer varying degrees of
reduction down to zygotic lethality and sterility
respectively. Abnormalities of morphology and
function are common.

The chromosome complement of the gamete is
haploid (x) and of the zygote diploid (2 x), i.e. in
man twenty-three and forty-six chromosomes,
respectively. In plants, it is fairly general that the
addition to the zygote of one or more complete
genoms (= x) causes less disturbance as compared with the addition of an odd number of
chromosomes. The former conditions are balanced, being multiples of x, the latter are unbalanced, i.e. 2x— [1..... (x—1) ]. It could be
that a general increase of the dose-effects of all
genes has a small or no negative effect while an
increase of the number of certain blocks of genes
and not others would disturb a delicate biochemical equilibrium much more. However, the
margin of safety appears to be narrower in
animals. This is evident in vertebrates and particularly in mammals where even a low degree of
polyploidy is deleterious. Triploidy is tolerated
in Anura and Urodela but very likely lethal or
sub-lethal in mammals.

The simplest type of an accident leading to a
change of the chromosome number occurs when
two homologous chromosomes fail to pair
properly during meiosis. As pairing efficiency is

152

correlated with chromosome length a breakdown of this mechanism more frequently affects
the shortest chromosomes of a given set.

During the first meiotic metaphase such unpaired chromosomes, i.e. univalents, will not be
properly orientated on the spindle but rather
distributed randomly in the cell. Therefore,
during the following anaphase-telophase, either
one, two or no univalents will be included in the
daughter cells.

Omitting the fine details of the two meiotic
divisions, such an accident in human gonads will
produce pre-gametic cells with twenty-two,
twenty-three and twenty-four chromosomes.
Assuming that all of these cells are capable of
developing into functioning egg cells or sperms,
the background is set for the occurrence of
exceptional zygotes containing one additional
chromosome, homologous to a certain pair, or
zygotes missing one of the chromosomes of the
same pair. In other words we should expect
zygotes with forty-seven chromosomes, being
trisomic and with forty-five chromosomes, being
monosomic.

The loss of a whole chromosome is likely to
have a lethal effect before birth. So far no individual with an unequivocal autosomal monosomy
has been reported in man. On the other hand, we
have several examples of presumably trisomic
conditions. The effect of such an added package
of genetical information, contained in a chromosome, 1s drastic and much more so than in plants
and lower animals. The internal homeostasis is
thrown off balance, resulting in a multitude of
morphological and functional abnormalities.

There are now three generally recognised socalled trisomic syndromes in man, involving
chromosomes belonging to the groups (13-15),
(17-18) or (21-22), alternatively named D, E and
G

The last mentioned one, conventionally called
trisomy 21 is associated with the well-known
Down’s syndrome. It is the most common
aneuploid condition observed in infants, with an
incidence of 1/500—1/1,000 and the extra
chromosome is one of the small acrocentrics
(Figure 1).

The other two syndromes are apparently quite
rare, at least in infants. In the E trisomy syndrome’ a relatively small submetacentric chromoCHROMOSOME VARIATIONS AND HUMAN MALFORMATIONS

8

A VF YY ¥-  » +
ae Jt Ho NG ay it )- FIGURE 1
KARYOTYPE OF A MALE PATIENT

py ae ee ee WITH DOWN’SSYNDROME. TRISOMY
ce it 0 40 yh 06 fa any 21 AND 47 CHROMOSOMES

Ekta 8a RR-& x CC A OC
FIGURE 2 Ie or | —tt
KARYOTYPE OF THE E TRISOMY —-3-35- 3-3- F :

a K2-—_¥ a —aa— a a ene

 

 

KX AR BAX BK 8a KR X

FPP en crema emer cannenmaie amet

ON Ad AAA —_

FIGURE 3
KARYOTYPE OF THE D TRISOMY
SYNDROME
(after Sergovich® et al. 1963).

 

 

 

a Fo —— F——
19 £0 ee

FIGURE 4 4 _& at.
KARYOTYPE OF A BOY WITH if ye - Wy a {
MICROCEPHALY, IMPAIRED HEAR
ING, VERY LARGE, LOW-SET MAL- _ Hh —te ) oe
FORMED EARS AND FORE-AURICULAR 7 ( {] df 6 a 1
PAPILLOMATA :

Available data indicate that this might —j}——_4- 8-110 212 oe —

be a trisomy 22 syndrome. a
i
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

3
n
Q.

2
2
—

ms

a
E

&
=
ae]
o
>
o
v&
a
2
a
"3
OU
3
mw
&
—_—
>

2

Bp

oO
a
oO
an
|
vl
ioe)
oO
Q
©
rl
A.
Z
e&
Zz
<
=
>
x=
Zz
Oo
Zz
es
es
>
QO
oO
O
n
wa
oO
Zz
<<
fa
fo
~
&
wn
a
oO
am
©
e
2
bie
°
n
had
wl
A.
=
<
*
i)
wi
ba
[4
~
oO
(a

 
CHROMOSOME VARIATIONS AND HUMAN MALFORMATIONS

|
——-.
‘ at
a ) — HR ! g
—
a ry, FIGURE 6

A VARIANT KARYOTYPE IN DOWN’S

 

 

6— 12 —-—--— —13-15— SYNDROME. THE MAJOR PART OF

._ Oe. = Z . AN ADDITIONAL CHROMOSOME 21
Us i Si 3s Bn 06 Of — HAS BEEN TRANSLOCATED TO ONE
CHROMOSOME OF THE D GROUP. A

NEW 21/D CHROMOSOME HAS ORIGINATED BY THIS PROCESS.

—6—188—- 19-205 —21-22-—

—82—84 oh 83-480

ie Ory.
FIGURE 7 ah M i iC i at i
ae
Syaomome, sisecering exew SE RE OE R33 BB gg te

D/D TRANSLOCATION CHROMOSOME

 

6S 8 rr
i.
promeemmmene me J es m 4—-5—
With ant Ane
6-12 ———, —13-15— | FIGURE 8
— } { 9990 _. 2 pea | _ A PHENOTYPICALLY-NORMAL WOMAN
x ug dé bi WITH A B/G TRANSLOCATION

m——16-18-——- r-19-20— r21-227

Yt _ ta
cl

THEORETICAL CHROMOSOME RECOMBINATIONS IN
ISSUES OF THE WOMAN OF FIGURE 8 WITH HER
HUSBAND OF A NORMAL KARYOTYPE AM

The index case of this family was a boy with congenital

malformations who died at the age of 34 months. His
karyotype corresponded to recombination | in the scheme

sr “fi “i
7

|
i
'

 

ili
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

KM te te eer:

UR BY. ee we ap ay MALFORMATION SYNDROME (le cri du_ chat)
iB ue ab bb a a dh 60 48 ASSOCIATED WITH A DEFICIENCY OF THE SHORT
ARM OF ONE B CHROMOSOME

33 RR oe te
*
pie eu
UT
it ata OA tae _ e
B
: ow
FIGURE I 1 a

A. KARYOTYPE OF A 28 YEAR OLD MAN INVESTIGATED BECAUSE OF CLINICAL STERILITY. a
FORTY-FIVE CHROMOSOMES AND A D/D TRANS- £
LOCATION
B, C, E and F. Schematical explanation of pairing
and separation of the translocation chromosome
and its homologues during the first meiotic division.
D. Actual appearance of the trivalent structure
(cf. C) lying below the XY bivalent.

 

FIGURE 12
VARIATIONS OF THE TRIVALENT STRUCTURE (CF.
FIG. 11 D) IN 10 DIFFERENT CELLS DURING THE
FIRST MEIOTIC METAPHASE
For comparison the XY bivalents of the same cells have
been included. Photomicrographs

 

i

iV
CHROMOSOME VARIATIONS AND HUMAN MALFORMATIONS

some is involved (Figure 2) and in the D
syndrome? a medium-sized acrocentric (Figure 3).
Up to now twenty-six infants with E and eighteen
with D trisomy have been reported.

All three are multiple malformation syndromes with overlapping pathological changes.
However, a number of distinctive signs and
symptoms will, in most cases, make clinical
differentiation possible.

There are some further points of interest with
respect to the origin of heteroploid conditions in
man. A correlation with above-average maternal
age has been established for the Down’s syndrome and it is very likely for the D syndrome.
This suggests a connection with the fact that
meiosis is timed differently in the two sexes. The
first meiotic prophase of the oocyte lasts from
early foetal life until ovulation occurs in the
adult female. This could very well contribute to
an increasing risk of chromosomal accidents by
ageing.

However, aneuploidy could also originate in a
different way than through meiotic failure.
During the first few cell divisions of the zygote
the mitotic mechanism might fail in such a way
that one daughter cell would become trisomic
and the other one monosomic. Since we have
reason to anticipate that monosomic cells would
not survive, the final result should be the same,
i.e. a trisomic foetus.

On the basis of general chromosome dynamics
one should expect another small acrocentric
trisomy to occur as frequently as the Down’s
syndrome. There is now some evidence suggesting the existence of this, let us say, trisomy 22
condition.

Several cases have been described, having an
extra small chromosome of the (21-22-Y) group
but without conclusive signs of Down’s syndrome*:!*, Some of them have undoubtedly an
additional Y chromosome making the association
with a rather disparate group of clinical syndromes coincidental. Others are still inconclusive
or too poorly investigated. However, there is a
remainder of five cases (three girls and two boys)
suggesting a trisomy 22 condition. Of these, two
girls* and one boy!® have been examined by us.
Among a variety of defects, including microcephaly, displayed by these cases, there is a
common denominator of significant hearing

impairment, of deafness, impressively large, lowset malformed ears and fore-auricular papillomata. The karyotype of the boy is shown in
Figure 4.

The apparent clinical and cytogenetical similarity between these cases argues against the
presence of an extra Y chromosome. Moreover,
the two girls examined by us displayed normal
female genital tracts. The fact that all cytogenetically investigated parents (of three of the four
families) had normal karyotypes and the occurrence of two sisters with practically identical
syndromes and karyotypes® makes it likely that
the extra chromosome is an additional No. 22
rather than being a heterologous chromosome
arisen through structural rearrangements. These
are merely suggestions although interesting
enough to encourage further systematic collection
of data which might eventually make it possible
to identify a trisomy 22 syndrome.

Polyploidy and Mixoploidy

The simultaneous fusion of the egg nucleus, the
sperm nucleus and one retained polar body will
give a triploid zygote. We do not know if this
simple mechanism operates in man.

Triploid cells have now been recovered from
three infants.1°?!, 22, 283 They were all 2x/3x
mosaics. Moreover triploid cells have on several
occasions been recovered from aborted foetuses.?4, 25, 26 Jt is still doubtful whether or not
these foetuses were mosaics. As no observations
support the explanation that a balanced diploid
cell could have originated from a triploid one by
mitosis, we can fairly safely exclude the possibility that the 2x/3x mosaics developed from
triploid zygotes.

My earlier suggestion of a normal fusion
between egg and sperm nucleus followed by a
mitotic division into two diploid nuclei, one of
which combines with one retained polar body,
thus resulting in one diploid and one triploid
nucleus, can now be supplemented through a
recent observation by Carr.** Twins of 10-15 mm
length from a spontaneous abortion were karyotyped. Triploid cells were recovered from upper
and lower limbs, cord and amniotic membrane
of one apparently normal embryo. The other
embryo had been partly destroyed but the
remains suggested a malformation. The cultured

153
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

cells had forty-seven chromosomes with D
trisomy. These findings suggest a connection
between twinning and the origin of 2x/3x mosaics
If a tendency to form monozygotic twins is a
factor in the hypothetical mechanism just
sketched the result could be either a 2x/3x mosaic
or a pair of twins, one diploid and the other
triploid.

Our observations on a 2x/3x mosaic boy have
shown that from the age of fourteen months to
43 years the triploid cells decreased in frequency,
e.g. in material from skin from 84 to 10 per cent
and in connective tissue material from 49 to 7 per
cent. A similar reduction has been observed in
long term cell cultures where an abundance of
mitotic irregularities, apparently, is an important
cause of cell elimination (Figure 5).

These findings are of particular interest since
they indicate that the pathological changes
occurring in such cases could be caused not only
by the triploidy as a gene dose effect but also, and
perhaps rather, by a large scale elimination of
cells. Such a process is likely to be particularly
destructive when affecting the central nervous
system.

Further analyses of cultured cells from the
bone marrow (988 cells) a lymph gland (1,029
cells) and colon mucosa (361 cells) showed a
prevalence of 5, 6 and 0.3 per cent triploid cells
respectively. The patient was then 44 years old.
Blood cultures continued to produce diploid
balanced cells only. This is further confirmation
of the mosaic, or, better, mixoploid constitution
of this individual. It also supports the hypothesis that a uniformly triploid bone marrow is
not likely to be compatible with survival.

‘Structural Changes
A large number of translocations have been
reported. They are probably quite common, but
easy to recognize only when relatively large unequal parts have been exchanged between two
chromosomes. Translocations lead to the formation of new chromosomes which, provided they
are monocentric, may be transmitted through
several generations by phenotypically normal
heterozygotes. These translocation heterozygotes may run risks as high as 50 per cent of
having abnormal offspring.

Examples of this mechanism are women with

154

forty-five chromosomes but translocation heterozygotes 21/D and D/D who have produced
children with Down’s syndrome (Figure 6) and
the D-trisomy syndrome (Figure 7).

Other examples of structural variation are
deletions and deficiencies, appearing as a shortening of a chromosome arm. As they represent a
loss of genetical information the effect in
normally diploid organisms is usually deleterious.
Such deletions and deficiencies may be caused by
translocation or inversion processes and by
exposure to chemical mutagens or ionizing
radiations.

Origin by translocation is exemplified by a
family recently examined in our laboratory.?’ The
mother had a piece of the short arm of a B
chromosome translocated to a G chromosome
(Figure 8). She had one son who displayed a
multitude of congenital malformations including
mental defect. He died at the age of 3} months
and was shown to have the major part of the
short arm of a B chromosome in triplicate.

The different possibilities of chromosome recombinations in issues of this woman with her
husband of a normal karyotype is shown in
Figure 9.

Curiously enough, while speculating about the
fate of a zygote of recombination 4 in Figure 9,
another case?! who was investigated at the same
time proved to have a karyotype of this appearance (Figure 10).

This patient, a sixteen-months-old girl, displayed a malformation syndrome with the
following main features, microcephaly, profound
mental defect, a broad face with a flat nose,
micro- and retrognathism, hypertelorism, bilateral epicanthus, impaired hearing, marked
growth retardation and an alien high pitched
wailing cry.

Another most interesting fact is that Lejeune
subsequently discovered another three infants
with nearly identical syndromes and, as far as
one can judge, with the same B chromosome
deficiency.28 Impressed by the cat-like cry of
these children, probably due to a malformation
of the larynx, he named this syndrome “‘le cri du
chat”’.

With a number of different techniques it is
possible to bring out in several chromosomes
what are probably secondary constrictions. One
CHROMOSOME VARIATIONS AND HUMAN MALFORMATIONS

such constriction appears to be located in the
short arm of one of the B chromosomes.
Chromosome constrictions represent weak points
and are more susceptible to some agents causing
breaks. This might explain why a deficiency can
appear as nearly identical in several unrelated
individuals.

Moreover, these cases open another interesting
perspective. Should this explanation be correct,
specific deficiency syndromes are to be expected
following exposure of the gonads to a variety of
chemical mutagens, including pharmaceutical
preparations. It is also possible that some chemicals have a specific affinity to chromosome constrictions. If so, we would have a new chain of
events leading to special malformation syndromes
in man.

Meiotic Irregularities

Human cytogenetics would remain seriously
handicapped, should it rest on the observation of
mitotic chromosomes only. Fortunately, improvements in cytological as well as surgical
biopsy techniques have now made it possible to
procede with examinations of the meiosis in
men?!,29, In women it is a little more complicated
and has to be reserved for a few selected cases.

Meiotic investigations are essential for the
proper identification of most chromosome variations. This is based on the fact that homologous
chromosomes pair and exchange parts during
meiotic prophase. Furthermore, in the following
phases of the two cell divisions, abnormal or
additional chromosomes often form characteristic associations whereby they can be identified
as to origin or type of change.

This can be exemplified by the findings in a
patient, selected from our project, on associations
between meiotic irregularities and impaired
fertility in the human male.*° This patient is a
twenty-eight-year-old man who was examined
because of a second childless marriage. His
spermiogram showed a sperm concentration
considerably below normal, nearly 50 per cent
abnormal sperms and 20 per cent motility only,
two hours after ejaculation. Analyses of mitotic
metaphases showed a chromosome number of
forty-five. There were only four chromosomes in
group D but an additional new large metacentric
chromosome (Figure | 1).

The meiotic preparations showed an easily
recognized large trivalent association at diakinesis and first metaphase (cf. Figures 11 and 12).
The detailed observations on the mitotic as well
as the meiotic chromosome strongly indicated
that the new large metacentric chromosome
originated through a translocation between two
heterologous chromosomes of the D group and
very likely between numbers 13 and 15.

The probable segregation of the chromosomes
to the secondary spermatocytes is shown in
Figure 11. One class of cells will receive an unbalanced haploid set of chromosomes and the
other a balanced one.

A similar or perhaps identical translocation
chromosome has been described earlier®!.32,33 in
connection with a variant of the D trisomy syndrome mentioned in this paper. Female D/D
translocation heterozygotes have produced children with this syndrome, with translocation
heterozygosity and with normal karyotypes. On
the other hand, two out of five D/D males had
each only one normal child. Available data also
indicate that children with the translocation
variant of a trisomy syndrome who have inherited the translocation chromosome, rarely
have it from their fathers. Our observations offer
some further evidence for the existence of a real
D trisomy syndrome and suggest that transmission of translocation chromosomes occurs
mainly through females due to haplontic
lethality and reduced fertility in the male translocation heterozygotes.

Concluding Remarks

The examples in this presentation were chosen to
explain some of the ways in which the recent
advances in human cytogenetics have contributed
to a better understanding of the origin of congenital malformations. I have also tried to
emphasize the close relations with general cytogenetics. Inherent in some examples were also
some indications as to future prospects. A large
number of individual scientists and research
groups all over the world have contributed to the
remarkable advances in human cytogenetics made
since 1956.

Summary |
The development of new techniques since the

155
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

early 1950s has increased significantly the
efficiency of human chromosome analysis. This
field of inquiry into human variability has now
been raised from a rather speculative stage to the
level of exact observations.

In human pathology and clinical medicine the
associations between chromosomal aberrations
and deviations from normal development and
function, correctly interpreted, has and will
increase enormously our understanding of a large
number of hitherto obscure pathogenetic events.

The facts which have been established up to
the present moment have considerably less
importance in terms of general biological principles because all details of chromosome variation now observed in man have been well known
to plant and animal geneticists for decades.
However, the fact that it is now possible to
demonstrate objectively that man is subject to
the same type of variation represents a significant
achievement.

The main part of the data which have been
accumulated since 1959 are related to mental
defects and physical malformations. From this
field of research it is now possible to give a series
of examples of the correspondence between
chromosome abnormalities in man and those
previously known in a multitude of other
organisms. The developmental effects of a sudden
change of the chromosome constitution, on the
other hand, will vary enormously between the
different species.

The following types of chromosome variation
and their significance in human pathology, and
in particular for the origin of malformation
syndromes, were discussed.

1. Heteroploidy and aneuploidy. Aneuploidy as
occurring in Down’s syndrome and other malformations. Individuals with a mixture of triploid
and diploid cells.

2. Structural variations. Translocations, deficiencies and the origin of new chromosomes.
The recently observed deficiency syndrome ‘“‘le
cri du chat” (B66k-Lejeune) is of great interest as
it is very likely related to the breakage at a
secondary constriction located in the short arm
of chromosome 4.

3. Meiotic irregularities. Earlier observations
were made on mitotic chromosomes. Improved
techniques will now extend the observations to

156

the details of meiosis in the human male. This is
exemplified by observations of meiosis in a D/D
translocation heterozygote with so far no detectable anomalies except clinical sterility and an
abnormal spermiogram.

REFERENCES

1. Edwards, J. H., Harnden, D. G., Cameron, A. M.,
Crosse, V. Mary and Wolff, O. H. 1960. A new
trisomic syndrome. Lancet i, 787-89.

2. Patau, Klaus, Smith, David W., Therman, Eeva,
Inhorn, Stanley L. and Wagner, Hans P. 1960.
Multiple congenital anomaly caused by an extra
autosome. Lancet i, 790-93.

3. Sergovich, F., Madronich, J. S., Barr, M. L., Carr,
D. H. and Langdon, W. A. 1963. The D trisomy syndrome: A case report with a description of ocular
pathology. Canad. med. Ass. J. 89, 151-57.

4. Hayward, M. D. and Bower, B. D. 1960. Chromosomal trisomy associated with the Sturge-Weber syndrome. Lancet ii, 844-46.

5. Turner, Brian and Jennings, A. N. 1961. Trisomy for
chromosome 22. Lancet ii, 49-50.

6. Dunn, H. G., Ford, D. K., Auersperg, N. and Miller,
J. R. 1961. Benign congenital hypotonia with chromosomal anomaly. Amer. J. Dis. Child. 102, 581.

7. Dunn, Henry G., Ford, Denys K., Auersperg, Nelly
and Miller, James R. 1961. Benign congenital hypotonia with chromosomal anomaly. Pediatrics 28,
578-91.

8. Gustavson, K.-H., Hagberg, Bengt, Finley, Sara C.
and Finley, Wayne H. 1962. An apparently identical
extra autosome in two severely retarded sisters with
multiple malformations. Cytogenetics 1, 32-41.

9. Biesele, John J., Schmid, Werner and Lawlis,
Marjorie G. 1962. Mentally retarded schizoid twin
girls with 47 chromosomes. Lancet i, 403-05.

10. Koulischer, L. and Perier, J. 1962. A propos d’un cas
de trisomie 22. Bull. Acad. Med. Belg., Série VII, 2,
329-44.

11. Zellweger, H., Mikamo, K. and Abbo, G. 1962. Two
cases of multiple malformations with an autosomal
chromosomal aberration—partial trisomy D? Helv.
Paediat. Acta 17, 290-300.

12. Ferguson, Jean and Pitt, David. 1963. Another child
with 47 chromosomes. Med. J. Aust. 1, 545—46.

13. Hall, Bertil. 1963. Mongolism and other abnormalities in a family with trisomy 21-22 tendency. Acta
paediatr., Stockh. 146, 77-91.

14. Becak, W., Becak, M. L., Andrade, J. D. and Manissadjian, A. 1963. Extra acrocentric chromosome in a
case of giant cavernous haemangioma with secondary
thrombocytopenia. Lancet ii, 468-69.

15. Bédk, J. A. Unpublished observations.

16. Bédk, J. A. and Santesson, Berta. 1960. Malformation syndrome in man associated with triploidy (69
chromosomes). Lancet i, 858-59.

17, Bédk, J. A. and Santesson, Berta. 1960, Further
studies i in clinical cytogenetics. Acta Univ. lund., ser.
2, 56, 19-20.

18. Book, J. A. and Santesson, Berta. 1961. Nuclear sex
in triploid XXY human cells. Lancet i ii, 318.

19. BéGk, J. A. 1961. Clinical cytogenetics. In: L. Gedda
(Editor) De Genetica Medica, 3, 21-47.
20.

21.

23,

26.

CHROMOSOME VARIATIONS AND

Béék, J. A., Masterson, J. G. and Santesson, Berta.
1962. Malformation syndrome associated with triploidy—Further chromosome studies of the patient
and his family. Acta genet. Basel, 12, 193-201.

Bodk, J. A., Atkins, L. and Santesson, Berta. 1963.
Some new data on autosomal aberrations in man.
Path, Biol. 11, 1159-62,

. Ellis, J. R., Marshall, Ruth, Normand, I. C. S. and

Penrose, L. S. 1963. Nature 198, 411. .
Ferrier, P., Ferrier, S., Stalder, G., Biihler, E.,
Bamatter, F. and Klein, D. 1964. Congenital asymmetry associated with diploid-triploid mosaicism and
large satellites. Lancet i, 80-82.

. Delhanty, Joy D. A., Ellis, J. R. and Rowley, P. T.

1961. Triploid cells in human embryo. Lancet i, 1286.

. Penrose, L. S. and Delhanty, Joy D. A. 1961. Triploid

cell cultures from a macerated foetus. Lancet i,
1261-62.

Carr, David H. 1963. Chromosome studies in abortuses and stillborn infants. Lancet ii, 603-06.

27

28

2a,

30.

31.

32.

33.

HUMAN MALFORMATIONS

. Gustavson, K.-H., Finley, S. C., Finley, W. H. and
Jalling, B. 1964. A 4—5/21—22 chromosomal translocation associated with multiple congenital anomalies.
Acta paediatr., Stockh. 53, 172-81.

. Lejeune, Jéréme, Lafourcade, Jacques, Berger,

Roland, Vialatte, Jacques, Boeswillwald, Marc,

Seringe, Philippe and Turpin, Raymond. 1963. Trois

cas de délétion partielle du bras court d’un chromo
some 5. C. R. Acad. Sci., Paris. 257, 3098-102.

B6éok, J. A. and Kjessler, B. 1964. Meiosis in the

human male. Cytogenetics (in press).

Kjessler, B. 1964. Meiosis in a man with a D/D trans
location and clinical sterility. Lancet i, 1421.

Walker, S. and Harris, R. 1962. Familial transmission

of a translocation between two chromosomes of the

13-15 group (Denver Classification). Ann. hum.

Genet. 26, 151-62.

Oikawa, K., Gromults, J. M. Jr. and Novins, J. 1962.

13-15 trisomy with translocation. Hum. Chrom.

Newsl. 7, 11. (Personal communication.).

Dill, F. J. and Miller, J. R. 1963. (Quoted by Hamer
ton et al. 1963 as personal communication.)

THE ECONOMIC JOURNAL

No. 295

I. ARTICLES

INDUCED BIAS IN INNOVATION AND THE THEORY OF DISTRIBUTION

ARE FORMAL WELFARE CRITERIA REQUIRED?
LORD PREFERENCE AND LORD FUNDS

SEPTEMBER 1964

Vol. LXXIV

C. KENNEDY
S. K. NATH
C. LLoyp

THE Fecuee ROLE OF THE MARKETING BOARDS IN NIGERIAN ECONOMIC DEE OREN

INVESTMENT ALLOCATION AND TECHNOLOGICAL CHOICE—A CASE OF COTTON SPINNING
TECHNIQUES A

THE WELFARE AND EMPIRICAL IMPLICATIONS OF MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITION

Il. REVIEWS
II. RECENT PERIODICALS AND NEW BOOKS

. K. HELLEINER

. S. BHALLA
H. DEMSETZ

MACMILLAN & CO. LTD., LONDON, W.C.2

Application for Fellowship to

ROYAL ECONOMIC SOCIETY, the Marshall Library, Sidgwick Avenue,
Cambridge

 

157
