SIR BERNARD MALLET

Two Appreciations of His Work and Character

O-DAY the Eugenics Society is

mourning the loss of its President,

Sir Bernard Mallet, K.C.B., who
died on October 28th, at the age of seventythree, in his own home. Many members
will miss him personally, whilst the Council and the office staff will do so especially
keenly.

He became a member of Council in 1918
and succeeded Major Darwin as President
in 1928. He was not simply a figurehead,
just a name upon the letterpaper, but a
working part of the organization. He
rarely missed a meeting and was constantly
at the office, ever ready to help and give
advice wherever it was sought.

So keen was Sir Bernard’s interest that
even when laid up by illness in his bed he
received officers of the Society and continued the work. During his life he held

HEN endeavouring to place on
record the severity of the loss
which our Society has sustained by

the death of Sir Bernard Mallet, I feel that I
cannot but begin by alluding to what I myself
have lost, and that is an exceptionally warmhearted and sympathetic friend with a quite
unforgettable charm of manner. His thoughts
were hardly ever concentrated on himself,
and the same qualities which gave rise to
such widespread affection were certainly
also of great value to the Society.

The concluding words of Sir Francis Galton’s autobiography, these being probably
his last utterances concerning eugenics, run
as follows: ‘‘ Natural selection rests upon
excessive production and wholesale destruction; eugenics on bringing no more individuals into the world than can be properly
cared for, and those only of the best stock.”’
What was intended to be conveyed by these
words was, I have no doubt, that eugenic
reforms must be based on science, and that

many important public offices and thereby
gained a wide knowledge of the world; and
it is therefore peculiarly significant that he
should have devoted so many years and
such energy to eugenics and population
problems. He had great faith in the future
of the race, but only if truth with regard
to it comes to be faced. He was no ostrich ;
he believed in analytical investigation, and
in then placing the results before the
general public, in the hope that a course of
chosen progress along right lines would be
followed. Hence he gave freely of his
energy and of the time which many thought
he had already earned for peaceful enjoyment on his retirement.

He finished his life and died in voluntary
harness—an example to others.

G. M. CHAMBERS.

until such reforms have been widely
adopted, mankind will continue to suffer an
enormous amount of unnecessary misery.
That Sir Bernard was a keen advocate of
scientific progress is proved by the prominent part which he played in initiating the
International Union for the Scientific
Investigation of Population Problems,
whilst his biological knowledge was quite
sufficient for his purposes. As to the
reforms needed, he no doubt realized that
the main difficulties to be faced in the
future will be to induce men and women to
adopt unpopular views and to make the
personal sacrifices needed to rid the world
as far as possible of the suffering due to
the presence of the unfit in our ranks. It
is, therefore, to the point here to note that
Sir Bernard worked for many years both
in connection with the Charity Organisation Society, with a London Hospital, and
as a member of a Borough Council, all these
being schools where the never-ending

271
272

misery due to faulty inborg qualities is
being constantly demonstrated. As to his
charitable work, it has been authoritatively
stated that ‘‘ probably no man living combined in himself so much first-hand knowledge and experience of ’’ day to day case
work, finance, and administration.

Turning to the means of attaining the
results at which we aim, folly and prejudice
will always remain our worst enemies, and
in fighting them character tells more than
detailed knowledge. All advocates of social
reform are sure to encounter great difficulties, and of these Sir Bernard met his full
share. In all practical matters he was no
doubt greatly assisted by the knowledge he
gained at the Foreign Office, the Treasury,
as Registrar-General, and in connection with
the Political Economy Club, of which he
was a leading spirit. And when it is
remembered that he had served as President of the Royal Statistical Society and
had written several important books,
including two volumes on the British
Budgets, it will be realized that very few
men have had at their command such wide
and varied experiences.

Some of the peculiar difficulties which he
had to face arose from the receipt of a
large bequest by the Society soon after he
became its President. ‘The first accounts
appearing in the papers considerably exaggerated the amount to be received, and
even the original estimates based on facts
proved to be faulty because the legacy was
largely invested in Australia, then in the
throes of a great financial crisis. "Thanks
largely to the wise guidance of Sir Bernard
in this matter, all went as well as could
possibly be expected, and I mention it
partly to enable me to give in detail one
instance of the trouble taken by our President when he thought that the Society’s
interests might be involved.

Our benefactor, Mr. Twitchin, who had
been giving the Society £1,000 a year for
some time before his death in 1930, was
living in the south of France in the spring
of that year, and when Sir Bernard was in
that neighbourhood he took the initiative
in getting into touch with him for the first

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

time. He found Mr. Twitchin in his
‘beautifully situated villa, high up over
Nice and overlooking twenty miles of
sea line, besides magnificent mountain
views’; this villa now being a _ white
elephant in the possession of the Society.
Sir Bernard told me that his host was
‘“ shrewd, alert, pleasant and hospitable,’’
and that he gave him information about
“the intensive campaign now being started
about sterilization ’’ by our Society, many
other subjects bearing on eugenics also
being discussed for over two hours. I
received no account from Mr. Twitchin of
the pleasure given to him by this visit, but
I am sure that this was solely due to the
fact that his sudden and fatal illness
occurred shortly afterwards.

When re-reading the numerous letters
received from Sir Bernard, from which the
above extracts have been made, I have
been forcibly struck by the evidence which
they afford of the great interest taken by
him in every activity of the Society and
in all projects for further advances, all of
which can be studied in the numbers of
our REVIEW issued during the four years
of his presidency. I am also thus
reminded that before he accepted the presidency he wrote to say that the more he
thought of it the less he liked it, implying
that the post could be better filled by someone else. After his election he reminded
me that he had only consented to serve
*“ under much kind pressure,’’ and later on
he declared that he should be ‘‘ quite glad
to slip out ’’ of it at the next annual meeting if that could be done without causing
inconvenience. It is certain that he only
undertook this onerous task out of a strong
sense of duty, and that the beneficial
influence which he exercised on those who
worked with him in many fields was
largely due to his self-forgetfulness. Those
of us who have had the good luck to be
his colleagues will ever retain pleasant
memories of his kindly aid and courteous
consideration whenever difficulties had to
be faced.

LEONARD DaRwIN.
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 4.
