NATIONAL SELF-SELECTION
By F. C. S. ScHILuter, M.A., D.Sc.

So far as our science can at present see three great principles
have gone to the making of our world. They may be called
Habit, Variation, and Selection.

Of these the first is the fundamental tendency of the persistence of that which is, in whatever way it may have come into
being. Its extent and importance may be gauged by the facts
that all the so-called “laws of nature” may be regarded most
simply as just the habits of the things that are said to “‘ obey”’
them. All things have habits (good or bad) and are the creatures
of habits, and that is why we may trust them to behave in an
orderly (t.e., stable) manner and can adjust our actions accordingly.
Without Habit there would be no cosmic order.

It is clear then that Habit is essential: it is the static
principle, conservative of the existing order, in default of which
the cosmos would revert to chaos. But by itself it would be the
acme of dullness and incurable fatality ; for it preserves all things
alike; it does not by itself lead to anything new or better, nor
permit us to regard the world as a progressive evolution.

Luckily, however, its effects are everywhere modified by a
principle of innovation, which seems essentially intrusive and
revolutionary, and, if unchecked, would baffle all our efforts.
This principle we may most conveniently entitle Variation.
Variation means essentially departure from the established types
of happening, and as such it is the source of all novelty. But it
is also intrinsically incalculable, and as such so troublesome to
science that, from a strictly official point of view, science declines
to recognise it. It is ‘‘ chance,” and chance cannot be real; it
must be only from our human ignorance that we fail to calculate
out the intricate results of the known “laws” or habits. On the
other hand, this narrowly pedantic view of what is theoreticaliy
NATIONAL SELF-SELECTION 9

admissible, is open to objection on the ground that it rules out
the possibility that these apparently ‘‘chance” variations may
be due to laws or habits we have not yet ascertained, or to
purposive determination by an intelligence we have not yet
discovered. We need not, however, here consider whether the
scientific postulate that ‘‘ chance ”’ is illusion really exhausts the
matter; for in the actual state of our knowledge it is undeniable
that we have practically to make allowance for a real element of
*‘chance”’ in our calculations, however we may speculate about
its origin. It is undeniable that for us the course of events is
not wholly determined by routine laws—that every day, nay,
every minute, brings a trace of something new, unforeseen,
incomparable and irreparable. For all her “ uniformity ’’ nature
never repeats herself, and it seems that somewhere at her core
there must be an exuberant well-spring of novelty that irrigates
the dull expanses of routine.

But at first sight this variation does not seem to have any
determinate character. It pours forth novelties of all sorts,
large and small, good, bad and indifferent, with so lavish a profusion that no definite purpose can be traced in them. The
variations seem fortuitous, and are taken as such by Science,
which regards a chance-distribution as most acceptable, because
it is the simplest and can in a way be predicted by the calculus
of probabilities. Or, if this treatment does not satisfy us, we
may say with William James,! that such over-production is itself
a law or habit of our universe. ‘‘ Everything is smothered in
the litter that is fated to accompany it. Without too much,
you cannot have enough, of anything. Lots of inferior books,
lots of bad statues, lots of dull speeches, of tenth-rate men and
women, as a condition of the few precious specimens in either
kind being realised. The gold dust comes to birth with the
quartz sand all round it.’’ True, most true; but is it anything
even a philosopher could call rational? Surely the world must
contain also contrivances for ridding itself of the superfluity of
rubbish it engenders. It must contain apparatus for fool-killing,
scavenging and purifying itself; for discerning the precious and
preferring it. And of course it does, if we will but see it.

1A Pluralistic Universe, p. 316.
IO F.C. S. Schiller:

The remedy for the indiscriminate production of variations
lies in the third great factor that makes our world, which we
have called Selection. Selection implies rejection, and the
preferential survival of the things selected. It, or something
like it, goes on spontaneously, and apparently without intelligence ;
for of the multitudinous variations which occur, only an infinitesimal proportion are able to maintain themselves, and growstereotyped by habit into new forms of being. We call this process
Natural Selection, denying that it means intelligence, because
we do not choose to regard it as an adaptive response to the
unceasing changes and enormous risks with which existence is
beset. Science has conceived so deep a horror of the futile
teleology of theology which ascribed the world-order to intelligence only in order to declare impious the inquiry into its nature,
motives and ends, that it dares not go beyond half-hearted
concessions to the obvious facts that wherever there is Selection
there is intelligence, and wherever there is intelligence there is
selection, and that an orderly world can only be constituted and
maintained in being by the constant operation of Selection.

The human intellect can only recognise alien intelligences
by their likeness to itself. And as its own operations are
throughout selective, Selection becomes the deepest and surest
mark of the presence of intelligence. Everywhere we discriminate, the good from the bad, the useful from the worthless, the
true from the false, the pleasant from the painful, etc., etc.
What we prefer we pick out and set apart, what we reject, we
ignore and discard and destroy. From the first efforts of the
baby’s nascent mind to control the unfamiliar organism of its
body and to set in order the confused flux of its impressions, to
the highest degrees of specialistic concentration which social
interests permit and require, the Law of Selection operates to
extract the valuable out of a vaster mass of unutilisable material.
The baby moves at random, but repeats only those movements
which lead to satisfactory results; the man concentrates himself
upon whatever function by performing which the social order
assures his livelihood. In either case there is abundance of

1 For the idea that the apparent profusion of nature is an adaptive response to
the amount of destructive waste, cf. R. Goldscheid, Darwin als Lebenselement unserer
modernen Kultur. Wien. Hugo Heller, 1909, p. 34 foll., 64, etc.
NATIONAL SELF-SELECTION II

experiment, of failure, of apparent waste; but by continuous
selection order somehow emerges out of chaos.

Now would it not be strange if the law which operates
throughout the functions of the individual’s life did not in any
way extend to the internal readjustments which alter the nature
of a social aggregate ? Societies are surely subject to the Law of
Natural Selection as wholes, just as are their individual members.

By pursuing a policy, a society, like an individual, can save
or destroy itself, and in either case the difference will depend on
the ends it chooses and the intelligent adjustment of means
thereto. Why should it not be possible, therefore, for a society
to operate similarly upon its own constituents? Why should it
not determine its own composition, the sort of members it
considers good and the means by which it may obtain them, and
then take steps to assure their production? The thing is
doubtless difficult because social problems are so complex, and
momentous, because any error will affect the welfare of so many;
but there seems to be no reason why it should be pronounced
impossible @ priortz. It is admitted that we all live under the
Law of Natural Selection, but it is obvious that we are constantly
transforming and supplementing it by the law of intelligence,
by the Selection of the good or valuable. The individual does
not merely take things as they come and accept their consequences; he does not scorn to take thought for the morrow, to
set before himself aims to realise and to ponder on the means
available; neither does the statesman assume a merely passive
policy with regard to the effects of national rivalry or of the
forces of nature. Why then should he uncomplainingly accept
the social material as it comes? Why should he regard it as
lying beyond his province to devise means by which the national
stock may be improved or prevented from deteriorating ?

That the negative answer to such questions is not rational
is suggested by the facts that national self-selection is in point
of fact continually going on, that nations are actually so
organised as to promote the development of certain qualities and
their possessors, and to handicap and extinguish certain other
qualities, and that among the qualities selected in a community
many are so favoured because they are judged to be good, while
12 F. C. S. Schiller :

the hostile discrimination against others is avowedly based on
the belief that they are bad. Contrast for example the honours
and rewards, paid to virtuous and heroic deeds in every society,
with the penalties inflicted on evil-doing. Every society does in
point of fact strive to make hard the way of the transgressor,
smooth that of the social saviour. We are not therefore
advocating any new and unheard-of principle in demanding that
this social selection should be more efficient, systematic and
intelligent than it actually is.

For at present nations are so imperfectly organised that the
process of social selection is as a whole unsystematic and
haphazard. The selection is largely left to individuals, with the
idea, presumably, that the interplay of individual egoisms will
issue in social benefits. But the individuals are not taught that
by their private choices of what is pleasant or conducive to their
personal purposes they are moulding and perhaps altering the
nature of the nation which supports them. They have not in
consequence any consciousness of social responsibility in the
exercise of their tastes. The London business man who prefers
Sunday golf to a sermon is not aware that he 1s thereby contributing to the survival of the caddy as against the preacher, nor does
the man who buys a ticket for musical comedy instead of fora
play of Shakespeare, realise that he is aiding the degradation of
artistic taste, nor is the ordinary citizen conscious that by
attending race meetings he may accelerate, and by attending
meetings of the Eugenics Society he may arrest, the decadence
of his country. There is in short very little reflection on the
social consequences of individual preferences.

Yet individual thoughtfulness is far greater than collective.
Collectively the nation, and those who profess to consider its
interests, do not seem to think at all. Else it would hardly
happen that the ends aimed at in the national self-selection
should be so often incapable of withstanding the least reflection,
and that the means adopted should so often defeat the ends in
view. The collective stupidity even of the most intelligent and
civilised societies is stupendous. They seem habitually to organise
themselves so as to foster what they detest and to destroy what
they admire. A society will profess to believe in human
NATIONAL SELF-SELECTION I3

equality, and yet maintain enormous differences of social position.
It will destroy distinctions of rank and thereby leave the field
open for the most insidious and irresponsible form of power,
that of plutocracy. Its democratic jealousy will debar the
upper classes from all access to honourable and useful careers
of social service, and it will thereupon complain of the idle rich.
It will try to cure poverty by almsgiving, and to restrain animalism by preaching celibacy. It will turn the law into the
most powerful engine of injustice. It will organise churches for
the promotion of the religious spirit, and be astonished when
they proceed to fossilise, and crush it. It will set up professional teachers of various branches of knowledge, and permit
their pedantry and futile formalism to make every form of learning seem detestable, and then join them in deploring the laziness
of youth. It will set up schools for the teaching of games and
make these compulsory, while work becomes optional. It will
make all its games professional, and turn all its professions into
games for dilettantes. It would serve no purpose, but that of
exasperation to record the whole series of social miscarriages,
but I may finally refer once more to the supreme instance of
social fatuity to which I have already tried to draw attention,
viz,, the fact that in all civilised societies the rate of reproduction
is lowest in the highest and highest in the lower (though not
always in the very lowest) classes.! For what does this mean
but that the social order operates so as to discriminate against
the very qualities which it deems most valuable ?

The natural result is that though there is an enormous amount
of self-selection continually going on in societies, now favouring
one set of qualities and now another, there is no unity of plan or
purpose controlling the whole, and consequently no definite
tendency or intelligent direction. Hence the whole process is.
of the lower and non-intelligent type which we call Natural
Selection, and not consciously selective. Man does not exercise
the same intelligent control over his own development as he does
over that of the other beings (such as cultivated plants and
domesticated animals) in whom he is interested. He is not yet
master and maker of his own destiny.

1 Cf. Oxford and Cambridge Review, No. 5.
14 F.C. S. Schiller:

And yet he does not fail from lack of power. Society asa
whole (and every member thereof) is continually interfering with
and controlling the activities of individuals, and moulding them
and altering their relative positions. It is always exacting from
them much conformity to its ideals. For it has ideals, though
they are often inconsistent. It trains its members to become
gentlemen and sportsmen and clergymen and what not, according
to certain regulation patterns, and woe betide those who are refractory. And it also changes its ideals. The medizval saint and
knight are types as extinct as the ichthyosaurus and the mastodon. The trouble is that its ideals always rest upon insufficient
reflection and knowledge and upon partial insight, and that they
are unrelated to one another and to any consistent plan of the
best life. Hence, the social influences brought to bear on the
individual, being unco-ordinated and at cross purposes, largely
neutralise one another, and the best defence of individualism
lies in the impotence and folly of collective enterprises.

But is this a sufficient defence of the existing chaos? Are
we still collectively too stupid and too ignorant to think out a
consistent scheme of a good life which a nation can safely enjoin
on its members? If so, it might certainly be better to let “ nature,”’
meaning thereby the existing habits of things, blindly take its
course, than to attempt to direct it. But against this policy we
may fairly cite the fact that no one really and consistently believes
in complete latsser faire. Every one believes that there are some
things which intelligence can regulate, in which we can improve
on nature’s ways, and can discern the better from the worse.
Even Christian Scientists and Peculiar People, though they think
it wrong to summon a doctor, do not think it wrong to interfere
with the course of disease. They pray, appealing from the
doctor to the Deity. Even anarchists, though they object to
government, do not think it right to follow every passing impulse.
In general there is a great mass of practically universal agreement
as to what behaviour is good and what bad. The minorities
which approve of the more atrocious forms of anti-social conduct,
murder, robbery, dishonesty, profligacy, cruelty, intolerance, are
so small and insignificant that universal consent may fairly be
said to condemn them.
NATIONAL SELF-SELECTION I5

All we need ask, therefore, is that society should not content
itself with merely verbal reprobation of such acts, nor undo the
salutary effects of its disapproval by encouraging this same
conduct by others of its institutions. The accepted ideals can,
and should, be made efficient. At present we do not live up
even to the light we have. It is inconsistent, ¢.g., to treat
infanticide as murder, and to acquiesce in the existing infant
death-rate of our workhouses ; to bring in habitually verdicts of
‘‘temporary insanity,” and yet to retain barbarous legislation
against suicide; to make duelling illegal and (as in Germany) to
enforce a code of “‘ honour ” which requires it. It is inconsistent,
further, to condemn theft and to encourage it by the laxity of
company laws, to advocate forestry and to tax it out of existence,
to believe in hereditary excellence and to frustrate the multiplication of the fit, to adore genius in the abstract and to crush it
out in the concrete, to recognise the necessity for progress and to
devise no means for discriminating between the social reformer
and the criminal. It is true, no doubt, that the world is made
for the average man; but the average man should never be
allowed to forget that it was not made by him, and that if left
to his own devices he would rot in the ruts of routine.

Theoretically, therefore, it is an ideal, which every society
should set before itself and inculcate into its members, to conceive
a social order which will ever be intent to maximise the good
and to minimise the bad in the conditions of human existence.
And having conceived this ideal, it should consciously strive to
realise it, ordering all its institutions and selecting all its types
so as to provide it.

It will not, however, be necessary to work this ideal out
theoretically in its minutest details, both because it will suffice if
the right course to be followed can be seen a few steps ahead,
and because it will always be essential to keep the ideal elastic,
so that it can be adjusted to any growth in knowledge in the
course of experience. To be of practical value a social ideal must
differ from those of nearly all Utopians in two essential particulars: (1) It must be from the outset intended for a progressive
world, and so must itself be capable of progressive self-correction
and improvement, and (2) it must be applicable to the existing
16 F.C. S. Schiller:

order and must not postulate a revolution in human nature and
institutions as a preliminary to its exercising any influence.!
For the operation of any ideal must necessarily be on the actual
order ; hence its application to the actual will have to be gradual
and discreet. For it is folly to ignore the potency of Habit ; the
inertia of ages cannot be undone in the day of reckoning.

Of course such a programme must expect to be beset with
difficulties and objections, and this paper would be futile if it
made no attempt to anticipate them.

(1) I will begin therefore with the objection that the
Social Order, which we may fitly term the Eugenic, will necessarily involve a tyrannical oppression of the individual, and be
destructive of all individual initiative; because the Eugenical
State, having adopted its ideal of the good life once for all, will
crush out all nonconformity.

I am particularly sensitive to this objection because I am
not ashamed to be called an individualist, though of course I
utterly repudiate the calumny that my humanism is socially
subversive and anarchical. I must therefore hasten to explain
that as an individualist I am neither insane nor inconsistent.
Individualism, as I conceive it, does not involve a denial of
society, though it does imply doubts, generated by reflection
and experience, as to the practical value of many forms of collective action: it merely believes that individual initiative is
socially indispensable and that certain functions are far better
left to it. Now it is quite consistent with this to believe that
there ought to be a social ideal, if it is added that individuals
are the people who ought to believe in it and are the right
instruments for realising it. The answer, therefore, to the
objection that there would be no place for individual initiative in
the Eugenical State is simply that the social ideal can and should
work through and on individuals, and that a reasonably organised
society would leave far more to them than does the existing order,
and would utilise individuals of exceptional ability far sooner
and far better. Foras things go, society hears of the exceptional
man about the time when he is getting too old to render the

1 By both these criteria Plato’s Republic is condemned as_ hopelessly
impracticable. Mr. H. G. Wells stands alone in perceiving the need for progressiveness, though even he hardly secures it by the institutions of his Utopia.
NATIONAL SELF-SELECTION I7

social services he could have rendered thirty years before. The
world knows nothing of its greatest men, because by the time
it knows something about them they have ceased to be the
greatest. The Eugenical State, we may reasonably hope, would
alter all that. It would contemplate the selection of the fit, not
as the premature promotion of youngsters who can wait, but as
something vitally concerning its own welfare. And it would
possess a definite ideal and standard of value whereby it would
discriminate far better than at present between the valuable and
the noxious departures from the current types. As things are,
a large proportion of ‘social reforms’ are fraudulent or illusory
or retrograde, and as nobody has any clear idea as to where we
either are going or ought to go, the social valuation of innovations
usually goes wrong, at least at first. Hence the best thing we
can dois to let the tares grow up with the wheat, lest we destroy
them both together. But the greater our ability to discriminate
between them, the freer would be the field left open to the wheat.

(2) A more serious objection, however, develops out of the
last. The effectiveness of a social ideal, as of all combined
action, presupposes agreement between the members of the
society as to what is good and bad, worthy of being fostered or
exterminated. At present, however, in all existing societies such
agreement is remarkable for itsabsence. Consequently nosociety
could agree to pursue any consistent policy of self-selection.

It must be admitted that this difficulty might well be fatal,
if it were a question of realising perfection by a coup de thédtre
and establishing the Eugenical State by a coup d'état. But this
idea is rendered sufficiently chimerical by the fact that our
leading politicians are sure to be the last persons to be converted.
to the necessity for a eugenical policy. And if our ambition is
limited to accelerating a little the upward crawl of evolution, a
two-fold reply will present itself. In the first place there is.
already a considerable measure of agreement among men as to
what is good and evil. The primary conditions of physical and
social welfare are established beyond dispute, and legislation
could give effect to this agreement to a far greater extent than
it does. What is really in question therefore is as to how the

existing sphere of agreement should be enlarged. And here it
18 | F. C. S. Schiller:

would be well to disclaim once more any rigorously coercive
policy, not on doctrinaire grounds, but simply because experience
shows it to be ineffective. Much more may be expected from an
era of reflection upon social problems and of conscious effort to
agree upon the best course practicable. At present our disagreements seem hopeless, because we have not consciously grasped
the principle that Selection must control Habit, and hence
acquiesce fatalistically in the discrepancies which nature and
habit have produced. But if we realise that man’s final duty is
to re-make himself, we shall have a common aim,—even though
we shall no doubt long continue to differ as to the means of
best achieving it. But such differences will be an advantage
rather than a drawback, if they excite greater zeal and ingenuity
in well-considered social experimentation. For we must attribute
to the Eugenical State a greater measure both of toleration
towards a variety of experiments and of docility in accepting
their results, than is compatible with the unscientific methods of
our present polity. And finally, it should be noted that as the
agreement needed will only be practical, andasan infinity of reasons
may always be given for doing the same thing, much theoretic
difference of opinion may continue to subsist without doing any
harm. In short, by stimulating reflection upon the desirability
and possibility of agreement, the Eugenical State may gradually
attain all of it it requires, while the elasticity of its structure will
always be ample to protect it against breaking strains in practice.

(3) A third objection will be found to be pretentious rather
than profound. It appeals to the economic Law of Supply and
Demand in order to confute the belief that self-selection is
possible, because social valuations mould social character and
the conditions of social life. No, it will be objected, a nation
cannot make a quality good by thinking it so, nor can its admiration make the worthless valuable. The social order ultimately
rests upon the rigid order of nature, and man has no power to
alter either. If socially valuable qualities are also rare, society
must paya high price for them : they have a monopoly value which
society must merely recognise. Ifa nation values amiable folly
and frivolity above gravityand strenuous wisdom, it must go under.

There is of course a grain of truth at the bottom of such
NATIONAL SELF-SELECTION 19

reasoning, but in its crude application to human society it isa
gross exaggeration. Ultimately, perhaps, it is possible to formulate all the facts of social remuneration and the whole interplay
of social relations in merely economic terms. But it does not
follow that this gives the deepest insight into their nature. And
we should not allow ourselves to forget the fact that they are
primarily dependent on social choices and appreciations, and vary
accordingly, and that this is the more directly human way of
regarding them. For mankind in general and the more advanced
nations in particular, have secured so immense a preponderance
over the dangers that beset their existence that they have up to
a point emancipated themselves from the struggle for existence
and the pressure of economic needs. Their position is so secure
that they can play the fool and indulge their whims with practical
impunity. The wealthy classes everywhere mostly do. We are
so strong and so rich that we can afford to live in an age of
unparalleled waste. Civilised man is everywhere squandering
the natural resources of the earth, burning up the coal, using up
the metals, cutting down the forests, killing off the fauna,
poisoning the air. Heissorich and so strong that he hardly even
thinks of insuring his posterity by paying a pittance to the men
of science who are labouring to find for him fresh resources in
lieu of those which his prodigality is rapidly exhausting. For
he has obtained such control over nature that it has become
largely plastic to his will, and instead of submitting to natural
conditions he adjusts them to his needs. And so the social order
is become plastic too. The Fates, the ineluctable necessities of
organic nature, are driven off the stage of modern life, and
constrained to lurk behind the scenes.

So it 1s the demand which creates the supply and not the
impossibility of increasing the supply of anything desired which
determines the intensity of the demand. If society desires
to have a thing it can make it desirable; if it desires something
else it is free to change its values. It has merely to affix a high
rate of pay or honour to the service it requires, and those able to
render it will divert their energies in this direction. Thus the
demand varies with the desires, that is, with the fashions and
opinions of men, and new values are constantly being created and
20 F. C. S. Schiller:

old ones disestablished. It is the demand for more rapid locomotion than human limbs could compass which has produced
the steamer, the railway, the motor and the aeroplane, which has
thrown the cabby and the coachman out of employment and exalted
the emoluments andcheek of the chauffeur. And be it observed that
each of these changes means not only a new form of machine but
also a new type of man. It is a change in taste which has substituted Wagnerian for Italian opera, horse racing for gladiatorial
shows, and zoological gardens for the sanguinary exhibitions of
the arena.

To descend still further into the concrete in order to test the
economic view, is it not nonsense to say that the Archbishop of
Canterbury is paid £15,e00a year and Prof. J. J. Thomson seven
or eight hundred, because the persons fitted to perform the latter’s
functions are twenty times as common as those suited to the
former’s? Is not the real reason plainly that the former is the
beneficiary of a long social development which has liberally
endowed the Church, while the social appreciation of the value
of science is only just beginning, and has not yet raised the
makers of new truths to a par with the custodians of timehonoured revelations ? Our example, however, draws attention
to a very general fact, viz., that the social position of various functions is very largely the product of past valuations which have
persisted from mere habit. Hence their present salaries do not
really prove that an Archbishop is twenty times as valuable to a
nation as a scientific genius, or thrice as precious as a Premier,
nor even that men now thinkso. How many of us, for example,
really now believe that mere descent from an illiterate medieval
baron attests sufficient merit to entitle a man to a hereditary
seat inthe House of Lords? If we continued to value fighting
qualities as highly as of yore, we should promote our actual fighting men. When we want really to defend the House of Lords,
we point to its sagacity in gauging the will of the people and
to the economic value of its attractiveness for foreign heiresses.

Hence one of the chief needs of a society which desires to
reconstitute itself on eugenical principles is a thorough revision
of social status. It must bring the social position of various
services into closer agreement with their present velue. And it
NATIONAL SELF-SELECTION 2I

must induce a greater feeling of responsibility about the popular
valuations and transvaluations of functions, which are constantly
exalting the position of the caterers to individual pleasures above
the consolidators of man’s permanent welfare. It is not good for
a society that a cricketer or a prize-fighter or a dancer should be
esteemed and rewarded more highly than the man who discovers
a cure for malaria or cancer.

(4) Still we must not flatter ourselves that our humanist
reply will convince the naturalistic doctrinatrve. He will rather
harden his heart and stiffen his doctrine, and bring up his heavy
guns. Hewillappeal to Natural Selection. Man lives, and must
continue to live, he will sagely point out, under this inexorable
law. It is useless to contend against it, and to strive to improve
our condition by our own initiative. Either the improvements
aimed at are consonant with the tendencies of Natural Selection
or contrary to them. In the one case they will come about
of themselves; in the other they cannot come about at all.

Natural Selection at present is probably the greatest bogey
in the whole field of social science. In the half century of its
existence it has changed from the most rabidly revolutionary to
the most stupidly conservative of principles. For the reason
mainly that both its universality and its connection with Intelligent Selection have been ignored. It is, assuredly, a universal
principle from which no form of organic life escapes. But for
this very reason there are a thousand forms of it; hence as a
whole it is indeterminate and admits of alternatives. It does
not answer the question how we shall live under it. It leaves us
free, therefore, to render the Selection to which we submit
intelligent and purposive.

In point of fact the form of Natural Selection its naturalistic
interpreters usually have in mind is on the lowest plane, the
plane of Habit. They mean by it the practice of the lower
animals, whose power to control their conditions of life is very
slight and who can adapt themselves only by modifying their bodily
structures. But it is mere folly to set up their practice as a
model for man to imitate, and sheer stupidity not to see how
differently he is situated.1| With man’s resources it is easier to

1 This difference has been brought out mos clearly and forcibly by Dr. Rudolf
Goldscheid, in his essay on Darwin als Lebenselement unserey modernen Kultur, 1900,
pp. 62 foll., cf. also his Entwicklungswerttheorie, 1908.
22 F. C. S. Schiller:

change the environment than to change human nature. In
society it is more economical to promote the fit than to extirpate
the unfit. It is cheaper to support a social burden than to provoke a social convulsion. And every end may be attained by a
dozen means, between which the bare Law of Natural Selection
does not decide. It is open therefore to a statesman to choose
among alternatives. He may believe that his nation will survive
better by throwing its energies into war or industry, into agriculture or manufacturing, by building up a strong army or a
strong navy, by organising itself individualistically or socialistically. And these may be real alternatives ; for actually nations
have prospered in all these ways, and so far as any one can foresee
there are real turning-points in history at which alternative
developments are potsible. Such choices are no more infractions
of the principle of the causal coherence of events than is the
occurrence of incalculable variations. For once they are decided,
the course of events flows calculably on, until the next crisis.
Hence Natural Selection is in practice a very elastic principle,
which may take the form of Intelligent Selection and work
through human choices. No appeal to it in the abstract therefore
need impede the course of social amelioration.

(5) Still even admitting all this, a serious danger would seem
to remain. Suppose a nation agrees to adopt an ideal of Good
and to organise itself for its attainment, how is it to make sure
that its ideal is the right one? Suppose it turns out that it has
adopted a false ideal, z.e., one that cannot be realised and that
works worse and worse the more it is persisted in! ‘Will not
the very concentration of national purpose and unification of
national endeavours enormously enhance the dangers of failure
and render the final overthrow more irretrievable ? Nay is not
this most likely to occur? Do not nations err like individuals,
only on a larger scale? Have they not frequently been saved
only by the fact that they did not all go wrong together ?

This objection sounds most formidable, but the difficulty is
hardly more than dialectical. There is no reason in the first
place why it should be more fatal to intelligent and purposive
action than to beings subject to the lowest forms of Natural
Selection. Nay these latter are even less likely to be infallible.
NATIONAL SELF-SELECTION 23

We may even, if we like, play with the idea that evolution has
committed irreparable errors or been a mistake altogether. It
might be contended for example that man’s intellectual growth
has been permanently stunted by his failure to develop six fingers
and a duodecimal notation to match them, and that the whole mammalian stock erred in retaining only two pairs of limbs instead of
acquiring the ampler endowments of insects and Indian gods,
and that sleeping and dying were foolish habits for living beings
to fall into.

But after all hardly any one really believes that the course
of evolution has gone irremediably astray from the start. The
possibilities of error loom large only while they are taken in
abstraction from the methods of correcting errors. And with
the growth of intelligence the resources both for avoiding and
for correcting errors are surely increasing. It is not at all probable that civilised men conduct the affairs of their life worse than
savages, savages than animals, vertebrates than invertebrates,
multicellulars than unicellulars. Of course societies, like individuals, make mistakes, and should expect to make them. But
not all mistakes are fatal, nor do they all preclude the subsequent
attainment of truth. Indeed it is usually by our errors that we
learn. It is not true that if we start wrong, we are bound to
plunge deeper and deeper into error. It is also possible that
we may gradually come to rectify our initial blunders and rise
to more and more adequate truths. This, indeed, is the inspiring
faith upon which the whole procedure of science rests. It is
moreover what we believe to have happened in the case of the
individuals and the societies which have survived. They did not
start with an assured knowledge of the absolutely right course.
It was impossible that they should; and it was also unnecessary.
They experimented and discriminated good from bad by their
consequences and groped their way up step by step.

Despite the asseverations of metaphysicians it is not true
that a knowledge of absolute truth and good is necessary to progress. We do not need to know what is absolutely good in order
to know that one thing is better than another. We do not need
to know the elixir of life in order to know that beef is more
nourishing than straw, and water healthier than absinthe. We
24 F.C. S. Schiller :

do not need to be assured of immortality in order to judge that
a life is worth living. Wedo not need to know absolute truth in
order to detect a lie. The fact is that our ideals are not actually
prior to the particular experiences they profess to ‘ explain,’ but
are built up out of suggestions derived from the latter.

Hence the Eugenical State, being aware of its liability to err,
will guard against error in advance by incorporating into its structure provisions for detecting and correcting the errors it may commit. It will value individuality highly enough to grant its members
freedom of discussion and experiment upon all questions which
are felt to be not yet settled, and it will be observant enough
of the experiments of other nations to profit by their experiences.
For it need not be supposed either that international rivalries
will cease (indeed they may even be aggravated by foolish race
theories), or that the same policies will be adopted in all the
societies converted to eugenics. Only so soon as an eugenical
expedient was found to work well anywhere it would have to be
adopted everywhere, just as at present any improvement in the
engines of destruction devised by any nation is speedily copied all
the world over.

The one serious danger, to which not only Eugenical Selection but Civilisation in general would seem to be exposed, would
be the universal and simultaneous adoption by mankind of a
scheme to arrest progress and to arrest itself at something like
its present level, by artificially eliminating all its progressive
stocks. This idea cannot be pronounced impossible a priori ;
for we have in the social insects examples of highly organised
communities which are non-progressive, and the ideals of current
socialism seem logically, and sometimes intentionally, to aim at
such a levelling of abilities and eradication of individuality. But
the obstacles to the success of such a scheme are far greater than
those in the way o* any eugenical policy; and after all even of
Socialism a nobler and more eugenical form is conceivable, and
indeed more likely to be practicable. Hence we may, I think,
conclude with considerable confidence that National] Self-Selection
is not impossible because it is actual, and that it is capable and
deserving of being turned into a great instrument for good.
