REVIEWS OF BOOKS

Study and Treatment of Sub-Fertility

THE Family Planning Association’s subfertility committee, referred to above, has
already made considerable progress. The very
large number of replies received in response
to its advertisement for a pathologist are
being examined with a view to selecting
candidates for interview. Arrangements are
also being made for a demonstration of
methods used in the diagnosis and treatment of sub-fertility, which will be held at
the North Kensington Clinic on Saturday,

REVIEWS

BIRTH CONTROL

Beebe, Gilbert Wheeler. Contraception
and Fertility in the Southern Appalachians.’ Baltimore, 1942. Williams
& Wilkins. London:  Bailliére,
Tindall & Cox. Pp. xu+274. Price
14s.

Tus scholarly work, published under the

auspices of the National Committee on

Maternal Health Inc., conveys more informa
tion than is implied in the title. Dr. Beebe

intended primarily to investigate the possibility of encouraging rural women of high
fertility to practise birth control. In the
event, it was found possible to explore some

** determinants of fertility in the absence of

contraceptive endeavour.”

The district of the investigation comprises
an area of 109,500 square miles and the
families concerned live under conditions
slightly comparable with those obtaining in
the Rhondda Valley in 1930-33, depressed
industry among people who have apparently
become irrevocably separated from the
fertile countryside. The district was specifically chosen as a region of low economic
opportunity and high population pressure—
in other words, from a materialistic standpoint, limitation of family could be welcomed.

43

October oth; from 2 to 5 p.m. Invitations
will be issued to clinic doctors and other
interested members of the medical profession:

Elections to the Society

THE following have been elected Fellows
(starred) and Members of the Society during
the past quarter :

*Dr. J. Isaac
Leslie Jones, Esq.
*F. Lafitte, Esq. —

A. E. H. Laston, Esq.
*Set. L. J. Latham, R.A.S.C.
Dr. J. Lorenc .

OF BOOKS

The absolute fertility is so great that if it
were not for emigration the population would double itself in one generation. However, the
author is at pains to stress that he considers

_ fertility reduction as only one factor in re
lieving the low standard of living. On the
other hand, as a single measure, it is preferable to emigration to urban districts.

The members of the National Committee
on Maternai Health Inc. have for some time
had an interest in devising control methods
of great simplicity, suitable for use among
people in poor circumstances, and so it was
possible, in liaison with the American Birth
Control League, to formulate a scheme for
the prescription (in the absence of medical
advice) of a contraceptive jelly without an
occlusive pessary. A schedule was drawn up
on which the nurse entered the reproductive
history, both before advice had been given
and afterwards. —

The population eligible was composed of
women of rural non-farm residence, fifteen
to forty-five years old. It was no surprise to
find that interest in contraception was
greatest in those of high fertility. The findings deduced from the completed schedule
have been collated and expressed in graph
and tabular form. In many cases, comparison
and contrast have been made with other
similar investigations, one in Puerto Rico
44
and the other in rural Kentucky. One very
significant result is that adolescent infertility
is by no means the rule, and that chronological age may be a much more exact index
of physiological maturity than age at
‘puberty. Another is that, in the samples
taken, uncontrolled fertility of the Negroes
was well below that of the Whites, probably
because of venereal infection and other
pathological states.

Contraceptive practice was, of course, by

no means unknown before the service was
started, two methods mainly in use being
the douche in Negroes and condom and
douche in Whites, but the average efficiency
was not good, and conception occurred in 50
per cent of cases; 10 per cent of the
conceptions were terminated by spontaneous
abortion, still-birth and induced abortion.
(The incidence of the last was lower than
in selected urban samples.)
_ Jt seemed that the service was welcomed
by those who accepted it, more because it
made contraception available to those who
desired it rather than because it introduced
or “converted ” those previously ignorant
or apathetic. The service was free and it was
made as easy as possible for supplies of jelly
to be continuously available. It is believed
that regularity or otherwise of use is a major
determinant of risk and highly irregular use
can offset differences of method. No great
progress can be made in research on physiological effectiveness until reliable statistics
can be obtained on this point.

In assessing the worth of a contraceptive
service, there is no doubt that acceptability
of method or methods prescribed is of major
importance, and Dr. Beebe reasonably concludes that regularity of use gave a measure
of acceptability. Irregularity of use can be
accepted as the first step to discontinuation.

THE EUGENICS. REVIEW

ol

An analysis of conceptions reported in ‘those
relying on the prescribed method showed
46°3 per cent alleged as due to one or more
omissions to use it, and as much as 45:5 per
cent due to unknown causes with alleged
regular use.

In a chapter on the organisation of a contraceptive service in a depressed rural area,
the classification is suggested into therapeutic
service (in which the patients are referred
because of medical contra-indications to
pregnancy) and a general service {such as the
one under review). It is obvious that the
former must put highest efficiency before
anything else, while, in the latter, many
other aspects must be watched. It is admitted, therefore, that a single prescription
was far from ideal, especially since most
clinicians rate the efficiency of an uncombined method as low, and, moreover, the
patient’s confidence is increased if sheregards the physician as a sympathetic
adviser with large resources, rather than a
mere purveyor of a block prescription.

The yearly cost of the service averaged
$4.20 per patient, but it should be noted
that it was carried on independently of other
public health services. On the other hand,
supplies were obtained at prices below actual
cost and no charge was made to patients. It
is estimated that the cost could be reduced
in practice from $4.20 to $2-3.

Among the appendices is included a most
useful discussion of methodology in work of
this nature in which the author explains his |
statistical techniques. The bibliography is
apparently confined to publications in the
U.S.A. and the index is reasonably full.
The format is excellent and there are a few
photographic illustrations whose direct
relevance to the subject matter is not
stressed. :
DouGLas ROBERTSON-RITCHIE.
