DIVORCE AND MARRIAGE REFORM

The Address at the Annual General Meeting, 1931, of the Eugenics
| Society

By the Right Honourable LORD SALVESEN, P.C., K.C., LL.D.

HE above subject has been chosen

for my address to this Society, be
cause I believe there is profound
dissatisfaction with the law of divorce as it
at present exists in England.

Ever since the Reformation infidelity has
been regarded as a ground sanctioned by
Scripture for the dissolution of a marriage,
although until 1857 the remedy was only
available to those who had sufficient means
(£500 was the minimum cost) to obtain a private Act of Parliament. Since 1857 the High
Court sitting in London has been open to
suits of divorce which could be presented by
persons of moderate means. An isolated act
of infidelity was a sufficient ground for
divorcing a wife at the husband’s instance,
but a wife who sought the same remedy had
to prove in addition cruelty or desertion by
the husband. Since the report of the Royal
Commission of Divorce in 1912 two important changes have been made. The woman
is now in exactly the same position as the
man in obtaining divorce, and facilities have
been given both in the High Court and in
certain provincial courts for poor persons to
bring their petitions without undue
expense. The judge who tries the case
is, however, still vested with a discretion to
refuse divorce to the complaining petitioner
if he or she has been guilty of adultery.
According to a recent decision of Lord
Merrivale, in order to get the benefit of this
discretion the petitioner must frankly state
the circumstances under which he or she has
been unfaithful to the marriage tie; and if
a full disclosure is not made after a decree
nist has been obtained, and this is subsequently ascertained, the Court refuses to
make the decree absolute. Such, in a nutshell, is the existing law.

As it stands, the law is open to grave
objections. Married persons who have
lapsed from virtue are often debarred from
seeking divorce, however great the delinquency of the other spouse, by having to
proclaim their own shortcomings. If they
do, and the judge considers that he is not
entitled to exercise his discretion in their
favour, the petition is dismissed and two
persons whose association as married persons has become unendurable remain tied
together for life. Further, the law gives no
remedy to those who have been deserted.
Such cases chiefly occur amongst the working classes. ‘The typical case is that of the
husband who has tired of supporting his wife
and children, suddenly emigrating to one
of the Dominions or to a different district
under an assumed name and leaving his
wife and children to starve. She cannot
trace his whereabouts—does not know
whether he is alive or dead—but until either
she can establish his adultery or the fact of
his death she must perforce remain celibate
or contract an illicit alliance.

Other cases equally hard occur more
rarely amongst the middle classes. A
Church of England clergyman wrote to me
that for twenty years his wife had refused
to live with him and he had been compelled
to live celibate without hope of children.
Again, as infidelity is the only ground of
divorce, evidence real or simulated has to
be manufactured sufficient to satisfy the
Court, and a dissolution of a marriage which
both parties ardently desire may thus be
secured. No wonder that in these circumstances collusion and perjury have become >
rife in the Probate and Divorce Division.

107
108

SEPARATIONS IN ENGLAND

It is impossible, of course, to ascertain
statistically how many such cases in the
aggregate occur. But as regards desertion
some guidance may be got from Scottish
statistics. Since 1560 malicious desertion
for four years has been a recognized ground
of divorce in Scotland. In 1924, of the 449
decrees pronounced in the Court of Session—
the one Court where actions of divorce are
competent—211 were for desertion, substantially all of them in favour of poor women
of the working class. If anything like the
same ratio of desertions occurs in England,
where in 1929 3,496 decrees of divorce were
granted, from 1,500 to 2,000 persons must
annually be in this position.

While I accept the view that infidelity is
a valid ground for the dissolution of a marriage, it does not appear to me to be necessarily the only, or in many cases the most
cogent, reason for divorce. In the early
Christian Church it was recognized and
has always been so in the Greek Church.
That Church discriminates, as the English
Church formerly did, between the infidelity
of the husband and infidelity of the wife.
In all Protestant countries infidelity has
been regarded as a ground for dissolving a
matriage. In many cases it has been the
most potent factor in the disruption of the
home, and, even in our times, there are
probably more murders committed from
jealousy than from any other specific cause.
At the same time it cannot be denied that
there are infinitely varied degrees of obliquity in the character of this. offence—like
the crime of manslaughter, which may be
punished with a fine, when it arises from a
mere trivial act of negligence, or with a long
term of penal servitude when the degree
approaches to murder. There is in the
degrees of infidelity the same distinction as
between weakness and wickedness.

Man is naturally a polygynous animal,
and a wife who is otherwise on good terms
with her husband will readily condone an
occasional iapse of virtue if he declares himself repentant and thoroughly ashamed of
himself. This is proved by the fact that in
Scotland far fewer cases of divorce at the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

instance of a wife on the ground of her
husband’s adultery are brought into court
than those which are brought by the husband for his wife’s adultery. This physiological difference explains why in the
former English law of divorce the wife’s
infidelity was treated as on a different plane
to that of the husband’s. Even that old
moralist, Samuel Johnson, declared that
there was a boundless difference between the
two,

For my part, I think that it is right that
the woman should be entitled to obtain
divorce for her husband's infidelity, because, apart from equality (which makes so
strong an appeal to feminist societies), for
one reason it puts in her hands a weapon by
which she may curb her husband’s incontinence—for the penalties of divorce in Scotland amongst the propertied classes are
very heavy indeed upon the delinquent
party. But that infidelity itself is not
necessarily disruptive of the home is demonstrated by the fact that it is’very frequently
condoned by the injured wife and not infrequently by the husband when the erring
wife is genuinely repentant. The law is
right in not making any distinction between
the sexes, for it leaves it open to the injured
spouse to use the remedy which it provides
or not to use it, as in the circumstances he
or she may see fit. Experience shows that
the majority of women do not do so unless
their affections have been permanently
alienated from their husbands, or the conduct of the latter in other respects has made
marriage unendurable. ‘There is no other
way of accounting for the relative infrequency of divorces for infidelity at the
instance of wives in Scotland, for there
can be no doubt that the general morality of
married women in this respect is higher
than that of men.

ROYAL COMMISSION’S REPORT

I have already referred to the Royal Commission of Divorce which sat from 1908 to
1912, when its report was issued. ‘That
Commission was one of the most remarkable in the history of the country. A very
large number of witnesses were examined
DIVORCE AND MARRIAGE REFORM

and the report of the Commission is contained in three huge folio volumes. The
report of the majority, which was no doubt
written by Lord Gorell, is a masterly exposition of the whole field that it covers.
In the end the Commissioners came to the
conclusion that five other grounds for dissolving marriage should be added to that
already existing, namely: wilful desertion
for three years and upwards, cruelty, incurable insanity for five years and upwards,
habituai drunkenness found incurable after
three years from first order, and imprisonment under a commuted death sentence.
The intolerable situation to the innocent
spouse arising from any of these causes need
scarcely be stressed.

I have also already referred to desertion
in Scotland where, I believe, it has been a
ground of divorce for longer than in any
other country in the world. After three and
a half centuries there has never been a suggestion that the law with regard to divorce
for desertion in Scotland should be repealed.
Its beneficial action in promoting morality
is known to all. Indeed, it does not really
extend the existing ground of divorce, because I have never known of a man who was
capable of leaving his wife and children to
starve, leading a chaste life thereafter.

We have not yet added to our Scotch
grounds of divorce the others referred to in
the Majority Report, but if any legislation
in England should be enacted, it should
be made equally applicable to Scotland.
Cruelty, no doubt, is in both countries a
ground of separation. That is necessary for
the protection of the life or health of the
injured woman. But the status created by
separation is almost universally condemned by every lay witness examined
before the Royal Commission. Mr. Justice Bargrave Deane, speaking of separation, said: ‘‘I would not have separation, it is a living death. That is
the way I look at separation. It is wrong
altogether. Either they must live together
or live apart, and that means be divorced.”’
A leading authority on the law of husband
and wife in Scotland, Professor Walton,
states the position thus: ‘‘ Public feeling is

109

strongly against increasing the number of
persons living as if single, and yet not free
to marry: husbands without wives and
wives without husbands.’? ‘The Majority
Report sums up the position in these words :
‘Our conclusion is that the remedy of
judicial separation is an unnatural and unsatisfactory remedy, leading to evil consequences, and that it is inadequate, in cases
where married life has become practically
impossible.”’

ARREARS OF SEPARATED PERSONS.

I have already adverted to the fact that
assuming that 200 is the number of divorces
for desertion granted in Scotland annually,
there are probably 1,500 to 2,000 such cases
in England annually demanding a remedy.
The arrears of similar cases must run into
very large figures. Possibly from 30,000
to 50,000 are in the position in England today of having been deserted for more than
three years. It would not be fair in such
cases to inquire into the life that they have
since been leading. For too often the
poverty to which a wife is reduced by a
deserting husband almost compels her to
live with any man who is willing to support
her and her children. Her infidelity, where
it exists, has resulted from the grievous
wrong done her by the husband. In my own
experience it is the decent poor who come
before the courts to seek divorce for desertion. When they have the opportunity of
marrying again, they come to court so that
they may enter into a legal union, and any
children that may be born may be legitimate.

DIVORCE OF THE INSANE

The case for adding insanity as a reason
for divorce rests on different grounds. ‘The
insane person is not necessarily responsible
for his physical and mental condition,
though it must not be overlooked that a
very large proportion of those who become
permanently insane are drunkards or syphilitics. An eminent doctor on whom the
Majority Report placed great reliance thus
summed up the situation :
ILO

‘* A person united in the bonds of
matrimony to a chronic and incurable
lunatic, is for all practical as well as
legal purposes one united to a dead person. For, by the nature of his physical
condition, he is not only unable to direct
the life of another, but is unable even to
control his own.’’

‘‘ Evidence given before us’”’ (says the
Report) ‘‘ and the communications received
by us prove the disastrous moral effects inseparable from the present state of the law.”’

In 1908, there were 150,000 registered insane persons in the United Kingdom, and
of these some 60,000 or 70,000 were married.
The number now is probably much larger.
Those who recover after five or even three
years’ confinement constitute only a negligible fraction. Itis not infrequently found that
insane persons who are discharged as recovered are, within a short period, again
confined. In a Society such as this it is
unnecessary to emphasize the disastrous
eugenic results which may be expected in
marriages between persons one of whom has
a hereditary taint of insanity. Habitual
drunkenness and criminality are, probably,
in practice, more rare. Neither of them,
unless accompanied by cruelty, is a cause
for separation. The misery of a person who
is condemned to live with a drunken spouse
or with a serious criminal, can scarcely be
exaggerated.

RELIGIOUS OPPOSITION CRITICIZED

At the present day the main opposition to
an extension of the existing ground of
divorce comes from the Roman Catholic
Church, and from a certain proportion of
the priesthood of the Church of England.
The former Church is inflexible in its opposition to the dissolution of any marriage
celebrated in church, whilst the priesthood
of the Anglican Church is divided. The
opposition is founded on the alleged sacramental character of marriage, a view which
is not shared by the majority of the lay
population belonging to the Church of England, nor by the large body who constitute
the remainder of the Protestant population.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

For the first seven centuries of Christian
faith divorces were allowed on various
grounds. It was not until the eighth century that the doctrine of marriage, being a
sacrament, was incorporated in the law of
Christian states. It spread over all the
countries subjected to the Western Church
and finally received the solemn sanction of
the Roman Catholic Church by the decree of
the Council of Trent. Anyone who reads
the history of that council in the article
published in the British Encyclopedia,
will not be favourably impressed by the
authority of that council, especially those
who are not prepared to submit to this
infallible rule of the Pope. The AngloCatholic clergy of the Church of England
rely for authority especially on the words of
our Lord : ‘‘ Whom God hath joined let not
man put asunder.’’ It is not consistent with
my conception of the Deity that He is
responsible for every ill-assorted marriage.
If what is meant is ‘‘ Whom the Church
hath joined let no man divorce,’’ it is really
an assertion that every marriage celebrated
in church should be assumed to be an act
of the Deity. It is dangerous to take too
literally the words of a great moral teacher.
If we did we should find ourselves in great
difticulties. In the Sermon on the Mount,
one finds the words: ‘‘ Judge not that ye
be not judged,’’ which, if literally interpreted, would abolish all courts of justice.

Again, what warrant is there for interpreting the words ‘‘ put asunder,’’ as meaning divorce and not separation? The Roman
Church has always recognized the right of
a spouse to be separated from another on the
ground of infidelity and on other grounds.
The decree of separation sunders as effectually the relationship between husband and
wife as a decree of divorce. From a legal
point of view, apart from authority and
tradition, the matter is scarcely open to
argument. It is mere assertion to say, even
if the words were construed as one would a
statute, that our Lord meant separation and
not divorce, for divorce is expressly sanctioned elsewhere for fornication. Taken
literally and by themselves the words
prohibit both.
DIVORCE AND MARRIAGE REFORM

CHRISTIAN UNFORGIVINGNESS

Before the Commission, some thirty persons, representative of all branches of the
Christian Church in the United Kingdom,
gave evidence. Some leading Anglican
clerics expressed the view that marriage
was a sacrament and that marriages were
therefore indissoluble, although this does
not necessarily seem to follow. Some went
so far as to regard an innocent person who
had divorced his wife or husband, as the
case might be, as guilty of adultery if he
or she entered into a second marriage. As I
understand their evidence, they would refuse to perform the marriage ceremony in
such a case, and they would also refuse
to receive a person, who had married a
second time after divorcing a guilty spouse,
into communion. ‘This attitude appears to
me to be more unforgiving than the Founder
of the Christian religion took up towards
the woman taken in adultery—which might
well be kept in view by those who profess
His religion. Representatives of even Presbyterian Churches differed fundamentally
as to the proper construction, or application,
of the words of Christ. The general conclusion of the Majority Report is thus expressed :

** The result is that we are unable to
find any general consensus of Christian
opinion, which would exclude any of the
questions stated above from being freely
considered. In view of the conflict of
opinion which has existed in all ages and
in all branches of the Christian Church,
among scholars and divines equally qualified to judge, and the fact that the State
must deal with all its citizens, whether
Christian, nominally Christian, or nonChristian, our conclusion is that we must
proceed to recommend the Legislature to
act upon an unfettered consideration of
what is best for the interest of the State,
society, and morality, and for that of
parties to suits and their families.”’

The Report also states that theological
differences had weighed little with the great
mass of the lay witnesses, and that amongst
those ‘‘ who feel them there are great differ
IIil

ences of opinion. With few exceptions the
lay witnesses pass them by, as if they concern theologians rather than practical legislation.”’ In the early Christian Church
under the Western and Eastern Emperors
there were the same acute differences of
opinion on the theological aspect, but the
legislation of the day permitted divorce, not
merely for infidelity but for many other
causes.

ROMAN CATHOLIC EVASIONS

While the Roman Catholic Church since
the eighth century has more or less consistently maintained that marriage was indissoluble, various devices have been resorted to for putting an end to the marriage
tie on the ground of the invalidity of the
matriage itself, even when contracted in
church. In his Medieval Church in Scotland, Bishop Dowden, who was the Episcopal Bishop of Edinburgh, describes the
state of matters immediately preceding the
Reformation :

“A man might be living happily in
wedlock for a score of years before some
accident revealed to him that his reputed
wife was a third cousin, and therefore no
real wife in the eye of the Church, and
that his children were illegitimate. But
the doctrine that affinity up to and including the fourth degree was an impediment to marriage vastly increased the
uncertainty whether a marriage was valid
or not. According to the Church, affinity
was created equally by illicit intercourse
and by marriage. An act of pre-nuptial
unchastity, let us suppose, on the part
of the man with a woman related to his
future wife in the fourth degree of consanguinity invalidated his marriage. It was
obviously possible for a man, by keeping
the evil secrets of his early life to himself,
to contract a marriage which he would be
able at any time to get declared null in
the consistorial court. Nor was it always
the man who took advantage of the ecclesiastical law in this respect.

The Council of Trent modified to some
extent the prohibitions of intermarriage,
IIZ

but on the evidence of Monsignor Moyes,
Prelate of the Roman Court, there are still
fifteen grounds upon which a marriage can
be declared null, even when regularly
entered into. Needless to say, only a very
few of these are recognized by the law of
England. Those not so recognized include
consanguinity in the third degree, affinity,
duress or violence affecting the liberty of
the consort, public decorum (if one or other
of the parties has been formally betrothed
to another), disparity of worship—e.g. the
marriage of a Christian and a non-Christian
—to mention only a few.

A modern instance of the application of
the impediment of duress is that of Miss
Vanderbilt, who married the Duke of Marlborough, and, after twenty-five years of
married life, divorced him in the American
Courts, and subsequently married a retired
French officer. Neither of the marriages
was celebrated in a Roman Catholic Church,
but as the lady wished to enter that
communion she brought a suit of annulment before the Roman Catholic Bishop of
Southwark. He granted an annulment on
the ground that the Duchess had been married under compulsion from her family, and
not of her own free will. The sacred Roman
Rota confirmed his judgment. Of course,
in law, the lady had been married quite
validly to her second husband, but the
Roman Church which she desired to enter
cotisidered that she was, in fact, living in
adultery if her first marriage was a legal
one, and this annulment was the only solution to her being received into their communion. In Catholic countries like Italy,
where there is no divorce, recourse is no
doubt often had to these fifteen methods of
setting aside a marriage, just as in the
medizeval times to which Bishop Dowden
referred.

PRIEST-RIDDEN ENGLAND

On this question of marriage reform England is, perhaps, the most priest-ridden of
all the existing States of Europe and it is
the clergy of her State Church that have
proved the chief obstacle to reform. A

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

section of them at present do not even recognize the validity of a decree of divorce
obtained on the sole ground of infidelity.
This appears to me to be all the more indefensible, as the 39 Articles, which still
constitute the creed of the Church of England, expressly negative the view that marriage is to ‘‘ be conducted as a Sacrament
of the Gospel.’”’ The 25th Article then proceeds, ‘‘ There are two Sacraments ordained
of Christ our Lord in the Gospel, that is to
say Baptism and the Supper of our Lord.”

Nor, on the other hand, do these priests
admit as valid more than a fraction of the
fifteen causes on which a marriage can be
annulled in those Roman Catholic countries
where no divorce is allowed by law. They are
even less liberal than the predominantly
Catholic country of Austria, which permits
divorces as between Protestants on various
grounds, although, as between Catholics, it
prohibits divorce. Christian communities
which are independent of the State can, of
course, make any rules they please to regulate the conduct of their own members. Such
regulations have no force or effect in law.
But it is intolerable that a section of a
Church which draws its revenues from the
State and is subject to its jurisdiction in
ecclesiastical matters should refuse to marry
couples to whose union there is no legal
impediment. I recognize, of course, that
vou cannot constrain consciences, but it is
part of the duty of a parish minister to offciate at marriages which parishioners desire
to take place in the parish church.

I am satisfied that a large majority of the
laity belonging to the Church of England
do not share the view that marriages are
indissoluble—nor was this the view of the
Reformers who founded it—and I feel sure
that still fewer of them subscribe to the
view that an act which has been sanctioned
by the law of the country constitutes a sin,
and apparently one which the Church in
their view should treat as unforgiveable.
Even in predominantly Catholic countries
divorce is recognized, not merely for infidelity, but for other conjugal offences that
they consider equally grave. France, Belgium, and even Portugal, are in this cateDIVORCE AND MARRIAGE REFORM II3

gory. It is surely time that England should permitting marriages to be annulled on
be brought abreast of all other civilized grounds which Protestants everywhere reStates except the two or three which reso- gard as quite unsubstantial and grossly
lutely refuse to sanction divorce, while unjust.

 

  

WHAT IS ; EUGENICS ?
LEONARD DARWIN

 

This “very admirable”’ and “authoritative little book,” 88 pages (Eugenics Review,
Jan., 1929), which ‘‘is the best brief answer yet published to the question the title asks”’
(Nature, Nov., 1929) is now published in six different editions.

The three editions in English are published by:

Es

z

5

3

f WATTS & CO., Johnson’s Court, London, E.C.4.

u GALTON PUBLISHING CO., 11 West 42nd St., New York. —

jz LOTHIAN PUBLISHING CO., Melbourne, Australia.

{ Spanish edition: Qué es la Eugenesia?

Introduction by Prof. Eugéne Pittard. Translated by Juan Comas Camps and
| Margarita Dellenbach. (Javier Morata, Tudescos 39, Madrid.)

:
3
E
E

German edition: Was ist Eugentk?
Introduction and translation by Dr. Felix Tietze. (Alfred Metzner, Gitschiner
Strasse 109, Berlin.)

French edition: Qu’est-ce que L’ Eugenique?
Introduction by Prof. Eugéne Pittard. Translated by Miss M. Vanderstichele.
(Librarie Felix Alcan, 108 Rue Saint Germain, Paris.)

Contents. I. Domestic Animals. II. Man’s Ancestors. III. Our Surroundings. IV. Hereditary
Qualities. V. Eugenic Methods. VI. The Men We Want. VII. Inferior Stocks. VIII. Birth Control.
IX. Sterilization. X. Feeblemindedness. XI. The Habitual Criminal. XII. Who Pays the Bill.
XIII. The Deterioration of Our Breed. XIV. Eugenics in the Future. XV. Bigger Families in Good
Stocks. XVI. Financial Aids to Parent Stocks. XVII. Selection in Marriage.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 2.
