VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION

Private Member’s Resolution

N February 28th, 1934, Mr. Hugh

Molson, M.P. for Doncaster, made

' the following speech in the House of
Commons:

I beg to move,

“‘ That this House considers that the facts set
out in the Report of the Departmental Committee
on Sterilization indicate a state of affairs calling
for action, and respectfully requests His Majesty’s
Government to give immediate consideration to
the unanimous recommendation of the committee
in favour of legislation permitting voluntary
sterilization in certain classes of cases.’

Eugenic sterilization has been discussed
in this country and elsewhere for many
years past, but it has only recently become
a question of practical politics owing to the
publication of the report of the Departmental
Committee upon this subject. I should like,
if I may, to congratulate the Minister of
Health on the foresight he displayed in
setting up that committee and in securing
the services of such distinguished men and
women to serve upon it. What, however,
is most remarkable is that this committee
has presented a unanimous report upon
what is admittedly a most controversial
subject, although unanimity among medical
persons is not very common.

The report unanimously recommends that
voluntary sterilization should be legalized
subject to certain safeguards. The persons
who may be sterilized are first, either mental
defectives or persons who have suffered
from mental disorder ; secondly, those who
suffer from some grave physical disability
which has been shown to be transmissible ;
and, thirdly, persons in whose case there is
evidence that he or she is likely to transmit
mental defect or disorder. Sterilization in
these cases is to be permissible in the first
place if the patient makes application for it ;
secondly, if it is recommended by two
medical practitioners ; and thirdly, if the
Minister of Health, after considering their
certificates, gives his approval.

47

In this House we are divided into parties,
largely because we disagree among ourselves
on what kind of social and political organization is most likely to reduce the amount of
human suffering in the world. This afternoon we are discussing the question of those
who come into the world and start life
without the normal equipment with which
most men and women are endowed ; people
who would not be able to live a normal life
in any conceivable organization of society,
however it might be reformed and improved.
We are discussing to-night the question of
those of whom it might be said,

‘Good were it for that man if he had
never been born.”

The first point which I wish to establish
is that mental deficiency or disorder is to a
large extent hereditary. There is already
a great volume of evidence both in this
country and abroad which tends to show
that there is a likelihood of mental defect
being transmitted. In view of this evidence
it is not surprising that all the witnesses who
appeared before the Departmental Committee were of opinion that heredity was an
important factor in bringing about these
conditions. Certain researches have been
made in foreign countries, and I will quote
a couple of examples. At Rostock in Mecklenburg it was found that 67°6 per cent. of
the inmates of an institution had one or two
parents mentally defective. At Renton, in
the United States of America, out of 1,000
cases of mental deficiency, only 350 had
both parents normal.

Not satisfied with this, however, the
Departmental Committee made an investigation itselt, one which was of special interest
because most of the researches that had been
made before had investigated the parentage
of mental defectives. This research was
carried out through the agency of local
authorities in England, who investigated the
children of mental defectives, and produced
48 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

some figures which are of extraordinary
interest. A group of 3,733 parents investigated had 8,841 children. Of these no less
than 2,001, or 22°5 per cent., had died. If I
may make a slight digression in passing,
apart from the question of mental deficiency,
we find among the children of mental
defectives this abnormally high rate of
mortality. Of those who survived, grouping
together defective and retarded children
between the ages of 7 and 13, the percentage
of sub-normal children was 40°4. In the
group of children over 13 that proportion
had risen to 45°4 per cent.

It may be said that all this evidence only
goes to show that in point of fact a large
proportion of the children of mental defectives are themselves mentally defective, and
that it does not prove that it is due to heredity. The suggestion may be put forward
that the condition may to some extent be
due to environment. In the first place, there
is no antithesis at all between heredity and
environment. It is recognized that in the
majority of cases there is some predisposition
which has been acquired by heredity and
then, where the environment is unfavourable, complete mental deficiency occurs.
Drs. Penrose and Turner made a special
investigation of a number of cases and found
that in their opinion 9 per cent. only were
defective for purely environmental reasons ;
29 per cent. were defective for reasons of
heredity only, and the remaining 62 per
cent. were mentally defective on account of a
combination of heredity and environment.

Heredity and environment go hand in
hand. The child is. born with some predisposition to mental deficiency, and then
the sordid, the squalid, in many cases the
appalling environment of a house looked
after and kept by a mentally defective woman
or man results in a child being stunted in
mind as well as in body. It is therefore a
part of my case that even if it were not the
fact—which, I think, I have shown—that
mental deficiency is largely hereditary, it
would still be undesirable for mentally
defective persons to have children. Upon
this point the Report of the Board of Control
for the year 1928 is almost conclusive :

“It can hardly be denied that the 200,000
defectives who must remain in the community
are wholly unfitted for parentage. Though it does
not necessarily follow that the children of defective
parents will themselves be defective, they are
liable to be exposed to the miseries and hardship
of being brought up by a mother or father incapable of self-control, who will almost certainly neglect
them and may, by reason of mental instability
and ungovernable temper, aggravate by cruelty
the results of ignorance and neglect.”

I claim that it is right that the State
should not only enable but encourage
parents of that kind to refrain from incurring
the responsibility of having children.

Perhaps I might give one striking case
where environment and heredity have gone
hand in hand. I will quote from the memorandum submitted to the Committee by the
National Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Children. In this case the family
consisted of mother, father, and six children.
The mother was mentally affected and also
two of the children, and a boy aged 13 and
a girl of 1m were mentally deficient and
suffering from paralysis. In the case of the
boy the society were able to put him into a
home and the result is that he has improved
both mentally and physically. No home
could be found for the girl and the result is
that she has grown steadily worse. She is
now almost completely paralysed and has
become practically an imbecile.

Although it is not part of my case to
prove that mental deficients are more fertile
than other people, perhaps I might be
allowed to quote the case of a family where
there was a strong taint of mental deficiency,
insanity and epilepsy. The mother had 17
children. The first two, who were illegitimate, died of convulsions in infancy. The
third, a daughter, was mentally deficient
and is now in an institution. The fourth,
a son, was certified as an imbecile and died
at the age of 11. The fifth was a son, certified
as a mental defective and is now in an
institution. The sixth was a daughter, an
imbecile. The seventh was a daughter, who
died at the age of 11 months. The eighth
was a son, certified as an imbecile. It is only
at the ninth child that we find the child
living and in service. The tenth child died
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION 49

in infancy. The eleventh child is of low
mentality, the twelfth is of average intelligence, the thirteenth is now in an institution,
the fourteenth is in an institution, the
fifteenth was recently admitted to an
institution, and the sixteenth and the seventeenth children are so small that it is not
yet known whether or not they are normal.

Apart from the strong tendency to
mental deficiency, it is from these same
stocks that there come those who compose
our social problem group. They not only
contribute to those who are filling our
mental homes, our asylums, our hospitals,
our infirmaries, our gaols and our workhouses, but they are also contributing a
large proportion of the criminal element of
the population, especially of those who are
charged with offences most repellent to
ordinary people. Of the cases of criminal
and indecent assaults dealt with by the
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Children, about one-half of the girls involved
were feeble-minded, while in the case of the
males it was exactly one-half. As will be
recognized by anyone who has sat on a
public assistance committee, it is these
stocks which contribute a vast quantity of
the unorganized, unskilled casual labour
which is so often upon the rates and which so
often undercuts a higher, more skilled and
better type of labour. So much for the
question of mental deficiency.

Cases where the mind and the intelligence
have not fully developed raise then one
question which I have dealt with; cases
where the mind has developed normally up
to a certain point and then become disordered raise quite a separate question. In
this class there are two particular forms of
insanity, both of them fairly common, in
which it has been almost proved—I do not
wish to overstate my case—that the taint is
hereditary. In the case of schizophrenia, in
Bavaria 5°8 per thousand of the population
are affected, and it has been shown there by
figures that where one parent is affected
Io per cent. of the offspring are insane and
34 to 40 per cent. are mildly affected.
Therefore, half the offspring of one single
person suffering from schizophrenia are to a

D

greater or lesser extent affected, and these
in turn are likely to transmit the taint to
another generation. In the case of another
common form of insanity, manic depressive
insanity, the proportion is slightly less, but
still high, 4:1 per thousand. Sixty to 66
per cent. of the children are likely to be
affected if one parent suffers from this form
of insanity, but if both are affected probably
100 per cent. will be affected.

Let me say a few words about the giving
of valid consent on the part of the patient.
In the case of manic depressive insanity
there is, first of all, mania, then acute
depression, and then a normal and lucid
interval, during which time there is no
question that the patient is able fully to
understand what is involved by sterilization,
and in such cases perfectly valid consent
could be given. In the case of schizophrenia
it is not suggested that any sterilization
could take place while the person is actually
suffering from that disease. It can only be
when such person can be safely released
from the institution that the question of a
voluntary operation for sterilization will
arise.

I have referred to cases of mental deficiency and insanity, but there is a third class
of people concerned, and I am not sure that
they do not present the strongest case of all
for legalizing sterilization. I refer to the
carriers who, in the words of the report, are
“ persons whose family history gives reasonable grounds for belief that they may transmit mental disorder or defect.”” Those are
the same people in whose family there is
some taint of insanity. Carriers are probably
1e times as numerous as affected people.
In their case there can be no question of the
reality of consent. The safeguard that a
certificate of two medical practitioners is
needed will make certain that it will not be
undue sensitiveness on the part of these
persons which causes them to apply for
sterilization. I have no doubt that most
hon. Members know of cases of people,
perfectly normal and perfectly sane, who
refrain from marriage and from having
children because they know that some parent
or some uncle or other relative has suffered
50 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

from insanity, and they feel very strongly
the responsibility and the danger of transmitting to offspring the misfortune that they
have seen in their parents or relatives. In
regard to people with so high a sense of
civic and parental responsibility, who do
not desire to have children to whom they
might unwittingly transmit so appalling an
affliction, are we justified in refusing them
the right to save themselves and their
possible children from any such danger?

There is also the question of physical
infirmity—deaf mutes and blind persons.
I went over a school for deaf mutes and
discussed this matter of sterilization, long
before the Report of the Commission came
out, with a gentleman who had given up the
whole of his life to devoted service in the
interests of one of the most unfortunate
communities in our midst, and he told me
that, from his own personal experience and
observation, he thought the danger of these
disabilities being transmitted was very
great, and that he was strongly in favour of
legalizing sterilization. My hon. and gallant
Friend who will second the Motion, if time
allows later in the evening, will deal in some
detail with the procedure recommended by
the committee and the safeguards against
abuses.

I see that on the Order Paper, in the name
of my hon. Friend the Member for Mile End
(Dr. O’Donovan), there is a reasoned Amendment which suggests that what is needed is a
further Departmental Committee to investigate the present legal position in regard to
sterilization. I could have wished and
expected that my hon. Friend’s Amendment would be less timid than it appears to
be. Whether one is opposed to the principle
of sterilization or not I cannot see that any
good purpose would be served by having a

further inquiry, more particularly as there
will be no chance of that inquiry being
conclusive. Whether voluntary eugenic
sterilization is legal or not is not known,,.
because there is no decided case upon the
subject. Therefore, no inquiry could make
the law on the subject certain. If we are in
favour of eugenic sterilization, let us legislate
and make the law certain. If we are against
it, then let us equally legislate and make the
law certain.

In the Motion which my friends and I
are putting before the House we do not put
foremost in our arguments the consideration
of the cost to the community of the increasing
number of mental defectives and insane
persons, great as that burden is, The capital
cost of a bed for each person in one of these
institutions is about £400, and the weekly
cost of maintaining them there is 25s., or
more than an unemployed man and his wife
cost. The cost of mental deficiency service
last year was over {1,800,000 and of mental
hospitals over £8,000,000. Important as
that point is, we do not over-stress it. Nor
do we emphasize overmuch the position of
the potential parent. We are not in any way
seeking to restrict the right of the individual
to parenthood, much as we may desire them
to regard it less as a right than as a responsibility. Rather we make our appeal to the
House in the name of the children, the
unborn children. We ask that an operation,
which even now is legal and not uncommon,
if the purpose of it is to prevent danger to
the life of the mother, should be equally made
legal if the purpose of the operation is to
prevent the danger of being born to the
afflicted and unwanted child, whose whole
life in this world must be one of misery and
humiliation.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 1
