THE

EUGENICS REVIEW

EUGENICS AND THE WAR.}
By THEODORE G. CHAMBERS.

THE subject of war, in its biological, sociological and ethical
aspects, has been discussed by many men through many years,
and the conclusions at which they have arrived merely confirm
the proverb ‘‘ Tot homines tot sententiz.’’ Let us consider, in
the first place, the relationship between Eugenics and War,
and determine whether, and to what extent, the subject may be
a legitimate field for discussion by this Society. The science
of eugenics is defined by a few words quoted from Galton, which
are so wisely reprinted on the title page of every number of
The Eugenics Review. ‘‘ Eugenics is the study of agencies
under social control that may improve or impair the racial
qualities of future generations, either physically or mentally.”’

The extent to which, in our own age, the condition of war
can be said to be under social control is a question for argument.
It may be that war partakes rather of the nature of a natural
catastrophe or cataclysm than a conscious determined act. The
larger the social groups and the more complex the social
organisms which find themselves in a condition of war, the
more do we seem to see the hand of fate and the inevitability of
the conflict. We seem to see the gradual accumulation of
antagonisms, the slow growth of incompatible ideals, a progressive difference of purpose foreshadowing only one conceivable end—trial by battle. So vast and varied are the forces,
so indeterminate their origin, and so complex the organisms in
which they develop, that it is impossible to define first causes

1N.B.—A lecture delivered on October 8th, 1914, before the Eugenics Education
Society, at the Grafton Galleries, London.
272 EUGENICS REVIEW.

or to locate responsibilities. All that can be said with certainty
is that man, with his inherited instincts, and his acquired
characteristics, is the medium through which the forces operate
which produce war and that it is upon the race in the aggregate
that the burden falls. War may be inevitable, but the fact
remains that we can control the methods by which we prepare
for and conduct it; and thus far we can influence in no small
degree the effect it may have upon the racial qualities of future
generations.

War has been an ever-recurring phenomena from the
beginning. Since life was, the condition of war has never been
long absent. War appeals to the most deep-rooted instincts.
It appeals to the highest as well as to the lowest instincts of
man. As McDougall says, ‘‘ The instinct of pugnacity has
played a part second to none in the evolution of social organisation. It has been operative in the emotion of revenge and in
the moral indignation which have led to the growth and maintenance of every system of criminal law and every code of
punishment. In the present age it operates more powerfully
than any instinct in producing demonstrations of collective
emotion and action on a great scale. The races of men
certainly differ greatly in respect to the innate strength of this
instinct; but there is no reason to think that it has grown
weaker among ourselves under centuries of civilisation; rather
it is probable that it is stronger in the European peoples than it
was in primitive man.’’ Every war is the result of this collective pugnacity. The widespread feeling of pleasure in war
comes from the gratification of this natural instinct.

The stern joy which warriors feel,

In foemen worthy of their steel.
says Scott. The same instinctive delight in war is expressed in
one of Stephen Graham’s recent letters from the East. He
reports a conversation with a young Russian officer. ‘‘ There
is a certain beauty in war, in going to death with songs,’ said
Graham to the officer. The reply was, ‘‘I would even say
there is no greater beauty.’’ The joy of war is still, as it always
has been, a constant theme with those to whose deep-rooted
instincts it appeals. Even the most sober-minded appear to be
EUGENICS AND THE WAR. 273

caught by the martial spirit and to find in war something which
appeals intensely to their instincts. The late Professor Cramb,
in his lectures on ‘‘ Germany and England,”’ says, ‘‘ And if the
dire event of a war with Germany—if it is a dire event—should
ever occur, there shall be seen upon this earth of ours a conflict
which, beyond all others, will recall that description of the great
Greek wars :

Heroes in battle with heroes,

And above them the wrathful gods.

And one can imagine the ancient mighty deity of all the
Teutonic kindred, throned above the clouds, looking serenely
down upon that conflict, upon his favourite children, the
English and the Germans, locked in a death struggle, smiling
upon the heroism of that struggle, the heroism of the children
of Odin, the war god.”’

Language such as this would indicate an atmosphere in which
the war spirit must thrive and flourish. But though the mere
notion of war appeals, it is in the actual environment of war,
when excitement reigns supreme, that the most unexpected
deep-seated instincts receive a stimulus. Lust, cruelty, and
blood-thirstiness on the one hand; sympathy, courage and
affection on the other, seem to be intensified. War brings out
into bold relief the intensest emotions of good and evil. War
tears off the decent garments of custom and leaves the soul
naked. There is no greater revealer of the heart of man.

It is to these primitive, uncontrolled instincts of man that the
apologist for war almost invariably appeals. Nietzsche, in a note
on the indispensable nature of war, says, ‘‘It is nothing but
fanaticism and beautiful soulism to expect very much (or even
much only) from humanity when it has forgotten how to wage
war. For the present, we know of no other means whereby the
rough energy of the camp, the deep impersonal hatred, the
cold-bloodedness of murder with a good conscience, the general
ardour of the system in the destruction of the enemy, the proud
indifference to great losses, to one’s own existence and that of
one’s friends, can be as forcibly and certainly communicated
to enervated nations as is done in every great war.’? The argument appears to be that war gives man something which
274 EUGENICS REVIEW.

peace cannot give, and that the natural instincts must be satisfied
regardless of the ethical factor and of the consequences to others.
The satisfaction of the natural instincts by more civilised
methods and in a manner less injurious to others is not considered by Nietzsche to be adequate. He says, ‘‘ The English
of to-day, who appear on the whole to have also renounced war,
adopt other means, in order to generate anew those vanishing
forces, namely, the dangerous exploring expeditions, sea
voyages and mountaineerings, nominally undertaken for scientific purposes, but in reality to bring home surplus strength from
adventures and dangers of all kinds.’’ We may doubt whether
the English have any such conscious purpose in their excursions
to the poles, their voyages and their mountain ascents, their
wild game expeditions and their explorations. But these
ventures undoubtedly provide the stimulus for the instinct of
pugnacity, and while giving intense satisfaction to the individual, are comparatively inocuous to others.

McDougall shows that the instinct of emulation tends to
replace the instinct of pugnacity, but that, as regards nations,
it will be a long time before the change will eliminate international war. He shows that individual pugnacity has already
to a large extent been checked. Within highly organised
communities, individual combat, and even expressions of
personal anger, may be almost completely suppressed. ‘* At
the present time,’’ he says, ‘‘ custom is only just beginning to
exert some control over international pugnacity and we are still
very far from the time when international law, following in the
wake of custom, will render the pugnacity of nations as needless
as that of the individuals of highly civilised states, and physical
combats between them as relatively infrequent.’’ At the
same time he sounds a note of warning when he says that
this tendency will bring to an end what has been an important, probably the most important, factor of progressive
evolution of human nature, namely, the selection of the fit and
the extermination of the less fit (among both individuals and
societies) resulting from their conflicts with one another. (He
suggests that it is to this tendency that the attempt to form a
science of eugenics owes its importance.)
EUGENICS AND THE WAR. 275

Spencer, in his ‘‘ Data of Ethics,’’ ventures to prophesy
a cessation of war. In his dissertation on the apparently
permanent opposition between egoism and altruism, he ‘says,
** If the idea of all was the securing of others’ pleasure, obviously
war would cease. Far off as seems such a state, yet every one
of the factors counted on to produce it may already be traced in
operation amongst those of highest natures. What now in
them is occasional and feeble, may be expected with further
evolution to become habitual and strong; and what now
characterises the exceptionally high may be expected eventually
to characterise all. For that which the best human nature is
capable of is within the reach of human nature at large.”’
Spencer appears to have realised that, at least in 1879, such
views would not gain general acceptance. He says, ‘‘ That
these conclusions will meet with any considerable acceptance is
improbable. Neither with current ideas, nor with current sentiments, are they sufficiently congruous.’’ But he ventures to
suggest that ‘‘ Some may not think it absurd to believe that a
rationalised version of its ethical principles will eventually be
acted upon.”’

The school of militarists, while admitting the tendency
towards at least a desire for peace, view the prospect with much
concern, and honestly believe it to be disastrous to the moral
and physical development of the race. Bernhardi says, ‘‘ Our
people must learn to see that the maintenance of peace never
can or may be the goal of a policy. The inevitableness, the
idealism and the blessing of war, as an indispensable and
stimulating law of development, must be repeatedly emphasised.”
‘* Nevertheless,’’ he continues with a note of regret, “‘ long
periods of war, far from convincing men of the necessity of war,
have, on the contrary, always revived the wish to exclude war,
where possible, from the political intercourse of nations.”’
Treitschke is particularly scornful towards the pacifist views. ‘* It
has always been,”’ he says, ‘‘ the weary, spiritless and exhausted
ages which have played with the dream of perpetual peace.”’
The view that what has been and is must therefore be right,
and that any betterment is but the dream of fanatics, is held by
very many. ‘‘ Wars are terrible,’”’ says Hegel, “* but necessary,
276 EUGENICS REVIEW.

for they save the state from social petrifaction and stagnation.
It is well that the transitoriness of the goods of this world is
not only preached, but is learned by experience. War alone
teaches this lesson.”’

It is not necessary to make further quotations to indicate
the general trend of the arguments of this type. For the
militarist point of view, we might quote profusely from both
German and Anglo-Saxon writers. Mahan, Lea and Roosevelt
in America, equally with Moltke, Treitschke and Bernhardi in
Germany, voice the belief in the efficiency of war as a beneficial
social agency. Even the pacifist school admits that in the past
at least war may have played a part, and a necessary part, in the
evolution of the race, and there are few who do not recognise
that in our present stage of development, whatever may be the
case in the future, war may be justifiable,, and is still inevitable.

While we may foreshadow the eventual abandonment of
war by man, though we may prophesy that the day may come
when war between nations will be as rare as duelling is in
England to-day, it must be evident to the practical mind that
such a day is still far away. It must be generally admitted that
the human race is still too little advanced for us to expect a
cessation of war in the near future. War is still necessary, still
justifiable in given conditions. | Even Spencer changed his
view of militancy considerably. From the doctrine: never
fight unless actually attacked, he came to admit the necessity
and rightfulness of militancy from the point of view of relative,
though not of absolute ethics. We can agree with Bernhardt
when he says ‘‘ The individual can perform no nobler moral
action than to pledge his life on his convictions, and to devote
his own existence to the cause which he serves, or even to the
conception of the value of ideals as to personal morality.
Similarly, nations and states can achieve no loftier consummation than to stake their whole power on upholding their
independence, their honour and their reputation.’’ We do not
think there is a living man in whose breast there is no response

to Addison’s words in Cato:

My voice is still for war!
Gods! Can a Roman senate long debate
Which of the two to choose, slavery or death!
EUGENICS AND THE WAR. 277

Whatever horror we may feel when we think of war, however
much we may recoil from it, we have to realise that the world
has not yet reached a stage of development in which it can be
dispensed with. We must all agree with the sentiment expressed in Van Dyke’s words on the statute of General
Sherman :

This is the soldier brave enough to tell

The glory-dazzled world that “ war is hell.”

Lover of peace, he looks beyond the strife,

And rides through hell to save his country’s life.

The inevitability of war and justification for war in the era
in which we ourselves live is amply proved by the circumstances
of the present war. England declared war upon Germany on
the 4th of August last owing to the summary rejection by the
German Government of our request that she should respect the
neutrality of Belgium, in accordance with a treaty to which she,
with ourselves and France, had been parties. Here was a
question of national good faith involving the existence of our
national honour. It was utterly impossible to stand by and see
a small nation crushed out of existence in defiance of international pledges, in order to satisfy the lust of power of one
European State. Here was a case where no man of honour or
of spirit, no man who cherished any ideal worthy of the name,
could fail to advocate war. No Government could have
retained office for a single day after the facts became known had
it hesitated to appeal to the ultimate test of arms.*

But, while admitting the justification of war for the maintenance of high ideals, for preservation of liberty and for
justice (and, in consequence, the inevitability of war in the
present state of civilisation) we must deny any justification of
wars of aggression, wars for power, and wars for greed, for
extension of empire or the power to impose ideals upon others,
arguments in favour of war which are put forward by the school
which is represented by Treitschke, Bernhardi and other Teutonic
Militarists. Their attitude is that war is such a good thing in

* It is not suggested that the defence of the neutrality of Belgium was the sole, or even
the principal, cause of the War, but it was the formal and official immediate cause, and it
amply provides the justification for the action of Great Britain and shows the inevitability
of our participation in the War.
278 EUGENICS REVIEW.

itself, so beneficial to man, that it is justifiable quite apart from
the purpose for which it is waged. A few quotations from
Bernhardi will indicate the trend of his opinions, which may be
taken as representative of a considerable school of militarists.

‘““ Might is at once the supreme right and the dispute as to
what is right is decided by the arbitrament of war. War gives
a biologically just decision, since its decisions rest on the very
nature of things.’’

‘War is a biological necessity of the first importance, a
regulative element in the life of mankind which cannot be dispensed with, since without it an unhealthy development will
follow, which excludes every advancement of the race and
therefore all real civilisation.’’

** The law of the stronger holds good everywhere. Those
forms survive which are able to procure themselves the most
favourable conditions of life, and to assert themselves in the
universal economy of nature. The weaker succumb. This
struggle is regulated and restrained by the unconscious sway of
biological laws.”’ |

All through Bernhardi’s writings is shown an _ overwhelming belief in Germany’s historic mission to impose her
Government and culture on others. The only alternative that
he can see to world power is downfall. In the merciless struggle
for existence with which his mind is obsessed, there are only
two courses open: death or domination. But all this conception of dominant empire, of bureaucratic government, of imposed
German-made moralities and culture and custom upon others is
based on a false application of the principles of evolution.
Survival is to Bernhardi the sole test of right. His is a plea
for national egoism bolstered up by a false appeal to the
principles of evolution.

That this false conception of evolution is not confined to
Bernhardi and Germany may be seen from an article in the
‘Nineteenth Century ’’ for July, by H. F. Wyatt. This
article originally appeared in the ‘‘ Nineteenth Century ’’ for
April, 1911. I refer to it mainly because it has been reprinted
at a moment when the mind of the country must be particularly
susceptible to any teaching on the subject of war, and conseEUGENICS AND THE WAR. 279

quently any erroneous teaching (if it is erroneous) is the more
dangerous. |

Wyatt speaks of the biological law of competition as still
ruling the destinies of nations as well as of individual men.
‘* Victory in war,’’ he says, is the method by which, in the
economy of God’s providence, the sound nation supersedes
the unsound. ‘‘ The survival of the fittest means the survival
of the ethically best.’’ Again, in a recent letter to the Times
of September 25th, the Bishop of Down says, ‘‘ The truth is
that modern Germany is animated by a totally different spirit.
That spirit is simply Darwinism turned into an ethical
princtple.’’

Huxley, in his Romanes Lecture of 1893, appears to have
been influenced to some extent by a similar conception of
evolution. He says, ‘‘ Let us understand once for all that the
ethical progress of society depends not on imitating the
cosmic progress, still less in running away from it, but in
combating it.’’ It is surely rash to assume that there is
antagonism between the cosmic process and ethical principles.
Doctor Sarolea, in his ‘‘ Anglo-German Problem,” says, ‘‘ In
our day we see many militarists still adducing Darwin as the
exponent of a military philosophy. There could be no more
shallow and confused interpretation of the Darwinian theory
as applied to human society. For no thoughtful Darwinian
would be prepared to admit that the fittest are the most warlike,
or that the struggle for life must necessarily take the form of
war. On the contrary, a Darwinian would remind us that war
is the application of anti-Darwinian principles, and that war,
like emigration, by eliminating the young and the brave, tends
to the survival of the most unfit. To the english Darwinian
philosopher, the struggle for life takes many forms, and the
decisive struggle for life in modern humanity is not the external
and superficial struggle of the battlefield, but the permanent
and deeper internal struggle of the city, of the laboratory, of
the workshop, of the home, of the soul, the struggle for political
rights or legal rights, the struggle for religous freedom, the
economic struggle for a living, or for a higher standard of
living, the struggle for truth.”’ Although Doctor Sarolea
280 EUGENICS REVIEW.

describes the process in a somewhat inverted form, he shows,
I think, a clear and true conception of the main principle of
evolution—that environment, in its widest and fullest sense is
the selective agent eliminating that which is not adaptable
and tending to retain and multiply that which is adaptable, and
he shows a keen appreciation of the wide range of the selective
power of the modern social environment.

It cannot, however, be too much emphasised that the law
of evolution by variation and selection is a natural law in precisely the same category as the law of gravity or the law of the
conservation of energy. As a law it has no more to do with
ethics than a problem in Euclid has to do with religion. To
suggest that the law of evolution is antagonistic to ethical principles is equivalent to saying that the law of gravity is contrary
to ethical principles because the apple falls when it comes off
the tree. It is possible that the expressions ‘‘ struggle for
existence’ and ‘‘ survival of the fittest,’? containing, as they
do, a suggestion of conscious effort and of ethical significance
have been to some extent responsible for a certain amount of
popular misconception. Put in its simplest form, the
Darwinian hypothesis is merely this :—

(1) Given suitable conditions, organisms reproduce themselves and increase in numbers.

(2) The numbers may become so great that it is impossible
for all to survive.

(3) Those survive, or tend to survive, which are most
adapted to their environment.

(4) It is the environment which thus governs selection, is,
in fact, the selective agent.

All that the expression ‘‘ struggle for existence ’’ means is
that, in the process of selection, one may be taken and the other
left. There is not implied any conscious rivalry, any conscious
competition, such as may be imported into the word
‘ struggle.’’ In the same way, the expression “‘ the survival
of the fittest ’? means no more than the survival of that which is
selected. Both these expressions have, from the days of their
first use, invited misinterpretation through the sense which may
be read into them of conscious action and ethical meaning. It

29
EUGENICS AND THE WAR. 281

is the introduction of the conception that that which survives
has a moral right to survive, which appears to have led to the
Bernhardi philosophy of might being right because it survives,
and for that reason alone. What has to be realised to-day—
and this seems to me to be the great lesson to be learned from a
study of the principles of evolution—is that man has a very considerable power to determine what is to survive. If this be true
a colossal responsibility rests upon man. He may by his
actions cause to survive that which he knows to be good or that
which he knows to be evil. By his influence upon environment
he posseses a considerable control. He may create survival
values. The beneficial effect of his influence in this direction
will depend entirely upon his ethical principles. Just as man
might, if he chose, breed hideous, gruesome beasts by selection,
and thus produce horrors, so he can by his influence over the
environment of his own race give survival value to base and
evil characteristics, and thus cause the deterioration of the race.
He is working within the laws of evolution. He may, on the
other hand, so influence environment as to tend to give survival
value to the highest and noblest characteristics, and thus, working within the same laws, he is raising the ethical standard of
the race. Because the Germans have, to a large extent, glorified
brute force, and have tried to set up an environment which would
give brute force a survival value, it is scarcely fair to the
Darwinian hypothesis to say, as the Bishop of Down says, that
they have turned Darwinism into an ethical principle.

Accepting the inevitability of war, let us now consider the
racial effect of war and preparation for war. And let us see to
what extent man may influence this effect by the exercise of
reason. For if war be justifiable, and at least in our era inevitable, it is desirable that we should do what lies in our power
to mitigate any bad racial effects it may have.

When we come to a consideration of the actual effect of war
upon the race, as far as it can be judged, there would seem to be
much conflicting evidence. There would appear to be a general
concensus of opinion that preparation for war is beneficial. It
sets a high physical standard and it trains to that standard.
It increases the moral of the nation and may give survival value
282 EUGENICS REVIEW.

to certain desirable characteristics. As a selective agency, it is
also possibly advantageous. It must certainly tend to give
many families a healthier environment than they would otherwise have, and in this direction it must improve the health of
the nation. We may also remember that to be prepared for
war is one of the most effectual means of preserving peace and
thus promoting the welfare of the race. It is also necessary to
be prepared for war if a State desires to possess power for good
in the councils of nations. Between universal training and a
large standing army there is a vast difference from the racial
standpoint. A large standing army, if it leads, as it does in
many instances, to the foregoing of the marriage tie and to
promiscuous sexual intercourse, must be prejudicial to the
future welfare of the race.

The racial effect of actual war would seem to vary greatly.
Certainly there are wide differences of opinion between investigators. It is so short a time since Chancellor Starr Jordan read
a paper before the Society on ‘‘ Eugenics and War’? that the
principle arguments to show that war is dysgenic will still be in
your memory. You will remember the main line of his argument. War tends to deplete the best stock in a nation. Ifa
nation has destroyed its bravest, its most courageous, it most
soldierly men, it will cease to breed that kind of man. You will
remember the examples he drew from history, how he attributed
the decay of the Roman Empire to its incessant wars; how the
Thirty Years War injured Germany by killing off nearly twothirds of the people; how the Napoleonic wars had the effect of
lowering the average stature in France, and other examples of a
similar kind.

This line of thought is also adopted in a recent article in
the ‘‘ New Statesman.’ Speaking of Rome, the writer says
the Recruiting Officer rejected the halt and the blind, the feeblekneed, the easily fatigued, saying, though he did not know it,
“* You are not good enough to be a Roman soldier: stay at
home and be a Roman father.’’ Dr. Starr Jordan, however,
admits that there was a time when the struggle of armies resulted
in a survival of the fittest, when the race was indeed to the swift
and the battle to the strong, but he considers that modern conEUGENICS AND THE WAR. 283

ditions render war almost entirely a process of reversed selection.

Nietzsche, in ‘‘ Human, all ‘Too Human,”’ appears fully
to recognise that war may be destructive of much that is best.
He says: ‘‘ The greatest disadvantage of the national army,
now so much glorified, lies in the squandering of men of the
highest civilisation; it is only by the favourableness of all
circumstances that there are such men at all; how carefully and
anxiously should we deal with them, since long periods are
required to create the chance conditions for the production of
such delicately organised brains. But as the Greeks wallowed
in the blood of Greeks, so do Europeans now in the blood of
Europeans; and, indeed, taken relatively, it is the most highly
cultivated who are sacrificed, those who promise an abundant
and excellent posterity ; for such stand in the front of the battle
as commanders, and also expose themselves to most danger, by
reason of their higher ambition.”’ It would be difficult to find
a more clear and definite notion of the dysgenic aspect of war
than this.

Sir Ronald Ross has recently questioned the soundness of
Dr. Starr Jordan’s views. He says that there is not sufficient
proof that warlike nations deteriorate to enable any general law
to be laid down. He shows that often the most virile periods.
followed great wars, as, for example, the wars of the roses and
the wars of Frederick the Great. He urges that fine races, such
as the Zulus and the Masai of Africa, and the Sikhs of India,
are pre-eminently warlike races and fine races. He might also
look nearer home and draw attention to the magnificent physique
of the Scottish Clans, which, till one hundred and fifty years.
ago, were incessantly fighting and killing one another. Sir
Ronald Ross concludes that war is a dreadful thing, but nevertheless it may quite possibly be utilised by nature for raising
racial standards.

McDougall gives a vivid instance of the racial benefit of
war. He says, ‘‘ As one travels up any of the large rivers of
Borneo, one meets with tribes that are successively more war-.
like. In the coast regions are peaceful communities which
never fight, save in self-defence, and then with but poor success ;

’
284 EUGENICS REVIEW.

while in the central regions, where the rivers take their rise, are
a number of extremely warlike tribes, whose raids have been
a constant source of terror to the communities settled in the
lower regions of the rivers.’’ Comparing the peace-loving with
the warlike tribes, he says, ‘‘ In almost all respects the advantage in character lies with the warlike tribes. Their houses are
better built, larger and cleaner. Their domestic morality is
superior. They are physically stronger and braver, and
physically and mentally more active and in general are more
trustworthy.’’

I am afraid my conclusions are somewhat indefinite. The
truth on the whole matter is probably to be found, as usual,
between the extreme opinions. It is probably true to say that
every case must be considered on its merits, that the eugenic
and dysgenic effects of war are infinitely varied according to
circumstances.

It is probable that the dysgenic effect of war is far greater
to-day than it was in primitive times. It may be urged that
while individual and tribal combat may have been eugenic, the
conditions of war between large groups, under modern conditions of mobility and machine power, are mainly dysgenic.
The subject is so large and the conditions so variable, the consequences so far-reaching and indeterminable, that it is impossible to dogmatise. It is, however, safe to say this: war under
modern conditions contains a great number of dysgenic
influences. Let us therefore look to these and see to what
extent we may mitigate these influences by the application of
sound principles with common sense. For the sake of convenience, a constructive eugenic policy in time of war must be
applied to two classes, the combatants and the non-combatants.

THE COMBATANTS.

The main dysgenic effect upon the combatants is the killing
of a high percentage of the best of the nation. Every regulation, every invention, which in war must reduce the dysgenic
effect ought to be adopted. Now the actual deaths due to war
are less numerous than most people imagine. Mulhall gives the
loss to Europe in wars from 1790 to 1880, a period of go years,
EUGENICS AND THE WAR. 285

as under 34 million men. It might be useful to consider these
figures in comparison with deaths by preventible disease and
preventible infant mortality in Europe during the same period.

But of these deaths from war, the vastly greater proportion
are due to sickness. In the Crimean war, 1854-56, out of
1,460,500 who took the field, 51,945 were killed in battle, 66,397
died of wounds, while 491,455 died of sickness, the total loss
being 609,797. |

In the Franco-Prussian War, 1870-1871, out of 1,713,000
who took the field, 60,782 were killed, 46,710 died of wounds,
59,259 died of sickness, the total loss being 166,751.

These two instances serve well to show the effect of the
circumstances in different cases. The Crimean War was
fought under the worst conditions it is possible to imagine as
regards nursing and surgery. By the date of the FrancoPrussian War, immense strides had been made in the methods
of dealing with wounds in the field. Chloroform was employed
on both sides; nursing had improved. Since the FrancoPrussian War, antiseptic treatment has been introduced, and
we have seen a gradual but steady improvement which
culminated in the close attention paid to both military and naval
surgery by the Japanese in their war with Russia. It is credibly
stated that when a Japanese warship was shortly going into
action the men were all ordered to take a bath with some disinfectant and to don clean freshly boiled underclothing. Thus
they substantially guaranteed that the operations performed on
them by the Russian missiles were aseptic. Without further
extending this question, it is necessary to urge that even to-day
far too little attention is being given by the nations which
consider themselves the most civilised in the world to this aspect
of war. From the racial standpoint, it is of the highest
importance, and no monetary cost should be allowed to stand
in the way of the most complete and ample provision for dealing
with the sick and wounded. While the exigencies of war may
at times warrant the most prodigious sacrifices of men to death
on the battlefield from the bullets of the enemy, there is no
conceivable excuse for sacrificing a single life that might be
saved by more efficient hospital and medical arrangements.
286 EUGENICS REVIEW.

From the eugenic standpoint, the question of the selection
of the combatants from the nation by voluntary or compulsory
systems is an interesting one. We have already pointed out
the eugenic advantage of universal training. In the relative
merits of voluntary and universal service or conscription, there
is also a eugenic question. Universal service tends to spread
the losses to the nation over a wider area. Under a voluntary
system the tendency must be for the war death-rate to strike
most heavily the fittest of the race. An over careful selection
of volunteers for service, the adoption of too high a physical
standard, accentuates the dysgenic effect of war, but here one
must recognise the military as well as the eugenic aspect of the
war. From a military point of view, a voluntary army is
probably far more efficient for its numbers than a conscript
army. Although it might conceivably be beneficial to the race
to place its least fit specimens in the front fighting ranks, one
can scarcely imagine that such a course would commend itself
from the military point of view. One willing fighter is worth
six pressed men, and there can be little doubt that the superiority
of General French’s Army to the enemy it has had to meet is
largely attributable to the voluntary system. As to the effect
of universal training, it may be said that universal training
without conscription would have the effect of raising the
physique and moral of the nation, and in time of war would
enormously increase the number of recruits for voluntary service. It is probable, therefore, that the best combination from
the military and eugenic standpoints would be universal training
with voluntary service for war.

Another question that is of the utmost importance from the
eugenic standpoint is that of encouraging the marriage of those
about to go to the front. Here we must recognise the sensible
action that has been taken at the instance of the Archbishop of
Canterbury in reducing the marriage fees, and it is to be hoped
that the Government will accede to the Archbishop’s suggestion
and temporarily waive the Government marriage licence duty.
The encouragement of recruits to marry is far-reaching in its
importance. Not only will it directly tend to the maintenance
of the race through the better stocks, but indirectly it must have
EUGENICS AND THE WAR. 287

an important influence in checking one of the most deplorable
dysgenic effects of war, merely, the increase of venereal disease.
Non-COMBATANTS.

It is of the utmost importance that the nation should
virtually guarantee to support in a suitable condition the wives
and families of those on active service, and here we must
recognise the soundness of the Government’s action in increasing the family allowances. Those at home who are in a position
to do so should co-operate to maintain the families of soldiers
and sailors in that sphere of life to which they have already
been. raised by the efforts of their forbears.

Every possible means should be taken to prevent the
economic disturbance due to the war proving disastrous to those
who, by reason of age or other cause, have been unable to go
on active service.

It is probably among the middle classes that the greatest
amount of distress will prevail, both during and after the war.
Out of a total of 16,284,399 persons of both sexes engaged in
occupations, and of ten years of age and upwards, 714,621 are
in professional occupations, and their subordinate services. It
is amongst these that distress will be inevitable. Amongst the
industrial classes there is far less chance of distress. The
industrial classes are to-day well organised and well cared for
by the State. The machinery of the state is well constructed
to deal with them. The Board of Trade and the Labour
Exchanges, the Local Government Board, the Municipal Bodies
and the Trades Unions; these bodies can do, and have already
done, much to prevent distress. It is doubtful whether the
sufferings of this class will in the main be severe. There must
be dislocation of industry, but, with large numbers enlisting
and with large orders for war materials, and with efficient
machinery to assist the mobility of labour, distress is likely to
be only temporary, at least during the term of the war. After
the war, new industries will be started, new openings for trade
created, and it is probable there will be work for all at some
rate of pay, even if it may take some little time to tind it.
Amongst those whose normal incomes range from £1 to £2 a
week, there will not be much suffering. It is in the middle
288 EUGENICS REVIEW.

classes, both lower and upper, and particularly among the
women of this class, that there will be really acute suffering.
Amongst journalists, authors, actors, painters, sculptors,
architects, musicians and clerks there will be a great pinch of
poverty. In normal times of peace, a rich country can
legitimately support a large section of its population in professional and artistic occupations. The product of such people’s
work is, in normal times, of a high money value, ranging from,
say, 4150 to 41,200 a year, according to supply and demand.
In times of war, the demand for such services falls very rapidly :
the value of the product diminishes. These people have, by
dint of hard work, often through several generations, raised
themselves to what has been legitimately considered a higher
sphere of occupation. Without depreciating the virtue of nonintellectual manual labour, it is obvious that work requiring
great skill and talent and a prolonged apprenticeship, often
preceded by a long non-productive educational period, not only
ranks higher in money value, but attracts a class whose natural
talents and laudable ambitions invite them to raise themselves
to this sphere. These people have become accustomed to conditions under which they can legitimately afford and enjoy
certain benefits which civilisation gives, benefits which would
not be enjoyed by those whose faculties had not been developed.
Many of this class now find themselves, through no fault of
their own, but because of economic conditions due to the war,
in a position of great need.

They cannot easily acquire dexterity in manual work. The
better paid kinds of manual labour require years of apprenticeship to obtain such skill as will command a remuneration of
anything over 30s. or £2 a week, and even though the skill
could be acquired, in many cases there will not be the physical
health and strength needed for such work.

In certain fields of enterprise, intellectual workers who
depend for payment on surplus wealth will be almost ruined.
Should the war last for twelve months, the loss of wealth and
diminution of credit will be very great. France and Germany ;
Russia, Belgium, Austria, Hungary, and Servia are already
engaged in war while active hostilities have involved Japan
EUGENICS AND THE WAR. 289

and South Africa beyond the seas." Should the war last
more than a year, the loss of capital will be prodigious,
and money must in consequence be rendered dearer for
many decades to come. Money may be cheap during the
war, but this must not blind us to the fact that it will be
dear after the war. This must affect most seriously the
middle classes of this and other countries, the classes that
attempt to live decently and intellectually at incomes ranging from £150 to £1,200 a year; that give their children
a sound education at a cost which often absorbs a large part of
their incomes for many years; classes which are not luxurious.
These classes contain men and women to whom the country
owes much. To quote from Sir Harry Johnson’s article in the
‘“ Nineteenth Century ’’ for September, ‘‘ For at least 300 years,
it is the middle class that has made the British Empire and
contributed its greatest glories in literature, art and science; the
middle class that produced Drake, Shakespeare, Newton
Harvey, Milton, Dryden, Wedgwood, Darwin, Dickens,
Thackeray, Tennyson, Huxley, Brummell, James Bruce,
Mungo Park, Speeke, Grant, Captain Scott, Charles Kingsley,
Gladstone, Bright, Disraeli, and all the noteworthy persons of
the present day in the Church, at the Bar, in the Army and
Navy, in painting and literature, in education, in science,
surgery, chemistry and mechanical inventions.”’

It is in the widespread injury of the war to this class, apart
from the loss of life entailed on the battle-field, that the real
injury to the nation lies. Is this a dysgenic effect of war? I
think it is.

A condition is produced which is not conducive to the
perpetuation of the best of the race. War is shown to be an
agency—under social control—which tends to impair the racial
qualities of future generations physically and mentally. This
class, from which it is pre-eminently desirable that the largest
number of children should be born, is, by the economic conditions
arising out of the war, crushed down and dissuaded by circumstances from reproducing its kind. Still further cause to
restriction of families is given. Bred from a race gifted with

* Turkey, Asia Minor, and Egypt must now be added to this list.
290 EUGENICS REVIEW.

taste to enjoy in reason the intellectual and physical standard
that requires a certain income to maintain, this class will
struggle to keep its place, and to do so will sacrifice marriage
and parenthood. Criticise this if you will; it is what must
happen. This blow struck at the middle classes of this country
is a great calamity, and every possible step should be taken
to reduce it. It is upon this class also that the burden of
taxation will fall after the war. One may quote Southey :—

Satan gave thereat his tail

A twirl of admiration,

For he thought of his daughter War,

And her suckling babe Taxation.
War may be glorious in prospect. It may be inevitable. It
may be justifiable. While it lasts we may suffer, but the excitement is intense. Every nerve is strained to bring to it but one
conclusion—victory.

But war has to be paid for and the payment comes after the
war. The loss to the nation in lives, in wealth: these will be
felt for many years. The present war will be more costly in
men and in money than anything the civilised world has known
before. Let us recognise this and be prepared.
