 

POPU a ION PROBLEM AND THE Vv

-FUTU RE*
By D. V. GLASS»

‘HE. past year has seen. ‘a marked

_ change ‘in the general attitude towards

the population question—at least, so
far as can be judged from the articles in
newspapers — ‘and periodicals. ‘Instead of
seeing comments on the rapidity with which
various populations are growing, we now
find a general acceptance of the probability
that our population will decline and speculations on the consequences of such a decline.
What is particularly interesting about this
volte-face is not the phenomenon itself; but
the length of time it needed to take place—
nearly a hundred and forty years.

The Malthusian Hypothesis

About a hundred and forty years ago
Malthus published his Essay on the Principle
of Population, and brought population into
the public arena. Beginning with two simple
postulates, * ‘ that food is necessary to the
existence of man,’ and “ that the passion
between the sexes is necessary and will
remain nearly in its present state,” he
arrived at the following thesis. First, that
population is. necessarily limited by the
means of subsistence. Secondly, population
always increases when the means of subsistence increase, unless it is prevented by
such checks as famine, war, plague or*moral
restraint. Finally, the actual population was
at its particular size because no increase in
that size could be compensated by greater or
even equal increases in the means of subsistence. .. |

Even at the beginning of the nineteenth
century, when the effects of the Napoleonic
Wars were being felt severely, and when the
process of industrial change was _ bearing
heavily upon:the ‘‘ common man,” acceptance of the Malthusian doctrine was by no
means universal. There were, for example,

A. Paper read at. the Annual Conference of Educational: ‘Associations, January 1937
39

the celebrated attacks of Godwin and
Shelley, and the books and pamphlets of
Graham and Weyland, Alison, Sadler and
Doubleday. The economists of the day did,
however, accept the theory and used it with
depressing results in their own field of

inquiry.

After the middle of the nineteenth century
attention was drawn away from the population controversy. This was not due to any
successful refutation of Malthus’s principle,
but to the fact that industrial progress was
so rapid. that the question of the pressure
of numbers upon the means of subsistence
became purely theoretical. The question was
not again publicly aired until the shock of
what, up to 1930, used to be called the
“Great Depression’’ had caused some
anxiety to the people who had hitherto

believed that prosperity had come to stay.

At the same time the belief in the automatic
action and eternal value of latsser-faire was
breaking down, and the road being thrown
open to intervention. by the State and other
institutions. Once external control is an
accepted possibility, the population question assumes a new importance, and it is not
surprising to find, in the ’nineties, such
statisticians as Dr. Ogle and Dr. G. B.
Longstaff again referring to the “ most
formidable ’’ rate of natural increase in
England and Wales, and the imminent need
to control that rate in order to prevent the
pressure of numbers on the means of subsistence. Yet while these statisticians were
re-creating the Malthusian spectre, the birthrate was already sliding downwards.

Technique of Population Analysis |
If we look back to the period we have just
discussed, two facts become evident. First,
the early nineteenth-century theorists were
discussing hypothetical rates of increase—
both the Malthusians and their opponents.
40

  

Secondly, the overpopulation

the later part of the century were discussing
the future, as their successors still do to-day,
in terms of the crude rate of natural increase
shown at the time—that is, the. percentage
by which the population increases from year
to year. Both forms of discussion are likely
to lead to incorrect conclusions: the first
because the imagination is unhampered by
the bonds of vital statistics, and the second
because the technique of analysis is basically
unsound.

In view of the recent publicity given to the
topic, it is unnecessary here to recapitulate
the criteria which must be fulfilled in the
accurate analysis of population trends. It
will be sufficient to state, as a reminder, that
these criteria are not satisfied by birth-rates,
general fertility rates, or crude rates of
natural increase. To estimate the trend of a
population we need to know not just how
many births and deaths there are each year,
but to what extent the fertile sections of the
population are replacing themselves from
generation to generation. Consequently not
until the extension of vital statistics and the
development of methods of analysis like
those of Kuczynski, Burgdorfer and Dublin
and Lotka were we in a position to discuss
anything more than hypothetical rates of
growth. The Malthusian controversy, so far
as its scientific aspect is concerned, has thus
resolved itself into a discussion of what has
been and what is now taking place, instead
of what might perhaps take place if fertility
were unchecked.

Population Trend Since 185r

Looking at the population of England and
Wales from this point of view, we notice
three facts. In the first place, there is no
reason to believe that fertility varied a great
deal up to the third quarter of the nineteenth
century. We cannot, with any accuracy, go
back before 1851, but examining the fertility
rates from that point to 1871, we see that the
average number of children born to a woman
passing through the child-bearing period was

4°49 in 1851
4°61 in 1861
4°78 in 1871

THE EVGENICS REVIEW
of The rise shown by these figures is very: small

—over the whole period it amounts té only
about 6- -5 per cent.—and since the period
was one in which the system of registration
was still in process of completion, it 1s
possible that the real increase was even
smaller. The second fact, which follows
directly from the first, is that the major
factor responsible for the growth of the
population was not the rise in fertility but
the fall in mortality.* Thirdly, instead of an
increase in material - productivity being
accompanied by a corresponding rise in
fertility, it was, after 1870, accompanied by
a marked fall, The average number of
children born to each woman passing through
the child-bearing period wast

4°64 in 1881
4°16 in 1891
3°51 in 1901

2°94 in i9g1II

2°72 in 1921 .
showing a fall of over 43 per. cent. between
1871 and 1921. Since we want to know the
extent to which each woman is replacing
herself, we are concerned particularly with
the average number of female children born
to each woman passing through the childbearing period. This is shown in Column 5B
of Table I.

TABLE I
A iB

Average number of
female children born
to each woman in
the same. circum
Average number of
children born’ to
each woman passing
through the child
bearing period ; with stances.

the fertility rates,

found in different

years in England

and Wales.
I85Ir_... 4°49 2°20
1861... 4°61 2°26
1871 4°78 2°34
1881 4°64 2°28
1891 4°16 2°04 |
I90I ... 3°51 1°73
IQII... 2°94 — 3°44
I92I_ ... 2°72 1°32.
1931 1°91 0°93
1934 1°79 0°87

Signi cance of Decline in Replacement Rate
The figures indicate that by 1934 fertility
had fallen so low that even if all the female

* The mean expectation of life at birth has: ‘risen
from 41°19 years in 1838-44 to 60-76 years in. 1930-2.  

» : ms \teaae” ; pare rer eee 3
A, a . 4 § i. , ve
. “kt ow + Apa Q
e ‘ .

children: ‘born: to each ‘woman ‘were themselves to survive until. the.completion of the
child-bearing ‘period, the rate: of replacement
would not be..adequate to maintain the
population. ‘When, in addition, it is remembered. that some of the children die between
ihe ages of o and 50 years, the deficit is still
more apparent. In 1934, in fact, taking into
account the existing conditions of fertility
and mortality, the rate of replacement was
only 76 per cent. of that necessary to maintain the population. It follows. that if
fertility remains unchanged our population
will soon reach its peak level, and after a
transition period of slow decline will begin to
fall off at the rate of 24: per cent. in every
generation. At this rate of decline, it would
be reduced to about 15 per cent. of its
previous size in just over two hundred years.*
The rate of decline could be reduced slightly
by further reductions in mortality, but the
effect would be insignificant. This is so,
first, because no amount of reduction in
mortality between the ages of o and 50 years
would make the replacement rate adequate,
and, secondly, because no extension in the
expectation of life beyond these ages, since
they are outside the child-bearing period,
could increase the reproductive capacity of
the nation. In this situation the population
question has changed its direction. We are
no longer concerned, in the. Western World
at any rate, with the pressure of numbers on
the means of subsistence. On -the contrary
the problem now.appears to be the possible
effect of declining numbers on the economic
and social ‘progress of the community. The
Malthusian issue, whatever its original applicability might have been, is now no longer of
practical interest to us.

The question that arises is: Are we
justified in considering that the decline in
fertility creates a real problem ? The implication is twofold. Is.there any reason to believe
that the decline is likely to be permanent,
and, if so, is the prospect of a declining
population a disconcerting one ? These questions take us into what is at present practically the realm .of the unknown, and the
_* That is, in two hundred years after the agecomposition had become stable. °=-2 . :

 

iD! THE FUTURE 41
only answers we can. give are general ones,
based. on very rough analyses of historical
trends.

The Persistence of the Decline in Fertility

- If the decline in fertility were the product
of only one or two decades, or of small
statistical size, we might be justified in
assuming that it was likely to be ephemeral
and unimportant. But it has been in
evidence in this country for about sixty
years, and during that period it has proceeded so rapidly that the average number
of children born to a woman living through
the child-bearing period has fallen from 4-78
to 1-79, a decline of nearly 63 per cent.
Moreover, the phenomenon is not confined
to England and Wales, but is apparent in
every country of the Western World. . The
table of net reproduction rates* given
in Table II shows that of sixteen European
and other Western countries, nine had net
reproduction rates below unity at the
dates when the figures were last available,
and it is probable that in at least three
more of the countries the rates have fallen

TABLE II
COUNTRIES WITH NET REPRODUCTION RATES UNDER
UnitTyT
Austria oss wee 1931/2 0-714
England and Wales 1933 0°735
Germany ..... eo. I93I 0-748
Sweden 1926/30 0°857
France wee = IQ3I 0-860.
Latvia eee eee 1929 0-900
United States 1933 0-940
Australia... 1932/3 0-976
New Zealand 1933 0-978
COUNTRIES WITH NET REPRODUCTION RATES ABOVE
| Unityf | an
- Hungary «s+ . 1930/1 I-Or!
Denmark - 1926/30 I*O12
Finland 1921/30 1*074
Italy 1931 I*209
Canada — 1931 I°319
Portugal 1930/1 I +334
Bulgaria 1926/7 1°446

* The net reproduction rate combines the number of
female children born to a woman passing through the
child-bearing period in given conditions of fertility
with the extent to which those children will themselves
survive, under given conditions of mortality, and pass
through the child-bearing period in the succeeding
generation. re : oe
__t The above rates are from Kuczynski, R. R., The
Measurement of Population Growth, with the exception
of those for France and the United States. - a
—w

42 *

below unity since the dates given. Moreover
in every country—with the possible exception of Germany, and even there the possibility is not very great—the downward
trend has been unbroken and shows no signs
of being checked in mest recent vears. Also
the countries whose rates are still abov
unity are those in which the process of
Westernization, or industrialization, began
latest. The persistence of relatively high
rates in those countries is, then, more probably due to.a time-lag in their development
than to any basic difference between them
and the countries where replacement is no
longer adequate. To call the phenomenon of
declining fertility superficial and ephemeral
is, consequently, to shirk the question, and
not to dispose of it. It is vital that we
realize the probability of a declining population in the near future and at least take
steps to meet the problems presented by
such a decline, even if we are not prepared
to attempt a reversal of the trend.

The Term “‘ Declining Population”

So far as the second implication referred
to above is concerned—namely whether the
prospect of a declining population is a
disconcerting one—it is imperative that we
should clearly understand what the term
‘‘ declining population ’’ means. Popular interpretation of the term is at present confused,
translating it into two possibilities: either
that the population falls for a time but then
stabilizes itself at a lower level, or that it
falls continuously without any sign of
stabilization. The importance of distinguishing between these current interpretations is due to the fact that the economic and
social consequences of the two events are
likely to be very different. In the first case
we have two problems to encounter—one
arising from an initial decrease in aggregate
numbers, and the other arising out of the
fact of stability. In the former problem we

are concerned with the effect of reduction

in numbers on the demand for goods and
services, and on the efficiency with which the
productive resources of the community are

used. That is, the question is one of optimum.

population. Now it is possible that, given

_ THE EUGENICS REVIEW: © 2

our present stock of:technical knowledge and
capital equipment, “Ergland and. Wales is
slightly overpopulated. If.so, a reduction in
numbers, unaccompanied by any other
change, would increase the national dividend
and ought therefore to increase the. per
capita income of the population. At the same
time, there is no reason to believe that
further advances in technique will not be
made during the period in which the population is falling, and every advance in knowledge tends to increase the size of the
population which would give the most
efficient use of the productive equipment
and resources of the community. It might
then happen that, with the ensuing technical
progress, a stationary number of inhabitants
would mean underpopulation—not that. the
standard of life would fall, but that it might
not rise as much as it would have done if
numbers were increasing. | |

Influence of Smaller Numbers on Economic
_ Demand | |
_ But to state the problem in this way is to
put it very crudely. In reality there are
many complex factors which may swing the
balance in either direction. For example,
there is the influence of smaller numbers on
the demand for different kinds of goods and
for goods in general. To some extent the
future of large-scale production depends
upon this, though it also depends upon the
size of the aggregate national dividend. In
general, there is no reason to fear that the
total demand for goods and services will
necessarily be reduced with a smaller population, even though the demands for specific
products may be smaller. But there is also
the point that production is generally
carried on ahead of demand, and usually in
anticipation of a growing demand. With
fixed numbers there might soon be a satiation point for particular products, and the
flow would thenceforth have to be more or
less constant. I#.certain fields this might
have the result of a constant reduction of
human employment. In agriculture, for
example, this would be the case. But with
technical progress we should in any case
expect the production of any one commodity
THE POPULATION PROBLEM AND THE FUTURE

or one ‘group::of ‘¢ommodities ‘to need a
smaller- amount’ of labour, and the problem
created by :a. stationary population isnot
new even ‘though it may be'more noticeable.
It is'a°question -of preventing decreasing
employment in one branch of production
from .becomitig increasing unemployment,
and is more intimately connected with the
given economic and social system than with
the given size of the population. Again,
reverting to our previous discyssion, although
rising numbers’ might, from some points: of
view, increase the standard of life more
quickly than’ stationary numbers, there
might at the same time be a point beyond
which ‘increasing physical congestion in
housing and the connected social services,
as well as in transport, would send up the
costs of the economic system to a level
higher than we anticipate. Nor must we
forget that the possibilities of technical
progress in production are so great that we
might easily afford to sacrifice part of our
future economic well-being if, for other
reasons, we decided to have a stationary,
instead of a growing, population.

Enfluence of Stability in Numbers

The stability aspect of the stationary
population* is no less complex than the size
aspect. In the first place we have to think
of the flexibility of the economic system
under the new conditions. In our present
population, adaptability to new demands
and new production is met largely by a
redirection of young recruits to industry and
the professions. In a growing population
where the proportion of young people is
larger than that of aged, this redirection is
made somewhat easier. But with the swing
in the age-composition that must necessarily
occur under the impact of stationary numbers, there will tend to be less recruitment
at the bottom and more wastage at the top

 

-* See Robbins, L., ‘‘ Notes on Some Probable
onsequences of the Advent of a Stationary Population
in Great Britain ”’ (Economica, 1929); Wolfe, A. B.,
“The Theory of Optimum Population” (Annals of
Am. Acad. of Pol. and Soc. Sc., Nov. 1936); and
Wolfe, A: B., ‘‘ The Rationalisation of Production and
Reproduction” (in Economics, Soctology and the
Modern World, ed. N. Himes; 1935),

43

than with increasing numbers, and flexibility
will be somewhat: impaired. Here again,
however, the problem is closely connected
with the extent to which the society is run
on planned lines. The tendency in general
production is for the average worker to
become a skilled machine-tender, and with
a correctly orientated vocational education
there is no reason to fear a decrease in the
adaptability of the labour supply.

Influence of Age-Composition of Population

This brings up the problem of the agecomposition of the population. A good many
references have been made to it in the last
few months, and it certainly does mean a
change in the structure. of the economic
system. It may mean that fewer toys will be
wanted ; but on the other hand it may result
in a greater demand for armchairs and
slippers. It may mean an increase in the
amount spent on pensions, but also a
decrease in the aggregate cost of education.
Thus the disadvantage of a slight ageing of
the population is by no means to be taken
for granted, particularly when we remember
that the productive capacity of the community is likely to be ‘increasing the whole
time.

Moreover, if we are not prepared to accept
some ageing of the population we must
realize what the protest implies. If we were
to stabilize our population at any level—at
ten millions or a hundred millions—we should
have a larger proportion of old persons than
we have at present. If we take present
mortality rates* as our basis, a stationary
population of any size would have approximately the age structure shown in Table III.

TABLE III
AGE STRUCTURE OF A STATIONARY POPULATION AT THE
_ Mortarity RatEs oF 1930 TO 1932

Age of Persons.. Percentage of Total Population.
22°37

O-15 years.
15-60 years. 60-19
6o years and over. 17°44

This is rather different from our present
Situation, which, according to the 1931
Census, showed-an allocation of 23- 83 per

 

* As given in the English Life Table No. 10.
44

cent.. of the population under 15 years of
age, 64°6r per cent. between 15 and 60
years, and 11-56 per cent. over 60 years
of age. But if we wished to. keep this kind
of age-composition we should have to follow
the procedure of cyclica! trends in fertility—
alternations of low and high fertility—for
the present position is the result of a special
history of fertility. It arises from the combination of high fertility in the past and low
fertility in the present. High fertility by
itself would not achieve the exact result, for
although helping to reduce the proportion
of the very cld, it would at the same time
raise the proportion of the very young. But
the change caused by the achievement of a
stationary population would not, if regarded
as a whole, be radical. Actually it would
mean an increase in the non-active section
of the population from 35°39 to 39°81 per
cent., and even this might be more apparent
than real. It might be made much greater
by prolonged education of the younger
sections of the population, or much less by
the increased use of machinery involving
little arduous labour on the part of the
workers using it, and thus capable of being
operated by persons much older than we are
accustomed to find in our industrial system
to-day.

Falling Population and Military Strength
All this discussion merely skims the surface of the problem of stabilizing our population at lower numbers than we have at
present. But it at least serves to show how
much spade-work is needed in this field, and,
in particular, how much the material situation of the future depends upon the adequate
planning of the economic system. I have
attempted here to deal only with those
problems which are pertinent to the population trend, and not with those which arise
largely from prejudice or unfounded fears.
In the latter category is, for example, the
anxiety that a fall in our numbers may
result in a deterioration of our military
position vis-a-vis the other Powers. There
is not a great deal of justification for this
fear since first, as we have seen, most of the
countries of the Western World are in a

| THE ‘EUGENICS: REVIEW ©) 6! if!

‘position ‘very -simijar, to our: own ;..-and

secondly, it ignores the. possibility. of-attracting man-power from other countries.by:means
of immigration facilities. It appears: paradoxical that many of those. who. lament the
falling off in our man-power for. military
purposes also believe in the maintenance oi
the present immigration regulations. . In any
case there might be one good reason to
welcome a. relative deterioration in our
numbers, if it were carried far enough ;. we
might then give up, like Denmark, attempts
to. compete in the armaments race and
devote that section of our expenditure ' to a
more worthy cause. | |

Influence of C ontinuous Decline in Numbers

_At the beginning of this section of the
discussion, we noted a second interpretation
of the term “declining population ’’—a
population the size of which continues to
fall, with no tendency for stabilization to
take place. Now the results of such a situation may be serious. In the first place there
would be an intensification of the-difficulties
mentioned in the analysis of a stationary
population—changes in the size and nature
of the demand for goods and services,
decreasing flexibility of the system due to
shrinkage in the flow of new recruits to
industry, and so forth. There are also two
additional influences .to take into account.
With falling numbers, the change in the agecomposition of the population may be very
large. For example, according to the second
estimate computed by Dr. Charles,* the nonactive section of the population might rise
to as much as.60-71 per cent.—consisting of
2°96 per cent. of persons aged o to 15 years,
and 57:75 per cent. of persons aged 60 years
and over. This. estimate assumes that -fer
tility ceases to decline after 1985, so that

eventually a stable age-composition would be
reached. If fertility actually. continued to
decline after that. daté, the ageing of the
population would be even more marked.
At the same time the decline in the numbers

* Charles, E.: ‘‘ The Effect of Present Trends in
Fertility and Mortality upon the Future Population of
England and Wales ”’ (London and Cambridge Economic
Service, Special Memorandum No..: go, August 1935).
THE POPULATION ‘PROBLEM ‘AND: THE FUTURE

themselves’ would -involve- the constant
remoulding :of. the economic structure at a
rate which might very well tax its powers of
recuperation: Consider, for example, the
impact of a fall of-25 per cent. in our numbers every thirty years (i.e. in successive
generations). To maintain demand at even
a constant level would involve a very high
rate of increase in individual purchasing
power, while if this were not done the
obsolescence factor would rise far above any
figure we have ever known. These are not
problems about which we would wish to. be
dogmatic, but it is evident that the difficulties
brought in the train of a continuously falling
population would be of a magnitude demanding the most serious consideration. And
though they could be surmounted with the
help of some rational planning, they would
probably divert, in the process, energies
which might be better utilized. |
This analysis has concerned itself with the
economic effects of a declining population
upon a society in which the means of production are privately owned. Were the
resources owned by the community as a
whole, the arguments would be far less
applicable. There are two main reasons for
this. First, because in that case it would be
much easier to plan for the country and avoid
discrepancies between supply and demand.
Secondly, because the most palpable danger
of a falling population—the impact of contracting markets upon individual producers
and, through them, upon the workers in
the affected industries—would not arise.
However, even a public economy would
have a number of problems to meet if its
population were in a state of continuous
decline. Of these, the most important
would be the structural rigidity introduced
by the diminishing proportion of. young
recruits to industry, and the general social
consequences of a continuous ageing of the
population. To.sum up the situation, we may
conclude that whereas in balance a stationary
population may offer distinct advantages
over a growing one, the same could not be said
of a continuously falling population, even in a
country in which the means of production
were owned communally. In an individualist

45

civilization, the results might, well be
thoroughly disastrous, so-far as we can judge
from the past reactions “to disturbances

which, by comparison, were relatively unimportant. os

Prerequisites of a Stationary Population
Suppose, then, that we decide to have a
stationary population. What would this
involve? Primarily, it would mean raising
fertility to a much. higher level than its
present one, though it need not mean an
annual supply of births larger than we had,
for.example, in 1934. This may sound selfcontradictory, but the justification for the
statement becomes clear if we refer back to
the earlier discussion on fertility and replacement. At that stage we noticed that a
population would only be maintained if each
woman had, on the average, a sufficient
number of girl children to replace her in the
next generation of potential mothers. If
there were no mortality between the ages of
o and 50 years, one girl child born to each
woman would be sufficient, and, taking the
present ratio of male to female live births,
this would mean an average total of 2-05
children. But there is, of course, a considerable mortality between the ages of o
and 50 years, and taking the present survival
rate.as the basis, each woman would need an
average total of 2-37 children. If, further,
we assume that as large a proportion of
women will not marry as was shown in the
1931 Census—i.e. 17°46 per cent. between
the ages of 40 and 49 years—then each
married woman must, during her fertile
period, bear 2°87 children in order for the
population to be maintained. Having
achieved that average, the total number of
births only matters in deciding upon the
level at which we wish to stabilize the
population. - In 1934, our population was
40-467 millions. Stabilization at that level,
given our present mortality, would require
an annual supply of about 666,000 live
births. If, on the other hand, we wished to
stabilize the number of women aged 15 to 49
years found in our 1934 population, we
Should require an annual supply of about
764,000 live births, and the total population
46 - THE EUGENICS REVIEW «= >

would then become stationary at the level of
46-426 millions.* | we

In 1934 there were, in England and Wales,
597,642 live births. According to our calculations (see Table IV), an annual supply of
that size should be enough to produce a
stationary population of about 36-3 millions,
and were that the prospect for the future, we
should have no cause for anxiety. But in
reality we had a large number of births. not
because fertility was high, but because there

TABLE IV
ANNUAL SUPPLY OF LIVE BIRTHS NECESSARY FOR
MAINTAINING POPULATIONS OF DIFFERENT SIZES
(WiTH PRESENT MORTALITY RATES)

Size of Annual Supply of No. of Women aged
Population Live Births neces- 15 to 49 in the

in millions. — sary. Given Populations
Millions).
50 822,900 11-965
48 790,000 11-486
46 757,100 II +007
44 724,200 10°529
42 691,200 10-050
40 658,300 9°572
38 625,400 9°093
36 592,500 8-614
34 559,600 8-136
32 526,700 7°657
30 493,700 7°179
28 460,800 6-700
26 427,900 6-222

was a large number of women of childbearing age. And this, in turn, was due to
the high fertility of the previous generation.
In 1934, there were I1,109,200 women aged
15 to 49 years and 597,642 live births,
giving a general fertility rate of 53-80 per
thousand. But with present mortality the
general fertility rate should be 68-78 per
thousand if the population is to be replaced.
What, therefore, was happening according
to fertility in 1934 was that, instead of each
woman bearing during her lifetime the average of 2-37 children necessary to replace
herself, she was bearing only I-79 children.
With such fertility it 1s impossible for the
population to stabilize itself at any level.

Fertility Rates Required for Stable Population
The only way to make replacement

adequate is to raise fertility, and since at the

* These results are obtained. by variations of the
method explained by Dr. F. Burgdérfer in his book,
- Dev Geburtenriickgang und seine Bekampfung (1929).

present time we have:about the maximuim
number of potentially fertile women ‘in :our
total population, an: immediate campaign. for
the maintenance ofa given population
would need least initial change in’ fertility.
Suppose we. had decided to. maintain a
population equal in size to that. found in
England and Wales in 1934—that is, 40-467
millions. Requiring an annual supply. of
666,000 live births with present mortality
rates, this would involve, if we had decided
to inaugurate the change in 1936, an increase
of general fertility to 57-19 per thousand -in
that year as compared with 53:80 per thousand in 1934 (see Table V). Since the number of women aged 15 to 49 years will decline
in the future, the continued annual supply of
666,000 live births would mean a steady rise
in the general fertility rate until about 1976,

TABLE Ve
GENERAL FERTILITY RATE REQUIRED, BEGINNING IN
1936, TO MAINTAIN A POPULATION OF 40°467 MILLIONS,
MORTALITY ASSUMED TO REMAIN AT THE 1930/2

LEVEL | |

Year. §$.No. of Women aged No. of Live Births
15 to 49 years per 1,000 Women
- (Millions). aged 15 to 49 years.

1936 Ir -646 57°19 |

1941 II-194 59°50

1946 10-979 60-66

1951 10-633 © 62°64

1956 10 +335 64°44

1961 10°007 65°55

1966 9: 768 68-18

1971 9-667 68-90

1976 9°531 e2. 88

1961 9°579 .

1986 & subs. 9°683 . | 68 33

after which the number of women in these
age groups would rise slightly and stabilize
themselves, by 1986, at 9-683 millions. The
maintenance of a population of 40-467
millions would thenceforth require a constant general fertility of 68-78 per thousand.
Since the rise in fertility shown in Table V is

quite gradual—in the first forty years it
means a total increase of under 21 per cent.—

this method would probably .be the least
difficult to follow. rs, oe But to find a method that agpears simple
from the mechanical point of view does not
provide a solution to-a problem in. social
biology. The question. that. still remains
unanswered is: Can we persuade people to
ae XY . Ss Bo Fe Oe e ‘Pp ty e@e>: ui gs. ‘ «
persuade them to raise their fertility at alt?
We cannot, at present, give an answer to this

question. Although we. have a fair know
ledge of the general trend of fertility in the
past century, we have scarcely even begun
to link-up this trend, or fluctuations in it,
with the movements of other factors in a
way which could help us to solve the problem
of depopulation.* 7

Concluston |

So long as this state of ignorance prevails,
attempts to check the fall in fertility cannot
hope to be successful, since they will be
directed, as Dr. Kuezynski says, by “ sentiment and prejudice,” instead of by informed
concern. At present we can only point to
such general features in the situation as the
changing nature and functions of the
family, and notice that in our civilization the
demands for a high standard of life and large
families seem to be incompatible at the
moment, though there is no technological
reason why they should continue to be so.
To be successful, measures for raising
fertility will have to alter the attitude of the
average person to marriage and the family,

 

* e.g. See Kuczynski, R. R.: ‘‘ Economic Causes

and Consequences of Population Movements” (Index,
November 1936).

SO FT HE Seo yg igs yp ao | iT ie |” 2% T No IN PR Ly: BL i : ‘ A rclase “
e pe : Se Ces Ne 4 PRS .
2 4 . a , . at ms : . - ae
x : ‘ Ja . _ .

| © : = * - ae & B : e 2 7 | _ * SO,
raise their fertility in this fashion, or can we

 

47
but it is extremely unlikely that this will be

z oe

done unless, at ‘the same time, some of the

major characteristics of the present social

.and economic milien are also altered. Even

to provide fairly substantial family allow
ances—say, ten shillings per week for second
and subsequent children up to 15 years of

~~ 28 ey

age—would probably involve a fundamental

reconstruction of our society, since it is

extremely doubtful if the cost, which would
amount to well over a hundred and fifty
million pounds a year, could be raised simply

_ by the imposition of further taxes. My own

view is that such a sum could only be raised
either by reducing expenditure on armaments, or by putting aside for allowances a
section of a much larger national dividend
than we now have. Neither course appears
feasible at the present time.

For the moment, therefore, our conclusion
must be a relatively barren one. First, that
the problems of a stationary or a declining
population will not be met adequately by an
unplanned economic system such as we have
to-day. Secondly, only. under some form of
rationally planned civilization are we likely
to produce an environment in which high
fertility and a high standard of life will both
be possible. This conclusion does not provide
us with immediate practical remedies, but it
is suggested that it points out the direction
in which future research. must proceed.

" Bugenics Review, Vol. EXEX, No. 1.
