ROBLEMS OF POPULATION FROM THE
~ CONSERVATIVE VIEWPOINT

  

lems which was held at the Conserva
Mtive Party Conference in September

1937, MR. DUNCAN Sanpys, M.P. (Norwood),
moved. the following resolution :

“ That this. conference, viewing with concern
the progressive decline in the birth-rate, congratulates the Minister of Health on having
decided .to institute a special inquiry into this
problem and assures its support for any measures
which the’ Government may think it wise to
adopt to encourage the increase in the numbers
of healthy children on which the future welfare
of the nation depends.” :

He said that ever since about 1870 our
birth-rate had been falling more and more
steeply. In three or four years’ time it was
expected that the number of births would be
fewer than the.number of deaths. That
meant that our population would then start
decreasing—at first slowly, then progressively faster. |

The population of England and Wales

T the. discussion on population prob
was now. 41,000,000. It was estimated that —

even if the birth-rate and death-rate were to
become stabilized at the present level (and
that was a-most optimistic assumption) our
population would in sixty years’ time have
fallen to 28,000,000. If, on the other hand,
the birth-rate continued to decline (which
for a time was more than probable) then by
thatusame date our numbers were likely to
hate. shrunk to less than one-half of what
they were to-day, and in a hundred years’
time it might well be that we should have
dwindled to somewhere between 4,000,000
and 5,000,000. =| |

Perhaps the most disquieting phenomenon
of a declining birth-rate was the progressive
rise in the average age of the population.
For example,.in forty years’ time, although
our total population would then be considerably smaller:.than it was now,- there
would be more than twice as many people
over sixty-five ‘years of age as there: were
to-daye) 2) a Sint

ld this affect the security of the

Vv

Empire and our standard of life? While we
and the other Western Powers would be
declining in numbers, the ‘countries of the
Balkans, Soviet Russia, and the peoples of
the Far East (with their already vast populations) would still be continuing to multiply.
He was certainly not advocating what was
called “‘ breeding babies for cannon fodder.”’
Nevertheless, we should be shirking our
responsibility if we were to conceal from
ourselves the fact that a great empire like
ours, whose population would be growing
progressively smaller and older, must inevitably become increasingly vulnerable to
attack. ° |

A declining population must inevitably
involve a deterioration in the whole standard
of life of our people. With a population
whose numbers are declining, and whose
average age is rising, we should be faced
with the situation of a smaller and smaller
proportion of active workers having to
support an ever-increasing proportion of old
people. Old-age pensions at present
amounted to {£40,000,000. In less than
thirty years’ time they would be costing
nearly £65,000,000.

Those were the dangers. What could be

‘done to avert them? There were two ways

of attempting to raise the birth-rate: one
was to do what they had done in Italy, and
make birth control illegal—a most retrograde step. The other was so to improve
social and economic conditions as to make
parents glad to have more children, and that,
he was sure, was the only civilized way to
approach this problem. There were many
reasons which made people restrict the size
of their families—the hardships of confinement, the interference with a woman’s
earning capacity, the expense of feeding and
clothing, the cost of education, the smallness
of the home, the drudgery of housework,

and numerous other reasons.

. Many different ‘methods of encouraging

larger families had-.~ been -.-advocated :
253 | CO
254

marriage loans, family allowances, a longer
period of rest before confinement for working
mothers, attendance by children of all
classes at the free elementary schools, the
de-urbanization of industry, more laboursaving dwellings, more créches and nursery
schools. Some of these measures, together
with others, would very likely have to be
adopted.

The Government had, however, wisely
decided that before determining their policy
they must have the fullest possible information. Hence the welcome announcement of
an inquiry. The Minister of Health and the
Government were to be warmly congratulated on having had the courage and farsightedness to tackle this difficult and
delicate problem. The purpose of the resolution was to assure them of the wholehearted
backing of their supporters in the momentous
task they had undertaken.

He was confident that as a nation we
should not be found lacking in a sense of
responsibility for the future. We were not
going to let our British Empire go the way
of the great empires of the past—dwindle,
decay, and disappear. Britain’s destiny still
lay ahead of her. The hopes of the world, of
democracy, of progress, of civilization were
to-day centred in the British race. Britain
had a part to play in history, and she meant
to play it. (Cheers.)

Lt.-CoL. J. SANDEMAN ALLEN, M.P. (West
Birkenhead), seconded the resolution. He
said that he knew of a case of a German
woman whose mother was English. She had
forty-two first cousins ; forty-one of them
were German and one English. That showed
the decline in the productive capacity of the
English. This was not a motion to produce
cannon fodder and to encourage war. It was
one which was far more likely to push war
into the background. The problem that they
were facing might be the problem of the
future, but it was the responsibility of
to-day, and they must stand by their responsibility. It was little short of criminal
that municipalities should prevent men and
women teachers from getting married and
remaining in their jobs. The same thing
applied to large firms, which said that a man

THE EUGENICS REVIEW |

could not get married at all till he was
earning a certain salary. Let them contrast
this with the action of one of their universj. _
ties, which gave {60 benefit to every member; —
of the staff for each child he had. The ©
marriage rate was as important as the birthrate, because if they had fewer matriages —
those who were married would have a greater
responsibility thrust upon them. ‘The people
who said that a smaller population was going _
to improve the unemployment problem were
very shortsighted. A smaller population
would only mean a smaller demand for ©
goods and an increase in the costs of production, and that naturally would make things
even more difficult to carry on the export
trade. This was a national problem, and it
could be best left to the National Government to deal with. |

Mr. E. S. Oak-RuIND (Isle of Thanet)
moved as an amendment to delete all the
words after the word “ problem.”

He said that if the Conference adopted the
resolution they would be pledging themselves to accept any measure that might
arise from this Government inquiry upon an
issue which affected every man and every

woman not only in that Conference but

throughout the whole country. He had no
objection to an inquiry. Indeed, he congratulated the Government on taking up this
inquiry, but he did feel that in an issue of
such domestic magnitude the findings of this
inquiry should be put before the people, and,
above all, before a Conservative Conference,
before they became part of the law of the
land. Parents had one great fear, and that
was that after they had made their sacrifices
for their families, they would be faced with
the position that their children would not be
able to find places in which they would be
able to earn their living in this great country
of theirs. : |

Mr. H. JENNINGS (Isle of Thanet) seconded
the amendment. He said that his association
believed that the correct way to proceed was
first to know what was to be done and to
agree afterwards. Speaking as a single man
(laughter) he assured them that there was a
certain arnount of fear in the younger
generation in these days, because the rearing

 
POPULATION PROBLEMS

of families was a very heavy responsibility.
There was always the fear that one’s children might land on the slag-heap of unemployment. They were heartily in support of
the Government's plan, but they did not
want to sign a blank cheque. (A delegate :
‘e Get married.’’) | .
COUNCILLOR Mrs. STEVENSON (Leeds) said
that there was a serious omission in that the

resolution asking the Government to en
courage an increase in the population said
nothing as to the quality of the proposed
increase. During her municipal work, particularly on the West Riding Mental Health
Board, she had been gradually filled with
alarm and apprehension for the future of this
country because she found that our lowest
types were increasing out of all proportion
to our highest types. She begged the
Government to take due account of this
factor while they were inquiring into this
vital problem. Things would be made
worse, not better, unless we saw to it that
our better strains were encouraged to produce more population, and unless at the
same time our worse strains were discouraged. “Io take an analogy from gardening, it was fairly obvious that they could not
plant dandelion seeds and expect to raise
gladioli.

She did not object to an increase in our
population. She welcomed it—but the
Government must see to it that the increase
came from the right direction. Our most
intellectual types were at present being
actively discouraged from propagating their
kind. She agreed that so long as women
teachers and women in the municipal and
civil services. were penalized on marriage by
having to leave the service, so long should we
continue to discourage the bearing of chil
dren by some of the most valuable and

intellectual types of people, thus preventing
that increase in the population in the direc.
tion that all so earnestly desired. .

_ Lapy Limericx said that while welcoming
the Minister’s decision to institute an
inquiry, she felt that she would be voicing
the views of a large. number of delegates in
stressing the importance—for the protection
of the community—of supporting only those

255

measures which would encourage the production of healthy children, thus improving
the nation’s physique. All must welcome the
production of healthy children. If healthy
large families were desirable certain facts
must be faced. There were many homes
where the health of the parents or of the
children already born made it not only
undesirable but wrong to have more children. To force the burden of increasing the
population on such parents was not only
cruel to them but bad policy for the nation.
Attention was now being drawn to the
importance of national fitness, not only for
their own sakes as individuals but for the
happiness and well-being of the community
as a whole. They could not start this campaign at too early a stage. They did not
want to encourage undesirable parents to
bring sickly children into the world. It might
be that as a result of the investigations in
progress or to be undertaken the Minister of
Health would be involved in a population
policy which would mean considerable expenditure. They wanted to urge that
whatever money and energy were to be
expended in this campaign should be laid
out so as to secure the maximum return.
Only by encouraging the best types in the
community to become parents would they
be tackling this question of national fitness
at its very source. Let them be consistent
in this campaign for national fitness. If they
wanted an Ar nation they must stress the
importance of quality as opposed to quantity.

SIR KINGSLEY Woop, Minister of Health,
said that this was one.of the most important
matters to come before the Conference this
year, and in his judgment the question was a
vital one to the country. In his position as
Minister of Health he did not think that, as
some people would suggest, this problem
could be left to look after itself. He was in
agreement with all the speakers that this was
a matter which considerably affected our
National and Imperial destiny. It was one
of considerable moment in determining our
future social and economic policy. Future
population was determined many years
ahead, and if we ignored this problem now
it might well be too late.
256

There was anxiety on the future trend of
the population, and it was growing in many
countries. There were other countries where
life was hard, and often precarious, where
the population was increasing in some cases
rapidly. In this country until recently the
trend had been unmistakable, and it was
true that if we accepted certain assumptions
our population would fall in thirty years
perhaps to some 30,000,000,.and in a hundred years to 5,000,000. Since the birth-rate
reached its lowest level in this country in
1933 it had remained during the three
completed years which had elapsed not only
without any further decline but with a
sight upward tendency. This tendency had
so far continued. during the present incomplete year. That was a remarkable, and he
thought unprecedented, phenomenon. Too
much must not be built on it. ‘The more the
check in the decline was prolonged, the more
it appeared that continuous decline was not
inevitable and irresistible. It might also
show that forces existed in this country
having an upward direction which might
well provide a basis for a _ constructive
policy in this country. The fact was that
much more information was wanted on the
whole subject. There were two inquiries
going on at present—one voluntary under
the chairmanship of Professor Saunders,
and the other by the Registrar-General—
and they were closely co-operating.

Before anything effective could be
achieved steps would have to be taken to
obtain really complete vital statistics. Our
present ones were unsatisfactory and incomplete. We knew the number of children born
to the population as a whole, but we wanted
more facts like the ages of the parents, the
date and duration of the marriage, the order
of the births and matters of that kind. He
hoped we would be able to build up annually
a continuing volume of statistics, and he
thought it would be best done through the
registration system. Parliamentary authority would be necessary for this step. He
wanted to emphasize that the confidential
aspect of this matter must be strictly preserved. He thought it could be done by

THE EUGENICS REVIEW |

dence on this matter. Some people suggested

  
  

giving the necessary information to th,
registrar confidentially, not for entry on the
public registers but for statistical purpose |
only, as in the case of the census inquiry —
He hoped it would be possible to proceed at
an early date on these lines. There was jo
question of the Government acting on its
own account without any Parliamentary
authority. so |
He would advise considerable caution a,
to the reasons for the causes of the fall ip |
population. He had had a large correspon.

that our population had declined because of
high taxation. On the other hand, some
people pointed out that families were prob.
ably smaller among those who paid the |
highest rates of taxation. Others had
suggested that we must put it down to the
effect of unemployment and other adverse
conditions. Others had pointed out that
this decline in population had proceeded
during a period. when there had been a
continuous improvement in the ‘conditions
of the people. It was true that a number of
people said that they had no desire to produce children as cannon fodder. It had also
been pointed out that the fall in the population was the sharpest when there was the

‘least fear of war. One expert observer said,

‘“ The dwindling family is the result of what
is worst and what is best in the potential
parents. Caution and self-indulgence, responsibility and the careless love of pleasure,
both cry out against the large family and
even the small one.”’ |

He thought he would have the support of
all parties in the House in saying, particularly in view of the doubtful success which
so far had been achieved in relation to the
steps taken by certain foreign countries in
this matter, that it was essential that we
should secure a foundation of evidence and
fact as to the operative causes before any
step could usefully be taken. He believed
that was the practical and the best way to
deal with this difficult and complex problem.

The amendment was carried, and _ the
motion as amended was agreed to unanimously. oo a

. Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIX, No. 4.
