CORRESPONDENCE

GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS IN HUMAN ABILITY

To the Editor, The Eugenics Review

Sir,—In his review of the Society’s second Symposium volume,* Halsey writes:

Once granted that environment contributes to the outcome to a significant
extent, it follows that many of the unsolved problems lie completely within the social
and moral arts and sciences. (My italics.)

Halsey is referring to the complex problem of the causes of phenotypic variance of intelligence test results though his statement, if true, could apply to any phenotypic variable
of incomplete heritability. ,

I would like to point out that for this statement to hold there must be no genotypeenvironment interaction, and no relevant genetic difference affecting the means of different
sub-groups of the population under consideration. Neither of these restricting conditions
is known to be true of any heritable continuous variate in any human population, so that
we cannot know that non-genetic causes of variation can be adequately studied except
in association with study of genetic variables. Biologists can sometimes study genetic and
environmental causes independently because they can use genetically uniform populations,
(e.g. inbred lines) to study environmental variables and use controlled environments to
study genetic variables. We cannot do this with human populations so that critical studies
of environmental and genetic causes of, for example, mean IQ differences distinguishing
social classes cannot be made independently.

It is implicit elsewhere in Halsey’s review that he believes that collaboration between
sociologists and biologists is desirable. It is a pity that the statement quoted above appears
in his review for it cannot but persuade some readers that such collaboration is not
essential J. M. THODAY

Department of Genetics
University of Cambridge

DR. HALSEY, who is at present abroad, hopes to reply to Professor Thoday’s comments
in the December number of the REVIEW. EDITOR

TOP PEOPLE HAVE LARGER FAMILIES

To the Editor, The Eugenics Review

Sir,—I thought at first that your heading Top People have Larger Families for the Notes
of the Quarter, March 1967, was a bit of light-heartedness, and just meant as a witty sideglance at the advertisements for The Times. I never dreamt that a scientific journal could
mean such a conception of topness to be taken seriously.

But apparently you are serious! On page 70 you again note, with emotional and
non-objective approval, that “top professional” people are having more children than
other groups, without defining “top”. All your comments and attitudes seem to bristle
with non-scientific prejudices and opinions that could be debated, and counteracted with
some facts.

“These trends are beneficial to the nation as a whole” you say. “In a competitive
world the best possible quality of thought and action is needed”. Would they not be needed

* Genetic and Environmental Factors in Human Ability. Ed. J. E. Meade and A. S. Parkes. (See THE
EUGENICS REVIEW, 59, 49-51).

216
