MATERNAL EMPLOYMENT AND THE
WELFARE OF CHILDREN
AN ACCOUNT OF A SURVEY IN PROGRESS*
By J. W. B. DOUGLAS, B.M., B.Ch., & J. M. BLOMFIELD

Maternal Employment in the Nineteenth
Century ©

[p the nineteenth century maternal emas anevil. ‘“‘ The habit of a manufacturing

life being once established in a woman, she

continues it, and leaves her home and

children to the care of a neighbour or of a

hired child, sometimes only a few years older
than her own children, whose services cost

ployment was, with good reason, regarded 
her probably as much as she obtains for her ©

labour. To this neglect on the part of their
parents is to be traced the death of many
children; they are left in the home with a
fire before they are old enough to know the
danger to which they are exposed, and are
often dreadfully burnt.”t It was noted in
Manchester during the cotton famine in 1862
and in Coventry during the trade depression
of 1861, that infant mortality declined
although the general mortality increased.
This was attributed to the decreased employment of women who were therefore
better able to look after their children, and it
‘was concluded that “‘ neglect of their homes
by mothers at work in factories is apparently
more fatal than starvation.’”’ During the
siege of Paris in 1870-71 also, the infant
death rate fell, whereas the general death
rate doubled.{

At the beginning of the present century
evidence given to the Interdepartmental
Committee on physical deterioration emphasised again the evils of the employment

* A paper read by Dr. J. W. B. Douglas at a Members’
Meeting of the Eugenics Society on December 12th, 1956.

¢ Chadwick, E. Sanitary Condition of the Labouring
Population of Great Britain. London, 1842. Clowes.
P. 139 quotes from the report of The Committee of
Physicians and Surgeons at Birmingham.

{ Newman, G. Infant Mortality. London,
Methuen. p. 227.

of women. It “...prevents them from
forming the domestic habits usually acquired
by women in their station. Few can sew,
bake.or cook; a vast number of these females
cannot make or mend or repair a single tear.
A girl who has been accustomed for years to
a manufacturing job cannot cook a dinner
of the plainest description. In consequence
the man she marries has no home but the
beer shop.”’

It is indeed not surprising that in the
nineteenth century the employment of
women was disastrous for their children.
The working week was 60-70 hours and time
cribbing was rife. The only holidays were
Sundays, Christmas Day, Good Friday and
four bank holidays. Wages were insufficient
to permit the employment of a responsible
child minder. |

Bad though these conditions were, it is
likely that they were an improvement on
those of women working in their homes before
factory employment became widespread.
Even so, there is no doubt that during the
last century many infants perished from
neglect and mismanagement that were a
direct consequence of the employment of
their mothers outside the home. They were
stupefied with opiates and left in the care of
children scarcely older than themselves,

~ who were removed from school for this

1906, —

69

purpose. Their mothers, having so little to
do with them, often became indifferent and
accepted their death with resignation, if not
with relief. And in many instances the death
of a child, through insurance, would bring
financial gain to the parents.

Maternal Employment To-day
The black record of married women’s.
employment in the nineteenth century may

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July, 1957. 49, 2.
70 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

well account in part for the prejudice against
their employment to-day. While it is felt that
women should be free to work if they so
wish, many believe that a child deprived in
this way of his mother’s attention, will
suffer for it mentally, if not physically.

In recent years earlier marriage and a.

diminishing excess of women over men have
meant that industry increasingly has to
satisfy its need for women workers from
those that are married. Thus, although the
size of the female labour force has not greatly

changed, the proportion of those working

who have young children has greatly increased. Some information on the present
position is given in the 1951 Census (cf. One
per cent Sample Tables Part II. 1952. Table
X6 p. 262) where the numbers of women in
employment with children under one year
of age are recorded and also the numbers of
children in the families of employed women
classified by marriage duration. From these
a minimum estimate of the number of
employed women with young children may
be obtained, but there is no information on
the ages of the individual children, or on how
they are looked after while their mothers are
away from home.

Much of the prejudice against women’s
work to-day arises from.the feeling that the
mother is the right person to look after her
child and that he will suffer if she does not do
so. Yet such evidence as there is for the
adverse effect of maternal employment on

the child’s development is indirect—from.

the study of delinquent and otherwise abnormal groups—and no figures are available
to show what proportion of the children of
employed women are likely to be affected or
at what ages or in what circumstances
maternal employment is likely to be most
harmful.

A Child Health Survey

An opportunity to study these questions
was provided by a longitudinal child health
survey which started in 1946 and has continued until the present day. This survey
is sponsored by the Institute of Child Health
(University of London), the Society of
Medical Officers of Health and the Popula
tion Investigation Committee. The sample is
5,386 children all born in the first week of
March 1946 and drawn from every part of
this country and from every type of home.
background. Information on many aspects of
the growth, health and development of these
children during .the succeeding years has
been gathered by health visitors, school
nurses, school doctors and teachers throughout the country. Owing to the help given by
local public health and education authorities,
losses have been small and in eleven years
only six per cent of the children originally
enrolled have been withdrawn from the
survey or are untraced.*

Throughout the survey we have been
interested in the extent to which women are
engaged in paid work, and a continuous
record of this is available for the whole
eleven years of the inquiry. We also have
details of who looked after the children while
their mothers were away from home and of
the use made of nurseries and daily minders.

The following paragraphs deal only with the

pre-school period. Further details will be
found in a forthcoming report.f

Few women started work until their
children were six months old, at which time
three per cent were employed. By the time
the children were one year, four per cent
were working and this proportion increased
to 15 per cent at four years. Approximately
half these mothers were in part time employment, 1.e. working less than thirty-five
hours a week. These figures, of course, refer
to women whose children were born eleven
years ago and to-day the proportion working
would undoubtedly be higher.t

Many women were employed for short
periods only and, in all, 26 per cent went out
to work at some time during the first four
years of their children’s lives.

In general, as would be expected, the
extent of employment was greater in the

* For further details of this study cf. Douglas, J. W.
B. and Blomfield, J. M. ‘“ The Reliability of Longitudinal Surveys.’’ 1956. Milbank. Memorial Fund
Quarterly. 39, p. 227.

+t Douglas, J. W. B. and Blomfield, J. M. Children
before Five. Allen & Unwin (in the press).

ft The 1951 Census One per cent Sample Tables show

44 per cent of women with children under one year of
age as working (see Table X6 p. 262).
MATERNAL EMPLOYMENT AND THE WELFARE OF CHILDREN 41

urban areas and greatest of all in the northern
County Boroughs and London. In Wales
relatively few mothers went out to work.
Social group differences in maternal employment lay in the type of work done rather than
in the proportion working. However, only
12 per cent of the small group of wives of
professional and salaried workers went out
to work while their children were under four
years. In all other social groups approximately double this proportion were working.
Part time work and short periods of work
were more often encountered among the
poorer women. In general the type of work
done by wives followed that of their husbands.

In looking at the characteristics of women
who went out to work it was convenient to
take only those who were working for at
least one year during the first four years of
their children’s lives. These women were I1
per cent of all those in the sample. They
were distinguished by having few children
during the survey years and by having their
own parents living with them. It was presumably these two conditions which made it
easy for them to go out to work.

Health visitors had difficulty in making
contact with the working mothers and when
they did so found them often inefficient and
unwilling to listen to their advice. In contrast, their record of attendances at child
welfare clinics was only slightly less good
than that of non-employed women.

At the time of this survey women were still
able to get the benefit of the day nurseries
set up during the war, many of which have
since been closed. Even so, only 17 per cent
of the two year old children whose mothers
were at work went to them. Much has been
said about the dangers of infection in
nurseries and this is borne out by this
inquiry.* During their stay in nurseries, but
not before or after, the children were much
more likely to contract whooping cough,
measles and other infections of childhood.

_ In attempting to assess the effects of the

* Douglas, J. W. B. and Rowntree, G. Supplementary Natal and Child Health Services. Population
Studies (1949) 3, p. 205.

mother’s work on the health and development of her child, we have matched each
child whose mother was working for twelve
months or more during the pre-school years
with another (the control) who came from

the same type of home background but

whose mother had never worked.

The children of working mothers at first
sight appeared to have an excess of lower
respiratory tract infections as compared with
their controls, but this was explained by the
larger number attending nurseries and getting
their coughs there. Hospital admissions also
were more frequent among these children
than among their controls, but only at times
when the mothers were working. In addition,
once they were admitted to hospital, the
children of working mothers stayed there
longer. It is likely that both the more
frequent hospital admissions and their longer
stay were necessary because they could not
be cared for at home.

In height, the children of working mothers
were not stunted as compared with their
controls, nor did they show an excess of bad
habits, nightmares or other signs suggestive
of emotional upset. It is, however, early yet
to say that these children have not suffered
from their mother’s absence from the home.
To reach a final judgment we will need to
follow them through adolescence and give
them much more searching tests than we.
have so far been able to do. This we hope
will be possible.

Summary

This paper gives a brief account of the
early years of a study which, among other
things, should throw light on the extent to
which the employment of mothers outside
the home affects the health, growth and
development of their children. An examination of the record of a national sample of
5,386 children of pre-school age gives no
reason for believing: that the children of
employed women are in any way at a dis
advantage. This group of children is, how
ever, still under observation and it is too

-early yet to reach a final conclusion.
