PROBLEM

3. March 1945. “ The Social Problem Group :
Poverty and sub-normality of Intelligence,” by
D. Caradog Jones, M.A. Reprinted from the
Canadian Bar Review. Published by the Canadian
Bar Association, Osgoode Law School, Tororto,
Canada.

8. September 1944. ‘“‘ Problem Families,’ by
k. C. Wofinden, M.D., B.S., D.P.H., Acting
Deputy M.O.H. and V.D. Medical Officer, Rotherham C.B.—Public Health.

9. Summer 1944. “ Child Neglect. A Problem
of Social Administration,’”’ by A. E. Martin, M.D.,
D.P.H., Assistant County M.O.H., Leicestershire
County Council.—Public Administration Summer
Number.

PROBLEM

FAMILIES 127

10. Undated 1944. “ The Care of Negtected
Children.”” Special Report by the Assistant School
Medical Officer. Leaflet by A. E. Martin, MLD.,
D.P.H.

II. 1943. ‘‘ Our Towns: AClose-up.’”” Women’s
Group on Public Welfare (in association with the
National Council for Social Service}.~Oxford
University Press. Booklet.

12. The paper just published (Oct. 1946) of Mr.
Charles G. Tomlinson, B.A. (Admin.), Senior.
Administrative Officer, Public Health Department,
Luton, is entitled: ‘‘ Families in Trouble: An
Inquiry into Problem Families in Luton.”

FA MILIES*

By R. C. WOFINDEN, M_.D., D.P.H.
Acting Deputy M.O.H., Rotherham.

life during the recent war and the

newly awakened interest in social
medicine has served to focus attention once
again on a section of the population origtnally described by Charles Booth as the
“submerged tenth.’’ Withm this section
are the problem families. These families for
one reason or another have not kept pace
with social progress and are a brake on the
wheels. They are the despair of health departments, education authorities, N.S.P.C.C.
inspectors, and, until recently, of anyone
who attempted to improve their lot m life.
They masquerade under a variety of names
—problem families, social problem families,
derelict families, handicapped families and
unsatisfactory households.

Definition
In spite of the mmltiplicity of names no
accepted definition of such families has yet

"| ie tremendous upheaval in family

* An address delivered at a conference on ‘‘ Problem
Families,’’ held at Manchester on June 22nd, 1946.

been produced. In 1944 I defined them as
“families with social defectiveness of such
a degree that they require care, supervision
and control for thetr own well-being and
for the well-being of others.” Dr. Burn,
Medical Officer of Health of Salford, has
suggested as a working definition ‘‘ families
where the standards of home life are so
gravely defective as to damage the normal
development of children ”’ ; and Dr. Stallybrass, Deputy Medical Officer of Health of
Liverpool, has suggested “‘ famihes presenting
an abnormal amount of subnorma! behaviour
over prolonged periods with a marked tendency to backsliding.” AIl these definitions
suffer from a certain vagueness which, from
the point of view of comparative study, is a
distinct handicap. The Pacifist Service
Units have also pointed out the disadvantages arising from the lack of a suitable
definition, and the families of their study
have been selected merely by the fact of
their being referred for assistance.

But does it really matter that a definition,
128

incapable of misinterpretation, has not so
far been produced ? There are some problems which are extremely difficult or even
impossible to reduce to mathematical formule or to submit to strict statistical
analysis, and in the present state of our
knowledge problem families would appear to
be among them. Their problems are essentially those of human conduct and therefore
difficult of measurement. Nevertheless, I
have always found that there is little doubt
in the minds of health and social welfare
workers of their chief characteristics, and in
default of an accepted definition reliance
must be placed on description of these
characteristics. I cannot improve on the
description I gave originally in 1944.

Often it is a large family, some of the children
being dull or feeble: minded. From their appearance they are strangers to soap and water,
toothbrush and comb ; the clothing is dirty and
torn and the footgear absent or totally inadequate. Often they are verminous and have
scabies and impetigo. Their nutrition is surprisingly average—doubtless due to extrafamilial feeding in schools. The-mother is
frequently substandard mentally. The home, if

_ indeed it can be described as such, has usually
the most. striking characteristics. Nauseating
odours assail one’s nostrils on entry, and the
source is usually located in some urine-sodden,
feecal-stained mattress in an upstairs room.
There are no floor coverings, no decorations on

_ the walls except perhaps the scribblings of the
children and bizarre patterns formed by absent
plaster. Furniture is of the most primitive,
cooking utensils absent, facilities for sleeping
hopeless—iron bedsteads furnished with soiled
mattresses and no coverings. Upstairs there is

flock everywhere, which the mother assures us ©

has come out of a mattress which she has unpacked for cleansing. But the flock seems to
stay there for weeks and the cleansed and repacked mattress never appears. The bathroom
is obviously the least frequented room of the
building. There are sometimes fecal accumulations on the floors upstairs, and tin baths
containing several days’ accumulations of faces
and urine are not unknown. The children,
especially the older ones, often seem” perfectly
happy and contented, despite such a shocking
environment. They will give a description of
how a full sized midday meal has been cooked
and eaten in the house on the day of the visit
when the absence of cooking utensils gives the
lie to their assertions. . . . One can only conclude that such children have never known
restful sleep, that the amount of housework

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

done by the mother is negligible, and that the
general standard of hygiene is lower than that
of the animal world.

Extent of the Problem

These are the chief characteristics of our
“‘ problem families.”” One of the aspects I
was asked to cover this morning was the
extent of problem families—how many of
these. families are there in this country ?
There are no national statistics and, so far
as I know, there have been only two publications in this country estimating the
localized incidence of problem families.
For many years it has been our practice in
Rotherham to keep careful records of these
families. Rotherham is an industrial county
borough with a population of approximately
76,000; we estimate that we have 243
problem families and that they contain about
goo children under the age of 14 years, i.e.
about 5 per cent of all the children under the
age of 14 years. Dr. Sidney Savage in his
Herefordshire inquiry found that in an area
with a population of 90,800 there were 89
problem families which included 333 children
under the age of 14 years, or I-9 per cent of
the children. I understand that inquiries
into problem families are proceeding in
several other tgwns throughout the country.

Certainly this country has no monopoly
so far as these families are concerned, but,
until recently, probably less has been done
to tackle the problem family than in other
countries. Thus Holland, Italy, Austria
and Nyasaland are all aware of the nature of
the problem and have made varying attempts
to combat it. In Nyasaland chief reliance
has been placed on training centres, in
Holland on segregation of the families in
special estates, in Italy on offering cheap
accommodation in municipally owned furnished apartments, and in Austria on the

_use of reconditioned property and long
term educational policies. Suggestions on
these lines have been made for tackling
problem families in this country, ‘particularly by segregation, but such an idea has
received little support owing to the obvious
stigma attaching to residence in such a
colony.
PROBLEM

It is surely obvious that national statistics
on this question are vitally necessary before
it will be possible to carry out any long-term
planning. The authority for the collection
of local statistics should, in my opinion, be
the local health department, for the medical
and public health aspects of problem families are all-important. The local health
authority should be made responsible for
the registration of these families, and should
work in close association with housing
managers, school teachers, probation officers,
public assistance officers, and the local inspector of the N.S.P.C.C. Another useful
idea is one which originated in Norwich by
Dr. Soothill, of an ‘‘ Unsatisfactory Households Sub-Committee.’”’ While such a committee can have few powers and duties, it
does provide an opportunity for bringing
these cases to the notice of the members of
a local authority and giving an opportunity
for discussion and making suggestions for
improvement.

Ascertainment for Prevention |
As a public health doctor, naturally I am
most interested in the preventive aspects of
problem families. Before we can embark
on a successful programme of prevention it
is necessary to ascertain the causation of
problem families; and before we can find
out the root causes prolonged and widespread research will probably be necessary.

The authors of the Pacifist Service Units’

Problem Families have said that *‘‘ study of
these cases does not show them to be readily
classifiable -in distinct social groups,’ and
that ‘‘ each problem family presents a unique
complex of circumstances’; or as Stallybrass puts it ‘‘ gach problem family presents
a unique family problem.”” The implication
is that the appropriate cure or rehabilitation is, in turn, unique and individual for
each family. The authors further point out
that one family in ten has shown sustained
improvement with assistance. I know that
their experiments have not been carried out
over a very prolonged period and that the
amount of assistance they have been able
to give has, of necessity, been limited.
Nevertheless this result does raise the

FAMILIES 129
question whether some more fundamental
approach should be made. Observation of
these cases does suggest some form of
grouping, and while there may be several
contributory factors in each case one factor
usually serves to predominate. In our
Rotherham inquiry we found that about 20
percent of the mothers of problem families
were either certified or suspected feebleminded cases. Dr. Savage in his Herefordshire inquiry estimated that 29-2 per cent
of the mothers of those problem families
were intellectually defective and therefore
ineducable and that 25 per cent of the
children of problem, families were mentally
retarded by 3-4 years. Surely, then, here
is one large group already. We all know
the extent to which family life revolves
around the mother. That a mentally defective woman should be allowed to bear and
attempt to rear children is a negation of
social progress. The solution is self-evident ;
more efficient ascertainment of mental. deficiency, the provision of more special schools
for éducationally subnormal children and
of more institutions and training centres.
Lewis estimated in 1929 that there were
105,000 feeble-minded children between the
ages of seven and sixteen in England and
Wales, and there is no reason to suppose
that the numbers are any less to-day. These
children, with the present widespread scandalous shortage of accommodation, are the
potential parents of our future problem
families. In short, I suggest that if the
mental deficiency problem was tackled with
more resolution there would be a good chance
of reducing the problem of problem families
by 20 to 30 per cent.

Classification of Problem Families

I think there are three other groups into
which problem families may be broadly
classifiable. There is one group in which
the chief defect appears to be one of character—either viciousness or weakness in one
or both parents. In another group the chief
defect appears to be one of training, more
particularly of the mother. It is this group
which would probably be most benefitted by
the training scheme suggested by the Penal
130

Reform Committee. Lastly, there is the
group where the chief difficulty would appear
to be economic. I would place in this group
those families in whose case the father is
unemployed or dead, cases with low family
income (either absolutely or relatively on
account of an excessive number of children),
and cases in which there is chronic ill health
of the mother.

A recent editorial in the Medical Officer
pointed out that, in reality, the problem
family is ‘“‘ the extreme end of a more general
problem—that of poverty and the degradation that poverty so often brings.’’ This
may well be true and doubtless many of
those problem families which fall into the
economic group would fairly rapidly cease
to be problem families if all the suggested
social legislation became a reality. But no
social legislation so far proposed can make
much impression on those families in which
the root defect is one of intellect, training
or character. In these cases the faculty of
self-help is conspicuously absent and in the
words of Simon “help from outside can
hardly be of permanent value, except in
proportion as it tends to develop the selfhelping faculties.”

It may be that I have over-simplified this
question of causation, but instances of
families in one or other group come fairly
readily to mind. Further inquiry may bring
to light groups other than those I have mentioned. I only lay stress on the necessity
of looking for families with fundamental
similarities because it should help to simplify the prevention of such cases. I know
that there is no simple short cut to stamp
out this evil in our midst.
made by the Pacifist Service Units and one
or two local authorities in the rehabilitation
of problem families, but it is imperative that
the preventive side should be pursued with
equal vigour.

Sane Elements in a Policy

Nursery schools and nursery classes, the
training of girls in housecraft and of boys
and girls in parentcraft are long-term policies
which in due course will show rich dividends.
As Professor Crew has pointed out, “Ina

A start has been

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

modern industrialized society there is a great
need for the education of potential parents
in their responsibilities and duties, for a
knowledge of the technique of raising offspring is not instinctive in us, it is an
acquisition to be obtained only through
serious study.”’ It is possible that in the
distant future, by a more enlightened outlook on marriage guidance, contraception and
sterilization, there will be a more conscious
selection of marriage partners with a view
to the consequences on the next generation.
It is significant that the Church should be
posing questions along these lines: “

do the principles of freedom and the rights
of man require that subnormal adults should
be allowed to contaminate a neighbourhood
with their sordid, filthy houses and to bring
into the world children for whom they have
no care or affection ? ”’

There are two other points I would like
to raise before leaving the preventive aspects
of problem families. The building of new
houses is at present very prominently before
the public. It has been said that many
problem families are housed in slum property
and they have never had a chance to improve, but that when they are provided with
a new house they willimprove. Our experience in Rotherham does not bear this out.
Nearly half of our problem families are in
good houses (municipal or the equivalent)
and many of these families had been moved
from previous slum property. In the prewar years it had been the custom to house
bad tenants next door to the good in the
hope that by precept and example the
former would improve. Unfortunately such
has not been the case.

The second point I should like to raise is
one that has been mentioned by several who
have written on this subject. Stress has
been laid on the importance of noting the
early symptoms of family disintegration—
poor school attendance, dirtiness or vermin
infestations in the children, arrears of rent
and so on. Any such case should rapidly
be ascertained and the appropriate supervision and assistance given in order to
preserve the family unit. In my experience
such cases have not been common, but
PROBLEM
perhaps this has been because we have not
been s speciiically on the look-out for them.
But I find it difficult to believe that a family
that has. once lived in a decent, hygienic
manner with a satisfactory routine can ever
sink to the depths of these problem families.
Surely it is more a question of what prevents
the family from rising above this level than
what causes them to be pulled down to this
level. In the majority of cases I suggest
that the problem family is handed down from
generation to generation partly by inherited
characteristics and partly, in the words of
Dr. Stallybrass, by: “‘ an atrocious upbringing ” of the children.

Problems for Research

We shall not be in a position to consider
the full consequences of problem families
until we know how many there are throughout the whole country. From the Rotherham and the Herefordshire figures it appears
that the average number of children in these
families is high, and the question arises, Is
this type of family propagating itself to a
greater extent than other families ? Some
observations of Titmuss are very much to
the point on this question. He says,

It cannot be regarded as wise or healthy if a
considerable section of the future population is
being recruited from a number of very large and
very poor families. Is this the position in
England to-day ? Are we, or are we not, confronted with a situation in which the economically under-privileged are producing a disproportionately large number of babies while those
more favoured with a good environment are
unduly restricting the size of their families ?

Titmuss goes on to say, ‘‘ The answer. . .
is that we do not know.”’ Once again the
need for further research is amply demonstrated. Nevertheless, if these families are
reproducing themselves at a high rate,
Savage has shown that in Herefordshire their
infant mortality rate is almost twice as high
as the average annual infant mortality rate
for that area, In the older children Savage
says “
the children (even when the mothers were
of average intelligence) was a very considerable retardation in school, amounting to
mental deficiency in some of the children.”

the most serious detectable change in ~

FAMILIES 131
To what extent these households form the
reservoirs for infectious disease or the breeding grounds for juvenile delinquency is not
known. .

Fate of the Children

One of the most serious and immediate
consequences of problem families is that of
child neglect. The two are very closely
associated and it is this question which has
brought the subject of problem families
before the public, One could almost argue
on a priort grounds that if children are living
in conditions such as I described earlier in
my paper they must inevitably be neglected.
Yet such children are often well nourished
and, in spite of their environment, apparently quite happy. They have the family
instinct well developed and will lie freely in
an effort to protect their parents. One is
torn between two conflicting emotions—the
desire to preserve the family as a unit and
the desire to protect the children and give
them a satisfactory environment. I say
conflicting emotions because, in present
circumstances, it is rarely possible to rehabilitate the family 7 situ without the children —
undergoing further hardship. The employment of ‘“ home advisers,” as in Norwich,
and the work of the Pacifist Service Units is
an endeavour to reconcile these conflicting
emotions. But the high percentage of ineducable problem family mothers inevitably
vitiates much of their work.

In any event it is being increasingly
realized that it is folly to prosecute all
parents for child neglect when many of
them, owing to lack of ability, cannot be
held responsible. When a mentally subnormal parent is sent to prison for child
neglect the State is, ironically enough,
punishing the parent for’its own deficiency.
Evidence of the efficacy of a prison sentence
for child neglect might be obtained by an
examination of the number of cases in which
the parents are prosecuted a second time for
the same offence. I have been unable to
discover any figures for the whole country,
but in the last ten years in Rotherham, out
of 40 cases prosecuted by the N.S.P.C.C. for child neglect involving the rewoval of 150
132

children to the Children’s Homes, only one
case has been prosecuted a second time.
This would appear to be evidence in favour
of prosecution, the implication being that
the prison sentence had produced the necessary improvement in the parents. But
from personal observation this is not the
case, and I think the scarcity of second
prosecutions is due to the wish to avoid
victimization. If the parent is sent to gaol

for child neglect there is, of course, whole
hearted agreement on seizing the opportunity for training the mother providing she
is trainable.

I am not quite sure how far the local
authority is justified in utilizing Section 52
of the Poor Law Act, 1930, in these cases.
If the parents are obviously incapable of
being trained to run a home and look after
their children, then, in the interests of the
children, it would seem to be the duty of the
local authority to make the necessary re
solution to take over the parents’ rights and °

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

powers with regard to the children. .On the
other hand it would seem to be wrong, after
removing all the children in such cases, to
allow the parents to start having another
batch of children. Yet in such cases there
is nothing to prevent them from doing so
and the local authority is to all intents and
purposes subsiding the parents’ shortcomings. —

Conclusion

I hope that in this somewhat fragmentary
account I have shown some of the inherent
difficulties of problem families and their relationship to the general structure of society.
In conclusion I would suggest that the most
urgent necessities are for the further scientific
study of these families, the better ascertainment and disposal of mental deficiency
cases, and the setting up of experimental
training centres where parents can be trained
in the proper management of a home and
the upbringing of children.

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY

Articles appearing in forthcoming issues :

FISSION AND DISINTEGRATION IN STYLARIA FOSSULARIS AT DIFFERENT ine

By T. F. Tsu,

. Cuu and S. Par, National University of Chekiang Meitan, Kweichow, Chin

THE EFFECT OF PEANUT OIL ON THE DESICCATION OF DIAPAUSE AND POST-DIAPAUSE
PUP OF THE MOTH, CALLOSAMIA PROMETHEA DRURY. By Daniel Ludwig, New York

University.

. THE INTERRELATIONS OF THYROID AND GONAD IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF SECONDARY
SEXUAL CHARACTERS IN BROWN LEGHORN ROOSTERS. By Ben B. Buivaiss, University of

Chic

ago.
AN ANALYSIS OF THE FACTORS INFLUENCING THE GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE
MAMMALIAN REPRODUCTIVE TRACT. By Dorothy Price, University of Chicago.

Edited by W. C. ALLEE, Professor of Zodlogy, The University of Chicago.
Quarterly by the University of Chicago Press.

English Agents: CAMBRIDGE

Published
Subscription: 57s. 6d. per year.

UNIVERSITY PRESS
Eugenics Review, Vol. -XXXVII, No. 8
