REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

Westermarck, E., Ph. and LL.D. Marriage Ceremonies in Morocca.
London. Macmillan and Co., Ltd.; 1914; price 12s.; pp. 422. _
THE possibility that a sort of eugenic instinct exists in the human race is
suggested by the fact that marriage is surrounded by more ritual than
any other human function and by the special character of some ceremonies.
In number and variety the symbolic and magical performances collected
by Prof. Westermarck are remarkable. His general explanation, which
will serve as a working hypothesis for the study of all ceremonial, is that
marriage ritual is an application of magical ideas for the purpose of
ensuring the safety and welfare of the bride and bridegroom. “A very
large number of marriage ceremonies spring from the feeling or idea
that bride and bridegroom are in a state of danger, and therefore stand
in need of purification and of special protection against magical influences
and evil spirits.” To this chief class belong such customs as shutting up
the bride in a box, dressing her as a man and the groom as a woman,
and the curious quivering noises made by the attendant women on all
possible occasions. Ceremonies with a positive intention include many
whose object is to make the bride a mother and a mother of male offspring.
P Fhus the bridegroom’s mother sings a song praying for male twins
“or even one son”; or she carries a sieve or a bundle of her son’s old
clothes on her back, like a baby. A married woman who is blessed with
children is selected to tie the magical knot, hayek, that the bride also
may be fruitful. An interesting detail is that the more beautiful of the
two young wedded people performs the usual ablution before the other on
the wedding night; it is believed that the children will resemble that
parent. Again, precautions are taken to prevent the offspring being
diseased. Superstition in the service of eugenics has evidently been a
force in human history.

Other sources for this or that ceremonial are justly admitted by the
author. The origin of many is mixed. For instance, there are several
which express or symbolise sexual bashfulness, a fact in itself indirectly
eugenic.

Prof. Westermarck has resided among the tribes whose customs he
has detailed so carefully, for various periods amounting in all to six
years. This condition enhances the value of one of the most important
contributions to the history of marriage. A. E. CRAWLEY.

Reissheimer, Hermann. Evolution by Co-operation. A Study in Bioeconomics. London. Kegan Paul, Trench, Triibner and Co.;
19133 price 3s. 6d. net.; pp. 200.
In this book the author attempts to show—what he regards as a new
principle of evolution—that a necessary condition for advance of type is
that the organism should contribute at least as much to the total supply
of nature as it takes from it. The relations of organisms should be like
those of manufacturers, each produces something which the other lacks;
if an organism lives at the expense of another without contributing anything in return, it 7fso facto degenerates. When a species lives “ legitimately ” it adds directly or indirectly to the total food supply, and thus the
Malthusian doctrine of over-production of individuals is said to fail.
It is, of course, obvious that if an organism lives in such a way as to
increase its own food supply, as in the case of an insect which feeds on
and at the same time fertilises a flower, it has a better chance than one
which merely destroys its food, and further that species which have a wide
choice of food and habit are more likely to give origin to new forms than
those which are specialised for one set of conditions. Apart from giving
REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 165

instances, mostly well known, of this kind of relation, the book seems to

shed little fresh light on the problem of evolution.
L. DONCASTER.

Haldane, J. S., M.D., LL.D., F.R.S. Mechanism, Life, and Personality: An Examination of the Mechanistic Theory of Life and
Mind. London. John Murray; 1913; price 2s. 6d.; pp. 1309.
In this book of four lectures delivered last May at Guy’s Hospital, Dr.
Haldane has developed, in a remarkably attractive and assimilable form,
his views on a subject of unfailing interest. Commencing with a fair
and lucid exposition of the mechanistic hypothesis of living organisms
and the physiological observations upon which this hypothesis is founded,
he discusses more superficially the objections raised in favour of vitalism,
only to reject this alternative hypothesis as “unproved, unintelligible,
and practically useless as a scientific working hypothesis.”

On such a clear and tangible foundation it is a little disappointing to
find that the mechanistic hypothesis is rejected on no better ground than
that of the extreme complexity of the intracellular mechanisms required
for the ordinary functions of cell life, and for heredity; in view of our
ignorance of the possibilities of molecular structure, such a conclusion
would seem to be somewhat presumptuous. Moreover, when we look
further for an alternative hypothesis, we are merely frustrated by a
philosophical discussion on the reality of the phenomenal universe, and
a not very relevant presentation of idealism.

That there is nothing in the mechanistic hypothesis which is inconsistent with the purest idealism must be familiar to all students of
Huxley; and we imagine that Hume would have particularly resented the
assertion (p. 74) that he had proved the world of matter to be nonexistent. Nor does it help matters to place organic beings in a special
category; if the physicist is right in attempting to express the relations
between physical quantities in terms of mathematical symbols, although
the symbols are avowedly not physical quantities, the physiologist is
equally right in explaining physiological mechanisms, even the most
obscure and intricate, in terms of physics and chemistry.

It is, indeed, to be regretted that Dr. Haldane, in developing speculations of great philosophical interest, should have founded them, in
appearance, upon the supposed inadequacy of the mechanistic theory; for
not only does he fail to establish this inadequacy, but there remains
between the physiological and the philosophical portions of his reasoning
an unbridged gap in an argument, which in other respects he has taken
pains to make complete.

Unquestionably the best lecture of the four, both from the literary
and from the scientific point of view, is the last, entitled “ Personality.”
Here, in a purely philosophical region, the author develops the consequences of the thesis that the phenomenal world is a product of personality; and in particular of the personality of an organism, itself
adapted to its environment. The conception bristles with paradoxes,
and it is only by appealing to an ultimate unity in the universe of personality that it is possible to escape from the sophistry of “ racial
solempsism”; nevertheless, it is by powerful reasoning as well as by
brilliant creative thought that we are led to the conclusion, that “ This
world and all that lies within it is a spiritual world.” R. A. FISHER.

Dealey, JAMES QUAYLE. The Family in Its Sociological Aspects. London.
G. G. Harrap and Co.; 1913; price 1s. 6d. net; pp. 137.
THIs little book does singularly little justice to its title. The first seven
chapters comprise a somewhat poor and unconvincing historical outline,
culminating in the modern family of American democracy.
“It is possible, therefore, to get a much clearer idea of the modern
family, in its later aspects at least, from a study of the American family
