C. P. BLACKER,
M.A., M.D.

The International Planned Parenthood

Federation
ASPECTS OF ITS HISTORY*

HAVE BEEN ASKED to speak this morning
[etout the I.P.P.F.’s history. But histories can

be dull. How, I asked myself, could I avoid
boring you with a dry recital of bare facts—facts
about the dates and places of conferences, the
number of attending delegates, the countries
represented, the resolutions passed, etc. How
could I avoid incurring the charge levelled against
a certain Oxford professor that, in a lengthy
syllabus, he made everything seem equally
unimportant?

I decided to try to do three things: first to
relate the developments of our movement to the
successive world events to which it has reacted;
second to describe how closely our respective
countries—the U.S.A. and the U.K.—have
worked together; and third to give you some
first-hand experiences of people and events. But
a word first about my title to speak on this
subject at all.

I first became involved in the birth control
movement as a medical student some forty years
ago, and when I look round the world to-day I
find that there are few people with such a long
first-hand experience. In 1953, when a governing
body of the I.P.P.F. was first established, I was
appointed its Vice-Chairman. I held this position
until 1959, when I was put into a then newlycreated post—that of Administrative Chairman
—which I occupied till I resigned at the end of
1960. The I.P.P.F., having been founded in 1952,
has existed for twelve years. Hence I have been

* Presented at the Fourth Conference of the International Planned Parenthood Federation, Western
Hemisphere Region, San Juan, Puerto Rico, April 19-27,
1964. The paper was addressed to an almost wholly
American audience. C.P.B.

¢ See THE EuGEnics REviEw, 1964. 55, 238.

one of its honorary officers, holding certain
administrative responsibilities, for the first eight
of these years.

I will divide my cursory review into three
parts: the long period before 1939; the decade
which followed the end of the Second World War
(1945-54); and the next decade (1955-64) which
brings us to the present day. A valuable survey
of the I.P.P.F.’s history has recently been written
by Mrs. Vera Houghton. It was published in
THE EUGENICS ReviEW (1961-62, 53, 149-53,
201-7).

It is the story before 1955 that I am best
qualified by my age to tell. I will speak, from the
standpoint of an Englishman, of events wholly
enacted in the Old World which I think might
be of interest to Americans. I will speak much of
Americans but little of America.

Period before 1939

I commend the account of this period which
is given by Dr. Norman Himes in his Medical
History of Contraception, first published in 1936.
The publication of a new edition of this workt,
with an ably written introduction by Dr. Alan
Guttmacher, is an imaginative and valuable
enterprise for which your Committee on Maternal
Health deserves credit and thanks. In Dr. Himes’s
words, the course of events in the last century
“oscillates between England and the United
States.” I will try to convince you that this
oscillation has continued to the present day.

In England, Thomas Malthus (1766-1834) and
Francis Place (1771-1854) were contemporaries
for sixty-three years, Place having been born
five years after the other. The ball was then, so
to speak, propelled across the Atlantic where the

135

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1964, 56, 3.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

influence of this couple was felt by two somewhat younger Americans—R. D. Owen (18011877) and Charles Knowlton (1800-1850). Owen
had, early in his life, spent some time in Switzerland and France. Both these men, you will
remember, recommended techniques of contraception; and you will recall how there was a
second crossing of the Atlantic, from west to
east, when Knowlton’s pamphlet, with the nowqueer-sounding title The Fruits of Philosophy,
was published in England. It was this event
which provoked the celebrated BradlaughBesant trial. The decline of Britain’s birth rate
began soon after. Thus did the ball come back
to the Old World where things began to move in
various European countries.

As you know better than I, Mrs. Margaret
Sanger embarked on her crusade and life-work
before the first war. Her friendship with Havelock Ellis (1859-1939) began before 1914. I did
not know either in those days. But I was with
them when they met in the middle twenties. I
recall the warmth of their regard for each other
and the easy flow of their conversation in the
course of which Margaret’s prison experiences
were lightly touched. Here was another interchange between our two countries. At this time
Ellis was in his early seventies; his flowing white
beard and gentle manner well befitted his
reputation, by then world wide, as a sage. I later
saw him fairly often and corresponded with him.
He was critical of the report of the (British)
Brock Committee on voluntary sterilization
(1934) which had recommended that, as a strictly
voluntary measure, sterilization should be
formally legalized. Ellis strongly held that such
a step was unnecessary and would do more harm
than good. Subsequent experience suggests that,
in certain contexts but not in all, his views were
realistic. They have prevailed, for example, in
India but not in Sweden.

I first met Margaret Sanger in connection with
the important World Population Conference,
which met in Geneva during the summer of
1927. This was convened by her and was the
first of its comprehensive kind ever held. Among
Margaret’s closest friends in England were
Clinton and Janet Chance, whom I am happy to
recall. Clinton Chance, an able organizer and

* Proceedings: p. 356.
136

business man, had much to do with the prepara
tion of the Geneva conference. Indeed, Mrs.

Sanger mentioned his name first, together with

that of Edith How-Martyn, when expressing

thanks to helpers in her preface to the volume

of Proceedings. She said that these two—
co-operated with me throughout and devoted
over a year to the preliminary preparation of the
Conference.

In a sense the preparation was too well done.
The wide preliminary publicity attracted the
notice of those who, for religious or political
reasons, were opposed to Margaret’s ideas.
Time was given for opponents to take steps to
neutralize her objective. The purpose of the
conference was finally declared to be the study
of population problems; discussion of solutions
of these problems was ruled out of order. Mrs.
Sanger who, with friends, had raised the money
and done the work, was quietly pushed into the
background and was never given the opportunity
to speak. But the conference ended well for her.
In a closing address, when it was too late for
“objections” to be raised, Sir Bernard Mallet,
the conference’s president, whom I later came
to know intimately, said:

I cannot sit down without an expression, perhaps
too long delayed, of admiration for the work of
Mrs. Sanger, and of recognition to her husband,

whose genial presence and generous hospitality
have done so much to smooth away difficulties. *

The words “‘too long delayed’”’ came from the
heart, for Sir Bernard was well aware of all that
Margaret had done. There was another pleasing
episode—quite unrehearsed. At a concluding
gala dinner at which the guests were seated at
separate tables Sir Bernard made a speech in the
course of which he expressed thanks to various
people. A recital of names was tepidly received
until he came to Mrs. Sanger’s. Clapping began
at a certain table which was slowly taken up at
other tables. The crescendo was quite slow. But
it steadily mounted until about a third of the
company stood up and cheered.

This conference provided a further example of
Anglo-American co-operation. In his inaugural
address on the first day, Sir Bernard declared
that

the first suggestion for the present conference

came from certain well-known scientists in the
United States of America who then approached,
INTERNATIONAL PLANNED

_ and found an eager response from, their British
colleagues. This [he added] will account for

- what some will no doubt consider an undue
predominance of the Anglo-Saxon element in
our councils. t

At least two organizations were (so to speak)
conceived at this conference held during 1927
in Geneva. One survives and flourishes. It is the
International Union for the Scientific Study of
Population. This union was formed in 1928 and
has now become an important though somewhat
technical professional organization of demographers. I may mention, jumping twenty-six
years that, in 1954, this union gave valued help
to the United Nations in promoting a second
world conference on population which was held
in the palatial headquarters of the Food and
Agriculture Organization in Rome. And a
tremendous conference it was. One of its most
memorable features was a reception of the
participants in the Basilica of St. Peter by the
Pope, who addressed to us words of greeting and
encouragement. The I.P.P.F.’s Governing Body
held its second meeting in Rome after this
Conference. Mrs. Sanger was not present. But in
so far as the Demographers’ International Union
was jointly responsible for the Rome conference,
and in so far as the Union can be counted as one
of Margaret’ s unplanned progeny, so can we
assign to Margaret some ancestral responsibility
for the Rome gathering in 1954.

I now move back to Geneva and 1927. It
was there that I first met Abraham Stone who
became a close friend. It was an inexhaustible
pleasure to meet him at ensuing conferences
before and after the second war. His modesty,
charm and lucidity as a writer caused him to be
widely honoured outside no less than inside the
I.P.P.F. He was singled out by invitation to give
a paper to the austere Rome Conference just
mentioned on the delicate subject of Present Day
Family Planning Techniques. The conference as a
whole was almost as allergic to anything classifiable as “Malthusian propaganda” as had been
the earlier conference in Geneva. Hence Abraham was on dangerous ground. But his tact was
perfect. There were no complaints such as
would have esmpted at Geneva in 1927. To

+ Ibid: p. 17.

PARENTHOOD FEDERATION

Abraham Stone I pay this rare tribute that,
having sat with him at numerous committees and
other gatherings, I never once heard him make a
contribution which was not to the point,
conciliatory and, in a welcome sense, constructive. I was always glad to hear him intervene.
The future historian of our early years will
accord him a place second only to Mrs.
Sanger’s.

In 1930 a conference was held in Ziirich. It was
very different from that held three years before in
Geneva, for it was attended only by supporters
of birth control. My main impression of this
conference was the vigour of the German
delegation several of whom were not seen again
after the war.

I now turn to world events to which our movement reacted. The two world wars have had quite
different aftermaths. Some ten years after the
first there set in the economic depression which
brought world-wide suffering. It was the deprivation and hardship, mainly affecting families
with numerous children, which gave impetus to
the birth control movement. Clinics, sometimes
federated under umbrella organizations, came
into existence in several countries. Sympathy
for the unemployed grew and became widespread. But the depression had a second consequence. I refer to the decline in birth rates
throughout the “western” world. The hardships
caused by the depression were slowly realized
as the conditions worsened. By contrast, the
demographic implications of the fall of the birth
rate were realized later and with dramatic
suddenness. In the U.K. the moment occurred
in the second half of 1936. The story, which is
rather peculiar, may not bore you. There were
published at about the same time in that year
three books (by Kuczynski, Carr-Saunders and
Glass) which drew attention to the now-obvious
fact that, though births still at that time exceeded
deaths, the population would, if trends then
current persisted, soon fail to replace itself. A
glance at the-population pyramid based on the
1931 census, undercut like a Christmas tree in its
lower tiers, provided a convincing visual
demonstration. These three books were reviewed
in two consecutive articles which appeared on
successive days—28th and 29th September, 1936
—in The Times of London. It is interesting to

137
ER—C
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

note to-day how these articles over-stated the
case. They concluded that—

there is no evidence that the British race will
maintain its numbers in the future. Far from it:
its numbers will certainly fall, perhaps catastrophically, during the next fifty years.

These two articles came as a sort of national
shock. They made widely known something
which had before been understood by but a
handful of demographers. The articles received a
wide publicity and were much quoted in the
provincial press of the U.K. I have a volume of
press cuttings which leave no doubt of their
effects.

There quickly ensued a general revaluation
in which our movement participated. One of the
effects was that the term birth control fell into
disfavour and was replaced by the expression
“Family Planning”; voluntary bodies which had
previously called themselves birth control
associations changed their names to family
planning associations.

- Services for the diagnosis and treatment of
infertility, designed to help parents to have
children and therefore to raise fertility, were
established alongside contraceptive services, so
that the family planning movement became twosided. It is scarcely an exaggeration to say that,
almost overnight, an over-population scare was
transformed into a depopulation scare.

Not long’ after came the war when family
planning and most other pre-war interests were
driven out of our heads. There were many

differences between the two wars, and one was

in the ways they ended. The first ended suddenly
and to everyone’s astonishment. Indeed, we were
caught on the wrong foot with no proper
schemes for demobilization ready. The second
war was different. The scales were turned at
Stalingrad and in North Africa; and by the
beginning of 1944 it was obvious what the ending
would be. It was but a question of time. The
British Government took advantage of this
forewarning by appointing in 1944, a Royal
Commission on Population. Its original object
was to try to forestall a post-war decline of the
country’s population. But half way through its
deliberations (its report was published in 1949)
the sign-post changed. Quite unlike what had
happened during the first war, the birth rate took

138

an upward turn in 1943 (the middle of the
second war), and by 1947 it reached the highest
figure since 1920.

The great depression which followed the first
war began in 1929—some ten years after its end.
The corresponding year for the second war would
have been 1956. But happily we were spared this
spectral aftermath. However, something else
happened. Instead of a global depression there
befell another event universally acclaimed as
welcome but nevertheless having disturbing
features. I refer to the dramatic and world-wide
falls in death rates. In under-developed countries
these declining death rates and rocketting
populations, have furnished a stronger argument
for birth control than was produced by the
economic depression after the first war. Indeed,
the entirely unforeseen fall of the death rate has
provided an unprecedented stimulus to the birth
control movement. It has done more: it has
created an urgency which would surely have
seemed inconceivable to those who, in the late
*thirties, were predicting depopulation and th
doom of capitalism. |

First Post-War Decade (1945-54)

So I come back from world events to our
movement. During the war rumours had reached
me that Mrs. Sanger had been seriously ill.
Hence it was a happy surprise indeed when, soon
after 1945, she reappeared in London full of
plans for the future. In 1946 Elise Ottesen
Jensen (president of the Swedish Family Planning
Association known as the R.F.S.U., and later
Margaret Sanger’s successor as the I.P.P.F.’s
president) took steps to initiate an international
organization. That the possibilities might be
discussed, she invited to a conference in Stockholm representatives of European organizations
which, after the war, were reconstituting themselves, and also representatives from the United
States. Thus in August 1946 was set up an
interim international committee which could
later be replaced by something permanent. This
project was carried out during the next year—
1948—at a conference held at Cheltenham. The
interim body was christened the International
Committee on Planned Parenthiood (I.C.P.P.)
and. consisted of representatives of but four
countries—the United States, Britain; Sweden
INTERNATIONAL PLANNED PARENTHOOD FEDERATION

and Holland. These four countries should not be
forgotten in the palmy present when the I.P.P.F.
has some thirty-five members. Then it was that
Mrs. Sanger took another decision which further
consolidated the relation between the U.S.A.
and the U.K. She firmly resisted the suggestion,
put to her by several people, mostly British, that
if the U.S.A. were to provide most of the funds
for an international organization, its headquarters should be in the United States. Mrs.
Sanger would not hear of it. She insisted that the
headquarters should be in London. Through the
goodwill of Mrs. Dorothy Brush, the Foundation
which bears her name provided generously; and
the Eugenics Society, of which I was at that
time secretary, provided office accommodation
rent free.

Another world event which profoundly shaped
the course of our movement was the acquisition
of independence in 1947 by India, Pakistan,
Ceylon and Burma. It is inconceivable that under
the restraints of our Colonial Office these
countries could have taken such vigorous
initiatives. Mrs. Sanger, who had travelled much
in Asia during the inter-war years, was not slow
to perceive the newly disclosed openings. India,
however, was in difficulties because of the standpoint of Mahatma Gandhi. Two trials of the
rhythm method (directed by Abraham Stone
under the auspices of the World Health Organization) clearly demonstrated that this method
was not universally practicable. In 1951 the
Bombay Family Planning Association—later to
expand into the Family Planning Association of
India—convened its first all-India conference.
Mrs. Sanger saw the opportunity. She wired to
the lady who is now the I.P.P.F.’s president
suggesting that the next conference of the interim
committee should be held in India. Thus originated the important Bombay conference of 1952
where the I.P.P.F., having been planned in 1946,
was, in a working physiological sense, conceived.
(It was born, properly constituted, in the following year).

This was a most memorable conference to
which IJ cannot do justice in this cursory review.
Two things stand out in my memory. The first
was the magnitude and brilliance. The inaugural
meeting in the massively domed and capacious
Sir Cowasji Jehangir Hall, its stalls and gallery

packed to capacity, was ablaze with jewelled
turbans and multi-coloured saris. The vicepresident of India, Dr. S. Radhakrishnan,
opened with a speech which should receive
prominence. in any later edited symposium of
noteworthy. declarations in the movement’s
history. And: it was then that we first saw that
remarkable woman, Lady Rama Rau, in action.
In an account of the conference written immediately afterwards I mentioned three out of many
noteworthy impressions; the exceptional vitality,
power of leadership and charm of Lady Rama
Rau who,. with Mrs. Sanger, was elected joint
honorary president of the new Federation; the
intelligence, common sense and realism of the
many Indian observers and delegates (267 were
recorded in the programme, most of them
women); and the remarkable achievement of
Mrs. Vera Houghton, by then secretary of the
I.P.P.F., who had travelled ahead of the rest of
us to help with the organization. Four new
countries joined the Federation—India, Hong
Kong, Singapore and Western Germany, taking
the membership to eight.

I recall the irregular way that the foundations
were laid of our regional organization. There was
at this stage no Governing Body, no Executive
or other committee and no responsible group.
Decisions were taken informally by Mrs. Sanger
who would call whom she pleased to her room in
the Taj Mahal hotel..On leaving her room with
Abraham Stone after one of these meetings, I
asked him if he didn’t agree that some sort of
regional demarcation and grouping should be
considered which could take some of the weight
off the London Office and encourage local
initiatives. He said he agreed. As we walked
down the hotel corridor one of us suggested that
a beginning might be made with three such
regions; one for Europe centred in London,
another for Asia centred in Bombay and another
for the Americas centred in New York. Two or
three days later a plenary meeting was held in
the same large Jehangir Hall; but this was
sparsely attended compared with the packed
inaugural celebration. Mrs. Sanger had asked
me to preside and from a platform I put various
issues to the vote. All were passed with little
discussion. I was about to terminate the proceedings when Abraham, who was sitting in the

139
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

front below me, said: “What about those
regions ?’’ I was not prepared for this and asked
him if he thought it was in order to bring the
matter up then. He said he thought it was quite
in order. So I outlined the proposal, and put it to
the meeting. It was carried without a dissentient.
That, I suppose, is how important decisions are
sometimes taken in the early and formative
stages of many movements.

In the following years, 1953, another six-day
international conference (the fourth since 1946)
was held, again in Stockholm. Its theme was
Population and World Resources in Relation to
the Family. Here there were gathered together in
committee representatives of ten countries. We
met daily, out of conference hours, during the
six days. An approved Constitution and Governing Body resulted. These were prolonged and
rather difficult meetings. I was appointed
chairman in which office I was much assisted by
six “‘observers” among whom were Mr. Tom
Griessemer and Mrs. Harriet Pilpel, both legal
experts, whom I then met for the first time. Many
have been the happy encounters I have since had
with Tom. I may perhaps say something about
our task. At Bombay the previous year, Mrs.
Sanger had asked me to prepare a draft of a
constitution for consideration at Stockholm.
Mrs. Houghton and I worked on such a draft
which was ready by the following April. I
thought it proper, as a first step, to submit this
draft to our presidents, Mrs. Sanger and Lady
Rama Rau. There resulted some useful suggestions which were embodied in a second draft.
This was circulated to various countries whose
F.P.A.s were to send representatives to the
conference. When, in Stockholm, we sat down
twenty-four strong (eighteen people with power
to vote and six observers) we had before us the
second draft above-mentioned and lists of
comments, criticisms and suggested amendments
from India, Hong Kong, Singapore, Sweden and
West Germany. Several of these suggested
amendments were incompatible and, what with
linguistic difficulties, you can imagine, I am sure,
that it was not easy to produce an agreed version.
But the co-operation of everyone concerned was
excellent; a vague mistrustfulness which seemed
to hover at the outset was changed in the course
of the meetings into general friendliness and the

146

task was just accomplished within the assigned
time limits. The most difficult lap in the course
was to evolve an agreed version of our Aims.
Mrs. Houghton and I produced a third draft
which we later submitted to Mr. Griessemer and
Mrs. Pilpel to be polished and dressed in legally
acceptable phrasing. Throughout this meeting, I
was conscious of, and grateful for, the happy
way that the American and British representatives worked together.

Thus was the Governing Body of the I.P.P.F.
constituted. There have since been modifications
of the original Stockholm version to meet
expected developments and expansions.

A decision of major importance taken at
Stockholm was the establishment of a fourth
region. The Asian region, centred on India,
which had been approved the year before, was
split into two—a Central Asian Region (thencalled) comprising India, Pakistan, Ceylon and
Burma; and a then-called Western Pacific Region
(centred at Singapore) including the other
Asian countries then interested. Two other full
members of the Federation were elected—the
Association in South Africa and in Finland; and
Australia’s was added to Japan’s organization
as an Associate member. This meeting in
Stockholm demonstrated to us all how great was
the honour and affection in which Mrs. Ottesen
Jensen was held in her own country.

To the world conference held in Rome the
following year (1954), and to the second meeting
of the Governing Body afterwards held in that
city, I have already alluded.

The Last Decade (1955-1964)

We now come to recent times of which many
here know as much as I. Three important figures
have appeared on the scene to guide the Federation—Mr. George Cadbury, Dr. Alan Guttmacher and Mr. Cass Canfield. Mr. and Mrs.
Cadbury have travelled widely and have produced reports on the countries visited in the
course of these travels. These reports, as Rufus
Day for one will testify, have been invaluable
to those responsible for deciding where to give
help and how to give it. I have seen enough of
Dr. Guttmacher to appreciate how great is his
authority and to realize what an asset to us he is
going to be. And I can say the same of Mr.
INTERNATIONAL PLANNED PARENTHOOD FEDERATION

Canfield who is now chairman of the Governing
Body. But I continue my story.

In 1955 a big conference was held in Tokyo
and the Governing Body again met. Here began
the participation in our conferences of physiologists and research workers whose presence has
been an increasingly important feature of later
occasions. Prominent in Tokyo were Dr.
Gregory Pincus, Dr. Warren Nelson, Sir Solly
_ Zuckerman and Dr. Alan Parkes. Shortly before
the Tokyo conference, Mr. Jerome Fisher
(U.S.A.), till then joint treasurer with Mr. Aird
Whyte (U.K.), had, to our chagrin, suddenly
died. Through a most fortunate turn of events
there stepped into his place Mr. Rufus Day.
With increasing assets later accruing through
the initiatives of Mr. Hugh Moore and others,
our finances were becoming realistic. Less was
heard of shoestrings. At successive meetings of
the Governing Body Mr. Day presented masterly
statements and recommendations. After a
preliminary meeting of a finance committee, he
would report on the assets available for disposal ;
and then, taking account on the one hand of the
Federation’s basic needs (such as the Headquarters Office, the regional organizations and
the News Sheet) and on the other of the applications for grants from member-organizations,
he would gear the demands to the resources in a
list of recommended allocations. I have listened
at these meetings with unfailing admiration,
amounting sometimes to wonder, to his
measured and lucid expositions. He so
combines an understanding of priorities with
mastery of detail and fairness of judgement that
his recommendations have invariably been
accepted with minimum debate. In this way we
have most mercifully been spared awkward
discussions of intricate issues over which
disruptive partisanship could easily be evoked.
Mr. Day’s skill and wisdom, and those of Sir
Jeremy Raisman, Mr. Aird Whyte’s successor
as Treasurer in the U.K., have piloted the ship
into protected waters of financial security. Mr.
Day has done the steersmanship; Mr. Hugh
Moore and others have provided the fuel.

After 1955, conferences of widening scope
were held in New Delhi during 1959 and in
Singapore during 1962. The Governing Body
met after these conferences and also in Berlin

during 1957 and at The Hague in 1960. During
this period the I.P.P.F. took on its present form.
There were four member-organizations in 1946;
there are now some thirty-five members of
different categories. Our expansion has, I think,
fairly closely matched the growth of public
interest in the population explosion and in its
possible remedies. The campaigns against hunger
and want have provided effective reminders that
mere food, however abundant, is no permanent
solution. The accelerating growth of world
population has provided the theme of many
national and international conferences whose
proceedings are published in an increasing spate
of volumes which are apt to find their way to the
desks of a small band of wearying reviewers.
The discovery of the pill, an event which our
successors may be tempted to call epoch-making,
belongs to this last decade. So does the improvement in mutual understanding between the
world’s religious faiths. So do the money-raising
campaigns conducted in our respective countries.
Yours has from the start been the I.P.P.F.’s
main financial mainstay; and you were the first
to embark on a major appeal. Personalities from
your country, moreover, have crossed the
Atlantic to stimulate and advise us on how to
make our U.K. appeal. I have particularly in
mind Mr, Cass Canfield. Further co-operation
between our two countries developed during this »
last decade. Mr. Cadbury’s assignments and
activities since 1960 provide an example. To tell
the truth, Iam not sure if Mr. Cadbury is now an
Englishman or a Canadian. He may be both.
But he won’t, I am sure, mind being treated for
my purpose as an Englishman. Another example
is surely the appointment this year of Sir
Colville Deverell as the I.P.P.F.’s SecretaryGeneral. If he is with us to-day, I confidently
wish him well in your country.

About the years after Tokyo (1955) I am no
better qualified to speak than many younger men
and women of your own country. Among those
I have in mind are Mrs. Brush, Mrs. Ferguson,
Mr. Day and Mr. Griessemer. I hope that you
will induce one of these to write a history of the
Federation’s expansion as seen from the New
World.

I finish on a personal note. I take this fine
opportunity which you have been good enough

141
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to provide for me of paying tributes to some of
the Americans with whom this movement has
brought me into contact. I have mentioned Mrs.
Sanger who will always remain our presiding
genius. I thank, also, Mrs. Brush and Mrs.
Watumull. Mrs. Brush has influenced her
Foundation to support the I.P.P.F. during what
we may call its lean beginnings. I have mentioned
how the generosity of the Brush Foundation
sustained the London Office over many years.
Mrs. Brush herself ably edited the monthly news
sheet (now called the International Planned
Parenthood News) till 1957 when it was taken
over by my old friend Dr. L. N. Jackson. She
has continued to provide financial support. She
also served as Honorary Adviser on Field Work
from 1957 to 1960 and in this capacity travelled
widely on behalf of the Federation and Mrs.
Sanger. Lastly I:am personally endebted to
Mrs. Brush for inviting me in 1959 to
Cleveland where I received memorable hospi
tality from her old friend Mrs. Roslyn Weir.

I also pay a tribute to Dr. William Vogt whom
I first met at Bombay in 1952, whose books I
have read with admiration and for whom I have
much affection and sympathy; to Mr. Joseph
Van Vieck with whom I have held many
stimulating discussions in New Delhi, Singapore
and elsewhere; and to Mrs. Frances Ferguson
whose unusually sensible contributions to
committee discussions I have admired from 1952
onwards as much as I have appreciated her
kindness when she put me up in New York five
years ago.

This account has not been easy to prepare.
There was so much to say about so many events.
There are numerous and grievous omissions for
which I hope I will be forgiven. But my difficulties in deciding what to leave out will be
apparent to you. May I conclude by thanking
you for the honour you have done me in
inviting me to address your Conference.

 

 

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY

July 1964

Volume XXXVII_ Number 3

Edited by Thomas Park, University of Chicago

Hemolymph Calcium Fluctuations as Related to Environmental Salinity during Ecdysis of the Blue Geab, © Callineotes sapidus

Water Balance in a Carnivorous Desert Rodent, the Grasshopper Mouse
Salt Tolerance and Water Requirements in the Salt-Marsh Harvest Mouse

Head-Body Temperature Difference in Horned Lizards

A. HAEFNER, JR.

K. SCHMIDT-NIELSEN and H. B. HAINES
HOWARD HAINES

JAMES EDWARD HEATH

A Comparative Study of Carbohydrate Metabolism in Fish as Affected by Temperature and Exercise

Cardiovascular Response to Temperature in the Lizard Sauromalus obesus
Growth and Liver Glycogen in the Chick Embryo under the Influence of Corticosteroids
Thermal and Metabolic Responses of the Gray Jay to Cold Stress

Water in the Mantle Cavity of Land Snails
New Books in Physiological ZodSlogy

JOHN MARK DEAN and CLARENCE J. GOODNIGHT |
JAMES R,. TEMPLETON

R. C. CLAWSON and L. V. DomM
JAMES H. VEGHTE

WALTER C. BLINN

KNuT SCHMIDT-NIELSEN, Desert Animals: Physiological Problems of Heat and Water, Edward F. Adolph

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY is published quarterly in January, April, July and October.
Subscription 82s. 6d. per volume. Single copies 24s. 6d., including postage.

THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS, 5750 Ellis Avenue, CHICAGO

142

 
