HUMAN STERILIZATION AND PUBLIC
UNDERSTANDING

_ By CLARENCE J. GAMBLE, M.D., Milton, Massachusetts

OW much can public education
influence governmental action? The ©

answer to this question was sought
on a large scale by a courageous individual
in 1929. The results of his exploration and
that of his successors are worthy of review.

Beginning in 1909 a number of the United
States had passed laws for the surgical
sterilization at public expense of those who
might pass on to their children hereditary
handicaps such as mental disease or mental
defect. Observing that these laws had not
been extensively used, Mr. E. S. Gosney, of
Pasadena, California, planned to increase
their availability to appropriate individuals.

His first step was to establish in 1929 and
finance the Human Betterment Foundation,
of California. A study made by its Executive
Secretary, Paul Popenoe, showed that there
was reluctance on the part of patients with
these handicaps to undergo the operation
and of their relatives to give the needed
consent, because they feared the loss of all
sexual powers and interests. Having heard
only of castration, the barnyard form of
sterilization, they considered that a large
sacrifice would be involved.

The superintendents of State institutions
for the care of such patients undoubtedly
knew that salpingectomy or vasectomy
removed no organ from the body and did not
alter sexual characteristics. They probably
‘felt, however, that as State employees they
must be guided by public opinion and
consequently did not often advise; the
operation.

To provide first-hand information Popenoe

arranged for a follow-up of tubectomized |

cases, both male and female. Of ninety-nine
salpingectomized women three reported a
decrease in their sexual life, for reasons
probably not connected with the sterilization.

These were outnumbered by thirty-six who
told of an increase. Sixty had detected no
change(r).

Similar reports were collected from thirtysix patients who had undergone vasectomy.
The five telling of a decrease in sexual
activity were exceeded by nine who had
noted an increase and twenty-two who
reported no alteration(2).

These findings and those of other studies
were used in a widespread educational
programme of the Human _ Betterment
Foundation. Reprints of twenty-six articles
in medical and sociological journals were
circulated(3). Meetings were held to discuss
the advantages of sterilization and these were reported in the newspapers. A_ book,
Sterilization for Human Betterment by Gosney
and Popenoe(4), was published and widely
distributed. .

Emphasis was also placed on the undesirability of the transmission of mental
disease and deficiency to the next generation.
and the unfavourable environment given
children by parents with such handicaps.
The effect in California was striking and
immediate. Sterilizations under the law,
which had averaged 480 per year in 1928-29,
rose to 870 in 1935, equalling 14 per 100,000
population. The literature distributed
throughout the country and perhaps the
example of the superintendents of State
institutions in California appear to have had
an effect in other States, for their eugenic
sterilization rates also rose, reaching 7 per
100,000 in 1935, and continuing near that
level until 1940 (Figure 1).

Since many other factors. were operative
and conditions cannot be considered to have
been the same in 1929 and 1935, it was not
possible to conclude that the educational
programme of the Foundation was the

165
166

entire cause. of the increased sterilization

rate.
In a laboratory inquiry, having found an

BET TERMENT
LEAGUES

N. ©.
lOWA

NEB.

 

Sterilizations under State sterilization laws, per year,
per 100,000 population in the four States (Georgia, Iowa,
North Carolina, and Nebraska) having Human Betterment Leagues, and in the remaining 23 States with
_ sterilization laws, but without Leagues. The horizontal
lines indicate the times of major activity of the Human
Betterment Foundation of California and of the four
Leagues.

- Inspired by

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

association of cause and effect, an investigator often performs the further experiment
of removing the supposed cause and of
observing whether the effect also disappears.
This is what an unkind fate did for the
Human Betterment Foundation which, after
a period of decreased activity connected with
Mr. Gosney’s illness, was brought to an end.
by his death in 1942. There followed a_
decrease in eugenic sterilizations shown in.
the Figure, a decrease which has continued
through 1951. |

Further confirmation of the hypothesis’
that pamphlets and publicity. can increase
the eugenic protection of the next generation
is provided by the experience in four States.
the Human Betterment
Foundation’s apparent effect on the protection of the next generation, groups of
interested persons formed the Human
Betterment Leagues of North Carolina and of
Iowa in 1947. Guided by the Foundation’s
experiénce and Dr. Popenoe’s advice these
groups began an educational programme.
The importance of preventing hereditary
disease and defect was pointed out in
pamphlets, together with the lifelong
psychological crippling which may result
when a child is brought up by an insane or
feeble-minded parent. The nature of a
sterilization operation consisting only of the
closing of the sperm or egg tubes without
removal of, glands or organs was described,
as well as the finding that in most cases
there was no change which the patient could
detect except that children were not born.
Reprints of medical articles on sterilization
were mailed to community leaders.
Encouragement and moral support were given
to the heads of State institutions and to the
county superintendents of public welfare.

To supplement the earlier work, scientific
studies were encouraged. Professor Jordan,
of the University of North Carolina, tested
1,980 white children in rural schools and
found that 8°6 per cent had intelligence
quotients under 70(5). In a similar series in a
city, 2°'4 per cent showed an I.Q. below 70

The high rate of inheritance of mental
deficiency was shown by a study made by
HUMAN STERILIZATION

Johnson of the children of the mentally
deficient later sterilized in New Hampshire(7).
Of these children, 36 per cent were rated as
mentally deficient and an additional 38 per
cent as retarded. A review of the presterilization fertility of these patients led to
the estimate that each sterilization had
prevented the birth of 2°5 children, of whom
nearly r (0°9) would have been mentally
deficient (8).

Encouragement was also given to a review
of the sexual effects of sterilization. Garrison
and Gamble(g) interviewed fifty vasectomied
patients and Woodside(10) talked to fortyeight upon whom salpingectomy had been
performed. For each sex the few who-told of
some decrease in sexual activity were outnumbered by those who reported an increase.
The great majority had noted no change.
Since there 1s no accurate ‘‘ sexometer ”’ to
estimate the intensity of sexual activity
either subjectively or objectively, the authors
concluded that many of the changes may
have been based on factors not physically
connected with the operation. Many of the
reported increases in sexual activity, for
example, may have been due to the removal
of anxiety over the possibility of a damaging
pregnancy.

Woodside also studied the sociological
and governmental aspects of sterilization,
reporting them in a book Sterilization in
North Carolina(11).

Reprints of these and other reports were
generously distributed to State and county
officials and other community leaders.

In 1948 the educational work was extended
by the formation of Human Betterment
‘Leagues in Georgia and Nebraska. The four
State leagues in 1949 joined to form the

Human Betterment Federation for their

united activities and for education in other
States.*

* Reprints of articles on sterilization may be secured
from the Human Betterment Federation, 512 Ninth
Street, Des Moines 9, Iowa.

Birthright, a group with offices in Princeton, New
Jersey, and New York, which had been studying the
field of sterilization, changed its name in 1950 to The
Human Betterment Association of America, Inc. It
has been invited to become a member of the Federation.

167°

These new organizations have made it
possible to test once again the relationship
between public education and the use of
eugenic sterilization laws. In the Figure the
eugenic sterilizations per 100,000 population
in the four States having Human Betterment
Leagues, North Carolina, lowa, Georgia and
Nebraska, are shown by the solid line. This
programme, beginning somewhat later in
these States than the remaining twenty-three
with sterilization laws (broken line),
increased until in 1941 the rate was
approximately the same in the two groups.

In the subsequent years the downward
trends in both areas were about equal,
but educational activity in the four States
was followed by a steady increase which
began in 1948. In the four years 1948 to
1951 there were 2,447 eugenic sterilizations
reported in the four States with Human.
Betterment Leagues, an increase of 1,453,
or 146 per cent, over the preceding four
years.- In the corresponding periods there
was a decrease of 897, or 21 per cent, in the
remaining twenty-three States. In 1951 the.
772 operations reported from the Human
Betterment League States were more than
half of the 1,459 for all States having
sterilization laws, and the rate of 6°7 per:
100,000 inhabitants in the four States was
five times that in the remaining twenty-three.

This finding that the application of.the
eugenic laws has twice increased after the
institution of measures to educate the public
and has decreased after their discontinuance
strongly suggests that the education has been
causative.

Summary

Pamphlets, reprints and newspaper
articles have been used to educate the. public
to understand the undesirability of the
hereditary transmission of mental disease.
and defect, the psychological damage which |
may result from upbringing by parents with
these handicaps, and the lack of sexual

‘change following the preventive operation, of

surgical sterilization.
Such education has twice been followed by
an increase in the use of State eugenic
‘168 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Jordan, A. M. “ Efficiency of Group Tests of
Intelligence in Discovering the Mentally Deficient.”
The High School Journal, 31, 73, March-April 1948
Johnson, Betsey Scott. ‘‘ A Study of Sterilized

Persons “7 the Laconia State School.”” Am. J.
Ment. Def., 54

sterilization laws, and an intermission in the ©.
educational programme was followed by a
decrease in the sterilization rate. 7,

REFERENCES

04, January 1950.
1, Vruwink, John, and Popenoe, Paul. ‘‘ Postoperative 8 » 404, J TY 195

Changes in the Libido Following Sterilization.”

Am.].Obs. and Gyn., 19, 72, January 1930.

. Popenoe, Paul. ‘‘ Effect of Vasectomy on the

Sexual Life.” J. Abnorm. and Social Psychology,

24, 251, October-December 1929.

. Collected Papers on Eugenic Sterilization in

California. The Human Betterment Foundation,

1930.

. Gosney, E. S., and Popenoe, Paul. Sterilization for

Human Betterment. New York, 1929. Macmillan.

. Jordan, A. M. “ Testing the Intelligence of the

Children of a Rural County.”” The High School
Journal, 30, 35, January-February 1947.

Io.

If.

. Garrison, Paul L., and Gamble, Clarence J.

. Tietze, Christopher. and Johnson, Betsey Scott.

‘‘Observations on the Fertility of Patients Discharged from the Laconia State School, 1924 to
1934." Am. J. Men. Def., 54, 551, April 1950.
‘‘ Sexual
Effects of Vasectomy.”’ J. of Am. Med. Assoc., 144,
293-95, September 23rd, 1950.
Woodside, Moya. ‘‘Sexual and Psychological
Adjustment after Sterilization.”” West J. of Surg.
Obst. and Gyn., 57, 600, December 1949.
Woodside, Moya. Sterilization in North Carolina ;
A Sociological and Psychological Study. Univ. of
N.C. Press, 1950.

THE ECONOMIC JOURNAL

The Quarterly Journal of the Royal Economic Soctety
JUNE 1953

ACCUMULATION, PRODUCTIVITY AND DISTRIBUTION

BRITISH ECONOMY, 1870-1938
FOREIGN EXCHANGE RATES AND MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITION

A COMMENT

IN THE.
E. H. Pretes Brown and B. WEBER

H. Brems
R. F. Harrop

DEVELOPMENT CHARGES AND THE COMPENSATION-BETTERMENT

PROBLEM

A MODEL OF INCOME DISTRIBUTION

R. TurveyY
D. G. CHAMPERNOWNE

CHOICE IN PSYCHOLOGY AND AS ECONOMIC ASSUMPTION

NOTES ON USER COST

A. L. MaAcFIEr
A. D. Scorr

WAGE CLAIMS AND THE PACE OF INFLATION (1948-51)

A. T. Peacock and W. J. L. Ryan

Reviews, — PERIODICALS AND New Books

MACMILLAN & CO., LTD., LONDON,

W.C.2

Application for Fellowship to .
ROYAL ‘ECONOMIC SOCIETY, 4 Portugal Street, London, W.C.2

Annual Subscription £1 10s.

 

Life Composition £22 10s.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLV, No. 3
