REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 249

decline, for which no such cause can be assigned, has affected the birthrate of all the more civilised European nations during the same period is
entirely ignored, which shows that this question has not been at all
deeply considered. The relations between birth-rate, density of population and standards of living are also matters which seem much simpler
to Mr. Fairchild than they actually are, but in spite of all these faults
the book may be commended as being most interesting and provocative
of thought. EDGAR SCHUSTER.

Aldrich, M. A., Carruth, W. A., Davenport, C. B., and others.
Eugenics. Twelve University Lectures. New York. Dodd,
Mead and Co.; 1914; pp. XIII. + 348.
THE progress of the eugenic movement both in the realm of practice and
in the realm of science depends largely on the success of the educational
campaign. This is obvious in the case of practice, and though less
obvious in the case of the science, is equally certain. For experience shows
that science advances most rapidly and with surest footsteps when some
benefit to mankind is its immediate goal, and the object of the educational campaign is to disseminate the conviction that the practice of
eugenics will confer benefits. The practical end stimulates both scientific
workers and their paymaster, and on the activities of the latter the
numbers and energies of the former in some measure depend.

Thus when Mrs. Huntingdon Wilson endowed a lecture at 32 of the
universities in the United States she earned the gratitude of all who have
the interests of eugenics at heart, and in publishing twelve of the
lectures together in the volume under review she has again laid them
under a debt. Acknowledging this, we yet feel bound to say that the
work as it stands cannot be recommended as a satisfactory introduction
to the subject. For the novice who has the perseverance and energy to
read a book of this length does not want to start the subject twelve times
over and to be introduced again and again to Mendel and the Jukes and
the Kalikaks, any more than a person desirous of climbing the
Matterhorn would be satisfied with an equivalent number of walks up
Primrose Hill. Nevertheless it must be understood that this is a
criticism of the necessary arrangement of the book, and not of the quality
of its contents. Although the twelve lectures are not conspicuous for
novelty, the method of presentation of their subject matter is in most
cases well calculated to have aroused the interest of the audiences who
listened to them, and to have convinced them of the soundness of the
eugenic appeal. They are the more forcible because characterized by
moderation and common sense. It is impossible to notice each separately
so we will pick out for special mention “The First Law of CharacterMaking,” by Dr. Holmes, of the Pennsylvania State College. Quoting
largely from “Rabbi Ben Ezra,” he starts by contrasting character as
shown in aspiration “ What I aspired to be and was not,” and in doing
“The vulgar mass called work,” and supported by Carlyle’s “ Know thy
work and do it,” inclines to the view that the latter is more important,
at any rate from the point of view of the eugenist. He then points out
forcibly with many instances how largely character as shown thus is
dependent on parentage, and concludes with a plea for the eugenic ideal
in marriage.

The subject of character and intellect is also treated by Professor
Thorndike, the psychologist, and his lecture is well worth reading, as it
contains an answer to an objection commonly made to eugenics in words
more or less like these, “ Even if you know the laws of heredity and how
to effect selective breeding in man you would not know what qualities to
select for.”

It is interesting to note in these lectures how seriously the
problem of selecting immigrants is being considered in America, and
this leads us to speculate whether Professor Ellwood, another contributor
250 EUGENICS REVIEW.

to the volume, was in any degree the result of Irish immigration. Some
such origin seems indicated in his treatment of race mixture, when he
recommends that marriages like those between whites and negroes should
be prohibited until we know more definitely what sort of results they give.
EDGAR SCHUSTER.

Garofalo, BARON R. Criminology (translated by R. W. Millar).
London. Heinemann; 1914; price 16s. net; pp. 478.

THIS well-known work was first published at Naples in 1885. A French
version which was prepared under the auspices of the author went through
five editions. Of these, the most recent, which appeared in 1905, was
completely recast by him and forms the original of the present version.
Baron Garofalo is primarily a lawyer, and the legal aspects of the treatment of criminals rightly receives a full share of attention, but it is
owing to the fact that he realizes the necessity for basing the reform of
the criminal and the protection of society on a thorough knowledge of
the natural history of the crime, that his great work has been written.
The translator has done his work adequately, and the get up of the book
is a credit to the publishers.

Creighton, Louise. The Social Disease and How to Fight It. A
Rejoinder. London. Longmans, Green and Co.; 1914; price IS. ;
Pp. 7.
AFTER the recently published literature dealing with the problems of
prostitution and venereal disease from the pens of various writers both
at home and abroad, it is indeed a relief to have this calm and reasoned
statement of the case by one who has had far-reaching experience of
the special problems under discussion. After the recommendations
of extremists—ranging from the segregation under conditions approximating to slavery of a group of women who, it is argued, must be so
maintained owing to the inherent polygamous character of the race, to an
extension of the Franchise to women as a means of abolishing prostitution
—it is a relief to turn to the dignified recognition of mutual responsibility
of both men and women for the existing state of affairs, and the possibility that their joint efforts to solve the problem may lead to a measure
of success in the near future.

Mrs. Creighton fully realises the racial effect of the diseases, and
advocates as the immediate policy careful education of the public, and the
provision of free treatment, as being the only sure method of reducing the
disease and the direct road to the formation of a standard of public
opinion which will recognise both the ethically and socially injurious
nature of prostitution. The origin of the problem lies in the social
custom of prostitution and a uniform standard of morality for both sexes
is recognised as its only true and final solution.

The recent tendency to use the social evil as a ground for sex
antagonism has been deeply deplored by many men and women
concerned in the attempt to improve conditions. It is only by
co-operation between the sexes ‘that any real progress can be made.
It is the recognition of this principle that is so warmly welcomed. The
race is composed of men and women, and neither part can make real
progress without the other. Mrs. Creighton urges care in the dissemination of knowledge, but emphasises the need of right instruction, education during childhood in the simple physiological laws of life, clear
warnings as to the prevalence and danger of disease for those going into
the world, the need of medical co-operation in supporting the principle of
chastity before marriage as a hygienic as well as a moral duty, the
provision of free and adequate treatment of disease, public recognition of
the danger of marriage until treatment is completed, an extension of the
feeling of parental responsibility, and above all the cultivation by women
and men together of a healthy public opinion. S. G.
