CUENOT ON PREADAPTATION.
A CRITICISM.

By R. A. FISHER AND C. S. STOCK.
No apology is needed to readers of the REviEw for introducing
a subject so apparently remote from Eugenics as a particular
theory of adaptation. Darwin’s work is truly fundamental,
and any considerable criticism of his main position must deserve
the careful attention of all who believe the process of evolution
to bea fact. A paper by Mon. L. Cuénot, of Nancy University,
in ‘* Scientia,’’ for July, 1914, provides just such an account
of the tendencies of one school of Biologists as will serve for
the ‘‘ point d’appui ’’ of certain criticisms which we believe it is
very much in the interests of Eugenics to make.

It will first be necessary to give a fairly detailed résumé of
Mons. Cuénot’s paper. He begins by discussing various
theories of adaptation. Organisms show manifest adaptation to
their environment. For example, moles, with their fore paws
transformed into digging tools, long sensitive nose, cylindrical
body, and very small protected eyes, are excellently well suited
to a subterranean life. Theology first, and science later tried
to explain the origin of adaptation. Isidore Geoffrey SaintHilaire put forward a limited transformism which commended
itself to Roman Catholics, according to which the Primordial
Types are the result of special creation, but genera and species
are the result of subsequent modification according to natural
law. The famous theory of Lamarck was based upon the
moderating influence of external factors on the organism,
summed up in the aphorism : ‘‘ Need creates the organ, necessity
and use strengthens and increases it considerably.”’ For
example, the needs of certain birds drew them to the water for
prey, and they then contracted the habit of stretching the skin
between the toes to beat the water. Incessant repetition produced a functional modification which was handed on to their
descendants, and being increased by them resulted in the wellCUENOT ON PREADAPTATION. 47

developed membranes between the toes which we now see. It
was a process of cumulative inheritance of functional modifica
tion. Certain birds in attempting to fish without wetting
the body, develop long necks, and long legs. Snakes
acquire an elongated form, and lose their limbs. Flying

squirrels (Scturoptera) of Ceylon and Sumatra develop the skin
of the flanks into large gliding membranes. Ruminants which
fight by butting acquire a formation of horned or osseous matter
on their heads which eventually produces horns and antlers.
Lamarckian explanations are not likely to satisfy any modern
biologist, even setting aside the more than doubtful assumption
of the inheritance of the effects of use and disuse. The utility
of webbed feet in aquatic birds and mammals is evident, but we
find freely aquatic forms where the webbing does not .exist.
The moorhen (Gallinula chloropus) swims perfectly well though
the toes are completely separated. The water rat has no trace
of webbing, the musk rat only the rudiments. Birds which
frequent river banks and marshes show every possible variation
in development of the interdigital membranes. Besides all this,
webbing appears in land birds among whose ancestors it is
impossible to count aquatic species. The maximum amount
of webbing in the case of dogs is found in the Newfoundland.
Since two or three hundred years is the longest time we
can allow for the duration of this race, is it possible that
Lamarckian explanations can apply? We must search further
than the creative effect of need and effort.

Darwin’s explanation is wholly different. Adaptations
established themselves by insensible gradations, each of which
was to a certain extent useful to the animal, and gave it a chance
of survival in the struggle for existence. It is to the constant
accumulation, generation after generation, of small variations
more marked in some individuals than in others that the gradual
development and final state of equilibrium of the adaptations is
due. Groups of individuals in advance supplant little by little
those who have remained in the rear. This takes place in such
a way that transitional states, no doubt represented by a small
number of examples, completely disappear. For instance, in
the family of squirrels, if we consider gradations between the
48 EUGENICS REVIEW.

common squirrel which leaps with agility and sciuroptera with
membranes for gliding great distances, the slightest dilatation of
the skin of the flanks and flattening of the tail constitutes an
advantage to their possessors by means of which jumping, and
escape from beasts of prey is made more easy, and danger of
falling diminished. Those best endowed in these respects lived
longer than the others, and left more descendants. Favourable
variations were intensified in each generation, till the state of
the flying squirrel was reached. An excellent example is the
giraffe. In times of drought those having the longest necks
could browse a little higher than the average, and a very small
increase in height might make all the difference between survival
and extinction. So moles with the smallest eyes, or even with
eyelids joined together would survive better than others under
the conditions of life in a narrow burrow. Darwin, seeking a
reply to certain criticisms, notably those of Mivart, set himself
to prove that every sort of useful transition could be conceived
between a given organ taken from its origin and its final adaptation, even though that should be of the most precise and
complicated nature. It will suffice to recall the Pedicellaria of
Echinoderms, developed to all appearance from tegumentary
spicules or granules; whalebone plates, derived from filtering
lamellz, analogous to those in the beak of the shoveller duck;
serial evolution of the feet of the horse by which horses have
become more and more swift of foot. When man wishes to
perfect a useful quality or an adaptation in a domestic animal
he copies nature and employs artificial selection. We may
imagine that by choosing dogs which retrieved best in water he
has perfected the well-known types of English sporting dog. It
was thought that the problem of adaptation had been solved by
Darwin’s very clear and general explanations. It is incontestable that there are transitions between an adaptation strictly
sufficient to a mode of life and the most perfect adaptation.
For example, between ordinary squirrels and sciuropteres both
arboreal ; between a shrew mouse and a mole, both subterranean
in different degrees ; between an ordinary ruminant and a giraffe.
But it appears doubtful whether the process of change has been
quite that which Darwin imagined. It is difficult to understand
CUENOT ON PREADAPTATION. 49

how small dimensional differences such as those which can exist
between examples of the same species can have such importance
in the struggle for existence that they cause the survival or
elimination of certain individuals even when all other conditions
are equal. Besides, modern studies in heredity have shown
that slight fluctuations about the mean type of a species are not
in general hereditary, in sucha sense that even effective selection
could produce any cumulative change.. These considerations
throw doubt on the reality of Darwin’s explanations. Nor is
this all. A reproach as grave as those which precede can be
thrown on Darwin’s general theory of adaptations. It enables
us to understand how an adaptation just sufficient can perfect
itself to the greatest specialisation, each step being a useful
gain. The animal becomes more and more adapted, the environment remaining constant; but the theory is no longer at all
applicable when we are concerned with organs whose utility
does not certainly appear until they have arrived at a terminal
state of perfection. For example, the electrical organs of fishes
developed independently in Torpedoes, Gymnotes, and Malapterures, have a defensive and offensive function, but the initial
stages cannot have played any useful role. The same remarks
apply to the luminous organs of insects. To sum up: the
Darwinian explanation is incomplete, and it is necessary to find
something else.
It is a question whether it is possible actually to formulate
a complete theory of adaptations, explaining at once their origin
and the process of their perfection. It is desired only to direct
attention to at least a partial solution of the problem. Organisms
display adaptation to environment, and we may ask whether a
particular species did not possess sufficient and necessary
adaptations before entry into that environment. If it did, then
it possessed characters having a utility beyond its needs, but
which have taken decisive importance at a given moment in permitting the creature which presents them to adopt a new manner
of life. As Davenport has justly said :
‘‘ The structure exists first, and the species seeks to find
the surroundings which respond to its particular constitution. The adaptive result is not due to a selection
50 EUGENICS REVIEW.

of structure suitable to a given environment (theory
of Darwin and Wallace), but on the contrary to the
choice of surroundings responding to a given struc
ture.”
Because the Newfoundland dog happened to possess webbed
feet he has been able to acquire more aquatic habits than other
dogs. One can call indifferent or semi-useful, characters in a
species which become evident adaptations on removal to a new
habitat or on the acquirement of new habits, preadaptive or
prophetic characters, or more briefly, preadaptations. The
‘following example will make this clear: the common stickleback (Gasterosteous aculeatus) normally a fresh water fish,
is found in Lorraine inhabiting also pools and streams of
varying salinity. This capacity for living in salt water, which
depends upon the osmotic properties of the peripheral tissues,
is fortuitous, without utility, acquired by chance. In the’fresh
water condition such a characteristic would remain unknown
without experiments, but it becomes decisive for survival in the
new habitat. Again, the Kea parrot (Nestor notabilis), from
the mountains of New Zealand, originally insectivorous, or
frugiverous has become a flesh cater since the introduction of
sheep into the country, attacking and feeding upon the living
animal. Nestor meridianalis, a nearly related species, still remains frugiverous.? It may be established as a general rule that
the minimal amount of adaptation which permits life in a certain
station, i.e., what is strictly necessary, appears always in the
line of being as preadaptation. Such characters appear under
the form of latent properties of indifferent or mediocre utility.
They have appeared by chance as fortuitous variations, and there
is no occasion to seek for a Darwinian or Lamarckian explanation of them. Assuredly, the strictly sufficient initial adaptation
may complicate itself, but this constitutes another problem which
is not considered. It is sufficient to present this concept of preadaptation which it is thought may be applied with success in
the animal and vegetable kingdom. It is curious to state that
it is Darwin who first noted in the clearest fashion cases of pre
* Paris, Alcan, 1911, L. Cuénot.
Refer to: ‘* La genése des espéces animales.”
CUENOT ON PREADAPTATION. 51

adaptation. (M. Cuénot then quotes two passages from the
Origin. The first one deals with the existence of sutures in the
skulls of young birds and reptiles, a provision which became later
on of such profound importance during parturition in viviparous
mammals, the second is concerned with a trailing palm in the
Malay Archipelago, which climbs the loftiest trees by the aid of
hooks round the end of the branches, hooks which occur on
many trees that are not climbers.) Since Darwin’s great book
appeared no one seems to have thought of developing the idea
shut up in germ in these two passages. ‘‘In 1901, without
remembering, I declare, this penetrating view of Darwin, I
formulated the Theory of Preadaptation.’’"' Morgan in 1903, in
‘Evolution and Adaptation,’’ and Davenport? in ‘‘ Animal
Ecology of Cold Spring Sandspit,’’ expressed absolutely
similar ideas. Morgan says,

‘* The origin of each form has nothing to do with surroundings or with utility, and the form appears
independently of the surroundings; once appeared, it
can be perpetuated in suitable conditions.”’

De Vries remarks that station alone has chosen the suitable
forms among a crowd and has no relation with their origin.
The following phrase clearly indicating a preadaptation occurs
in the ‘‘ Tetraplasy,’’ of Osborne, 1912, it is the more interesting coming from a very Lamarckian palzontologist :—

‘‘In the development of points on the molar teeth it
appears that the structures can precede the functions
which they will serve.”’

In effect, before the insufficiency of the classical explanation of
adaptation by selection or by use, it is natural enough to think
of adaptation anterior to the entry into an environment. The
notion of preadaptation in addition co-ordinates itself perfectly
with that of mutations and the Mendelian theories. Each of
these three conceptions completes the others and can be considered as the triple basis cf modern transformism.

Such is Monsieur Cuénot’s contribution.

1 12évolution des théories transformistes. (Revue générale des Sciences, 120me
ann. 1go1, p. 264.)

2 Animal Ecology of Cold Spring Sandspit, with remarks on the theory of
adaptation. (The Decennial Publications of the Univ. Chicago, 10, 1903.)
52 , EUGENICS REVIEW.

It will be seen that the part of M. Cuénot’s paper to which
the author evidently attaches most importance consists of sundry
criticisms of Charles Darwin’s theory of Natural Selection, and
an exposition of the so-called ‘‘ Theory of preadaptation,’’ which
is presumably supposed to remove some of the deficiencies of
the orthodox Darwinian view. Upon examination, M. Cuénot’s
conclusions appear to us invalid, and his claims preposterous.
We must, however, claim the indulgence of our reader, since
we cannot concisely indicate where he has gone astray. The
objections which can be raised to a logical and consecutive
argument are easy to express. There must be some fault, either
in the premises, or in the reasoning. It is otherwise when the
argument turns out to be continuous only in appearance. In
the present case, M. Cuénot’s “‘ theory of preadaptation ’’ does
not satisfy, or bear any relation to the objections he raises to
Darwin’s theory. In addition, the one solid fact which M.
Cuénot is at pains to present, that animals and plants frequently
do exhibit fortuitous variations, which would be of service in
some other habitat, is a necessary element of Darwin’s theory,
and—although insignificant in itself—has been amply illustrated
in the many instances of change of function on the part of an
organ which we find in the pages of ‘‘ The Origin of Species.’’

Since the paper is incoherent, and shows great confusion of
thought, it will be necessary to deal with it piecemeal, and in
particular we must consider the ‘‘ theory of preadaptation,’’ as
expounded by M. Cuénot, and the objections he raises to Natural
Selection.

The objections to Darwin’s theory are three, and are all
exceedingly familiar to readers of the Origin, since they are
fully answered in that work. First, it is asserted that individual
differences of animals of the same species are not sufficient to
affect their chances of life. Next, that effective selection would
not modify the race because the individual differences are not
inherited; and finally that the initial stages of highly perfected
organs, being useless, could not have been improved by natural
selection. It is little short of amazing to find the three best
established propositions in the Origin calmly contradicted. The
individual differences of animals affect their chances of life in
CUENOT ON PREADAPTATION. 53

every conceivable way. There would be no meaning in the word
‘‘ adaptation ”’ if it was not so. An adaptation is nothing but a
particular feature in an animal or plant, which improves its
chances of life in a given environment. What could be of more
importance to a tree-browsing animal, in times of scarcity, than
the ability to reach a trifle higher than the rest of the herd?
And M. Cuénot does not deny that giraffes do vary in stature.
Even if obvious differences of high importance did not appear
whenever a group of animals is studied individually, it would
be obvious that an individual difference, however slight, must
have, in the infinite diversity of circumstances in different situations, and over the lapse of years, a definite balance of advantage
er disadvantage, which, if inherited, is represented by a correspondingly definite modification, be it great or small, of the
species. Modern investigations have, indeed, shown that there
is a class of slight fluctuations about the mean type of a species
(due to the differences of individual environment) which are not
inherited. But to say that effective selection can cause no
cumulative change is to contradict the perpetual experience of
breeders of all kinds of domestic animals. Is it seriously supposed that the innumerable varieties of domestic animals and
plants, exactly fitted to our needs and tastes, have not been
modified by the cumulative effect of selection? It is difficult to
imagine why M. Cuénot allowed himself to support these two
thoroughly exploded fallacies, and that without—like the early
opponents of Darwin—adducing any evidence on their behalf.
They do not in any way lead up to the ‘‘ Theory of preadaptation,’’ but merely give an impression of intellectual levity, distinctly prejudicial to his claims as a discoverer.

The third difficulty, that of the initial stages of highly
developed organs, deserved and received from Darwin ample
attention. We quote from the Origin :—

‘* The illustration of the swim bladder in fishes is a good
one, because it shows us clearly the highly important
fact that an organ originally constructed for one purpose, namely, flotation, may be converted into one for
a widely different purpose, namely, respiration. The
swim bladder has, also, been worked in as an accessory
to the auditory organs of certain fishes.’”*

™ Origin of Species, p. 230.
54 EUGENICS REVIEW.

In modern bony fishes (Teleosts) the swim bladder is a
characteristic organ, its function being to counteract the effect
of varying pressures at different depths. The lining secretes a
mixture of oxygen and nitrogen. In primitive teleosts this
organ probably exercised some respiratory function ; but in lung
fishes (Dipnot) it has been completely transformed into lungs,
though these fishes still retain gills in addition. There are three
species of dipnoi: Lepidosiren, of tropical South America, in
which respiration is assisted by lungs at ordinary times, breaths
being frequently taken at the surface. In the dry season however respiration is entirely performed by them. Protopterus, the
African Dipneust, is similar in its habits; Ceratodus, the
Australian Dipneust, though it frequently breathes at the surface
is never actually deprived of water. Here are examples of
organs useful at all stages, and functional at all stages. Again,
““Landois has shown that the wings of insects are
developed from the trachee; it is therefore highly
probable that in this great class, organs which once
served for respiration have been actually converted into
organs for flight.’” .
In barnacles (Cirripedes), the study of which Darwin made
peculiarly his own, we find some excellent examples.” Very
briefly, pedunculated (stalked) cirrepedes have two minute
folds of skin which retain the eggs by a sticky secretion in
the sack until hatched. Unprovided with branchiz, the whole
surface of the body serves for respiration. Sessile cirripedes
have no folds, the eggs being loose in the sack, but in the same
relative position as the folds they have branchiz, so that the two
minute folds which originally held the eggs, and together with
the rest of the body slightly aided in respiration, have been
gradually converted by natural selection into branchiz.

After the large number of detailed examples which Darwin
gave, it is, we suppose, universally admitted that useful gradations of structure can exist between the most undifferentiated
beginning and the final highly developed organ. As a further

* Origin of Species, p. 231.
§ Origin of Species, p. 232.
CUENOT ON PREADAPTATION. 55

example we may quote the case of the electrical organs of fishes,
which M. Cuénot mentions.

‘‘In the gymnotus and torpedo they, no doubt, serve as
powerful means of defence, and perhaps for securing
prey; yet in the ray, as observed by Matteucci, an
analogous organ in the tail manifests but little electricity, even when the animal is greatly irritated; so
little, that it can hardly be of any use for the above
purposes. Moreover, in the ray, besides the organ
just referred to, there is, as Dr. R. M’Donnell has
shown, another organ near the head, not known to be
electrical, but which appears to be the real homologue
of the electric battery in the torpedo. It is generally
admitted that there exists between these organs and
ordinary muscle a close analogy in rudimentary structure, in the distribution of the nerves, and in the
manner in which they are acted on by various reagents.
It should, also, be especially observed that muscular
contraction is accompanied by an electrical discharge;
and, as Dr. Radcliffe insists, ‘ in the electrical apparatus
of the torpedo during rest there would seem to be a
charge in every respect like that which is met with in
muscle and nerve during rest, and the discharge of the
torpedo, instead of being peculiar, may be only another
form of the discharge which attends upon the action of
muscle and motor nerve.’

Beyond this we cannot at present go in the way of
explanation ; but as we know so little about the uses of
these organs, and as we know nothing about the habits
and structure of the progenitors of the existing electric
fishes, it would be extremely bold to maintain that no
serviceable transitions are possible by which these
organs might have been gradually developed.”’
Turning now to the ‘‘ theory of preadaptation ’’ we find it to
consist of the fact that organisms in one habitat often present
variations which would be of use in another, and in virtue of such
variations many successfully change their habitat. To the student
56 EUGENICS REVIEW.

of Darwin it is obvious that, since variations occur arbitrarily
and in all directions, variations which would be of advantage in
some other habitat must occur as frequently as those which are
in fact of advantage in the conditions in which the species lives;
only, the species is selected by, and becomes more fitted for the
struggle for existence in the habitat to which it belongs. Migration takes an important place in the Darwinian scheme, and a
migration in general presupposes, not only the ‘‘ minimal
adaptation ’’ of M. Cuénot, but the discovery of a more favourable place in the economy of nature than was originally
occupied.

Not only does fortuitous variation necessitate the appearance
of modifications which render the animal or plant better fitted
for some habitat other than its own, but there exists among
widely ranging and highly organised animals a strong tendency
to develop organs which are versatile, that is, capable of a wide
range of function. By being warm-blooded, mammals and birds
are enabled to maintain their normal activity throughout a wide
range of temperature, and they may therefore be said to be preadapted to all temperatures within that range. In this sense
versatility is an attempt at universal preadaptation, indeed at
complete independence of particular circumstances.

M. Cuénot might say that the hand of primitive man was
preadapted for steering. an automobile, but in truth the hand,
and even more the brain of men are highly versatile organs,
appropriate to a widély ranging animal, the possibilities of
which are still perhaps far from being exhausted.

If M. Cuénot wishes to suggest that these preadaptations
are due to a prophetic or teleological quality in the organism,
which foresees a change of condition, and provides against it,
then he is stepping outside the philosophy of the physical
sciences, and may at least be expected to provide the strongest
grounds for such a departure. If he merely wishes us to understand that these preadaptations are fortuitous and accidental
instances of the universal tendency to vary, then it only remains
for us to say that he has added nothing to our knowledge.
CUENOT ON PREADAPTATION. 57

M. Cuénot gives several quotations from modern biologists,
which may serve as examples of how loose phrases propagate
false ideas. Mr. Morgan, for instance, remarks,

‘‘ The origin of each form has nothing to do with surroundings, or with utility, and the form appears
independently of the surroundings; once appeared it
can be perpetuated in suitable conditions.’’

Let us be careful to distinguish between the individual form,
and the form of the species. The origin of each individual form
may truly be said to be independent of environment and utility ;
the effect of environment is to select or to reject it. But it is
this very selection which has insensibly modified the species,
and produced the finest and most exact relations between the
form and its surroundings. The origin of the form of the
species lies precisely in its surroundings, and its needs among
them. The quotation from Davenport displays a further
development of the same confusion.

‘* The structure exists first, and the species seeks for or
meets the environment which responds to its particular
constitution ; the adaptive result is not due to a selection
of structure suitable to a given environment (theory of
Darwin and Wallace), but on the contrary to the choice
of an environment responding to a given structure.”

For ‘‘ species ’’ read ‘‘ individual,’’ and a grain of truth emerges.
The environment of a species, however, is nothing less than the
total surroundings, organic and inorganic, of all its individuals ;
this cannot be changed save by universal migrations, or universal
changes of habit. These changes do, no doubt, very slowly
take place, as the climate and organic surroundings are slowly
modified. But selection is going on all the while, between all
the individuals, according as they succeed or fail in perpetuating
themselves under the conditions determined by the environment
of the species.

So melancholy a neglect of Darwin’s work suggests reflection upon the use of those rare and precious possessions of man—
great books. It was, we believe, the custom of the late
Professor Freeman to warn his students that mastery of one
great book was worth any amount of knowledge of many lesser
58 EUGENICS REVIEW.

ones. The tendency of modern scientific teaching is to neglect
the great books, to lay far too much stress upon relatively unimportant modern work, and to present masses of detail of doubtful truth and questionable weight in such a way as to obscure
principles. Everything depends upon the view the lecturer
takes of his responsibilities. Experience in the lecture room
suggests that his main concern is, in most cases, to be ‘‘ up to
date.’’ Credit must, no doubt, be given for the assumption that
students will themselves turn their information into knowledge
by reference to co-ordinating principles; but this course is not
urged upon them. How many biological students of to-day
have read the Origin? The majority know it only from
extracts, a singularly ineffective means, for a work of genius
does not easily lend itself to the scissors; its unity is too marked.
Nothing can really take the place of a first-hand study of the
work itself. Many lecturers give the impression that they are
using a great work merely as a background against which to
display the brilliance of modern research. Eagerness to
announce revolutionary discoveries is an unfailing sign of a
superficial intelligence, and is surely beneath the dignity of the
Professorial Chair.

The specialised research worker is always ready to sneer at
the man who prefers the labours of mental abstraction. About
brilliant ‘detailed investigation there is certainly something
sensational not commonly associated with the creative thought
which leads up to a principle. The Origin will never satisfy
a craving for sensation, it is a long and sustained argument
from cover to cover, but that is just what makes it attractive at
all times to men of any mental depth, and especially attractive at
a time when abstractors flourish and preoccupation with detail is
almost universal. Darwin, moreover, is still the first-hand
source of our most valuable knowledge about principles of
biology in the widest sense.

An age of extreme and unparalleled specialisation, such as
that in which we live, needs above all the steadying influence
of a firm grasp on principles. Detail in itself is arid and
tedious; it is moreover largely unintelligible in the absence of
explanatory principle. There is too much experiment and too
CUENOT ON PREADAPTATION. 59

little thought. The inductive method exalts experiment into a
position of supreme importance, but it is sometimes forgotten
that the end is generalisation. The search for principle demands
disentanglement from detail, and domination of it; a requirement Darwin satisfied in a very high degree. To call into being
intelligence of a sufficiently high order to perform this task, so
urgent at the present time in every department of knowledge,
is perhaps a problem for eugenics. Certain it is that powers of
mental abstraction are all too rare.

The modern studies in biology to which M. Cuénot refers
are not favourable to those large abstract arguments and reasonings of which the Origin is so illustrious an example.
Extremists have set Darwinism over against Mendelism as if
some kind of antithesis existed between them. This simply
shows a failure to grasp the question at issue. Darwinism is
concerned with evolution, Mendelism with the mechanism of
heredity. Looked at from the point of view of evolution,
Mendelism presents the picture of a closed system, none the
less, ‘‘this interesting discovery,’’ as Professor Poulton has
called it, has been greeted in some quarters as if it ushered in a
new theory of evolution. Nothing could be more unfortunate
than to belittle new work just because it is new, and it is no
motive of belittlement which constrains us to say that regrettable
things have been done, and more regrettable things have been
said in America in the name of Mendel. Direct legislative
proposals have been made, and in some cases passed, based
upon quite inadequate knowledge. Persons suffering from
supposedly Mendelian defects have been advised to mingle with
sound stocks, though the result of doing so is clearly to lay up
hereditary trouble for the future. Something must be allowed
for American methods of thought, and something for their modes
of expression, but when all reasonable allowance has been made
can it be doubted that these things are really due to narrowness
of view, to a failure to step back and take a wide survey in the
manner of Darwin.

The preoccupation of the lesser Mendelians with detail is
painful, and their blindness to well-established, and, so
far as their own facts are concerned, co-ordinating principles,
60 EUGENICS REVIEW.

astonishing. It would seem that preoccupation with detail
inhibits the use of abstract reasoning. When the whole province
of life is to be considered nothing less than the clearest grasp of
the widest possible generality is likely to lead to either just or
well-proportioned conclusions. It is essential for Eugenists to
consider on which side they ought to range themselves in this
confused controversy, and that they should see clearly whither
the extreme Mendelians would lead them. It is in the highest
degree unlikely that Mendelism will ever cover even the field of
heredity, and any amount of information about the mechanism
of heredity cannot do away with the need for broad co-ordinating
principles of evolution. On the other hand Darwin’s work does
*“cover’’ the field in the sense that it continues to satisfy the
required scientific test, that it explains and co-ordinates new
facts. Arguments of doubtful validity are much more likely to
proceed from new work of a specialised nature than from a
well-established theory. By far the strongest ground upon
which Eugenists can take their stand is that provided by general
principles. They are open to all kinds of attack on the side of
Mendelism, on Darwin’s ground they are impregnable. It is not
easy to exaggerate the importance to Eugenists of the broad
principles outlined in the Origin. Were all information, except
that used by Darwin inaccessible, such information would not
only allow but compel us to formulate eugenic concepts and
proposals. Changes in the constitution of a mixed population
depend primarily upon selection; the existing and possible
agencies of selection do at present and must always provide the
most fruitful field of eugenic research. These agencies acting
at large amidst a multitude of random causes, each of which
may have predominant influence if we fix our attention upon
a particular individual, nevertheless determine the progress or
decadence of the population as a whole. We may borrow an
illustration from the kinetic theory of gases. The several molecules are conceived to move freely in all directions with greatly
varying velocities, but the statistical result is a perfectly definite
measurable pressure. Controversy may rage round the nature
and properties of the atom, yet our knowledge of general principles enables us to calculate gas pressures with accuracy. We
CUENOT ON PREADAPTATION. 61

are independent of particular knowledge about separate atoms,
as in eugenics we are independent of particular knowledge about
individuals. It is by no means suggested that such knowledge
is not of the highest importance, interest and use. It is,
however, unnecessary alike for a general theory of gases and for
a general theory of eugenics.
