“ Eugenics is the science which deals with all influences that improve the inborn qualities of a race; also
with those that develop them to the utmost advantage.’—SIR FRANCIS GALTON (1904)

The Eugenics Review

EDITORIAL OFFICES: THE EUGENICS SOCIETY * 69 ECCLESTON SQUARE - LONDON ° SWI °

Editor for the Society : Mrs. K. Hodson

VICTORIA 2091

 

NOTES OF THE
QUARTER

THE BIOLOGY OF CO-OPERATION

WE PRINT IN this issue of the REVIEW three
papers which were read at a half-day Symposium
for young scientists which took place on 11th
December 1965 at University College, London.

This meeting, on the Biology of Co-operation,
was held as part of the British contribution to
International Co-operation Year. It was organized by Dr. G. Ainsworth Harrison as a joint
project of the Eugenics Society, the Royal
Anthropological Institute and the Society for the
Study of Human Biology.

The Chair was taken by Professor J. S.
Weiner; he was, in 1963, appointed Convenor of
Project D (Human Adaptability) of the International Biological Programme. The first paper
read, Co-operation in Mammalian Societies by
Dr. M. J. Cullen, is unfortunately not available
for publication; the three which followed it form
an interesting series—Co-operation in Primate
Societies by Dr. John Hurrell Crook, in Primitive
Human Communities by Dr. Burton Benedict
and, finally, the Psychology of Co-operation by
Dr. Henri Tajfel.

POPULATION PROSPECTS

THE LATEST PROJECTION Of the population of
England and Wales, to be seen in the Registrar
General’s Quarterly Return for December 1965,

ER—E 57

does not present any radically new picture of the
likely growth in our numbers until the end of
the century. The estimated population in broad
age-groups for the year 2001 is shown in the
following statement for both the newly published
figures and for those issued a year ago:

1965 1964
Age Projection Projection
(Numbers in millions)
0-14 18-7 18-3
15-44 27:4 27:4
45-64* 11:4 11°6
65 and over* 8-9 9-1
Total 66°4 66-4

* The dividing line is age 65 for men but age 60 for
women.

Both the total and the number at ages 15-44
are unchanged, but the population of children
has been increased by nearly half a million
whereas the number of persons aged 45 and over
have been reduced by a corresponding amount.
These changes directly reflect a mild rise in
expected fertility and a projected net migratory
intake that is halved after 1978 in comparison
with the previous year’s assessment.

In recent years the public has been accustomed
to see dramatic changes in the long-term population outlook, a magnified representation of
year-to-year developments in current experience
in regard mainly to fertility and migration. By
such standards the changes between the 1964 and
1965 are very mild, and with the numbers of
births wavering at their peak it is all too possible
that the next exercise of this kind will show a
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

stronger variation of outlook, perhaps with a
diminution of prospective numbers.

In an interesting article in New Society (3rd
March 1966) Mr. John Boreham, a Chief
Statistician of the General Register Office with
special responsibility for population and censuses,
explained in broad outline how projections are
made and the connection they have with the reshaping of social policy. He asked whether, in
the light of the latest figures, a new population
policy is needed for Britain, in relation to
population pressure generally and the drift to the
south-east in particular.

As befits a Government official, he did not
give any direct answer to this question, although
he emphasized that complex considerations are
involved. But he did draw attention to the fact
that in the period 1865-1900 cities were hurriedly
built for a population increase of twelve million
whereas over the thirty-five remaining years of
the present century cities must be equally speedily
built for an increase of twenty million. The
remnants of the Victorian cities are often mean
and squalid: could we now do better? It might
perhaps be added that the Victorians left some
countryside between the cities whereas, in the
current expansion, sprawling conurbations eat
up agricultural land over huge areas.

It is against such a background that any
suggestion of a general increase in family
allowances should be considered.

ABORTION LAW

MRS. VERA HOUGHTON writes: When it became
clear on 9th July 1965 that the abortion Bill
introduced by Mrs. Renée Short, Labour
Member for Wolverhampton, North-East,* could
make no further progress before the end of the
session, supporters of this reform, headed by
Mrs. Short, tabled a motion asking the Government to provide time in the next session,
beginning in the following October. Replying to
a question the previous day, Miss Alice Bacon,
Minister of State, Home Office, had said that if
any Member were to be lucky in the ballot, then
the Government would have to see what their
attitude would be about doing for abortion what

* The Eugenics Review, 1965, 57, 105—7.
58

they did in the case of the abolition of capital
punishment. When the House rose on 5th
August for the summer recess, 144 Members of
all parties had signed the motion.

At about this time the Abortion Law Reform
Association began to direct its activities to the
House of Lords where there are more facilities
for debate. A previous attempt had been made in
1954 by Lord Amulree but after presenting a Bill
which would have done no more than give
statutory effect to the Bourne judgement of
1938, he withdrew it in the face of opposition.
Now that the Lords had found a new zeal for
social reform, and had already tackled two
highly controversial issues, homosexuality and
capital punishment, the time seemed ripe for a
third: abortion. Lord Silkin, a former Labour
Member for Peckham and Minister of Town and
Country Planning in a previous Labour Government, was approached and agreed to take a Bill.
He could hardly have foreseen the tremendous
amount of public interest his Bill would arouse,
the hundreds of letters and the requests to
address meetings, nor the many hours he would
spend in trying to find a basis for agreement, the
pressures that would be brought to bear, the
delaying tactics, and the emotions which
persuaded the House on one occasion to go back
on an earlier decision.

Unlike the Commons where a Bill that goes
into committee is usually dealt with by a selected
number of Members, a committee of the House
of Lords comprises the whole chamber and,
according to the attendance, may vary in size and
composition with each sitting. This adds to the
strain of steering a Bill through the committee
stage. A further hazard, common to both
Houses, is that the help of Parliamentary draftsmen is not available to private Members, and if
the Government is adopting a neutral attitude,
departmental advice is also withheld until the
wish of the House on the principle of the Bill is
clear, that is, after the Second reading.

Lord Silkin’s Bill

Despite all that was said about the drafting
defects of Lord Silkin’s Bill, it was certainly no
worse and probably a good deal better than
many others. What started off as a relatively
NOTES OF THE QUARTER

straightforward five-clause Bill became increasingly complex as each critic tried to define
it more exactly. The amendments were so
numerous that a second committee stage was
necessary and the Bill itself was reprinted four
times. It occupied seven sitting days from the
Second reading on 30th November to the
passing of the Bill at the Third reading on 7th
March 1966, three days before the dissolution of
Parliament, when it fell along with all the other
Bills that had not completed their passage
through both Houses. Twenty-six Peers gave
advance notice of their wish to speak in the
debate on the Second reading; 227 Peers in all
voted at one stage or another of the Bill.

Lord Silkin remained imperturbable throughout, his patience was monumental and his
staying-power remarkable. He proposed to
introduce a fresh Bill early in the new Parliament
which should have every chance of reaching the
Commons early enough in the session for time
to be given for a full-length debate and for it to
make progress. Abortion law reform supporters
in the House of Commons who now number
over 300 would help to make sure of this.

Grounds for Abortion

The original Bill as passed at the Second

reading differed in one major respect only from
the Bills introduced by Mr. Kenneth Robinson,
now the Minister of Health, in 1961 and by
Mrs. Short in June 1965. It sought to add a new
provision to enable social indications to be taken
into account in so far as they affect the patient’s
suitability as a mother:
... in the belief that the health of the patient or the
social conditions in which she is living (including
the social conditions of her existing children) make
her unsuitable to assume the legal and moral
responsibility for caring for a child or another child
as the case may be.

Because of the difficulty of defining social
conditions to everyone’s satisfaction, Lord Silkin
agreed to try to find an alternative wording at
the committee stage.

The new wording that
. .. the pregnant mother is or will be physically or

mentally inadequate to be the mother of a child or
of another child as the case may be

was adopted on 3rd February after an amendment, moved by Viscount Dilhorne and the
Bishop of Exeter, to leave out this clause, had
been defeated by 71 to 51 votes. But at the
report stage on 22nd February when Lady
Wootton and the Archbishop of Canterbury
joined Viscount Dilhorne and Lord Brain in
again moving the amendment, it was carried by
81 to 51 votes and the earlier decision was
reversed.

Was it an accident that on the second occasion
there were 61 Peers who had not been present on
the earlier occasion, and that 42 of them voted in
favour of the amendment? Lady Summerskill
thought otherwise “. . . never before, in the
whole of my Parliamentary career, have I seen a
vote manipulated as was the vote last week”
(22nd February). It was certainly a disaster that
33 of those who voted on 3rd February to retain
the clause were absent on the second occasion,
and a matter for conjecture that 12 Members
changed their minds.

Commenting on this clause in the British
Medical Journal of 19th March,* Lord Brain
states it “was attacked on the grounds that
physical and mental inadequacy was an illdefined concept, that its implications were social
rather than medical, and that therefore it was
not a matter for decision by doctors, and that,
in any case, if the mother’s physical or mental
health was likely to be seriously impaired by the
continuation of the pregnancy, grounds for its
termination were already provided by subsection 1 (a)’’, which gives statutory effect to the
Bourne judgement.

Rape was another ground where it was
suggested that the pregnant woman’s physical or
mental health should be the deciding factor, and
that doctors should not have to decide a question
of fact. Despite Lord Silkin’s introduction of a
safeguard against wrongfully alleged rape, that
the woman must have consulted a registered
medical practitioner as soon as practicable after
the incident and that there was then medical
evidence of sexual assault upon her, Viscount
Dilhorne’s amendment to leave out rape was
carried by 40 to 31 votes. At the time that this
division took place a number of Peers who had

* “Medical Issues in Abortion Law Reform.,”’

59
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

earlier in the day supported the “inadequacy”
clause and who might well have been in favour
of retaining the “‘rape”’ clause, had had to leave
for other engagements. This was just bad luck,
the sitting had not been expected to continue
so long.

At one stage, on 28th February, it looked as if
the “deformed child”? clause would founder on
the degree of probability of abnormality. Lord
Silkin had finally moved an amendment to
provide for termination of pregnancy on the
ground that “there is a substantial risk that if the
child were born it would suffer from such
physical or mental abnormalities as to deprive it
of any prospect of reasonable enjoyment of
life’’. Viscount Dilhorne wanted to leave out
“there is a substantial risk”? and to insert
instead “it is more probable than not’. Lord
Brain’s comments on the degree of abnormality
will be of interest here to readers. I quote from
the B.M.J.:

The accuracy with which the risk that a child will
be born abnormal can be estimated must vary
greatly in different circumstances. There is a high
degree of probability when a pregnant woman suffers
from rubella during the first few weeks of pregnancy.
... The risk of transmission of a disorder inherited
as a Mendelian dominant, and for which one parent
is heterozygous, being 50 per cent, would not qualify
for the termination of the pregnancy on the basis of
Lord Dilhorne’s amendment. When this was pointed
out, he said that another suggested phrase, “as
probable as not’, would cover that particular risk.
It would not, however, cover the risk of inheritance
of an autosomal recessive factor for which both
parents were heterozygous, which is 25 per cent.

Other factors which need to be taken into account
in this context are the increasing frequency with
which clinically normal carriers of abnormal genes
can be detected, and also the possibility of discovering in some cases whether the foetus in utero is
normal or abnormal. The issue in the Debate really
turned on the meaning of “‘substantial risk”’ and how
this was to be assessed. It may be questioned whether
the relevant considerations can all be expressed
mathematically... .

As the Bill stood there was no special provision
requiring an expert opinion on this difficult question.
The responsibility was left with the gynaecologist
terminating the pregnancy and the undefined doctor
providing the second certificate.

In any case, if the mother’s mental health is
seriously threatened by the fear that the unborn
child may be abnormal, the pregnancy could be
terminated under the provision of 1 (a) without the
need for a precise assessment of that risk. The most

60

fundamental question of all was hardly discussed:
how does one decide what physical or mental
abnormalities deprive a child of any prospect of
reasonable enjoyment of life?

The last ground to be fought over was where
the girl becomes pregnant while under the age of
sixteen. As Lord Brain points out in the B.M.J.
“this provision was defended on the ground of
the psychological immaturity of the girl,
interference with schooling, and the social stigma
involved in pregnancy’’. I thought Lord Raglan
put this issue in a nutshell in the debate: “A
young girl under sixteen is supposed to be
protected by law, and yet we say that she has no
right to a remedy if she conceives. I see no point
in having one law which is meant to protect, and
another law which ignores the damage if that
protection fails’’. The girl under sixteen remains
in the Bill.

The Lords also accepted that termination of
pregnancy should be allowed where the pregnant
woman is a defective. On the understanding that
he could look at it again before he re-introduced
his Bill, Lord Silkin accepted an amendment
from Lord Molson that “defective’’ should mean
in England and Wales a person suffering from
subnormality within the meaning of section 4 of
the Mental Health Act, 1959, or in Scotland a
person suffering from mental deficiency within
the meaning of section 6 of the Mental Health
(Scotland) Act, 1960.

The remaining clauses of the Bill deal with who
should be permitted to terminate a pregnancy,
where it should be done, who should certify
(previous Bills have only specified that there shall
be a second medical opinion) and with the
notification of termination of pregnancy. All
designed supposedly to safeguard the patient
from the unscrupulous doctor, but also to
protect the doctor from the patient who knows
what she wants, and to reassure society. Never
before has an attempt been made to legislate on
the circumstances in which a surgical operation
may take place and the conditions under which
it may be done. If it was necessary to do this for
all operations, we should recognize the absurdity
of it. But as long as we stop short of allowing the
individual the freedom of personal decision and
the surgeon the freedom of his profession, this
problem will remain with us.
NOTES OF THE QUARTER

Mr. Digby’s Bill

While the House of Lords was grappling with
the final stages of Lord Silkin’s Bill, another
attempt, the fourth, was being made in the
Commons. One of the supporters of Mrs. Short’s
Bill, Mr. Wingfield Digby, Conservative Member
for Dorset, West, had drawn eighth place in the
ballot for private Members’ Bills, and bravely
decided on medical termination of pregnancy.
Since only a limited number of days are allotted
to private Members’ Bills Mr. Digby knew that
his could not be the first on the order paper for
the day and that therefore it ran the risk of being
“‘talked out’? as happened with Mr. Reeves’s Bill
in 1953 and with Mr. Robinson’s in 1961.
Mr. Digby confined his Bill to giving statutory
effect to the Bourne judgement and to cases
where “‘it is as probable as not that the child if
born would suffer from such physical or mental
abnormalities or both as to deprive it of any
prospect of reasonable enjoyment of life’’. At
the time his Bill had to go to print, rape had
already gone from Lord Silkin’s Bill and the girl
under sixteen was still in the balance. At 4
o’clock on Friday, 25th February, Mr. Digby’s
Bill was talked out by a Roman Catholic M.P.,
Mr. Peter Mabon (Labour, Preston, South) amid
cries of “shame” from both the chamber and
public gallery.

Mr. Digby and the supporters of his Bill
immediately put down a motion calling for
“early reform” and in the few days left before
Parliament was dissolved on 10th March
Members of all three parties quickly added their
signatures.

Addendum:

The House of Lords gave Lord Silkin’s new
Bill (identical to the Bill passed on 7th March)
an unopposed Second reading on 10th May and
completed the committee and report stages on
23rd May. Amendments accepted in committee
include a re-wording of the ‘‘deformed child”’
clause to read that the child ‘“‘would suffer from
such physical or mental abnormalities as to be
seriously handicapped” (instead of ‘‘to deprive
it of any prospect of reasonable enjoyment of
life’), and a new clause (by the overwhelming
majority of 60 votes to 15) which provides for

termination where ‘“‘the pregnant woman’s
capacity as a mother will be severely overstrained by the care of a child or of another
child as the case may be’’. The interpretation
of ‘“‘defective’ has been reversed from ‘‘subnormality” to “‘severe subnormality”.

In the Commons Mr. David Steel, the Liberal
Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles,
who drew third place in the recent ballot will
introduce a Bill on abortion this summer.

THE GYPSY UNDER SOCIALISM

COLONEL JAMES CAMPBELL writes: Eugenic
considerations have been and still appear in
many countries to be obscured and bedevilled by
the odium attaching to Hitler’s ideas on race. So
obsessed are some governments and individuals
with their old anti-Hitler feelings and propaganda that their ideas are still in danger of
becoming fixed and immutable.

The Prague correspondent of The Financial
Times (1st March 1966), on the subject of the
Gypsy under Socialism, writes:

Formerly a high mortality rate, particularly of
infants, kept the gypsy population stagnant among
the growing nations of the Czechs and Slovaks.
Now the gypsies are staging a population explosion
contrasting sharply with the no-babies attitude of
the Czechs and Slovaks. The percentage of gypsies
in the population has almost doubled since 1927 and
is now increasing at a still faster rate. In a single
year, gypsy families working side by side with
Slovaks in a certain new factory had 25 births for
every one birth in the same number of Slovak
families.

In some districts the gypsy population increment
was estimated in 1965 at 10 per cent. The explanation
is simple. The gypsies not only ignore contraception
but would not dream of making use of the opportunity open to women with several children or in
difficult circumstances of having a legal abortion.

The solution of the problem was made more
difficult by a muddled approach in the post-war
period. With the Nazi extermination policy and
deportations of gypsies to the death camps fresh in
their memory, people were understandably shy of
doing anything which could be misinterpreted as
racial discrimination and tended to overlook many
petty offences.

I have not heard elsewhere of a ‘“‘no-babies’’
attitude of Czechs and Slovaks, though I have

61
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

heard of their desire for efficient family planning.
The correspondent continues:

The gypsy problem may get still worse if new
measures, contemplated by the government in the
field of family allowances, are adopted. Family
allowances, paid in Czechoslovakia on a scale
increasing with every further child have been for
many gypsies an important part of income, but so
far have been paid only to parents who could prove
a certain minimum period of employment. . . . It is
obvious that an increase in allowances and their
payment regardless of parents’ employment would
put a premium on the gypsy way of life.

One does not have to look far in the United
Kingdom to find somewhat parallel population
problems, not only in regard to gypsies but even
sections powerfully represented in Parliament.
Here also the same hangover from the reaction
to Hitler’s policies inhibits clear thinking and
open expression of views. Perhaps the next
generation may be free from these inhibitions
but in the meantime much harm may be done
unless the facts are faced.

HUMAN GENETICS IN ROMANIA

GENETIC STUDIES IN Romania, as in other East
European countries, did not develop until a few
years ago. This was due to the influence of the
Russian biologist, Lysenko, whose dead hand on
all scientific genetics extended to the satellite
countries. With the relaxation of his hold and
with the growing independence of Romania from
direct Russian control, serious research in
genetics began about seven years ago in the field
of microbiology in which Romania is very well
advanced, with two major institutes in Bucharest.
In the last six years good departments of human
genetics have also developed, both in the
Institute of Endocrinology and the University
Department of Forensic Medicine in Bucharest.
Similar developments are, no doubt, taking place
in other eastern European socialist republics and

62

we may now look forward to a steady flow of
research from this part of Europe.

ABORTION BY VACUUMASPIRATION METHOD

COLONEL JAMES CAMPBELL writes: “Use of
the Vacuum Extractor”’ is the title of an article
in the British Medical Journal of 19th January
1963 by Moshe Lancet, M.D., Department of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Rehoveth, Israel.

It is surprising that some who read this article
have failed to notice that this vacuum extractor,
to be used instead of forceps, should not be confused with the vacuum-aspiration device introduced in the USSR which was discussed in THE
EUGENICS REVIEW for January 1963 (54, 189)
and was more fully described in its pages in
October 1964 (56, 129).

SOCIAL AND GENETIC INFLUENCES
ON LIFE AND DEATH

FOLLOWING ITS SUCCESSFUL Symposia in
1964 on Biological Aspects of Social Problems
and in 1965 on Genetic and Environmental Factors
in Human Ability, the Eugenics Society is
organizing a two-day conference on Social and
Genetic Influences on Life and Death which will
be held on Wednesday and Thursday, 28th and
29th September 1966 at the Botany Lecture
Theatre, University College London, Gower
Street, London, W.C. 1.

As before, the Symposium will be divided into four sessions: Conception, Pregnancy and
Birth; Some Major Causes of Illness, I. Somatic
Illness (session 2) and II. Psychological Illness
(session 3); and Causes and Effects of Ageing.

The full list of chairmen, speakers and their
subjects is advertised in this issue of the Review;
the proceedings will be published as Eugenics
Society Symposia, Volume 3.

Admission is free but by ticket for which
application should be made to the General
Secretary of the Eugenics Society.
