HAROLD SANDON
M.A., Ph.D., Professor of Zoology, University of Khartoum

On University Entrance Qualifications

for Students of Biology

FTEN IN THE past, and especially during
( ) year of centenary celebrations. I have

wondered uneasily what we should have
made of Charles Darwin had he been one of our
students today. Now we have the REVIEW’S
editorial answer:* “Darwin was a truly late
developer. In the modern competition for
university places it seems evident that he would
have failed. To-day precocity is at a premium.”

This conclusion is important, not merely
because of our interest in everything concerning
Darwin, but even more because in this he was
typical of a considerable class of biologists
both great and small. ‘As a schoolboy, and for
long as an undergraduate, I was ignorant of my
true vocation, and never had sufficient mental
enthusiasm for the studies put before me to
win any scholarships. ... A child of workingclass parents who, like me, did not succeed in
finding his real aim in life until nearly the age of
nineteen or twenty, would have little chance of
pursuing it.” That was written by Joseph
Needham, but there are many other eminent
biologists who might equally truthfully have
written it.

As for the less eminent ones, no doubt every
university teacher of these subjects can recall
numerous instances among his own students.
How often does it happen that in the final years
of a course the winner proves to be a dark horse
who, throughout his school and early university
career, had done no more than just hold his
place in the general field among the mediocrities? How often has one had to struggle to
press the claims of such a student against incomprehending colleagues of other departments who
firmly believe that a man cannot possibly be
first-class unless the whole of his career has been

marked by an uninterrupted series of brilliant

* EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1958, 50, 2.

successes? The linguist, the mathematician, the
physicist or the chemist almost invariably reveals
his special abilities almost from the first day he
enters school. So do some biologists, but there
is a large class of these who do not. How many
of these will be lost entirely if we yield to the
rising clamour of the raising of university
entrance qualifications, especially in Mathematics and Chemistry?

Yet the terms “‘late’’ and “precocious” are
misleading. Gregor Mendel failed the State
Teachers’ Examination for the second time at
the age of thirty-four. This was only very shortly
before he started that series of experiments
which led, only nine years later, to the publication of his Experiments on Plant Hybridization.
Can we believe that his scientific abilities had
been retarded up to the age of thirty-four and
then suddenly blossomed out? Or if we compare the “late developer” Darwin with a
precocious one such as J. S. Mill, the differences
are obviously qualitative ones. The remarkable
abilities in languages and mathematics shown by
Mill even in infancy did not develop more slowly
in Darwin. They simply did not develop at all.

Mental Characteristics of Darwin and Wallace

If we try to define just what are the characteristics
which make for the success of the DarwinMendel type of biologist, our first impression is
that these are marked mainly by negatives.
Darwin, by his own admission, was not very
quick at learning anything, was singularly
incapable of mastering any language, was not
able to see any meaning in the early steps of
algebra, was not quick-witted enough to hold an
argument with anyone, had only a very limited
ability to follow a long or purely abstract train
of thought and therefore could never have
succeeded with metaphysics or mathematics,
had an extensive but hazy memory so that he

247

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1959, 50, 4.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

had never been able to remember for more than
a few days a single date or line of poetry, could
neither sing nor draw and, according to his son,
regarded a skilful dissection as something almost
superhuman. Alfred Russel Wallace’s selfanalysis is very similar; he did not think that as
a young man he could be said to have shown
special abilities in any of the higher mental
faculties but he records a long list of his defects
including an inability to appreciate the niceties
of melody and harmony in music, bad verbal
memory which, combined with the inability to
reproduce vocal sounds, rendered the acquirements of foreign languages very difficult and
distasteful, inability as a speaker to find the
right words or expressions, a very limited power
of drawing or perception of the intricacies of
form, and so on. When we ask what there is on
the credit side of such balance sheets, all that
Darwin could claim was “ strong and diversified tastes, much zeal in whatever interests me
and keen pleasure in understanding any complex
subject or thing”’ together with “‘a fair share of
invention and of common sense or judgment
such as every fairly successful lawyer or doctor
must have but not, I believe, in any higher
degree”. For Wallace it was “‘a strong desire to
know the causes of things, a great love of beauty
in form and colour, a considerable but not
excessive desire for order and arrangement in
whatever I had to do and a power of correct
reasoning from a review of known facts in any
case to the causes or laws which produced
them’’. These are hardly things which come out
in any kind of scholastic test. It appears that
motivation is a more decisive characteristic of
such men than any special intellectual gifts.

Late Development

This is where late development comes in for it
seems characteristic of men of this type that
their early interests are wide and diversified and
only relatively late converge to a definite point.
It is not accidental that a rather large proportion of eminent zoologists started their
university studies with some totally different
career in view and only switched over to their
definitive vocation later on. In the old days,
when one went to the university at Father’s
expense, this did not matter provided that

248

Father was able to afford to pay for the extra
years of study. But now, when the great majority
of students are educated at the public expense, to
change one’s course of study mid-way is a
luxury that can rarely be permitted. This is a
pity, for a university is, above all, a place where
one changes one’s mind about a lot of things,
including for many people their own aims in life.
A school-boy enthusiasm for natural history is
no indication that a man will make a good biologist, for, unlike Wordsworth’s Happy Warrior,
he is liable to grow up and, when brought among
the tasks of real life he may well find that the
plan that pleased his boyish thought made no
provision for ambitions which, with maturity,
become dominant. We ought to be able to
know a student better than he knows himself
so as to be able to guide him into a career which
will give him permanent satisfaction regardless
of his temporary fancies.

Student guidance in under-developed countries
Nowhere is this matter of student guidance
more important than in the new universities
in what it is customary to call the ‘“‘underdeveloped” countries. Many students come to
them with very little idea of what a professional
scientist is or does. Their choice of curriculum
is determined, only too often, by accident or
misunderstanding and if, later on, they regret it,
there is little that can be done to alter it. If in
later life some of these provide examples for
cynics who assert that university education
merely produces disgruntled, socially undesirable individuals, with no sense of vocation
and whose ambitions are simply to have a
bigger salary, a more impressive office desk and
a smarter car than their neighbours, is this
surprising? These are the natural consequences
of the circumstances which pushed them into
careers which they find, as Wallace found
languages, “difficult and distasteful” and could
in most cases have been avoided if they had been
guided into careers more fitting to their abilities
and tastes.

In the biological sciences the problems of
student selection and guidance are complicated
by the fact that we ourselves do not really know
what we want. The change that comes over a
class when it passes on from the descriptive
ON UNIVERSITY ENTRANCE QUALIFICATIONS FOR STUDENTS OF BIOLOGY

parts of zoology or botany to genetics is a
familiar one. The faces of the brightest students
—those whose drawings and dissections are
impeccable and who can always unhesitatingly
remember the correct names of everything—
immediately assume a blank look, while it is
from some previously very ordinary members of
the class that all the answers come, correctly
and effortlessly. Which kind of student do we
consider the better zoologist or botanist? Or
do we rank them both inferior to those who just
do moderately well at everything without showing any particular ability at anything? Curricula
are usually weighted heavily on one side or the
other and fashions change rapidly. Only a
generation ago it was quite common to assume
that a man could not possibly be considered as a
potential zoologist unless he combined artistic
skill with the kind of visual memory that would
enable him, for instance, to draw a complicated
three-dimensional object such as a skull neatly
and accurately from memory in an examination.
Now-a-days the pons asinorum is more likely
to be biochemical. Both kinds of test are effective for picking out men whose special gifts are
needed for work in particular branches of
biology. But they are equally effective in failing
some others and it is doubtful if the Darwins,
Wallaces and Mendels would manage to cross
either of the bridges.

The need for varied abilities

Biology is the most catholic of all disciplines.
Men of almost every kind of natural endowment can make their characteristic contribu
tions to it. At the present time there is no doubt
that the most exciting advances are in those
branches for which expertise in the mathematical
and physical sciences is essential and, if this
were all, the arguments in favour of raising the
qualifications for admission to the courses
would be unanswerable. But progress would be
very lop-sided and would soon come to a standstill if there were not also a strong body of
morphologists, systematists, ecologists and field
naturalists. The health of the science depends
more than anything else upon the influence of a
solid core of men distinguished by their intimate
familiarity with and intuitive sympathy for
living things.

These varied kinds of work call for men of
very varied kinds of abilities which rarely coexist
in a single individual. In fact it is quite possible
that some of them may be mutually exclusive.
Somehow we need to adjust our curricula and
examinations in such ways as to enable men of
all these different types to make the best of the
abilities which they have without being held
back on account of those which they lack. How
to do this is, at present, much more a matter of
guess-work than of knowledge. Research into
such problems is urgent for without the understanding of these matters which research alone
can give, quite a considerable part of the resources available for higher education in
science will continue to be wasted in efforts to
fit square pegs into round holes. This is not
merely a deplorable waste of money but a
potent source of trouble alike to the unfortunate
individuals on whom we make our mistakes and
to the communities to which they belong.

249
