NOTES AND MEMORANDA

ARABELLA KENEALY

DR. MICHAEL ROE, Senior Lecturer in History
at the University of Tasmania, is studying the
beliefs of Arabella Kenealy, the medico-cumnovelist-cum-philosopher, who was a member of
the Eugenics Society in its early years. He would
be grateful to hear from anyone who shares this
interest, or who has some particular knowledge
of Miss Kenealy.

Dr. Roe’s present address is 120 Union Lane,
Cambridge. |

RESEARCH GRANTS

THE COUNCIL OF the Eugenics Society is prepared to consider applications for grants for
research in specialized fields.

Previous grants have covered subjects ranging
from the factors determining occupational selection and success to the low temperature preservation of spermatozoa.

Applications, giving an outline of the projected research, should be made to the General
Secretary of the Eugenics Society not later than
March 31st, 1966.

DIFFERENTIAL FERTILITY AND
SOCIAL MOBILITY

Interim Report of a Survey by John B. Gibson

THE PREVIOUS PILOT survey in the City of
Cambridge confirmed that the paradox of the
measured intelligence level of the population
failing to decline despite an apparent negative
correlation between intelligence and family size
was due to the high proportion of unmarried
and/or married but non-reproducing people in
the lower socio-economic classes.

The social mobility data suggested that
amongst the probands in our sample (who were
all sixty-five years old) a high proportion had
migrated into the City of Cambridge from the
surrounding villages early in their working lives
and to them this was social promotion. However, many had taken occupations that were
below their capabilities and thus we found a

23

lower correlation between occupation and intelligence for the probands than expected. This
correlation increased in the son’s generation
but the overall picture was that, partly due to
the paucity of industry, Cambridge was further
back in time than the population as a whole.

In the second pilot survey it was hoped to
investigate a larger sample in a more industrialized town but preliminary work indicated
that only a national representative sample
would be suitable. Financially, this was not
possible and it was decided to concentrate
resources on the two socio-economic groups
that had proved to be most informative in the
previous pilot. |

Differential fertility data, which included nonreproducing probands, had shown a bimodal
relationship between measured intelligence and
fertility and over all classes there was a slightly
positive and significant correlation between intelligence and family size. The relatively high
fertility found for the high intelligence groups
was extremely interesting and warranted detailed study. Thus the present work has concentrated on a comparative survey of differential
fertility and social mobility in a high intelligence
group (Cambridge Scientists) and a group taken
from the manual/non-manual socio-economic
boundary (Laboratory workers).

The total grant obtained through the auspices
of the Eugenics Society was £3,390 and they
have recently made a further grant of £200 to
the present survey. The experimental approach
was changed to take into account a difficulty
apparent in the previous pilot, i.e. sons did not
readily welcome being contacted via their
fathers. Thus the present proband samples are
of sons aged between twenty-six and thirty-two,
contact then being made with their sibs, their
fathers (if alive) and with their father’s sibs. In
this way fertilities can be measured and it is
hoped to generate 100 probands whose fathers
are alive in each of the comparative samples. A
further change, made in collaboration with Dr.
C. O. Carter of the Eugenics Society, was to
include in the questionnaire a much more detailed
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

section on birth control. Consultations with
psychologists suggested that the “Weschler
Adult Intelligence Scale’ (WAIS) would be a
more informative test than ““Raven’s Progressive
Matrices” used in the previous pilot. As in all
the previous work the information is obtained
by personal interview which, including the
WAIS test, takes two hours to complete and a
further hour to report and score. A research
assistant was appointed for one year from Ist
July 1965.

The start of the survey was delayed, but
eventually began on Ist July 1965. The questionnaires and the intelligence test to be used in the
interviews were piloted in Norwich with the
generous help of the Vice-Chancellor of the
University of East Anglia, Dr. Thistlethwaite
and Professor Emmerson of the Department of
Sociology in the University of East Anglia.
Appropriate changes were made to the questionnaires after this small but valuable pre-pilot
survey.

- The “Cambridge Scientists’’ sample has been
concentrated on since the Norwich work and
contact has been made with all the probands in
the original sample of 170 apart from those
absent from Cambridge during the vacation.
Interviews have been completed on seventy
probands whose fathers are alive and a number
of interviews have also been completed on
fatherless probands but although such interviews provide valuable information on some
aspects of the work they will have to be restricted.
One member of the sample has refused to be
interviewed.

The work is at too early a stage for a report
to be made on the data obtained but it does
show that the questions and form of interview
are providing the answers required. Work is
also being carried out on methods of analysis
of the data by computer and the coding systems
to be used. The Mathematical Laboratory in
Cambridge is being extremely helpful and we
are co-operating with a clinical psychologist in
the analysis of the WAIS data, of which we will
have an extremely useful collection. Much
interest has been shown in the ‘Cambridge
Scientists” sample by educationalists and psychologists as it provides information on the
origins and careers of scientists. For these

24

reasons I have been asked to try to complete
interviews on all the fatherless scientists in the
sample; however, these requests will have to be
turned down unless the people interested can
help to finance this aspect of the survey.

INTERNATIONAL PLANNED
PARENTHOOD: CHINA |

IN NOVEMBER 1963, Mr. Henrik Beer, SecretaryGeneral of the League of Red Cross Societies,
paid a visit to Mainland China and reported
that a major campaign to promote birth control
was being launched.

After some months of correspondence and
discussion between the International Planned
Parenthood Federation and the Chinese health
authorities, the Chinese Medical Association
invited a group of Japanese doctors and other
personnel, under the leadership of Dr. Kan
Majima, in company with Mr. Tameyoshi
Katagiri, the Regional Secretary of the IPPF
for the Western Pacific Region, to visit China
in March and April 1964, when a comprehensive
tour of the larger cities took place. Among the
main impressions gleaned during this visit were
the following:

Family planning was being promoted as part
of the maternal and child health programme.

Doctors, nurses and midwives gave guidance
on the conventional methods of family planning
and on sterilization and induced abortion. Oral
contraceptives were under study and a subject
of great interest.

All contraceptives were dispensed through
hospitals, clinics, pharmacies, and were also on
sale in some stores; in women’s associatons,
trade unions, and in people’s communes there
were representatives to whom people could go
for guidance.

There was considerable interest in family
planning methods in use in other countries and
Mrs. Lee Dua Chuen, the Minister of Health,
expressed eagerness to co-operate with the
Japan Family Planning Association.

Definite statistics on fertility and mortality
were generally unobtainable.

Following this first visit the medical committee of the IPPF issued an invitation to the
Chinese Medical Association to send a group of
NOTES AND MEMORANDA

doctors to Japan or some suitable point for
further discussion and demonstration of the
contraceptive methods which are being developed
all over the world. It is clear that there are many
interesting experiences both in China and elsewhere which could be exchanged with advantage
to all parties.

Mr. Tameyoshi Katagiri paid a second visit
to Mainland China in July 1965 and was able
to strengthen the existing contacts. He also
made the following observations which show
the considerable advances which are being made
in China in the field of contraceptives:

Increasing confidence in family planning is
apparent among health workers. Family planning is quite independent of demographic or
statistical considerations; it is promoted as
advantageous to socialism, to maternal and
child health, to the next generation, and to the
individual, for planning daily life, with concentration on learning and production.

The ideal age for marriage is considered
between twenty-five and thirty, since by this age
people are sufficiently mature to deal with family
welfare, development and education problems.

The most popular method is the intra-uterine

device (in nearly every case the metal
ring).
The number of induced abortions seemed to
be decreasing and advice on family planning is
given to women after abortion, when intrauterine devices are in most cases fitted.

Oral contraceptives were still under study at
the time of Mr. Katagiri’s visit.

It was reported that the Ogino (safe period)
method was responsible for most cases of failure.

On one typical commune that Mr. Katagiri
visited, over SO per cent of the people were
practising family planning.

Training programmes are run at certain
hospitals for doctors, who return to their areas
and provide training for midwives. Each district
health leader receives training in family planning.
It was stressed that contraception was essentially
a matter for the individual to decide, using the
widespread health insurance scheme.

It is now clear that parallel and very similar
developments, though with slightly different
emphasis and stress on different methods, are
taking place in Mainland China on lines broadly

similar to these being followed in other countries
where the IPPF is active.

AUSTRALIA AND THE PROBLEM
OF RETIRED PEOPLE

IN THE STATE of Victoria, an organization
called the Over-Fifties Association with its
headquarters in Melbourne, is doing much to
make new opportunities for elderly and retired
people.

The Over-Fifties Association was formed ten
years ago by Mr. Stan Gilmour, who was
shocked one day to hear a man aged sixty-five
remark that it was “‘pretty hard to wait to die’.
To-day, the association has a membership of
1,200 men and women and every year it finds
useful occupation for several hundred older
people in the State.

Mr. Gilmour estimates that the people who
have been found work by the association in the
past ten years have earned about £A10,000,000 in
wages. They have paid about £A 1,250,000 in taxes
and have saved the nation about £A2,500,000
in pension and health costs.

Throughout its existence, the Over-Fifties
Association has tried to convince society in
general that people are not necessarily “over the
hill” when they reach retirement age.

The Federal Department of Labour and
National Service has come to the conclusion
that although most workers reach their mental
and physical peak at about twenty to twentyfive years, age is not a reliable guide to the
selection of employees either for skilled or unskilled positions in factories or for a variety of
positions in administrative offices; older people
are often more reliable than the young or middleaged in work that calls for consistency of output,
accuracy and the ability to remain in a position
without becoming discontented, and they can
cope with industrial training courses and adjust
themselves to the new skills required by technological advances.

Mr. Gilmour now believes that in general
terms there is no age at which a person is too
old to work. One of the main objects of the
Over-Fifties Association is to abolish the fixed
retiring age—this arbitrary age of sixty-five
which was fixed by Bismark when he was forming

25
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Germany’s public service in the nineteenth
century. To-day, some occupations insist on an
even lower retiring age.

Sir John Eccles, Professor of Physiology at
the University in Canberra, agrees that people
should be given the opportunity of continuing
to work, at lower wages if necessary, and cites
Charles de Gaulle and Winston Churchill as
examples of men who continued to play a leading
role in public life long after they had turned
sixty-five.

Although many Australian employers continue
to advertise for staff on the basis that they will
not employ people of more than forty or fortyfive, the Over-Fifties Association and the
Federal Government are trying to break down
the belief that it is not a good risk to employ
older workers. As a result, the number of firms
which realized that employment of elderly people
is by no means a charitable affair is steadily increasing; they have found that what these people
lack in speed, they compensate for in experience,
reliability, tolerance and loyalty.

PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED

Abortion: An Ethical Discussion. London, 1965.
Church Information Office for The Church
Assembly Board for Social Responsibility. Pp. 70.
Price 4s. 6d.

Abortion Law Reform Association—Birmingham
Group. Survey of Abortifacient Drugs. November,
1965. Pp. 14. Price 2s. 6d.

Abu-Lughod, Janet. The Emergence of Differential
Fertility in Urban Egypt. Reprinted from The
Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, 1965. 43, 235.

Aspects of Family Mental Health in Europe by various
authors. Geneva, 1965. WHO. Pp. 123. Price

s. 6d.

Bertram, G. C. L. Socio-Biological Responsibility.
Hull, 1965. University of Hull Publications. Pp.
22. Price 5s.

Bonner, John Tyler. Size and Cycles: An essay on
the structure of biology. Princeton, N.J., 1965.
Princeton University Press (London, 1966, Oxford
University Press). Pp. viii+219. Price 60s.

BRA Review. Journal of the British Rheumatic and
Arthritis Association.

Butler, J. A. V. The Life of the Cell: Its nature, origin
and development. Second edition. London, 1966.
Allen and Unwin. Pp. 167. Price 21s. Paperback.

Crew, F. A. E. Sex-Determination. London, 1965.
Methuen. Pp. viii+ 188. Price 21s.

Day, Michael. Guide to Fossil Man. London, 1965.
Cassell. Pp. 289. Price 42s.

26

Draper, Elizabeth. Birth Control in the Modern
World. A Pelican Original. Harmondsworth, 1965.
Penguin. Pp. 333. Price 5s.

Family Service Units. Annual Report, 1964-65.

Fisher, Joseph L. and Potter, Neal. World Prospects
for Natural Resources. Baltimore, 1964. Johns
Hopkins Press. (London, Oxford University
Press.) Pp. vi+-73. Price 12s. in UK only.

Fryer, Peter. The Birth Controllers. London, 1965.
Secker and Warburg. Pp. 384. Price 42s.

Galton, Francis. Finger Prints. New preface by
Harold Cummins. Unabridged republication of the
1892 edition. New York, 1965. Da Capo. Pp.
XXIII+xvi+ 216. Price $6.95.

Goldstein, S. and Mayer, K. B. Residence and Status
Differences in Fertility. Reprinted from The
Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, 1965. 43, 291.

Gregory, I. Retrospective Estimates of Orphanhood
from Generation Life Tables. Reprinted from The
Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, 1965. 43, 323.

Guerrin, R. F. and Borgatta, E. F. Socio-Economic
and Demographic Correlates of Tuberculosis
Incidence. Reprinted from The Milbank Memorial
Fund Quarterly, 1965. 43, 269.

Health Information Foundation. An Inventory of
Social and Economic Research in Health. Fourteen
edition. Chicago, 1965. Pp. 108. n.p.

Italy: Documents and Notes. italian Information
Service.

King, Robert C. Genetics. Second edition. London,
1965. Oxford University Press. Pp. xiv+450.
Price 68s.

Kiser, Clyde V. Types of Demographic Data of
Possible Relevance to Population Genetics.
Reprinted from Eugenics Quarterly, 1965. 12, 72.

Kiser, Clyde V. The Use of Official Statistics for
Thesis Topics in the Field of Sociology. Reprinted
from The Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly,
1965. 43, 7.

Lipset, S. M. and Bendix, R. Social Mobility in
Industrial Society. Berkeley and Los Angeles,
1963. University of California Press. (London
agents, Cambridge University Press.) Pp. xxi+ 309.
Price $6.00; 48s. cloth, 17s. paper.

Mears, Eleanor (editor). Handbook on Oral Contraception. London, 1965. Churchill. Pp. xv+107.
Price 20s.

National Central Library. 49th Annual Report of the
Executive Committee for the Year ending 31st
March 1965.

Noonan, John T., Jr. Contraception: A history of its
treatment by the Catholic theologians and canonists.
Cambridge, Mass., 1965. (London, Oxford University Press.) Pp. x+561. Price 64s.

Paniagua, Manuel E. et al. Medical and Psychological
Sequelae of Surgical Sterilization of Women.
Reprinted from American Journal of Obstetrics
and Gynaecology, 1964. 90, 421.

Peel, John. Birth Control and Catholic Doctrine.
Reprinted from The London Quarterly and Holborn
Review, October 1965.
NOTES AND MEMORANDA

Potter, R. G. et al. A Fertility Differential in Eleven
Punjab Villages. Reprinted from The Milbank
Memorial Fund Quarterly, 1965. 43, 185.

Rele, J. R. Trends and Differentials in the American
Age at Marriage. Reprinted from The Milbank
Memorial Fund Quarterly, 1965. 43, 219.

Sharma, Arun Kumar and Sharma, Archana. Chromosome Techniques: Theory and Practice. London,
1965. Butterworths. Pp. x-+-474. Price 87s. 6d.

Sonneborn, T. M. (editor). The Control of Human
Heredity and Evolution. New York, 1965.
Macmillan. (London, Collier-Macmillan.) Pp.
xiii+ 127. Price 15s. Paperback.

Srb, Adrian M., Owen, Ray D. and Edgar, Robert S.
General Genetics. Second edition. London, 1965.
Freeman. Pp. x+-557. Price 50s.

Studies in Family Planning. New York. The Population Council.

Sutton, H. Eldon. An Introduction to Human Genetics.
London, 1965. Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Pp. x+262. Price 48s.

Thorpe, W. H. Science, Man and Morals. London,
1965. Methuen. Pp. xii+ 176. Price 25s.

Tietze, Christopher (editor). Bibliography of Fertility
Control, 1950-65. New York, 1965. National Committee on Maternal Health. Pp. iv+ 198.

Tietze, Christopher (editor). History of Contraceptive Methods. Reprinted from The Journal of
Sex Research, 1965. 1, 69. National Committee
on Maternal Health Publication No. 25.

Tietze, Christopher and Lewit, Sarah. Intra-uterine
Contraception: Effectiveness and Acceptability.
Reprinted from Exerpta Medica International
Congress Series No. 86. National Committee on
Maternal Health. Publication No. 24.

Vernon, M. D. The Psychology of Perception. London,
1965. University of London Press, Pp. 235. Price
25s.

Whittinghill, Maurice. Human Genetics and _ its
Foundations. New York, 1965. Reinhold. (London,
Chapman and Hall.) Pp. xvi+431. Price $8.95.

WHO. The Biochemistry and Microbiology of the
Female and Male Genital Tracts. Technical
Report Series No. 313. Geneva, 1965. WHO. Pp.
15. Price 3s. 6d.

WHO. Health Problems of Adolescents. Technical
Report Series No. 308. Geneva, 1965. Pp. 28.
Price 3s. 6d. Obtainable through HMSO.

Williamson, G. Scott and Pearse, Innes, H. Science,
Synthesis and Sanity. London, 1965. Collins. Pp.
352. Price 54s.

ADDITIONS TO THE LIBRARY

Beijer, G. et al. Characteristics of Overseas Migrants.
1961. Pp. 319.

Butler, J. A. V. The Life of the Cell. 1966. Pp. 167.

Cattell, R. B. The Scientific Analysis of Personality.
1965. Pp. 370. Paperback. Presented by Professor
P. E. Vernon.

Dobzhansky, Th. Heredity and the Nature of Man.
1965. Pp. 179. Presented by Sir Robert Platt.

oon ae Birth Control in the Modern World. 1965.

FAO. The State of Food and Agriculture for 1965.
1965. Pp. 273.

Fryer, P. The Birth Controllers. 1965. Pp. 384.

Glass, D. V. and Eversley, D. E. C. (editors). Population in History. 1965. Pp. 692.

Hauser, P. M. (editor). The Population Dilemma.
1965. Pp. 187.

King, Robert C. Genetics. Second edition. 1965. Pp.

McKeown, T. Medicine in Modern Society. 1965.
Pp. 234.

Nortman, D. L. The Population Problem. 1965. Pp.
51. Presented by Mr. P. R. Cox.

Schofield, M. The Sexual Behaviour of Young People.
1965. Pp. 316.

Sonneborn, T. M. (editor). The Control of Human
Heredity and Evolution. 1965. Pp. 127.

Srb, A. M., Owen, R. D. and Edgar, R. S. General
Genetics. Second edition. 1965. Pp. 557.

Sutton, H. E. An Introduction to Human Genetics.
1965. Pp. 262.

United Nations. Demographic Yearbook 1964. 1965.
Pp. 752.

inghill, M. Human Genetics and its Foundations.

1965. Pp. 431.

Williamson, G. Scott and Pearse, Innes H. Science,
Synthesis and Sanity. 1965. Pp. 352.

ELECTIONS TO THE SOCIETY
THE FOLLOWING HAVE been elected Fellows*
and Members of the Eugenics Society :

*C. E. Blank, M.B., B.CH., PH.D.
J. A. Lourie, B.A.
R. M. Mackessack

27
