STERILIZATION IN PRACTICE

First-hand Impressions of American Methods and Experience
By C. B. $8. HODSON, F.L.S.

“Mrs. Hodson has just returned from a tour in the United States, during which she
had special facilities for investigating the treatment of the mentally diseased, and par
ticularly the practice of eugenic sterilization.

She discovered one point of especial

importance—the usual friendly co-operation of patients and their guardians.—ED.

‘

OST students of recent social work
M are aware that sterilization’ has
been adopted in some parts of the
United States as one amongst many instruments for reducing the misery, both present
and future, caused by mental deficiency and
mental diseases. There is, however, still a
great deal of misunderstanding and vagueness on this matter; and at the risk of
repeating what is well known to some
readers, I propose first briefly to summarize the data now available in regard
to the extent of legislation and practice.
Two studies are in the main responsible
for making readily accessible relevant information. The first is in the survey of
the legal position made by Dr. H. H.
Laughlin in 1922 and subsequently. He
has shown clearly that the repeal movement

amongst States which had already adopted _

sterilization laws was not, as Europeans
have so frequently supposed, owing to undesirable social results, but to purely legal
difficulties. Sterilization laws are an affair
of the State legislature, but all State law,
if not conformable to the Constitution as
expressed in the Federal Laws, is likely at
some time or other to be contested in the
Courts. The first State to introduce steri
_

*Those who are not regular readers of the
ReEvigw should note the following points. The term
sterilization is used for an operation which leaves
the reproductive glands intact, but which interrupts
the tubes (by tying, severing, or both) conveying
the reproductive cells, either of male or female, to
the exterior. The term is also used for ray treatment (external) of the ovaries, which without destroying the functions of the non-germinal parts of
these organs, so disturbs the germinal layers that
they are incapable of producing ova for a period,
sometimes permanently.

35

lization was Indiana in 1899. ‘The law in
this State, as also in some others which followed Indiana’s lead, was made applicable
to criminals, and objections were brought
forward in the Courts that under such
statutes sterilization could be regarded as
a punishment, and was then held to be a
** cruel and unusual ’’ form of punishment
and therefore contrary to the Constitution.
Such rulings led to the repeal of quite a
number of statutes in which penitentiaries
and reformatories were included amongst
the State institutions authorized to perform
this operation.

Dr. Laughlin did much good work in
helping to frame a form of statute conformable to the Federal Law. The law in
Virginia has now become famous as the one
which has stood a trial in the Federal High
Court and has there been vindicated as constitutional.

The number of States which had laws
permitting, at the State charge, the sterilization of mental defectives and insane
patients, was 21 on January 1st, 1928. The
number of patients treated varies greatly
in different States; and the total was 8,515
on the date above mentioned.

However enthusiastic the eugenist may
feel about the probable value of sterilization
in cutting off a source of racial contamination wherever it manifests itself, he must
nevertheless, as a student of social affairs,
feel the gravity of supporting measures
which might adversely affect social ethics
and the cultural level of the life of the
community. It is, indeed, eugenists who
are probably most alive to this danger.
Those students who do not regard society
36

as a biological unit have some excuse for
believing that they can by imagination and
logic predict beforehand the social effect
of any change, whether legislative or
economic; but for those who regard not
only individuals, but also populations as
fundamentally subject to biological laws,
there can be no a priori argument as to what
the outcome of any change will be. We can
only observe in the field and in the street as
patiently and carefully as we do in the
laboratory.

The whole world is under a debt to the
first State in the Union which was bold
enough to venture on operative sterilization
as a social instrument. But most of all is
the world indebted to-day to the State of
California, which has followed this lead on
such a scale that a study of the working out
of the system there can be of value as an
adequate demonstration of its possibilities.

A LURE TO THE UNFORTUNATE

It may be well to remind ourselves that a
result, in the sense of a statistical diminution of inheritable deficiency or mental
disease, is not to be expected in fifteen
years—the time which the Californian experiment covers. It is very doubtful, in
fact, whether California will ever be a
region capable of showing such results.
Each State in the United States must necessarily be less a unit as regards population
than a nation or country of Europe; people
pass freely from State to State as their
employment or their desires dictate. But
California draws certain groups to-day with
such persistent lure, that a considerable
part of its population ought really to be
called migratory. Not only do the special
groups of sufferers from tuberculosis and
arthritis flock in; the ‘‘ unfortunate ’”’ also
seem to cherish the conviction that this E]
Dorado is the one place in the world where
failure will not again overtake them. Ata
single sitting of the Juvenile Court for boys
in Los Angeles, only two cases (brothers)
appeared whose parents were resident in
California; every other lad had come from
another State (some all the way from the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

East) as stowaways on every kind of transport, in the hope of finding a fortune.

I have never felt any doubt on the point
of the ultimate racial advantage of a sterilization law, but I have been often very
seriously concerned as to its social reactions
when put into practice on a large scale. An
objection has very frequently, of course,
been brought up in regard to a possible
growth of moral temptation, with consequent spread of venereal disease, when
sterilized patients return to more or less
free community life. It is often alleged
that the knowledge that no offspring could
result would lead to an increase of irregular
intercourse. On the psychological side,
this suggestion will not have much weight
with those who have had experience of the
very small extent to which the danger of
procreation acts as an inhibition either with
men or women in our own country—even in
classes which could by no means be brought
under the heading of defective or insane.
Nevertheless, this objection has to be met,
and California, with its very heterogeneous
population, with its constant influx of poor
and rather low-grade Mexican labourers and
their families, with its villages of Digger
Indians (not as fine a human type as the
tribes in the North and North-East), is certainly a region where such consequences
would be likely to become apparent, if the
danger were as great as has been supposed.

VENEREAL DISEASE NOT SPREAD

Under the safeguards of the scheme carried out by the State institutions in California, this trouble is obviated—that is to
say, neither the Chief Probation Officers
nor the women who are taking a prominent
part in State legislation for female offenders, were able to point to cases coming
under this head. Further, neither these
people (who would be in the best position
to know if such cases do exist), nor
psychiatrists in mental hygiene work,
child guidance work, and connected with
the children’s courts, as well as other citizens, social workers, teachers, and so on,
felt this objection to be valid, or to have
STERILIZATION IN PRACTICE 37

become a recognizable feature since the
introduction of the law.

A much more real danger (though less
frequently anticipated), is the possibility
that sterilization laws may influence public
opinion in such a way as to hinder the
growth and development of scientific and
humane methods of treatment of mental
patients and mental defectives now present
in the population. It might well be that
the public, lulled by the illusion that sterilization gives a cheap and easy method of
cutting off the source of future misery,
may therewith rest content, letting the present take care of itself. If such an attitude
should grow up, it would cause a serious
setback to the present growing sense in the
community at large of responsibility for
those who are in distress through no fault
of their own.

This feature of the social conscience
surely holds rank as one of the most precious products of our civilization. I was
therefore at some pains to inquire into the
development, not only of institutions and
schools dealing with all phases of mental
and temperamental trouble, but also into
the public interest in such work, as expressed in the growth of voluntary social
organizations connected therewith. There
can be no doubt that in California some of
the most advanced work in these directions
has been taken in hand, and year by year
special schools, children’s courts (following
the most enlightened methods of dealing
with delinquency) psychological clinics
attached to the courts, child guidance work,
and the like are all growing rapidly and vigorously. Further, the reports of social
agencies show that support in time and
money for such work is every year increasing. A law of our own nature, which has
not always met with due_ recognition,
operates in this field, namely, that men are
apt to be most careless and unfeeling where
they are conscious that they have least
power. As fresh social instruments are
put into their hands, human beings, whether
as individuals or societies, find their sense
of responsibility becomes intensified. Thus
sterilization in California may almost be

said to be a root of that vigorous growth of
public sentiment determined to do the best
that is possible for the individual patient.
At the same time, the knowledge deepens
that the happiness of the future largely depends upon the course taken by this generation, and the sacrifices entailed, whether
personal or social, are boldly shouldered.
It would be confusing to think of the Californian law as though it stood by itself.
The Act is in fact the pivot of a whole
system of careful social treatment ; and it is
further a satisfaction to realize that this
system in practice has a great educational
value in developing a eugenic conscience.
Three points should be noted in regard to
the method of putting the law into operation.
First, there has been great frankness;
secondly, individual objections and religious
or political bias have been very liberally
treated; thirdly, careful social work has
accompanied and upheld decrees. The law
itself is compulsory, but the directors of
institutions are at pains not to have recourse
to compulsion. Operations are never suggested for patients until they have reached
the stage at which they might with safety to
the community and advantage to themselves
either return home or be released as selfsupporting units. When this time arrives,
it is suggested to the patient that he is now
in a position to be independent, but that
either for reasons of heredity, or because he
would not be capable of supporting and caring for a child, it is desirable that the State
and posterity should be guaranteed against
the possibility of procreation. He is therefore offered the opportunity of sterilization
in the hospital of the institution, with
subsequent parole. The spouse, in the

case of married persons, is asked for con
sent as well as the patient. In the case of
the mentally defective, the guardians are
asked to give their consent. If this is withheld, the director of the institution may, if
he considers it desirable in the interest of
the State, keep the patient in the institution; there is then always the possibility
that the relatives may resort to a Court for
awrit of habeas corpus. This is sometimes
successful, where some relative may be
38 ' THE EUGENICS REVIEW

found who will guarantee that any offspring
shall not become a State charge.

After consent given and sterilization, the
individual is released on parole. Always a
suitable home is first found. Of course,
for the insane it is often simply a question
of return to their own homes. For the
mentally defective it is usually a case of
finding a reliable employer; for in California, even when there are known parents
or relatives, these are mostly found to be of
such low-grade intelligence themselves as
to be unsuitable guardians. After the
successful training in the State homes,
there seems little difficulty in finding decent
employment. For the boys, this is mainly
in gardens and farms, on fruit estates, and
so on ; for the girls in domestic service. The
parole officers attached to the institutions
are, in the main, women. ‘This is probably
as arduous a piece of social work as one can
find, and one would therefore expect a high
grade of personnel, well trained and of
attractive personality. A. woman who
spends much of her time driving in her car
about rural California (where hold-ups are
so frequent), alone unless she is carrying
one or two patients from place to place—
dealing sometimes with farmers, with mistresses of three or four different nationalities
—called up by telephone at all sorts of
awkward hours when one of her charges is
suddenly in trouble or il], has indeed need
to be an all-round woman, well-educated,
sympathetic, strong, and courageous.

Parole usually continues for two years,
sometimes longer, and if the patients demonstrate that they are not really capable
of making good in the community, they can
be recalled to the institution. There is a
very cordial and courteous co-operation between the Courts and the institutions.

At present the care given to the examination of children in schools varies in different
counties, just as it does in different districts
in England, so that very frequently the
mental defective is not detected until he or
she is brought to public notice in the Courts.
Thus probably California does not give an
exact test as to how far the possibility of
sterilization might be a deterrent in Euro
pean countries to parents in allowing their
children to be taken to an institution.” That
the probation officers and the social workers
attached to the Courts feel sterilization to
be a very important and useful measure is
clear. Probably no group is working so
hard to get consent for operations as these
officers ; and they often meet with such success that patients who are not committed by
the Courts are sent to institutions by their
parents to enable them to have the operation.

MARRIAGE ENCOURAGED

One interesting development amongst the
paroled mental defectives is the extent to
which marriage can be allowed or encouraged. Some of these marriages, of course,
are not successful, the percentage of
failures to date being somewhat higher
than the percentage of divorce in the
United States at large (though not than in
the worst States). Where the marriage is
successful, it is surely a very consoling
achievement, and a triumph of the modern
way of handling the mental defective. I
saw two typical homes, one in town and one
in country, of married sterilized girls; and
could only wish that such a prospect was
possible for girls of the same type whom I
know in this country.

It is to be emphasized that sterilization is
never allowed in California for anyone in a
criminal institution. This plays a part in
the fine tradition which is being built up,
namely, that presenting himself for sterilization is an ennobling act on the patient’s
part, one by which he puts himself in line
with the best feeling of the community and
demonstrates his sense of citizenship,
assuming his share of responsibility for the
future and for progress. The criminal is
not offered this opportunity, though obviously when someone serving sentence is
shown to be insane or mentally defective, he
may be transferred to the appropriate home,

 

* With us some careful safeguarding, putting children in non-resident special schools on the same
footing as institutional cases, would need to be
Gevised ; and such is in contemplation in the far

est.
STERILIZATION IN PRACTICE

and in his new category would have the
opportunity of sterilization before parole.

DESIRE FOR OPERATION

I was very curious to learn how the
mentally defective patient was notified of
the fact that an operation was pending in
his or her case, how they would feel about
it, whether they would be frightened or
distressed. In those institutions with
which I came in touch, there had evidently
been very careful work done in the first
instance, so that a thoroughly happy sentiment now prevails. The doctors told me
that it was never necessary to tell a patient
that they were due for operation. Those
who think they are getting on well with
their training constantly importune the doctors as they go their rounds, asking how
soon their turn will come. It is realized
that having the operation marks a stage of
advance in the patient’s training and behaviour, and is the hall-mark of his being
ready to take his place as a normal citizen
again. In the State Home in which |]
stayed, the life was very free and seemed
happy, and the relationship between the
authorities and patients most friendly. So
that this hurry to be put on the hospital
list, in that institution at any rate, was
obviously not due to any desire to escape.
In the hospital itself, those who had
recently been operated upon spoke frankly
and happily about it. They showed all the
normal interest in their condition that one
finds in a recovering surgical case, and
would with pride display their scar with
slender encouragement.

Whatever the social dangers and difficulties may be in regard to sterilization for
the mental defective—and it seems clear
from California that with caréful work these
may be reduced to a minimum—no such
objections can be urged in regard to the
recovered insane. For them, when they
understand what sterilization means—that
it will leave unaffected normal married relations, but will release them from the responsibility of an increasing family—it can have
only beneficial results ; and I had the opportunity of seeing patients who attributed the

39

ease with which they were once more living
an ordinary life, to the fact that this
anxiety was removed. In the mental
hospital the strong feeling for posterity was
a pleasing feature of the frank and careful
scientific information’ given to patients.
Obviously not all cases would be hereditary,
but any married person, who knew the diffculties of returning to work, would feel that
from the point of view of support and
environment he or she would not desire
another child. |

There are many points about the general
organization of the Californian Institutions,
which differ somewhat from the type most
often found over here; but this is not the
place to go into such details, save to state
that the State control is sufficiently elastic
to allow of a good deal of diversity and to
admit of careful adjustment to the type of
patient. The presence of a well-trained
psychologist in Homes for the FeebleMinded, Homes for the Young Delinquent,
and Mental Hospitals, will be anticipated
from what has already been said about
mental examination in schools and courts.

In the Stockton Mental Hospital I was
particularly impressed by the capacity of
the personnel in general, the air of comfort
pervading the whole institution, and the
evidences of concern for adjustment of routine to conditions of individual patients. It
may be well to repeat that every patient in
every institution is early examined and
their intelligence quotient noted (in insane
cases where possible), with any subsequent
deviation detected ; and this, together with
temperamental] assessments (in which Dr.
Ordahl of Sonoma has evolved a very
interesting technique), is constantly referred to by all who have contact with the
case. | . |

As regards the operations, the institutions vary; in some one surgeon is responsible for most of the work done. In others,
each medical officer takes his or her turn.
Outstanding work has been done at the
Stockton Mental Hospital, where the Director, Dr. Clark, has from the beginning left
this in the hands of Dr. Margaret Smythe,
whose skilful technique is now so well
40

known that many operators come to see her
work.

A technical medical description of the
types of vasectomy and salpingectomy has
recently been published in the States, and a
number of reprints (carefully illustrated)
will shortly be available here, through the
kindness of the Committee on Maternal
Health, New York. It is enough for the

general public to say that these two opera- .

tions are those exclusively used in California, and for males as well as females a
general anzesthetic is customary.

As Mr. Paul Popenoe, working for Mr.
Gosney’s foundation, has already published
a most successful analysis of the various
categories concerned,’ it is unnecessary to
repeat here his findings, particularly inasmuch as they should soon be available in
this country in book form. But it may not
be out of place to say a word about the data
on which they are based. In every institution I was given the opportunity of examining the records kept of patients, and I
was struck with the completeness of the
data available, from the moment the first
contact is made with a patient till the last on
which the responsible social worker hears
from him or her.

SUMMARY

California brings out clearly the fact that
sterilization legislation is only an instrument; and that its social value depends
wholly on the way in which it is used.

The importance of slow and careful popular education is brought out.

The value (though it may at first appear
a hindrance) of working on a voluntary
basis, is clear, as is also the possibility
of securing a widespread public co-operation

* Sterilization in California series of pamphlets;
Human Betterment Foundation, 26, North Marengo
Avenue, Pasadena, California. These may also be
consulted in this Society’s library.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in this method when the real objectives are
kept in view from the start, namely (1) the
safeguarding of posterity, (2) the lightening
of the present burden of misery, by preventing procreation and enabling trained, recovered patients to lead as nearly normal a
life as possible with a maximum of personal
liberty, under the safeguards which sterilization creates.

The most striking evidence of success is
yet to be mentioned, in that the anticipated
opposition of the Hebrew and Roman Catholic communities has, in the former case
disappeared, and in the latter no longer
causes obstruction.

 

For the information on which this survey is
based I am indebted to the Assistant Director of
the State Department of Institutions, Sacramento,
California, who explained the present law and the
method by which all sterilization operations under
the law come up for the sanction of the Director,
and also of the Director of the State Department
of Public Health. Further to Dr. Butler, Director
of Sonoma State Home for the Mentally Defective ,
at Eldridge, who allowed me to stay in the Home,
and who, with his staff, including social workers,
gave me every facility for study. Dr. Clark,
Director of the Stockton Mental Hospital, allowed
me to stay in the Hospital, and Dr. Margaret
Smythe (who has been in charge of sterilization
work there since the beginning) gave me all
possible information. To Dr. and Mrs. Fenton,
of the Whittier State School, to the Assistant
Director of the Norwalk State Hospital, to the
Chairman of the Psychopathic Court and Mrs.
McCracken of the Psychopathic Hospital and
after-care organization in Los Angeles I owe my
thanks for cordial help. Also to persons outside
the Institutions: Mr. Astredo and Mrs. Bray,
Chief Probation Officers, San Francisco ; the socia}
workers attached to the Sonoma Home and Stockton Mental Hospital; the social workers attached
to the central probation office in Los Angeles. I
am grateful for information also given by the
Director of Child Guidance Work in Los Angeles,
and Dr. Rosanoff, Professor Frans, and Dr. Gow
and Dr. Laws. Finally, to Mr. E. S. Gosney and
Mr. Paul Popenoe, who put all the resources of
the office of the Human Betterment Foundation at
my disposal and helped me in every way.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 1.
