RACIAL DANGERS OF MENTAL ~
DEFECT.*

THE; DESIRABILITY OF GREATLY INCREASED INSTITUTIONAL ACCOMMODATION FOR MENTAL DEFECTIVES.

By W. A. Ports, M.A., M.D.

We have come here to talk about Mental Defect, which is as you
know, practically always an inborn condition, which continues as a
life-long handicap. Mental defect is seldom amenable to treatment,
although we believe and hope that much can be done by way of prevention. Mental defect is therefore essentially different to Insanity,
which has more the nature of an ordinary illness, and is often amenable
to treatment, so that afterwards the sufferer becomes as normal as he
was before. It is important to be clear in regard to this difference.
Certainly there is a relationship between Mental Defect and Insanity
in that they sometimes occur in the same family ; further the incidence
of insanity is much more frequent among Mental Defectives than in the
ordinary population. But all the same Mental Defect and Insanity
are two different conditions. When we aim at stamping them out by
segregation or other efficient means we are faced by two different contingencies. As a rule Mental Defect occurs in degenerate families,
many of the other members of which are Mentally Defective, or suffering
from some disease, which prevents their being an asset to the community. I know there are exceptions. But still the case is
different to what holds good as regards Insanity. For there is
considerable truth in the saying that Insanity is sometimes closely
allied to genius, so that if we succeeded in cutting out insanity altogether we might at the same time eliminate a certain amount of genius,
with corresponding serious loss to the race. With mental defect there
is little risk of that kind, especially as the condition is more clear cut
and definite, so that it is easier to say whether the family in which it
occurs is really degenerate or not.

The last Annual Report of the Board of Control contains clear
proof of the way in which we are still failing to deal satisfactorily with
mental defect. That report reminds us that eighteen years ago the
Medical Investigators to the Royal Commission on the Feeble-minded
estimated that there were nearly 150,000 mental defectives in the
country, over 60,000 of whom urgently required care, protection and
control. The Mental Deficiency Act came into force more than ten
years ago; yet what is the position to-day? The Report shows that
only about 30,000 cases are in Special Schools or Institutions, exactly

* Papers and Speeches and letters given at a Conference on the Desirability
of Securing increased Institutional accommodation for Defectives. (June 13th,
1924, in the Rooms of Royal Society, Burlington House.)
130 EUGENICS REVIEW.

half the number found 18 years ago urgently requiring care. Both as
regards school children and the other cases the number being dealt with
is less than half what it should be. The ascertained number of mental
defective children requiring instruction in Special Schools is 31,000.
The number provided for in these schools is only 16,000. The present
neglect is very serious. It is certain that the number requiring care is
not smaller now than in 1906. Indeed there is reason to think that the
numbers are bigger than they were. For instance, hundreds of school
children suspected of being Mental defectives have not been examined
as yet, simply because it is certain that most of them will be found to be
mental defectives, and it is equally certain there is no accommodation
for them. To confirm these figures I would refer for a moment to the
‘position in Birmingham; I do this not because Birmingham has dealt
‘thoroughly with the problem, for we have not, but because we have a
pretty good idea of the number we ought to deal with and our
‘shortcomings. At the moment out of a population of a million we
have placed 578 in institutions, while there are over 1,000 in Special
Schools. But there are 543 waiting to be examined for admission to
Special Schools, while the Local Authority has 240 cases on its waiting
list for institutions, more than half of whom are very urgent. Further
there are another 600 under supervision only, and many of these may
at any moment urgently require institutional care. If this is the
position in a city which has been fairly active in the work from the day
the Mental Deficiency Act came into force what must it be in those
parts of the country where there has been less activity or even complete
apathy? The Board of Control state that some authorities have not
ascertained a single case and say they ‘‘can only conclude that in some
districts the search for defectives has either not been made, or made
in a perfunctory manner.”’

What are the dangers of this extraordinary indifference to a grave
social problem? There is: 1. The risk of personal disaster to the
unfortunate defective. 2. Secondly, there is the serious menace to
the community from crime and the spread of disease. 3. There is
also the consideration that as long as defectives are left at large they
will go on breeding defectives. There is not even the excuse of neglect
being an economical procedure, for though we ignore defectives we do
not escape paying forthem. Weare often, without realising it, keeping
them nearly all the time either in prison, in the Maternity Ward or
in a Rescue Home, or else paying them an unemployment dole, though
they have never been really capable of work. A few weeks ago I
certified as mentally defective and placed in an institution a young
woman of 24 who had had 18 sentences of imprisonment in the preceding
44 years. The Board of Control report in regard to the mentally
defective women with illegitimate children in workhouses that in one
workhouse alone they found four mentally defective women with these
records |

No. 1, age 33, with 4 illegitimate children.

.No. 2, age 31, with 6 illegitimate children.

No. 8, age 25, with 5 illegitimate children, and pregnant again.
No. 4, age 20, with 1 illegitimate child.
RACIAL DANGERS OF MENTAL DEFECT. 131

Allowing unrestricted liberty to such degenerates is the most extravagant procedure possible. The Report of the Prison Commissioners
for last year also gives many glaring instances of defectives who were
not recognised by the responsible authority. After first stating their
opinion that ‘‘the provision of more institutions for defectives, at as
early a date as possible, is a matter of urgent public importance,’’ they
give some striking examples, e.g., ‘‘two sisters, aged 17 and 19, found
in prison. One, aged 17, is abnormally slow, ignorant and stupid ; small
and undeveloped, only as much intelligence as an ordinary child of
7; never got past standard 3 at school; three previous convictions for
theft, the first at 14. She was fined on each occasion except the fourth
when she was given a month’s imprisonment. The second, aged 19,
simple, childish, very ignorant; less intelligence than an ordinary
child of 8. Five previous convictions for theft. On the fourth fined ; on
the fifth and sixth imprisoned.’’ These two young things were certified
to be mentally defective by a Prison Medical Officer of great experience, and a specialist of wide reputation. They were not dealt with however because the medical officer of the local authority did not consider
them defective. I am glad to say that the Prison Commissioners have
ascertained since that the local authority had no right to turn down
cases so certified, and in future the Home Office will see they are dealt
with. |

Just one more instance from the Prison Commission Report; a
lad, aged 16, sentenced to four months’ hard labour for an indecent
assault on a girl of seven; he was certified in prison as an imbecile.
The Medical Officer said he had been defective from birth or an early
age, and was dangerous to little girls. Again the local authority
would not deal with him because they referred him to their Medical
Officer of Health who said he was not defective.

It is unnecessary to give you further examples showing how mental
defectives complicate other social problems. The curse of venereal
disease can never be properly tackled till the mentally defective are
eliminated first ; it is they who spread such disease broadcast, because
they neither take any measures to prevent infection, nor recognise the
necessity of treatment and especially of continuing treatment till the
disease is cured. So too chronic drunkenness, though not due only to
mental defect, often claims as victims men and women whose judgment
and self-control are so poorly developed as to constitute a form of
feeble-mindedness. Again many defectives are receiving unemployment pay, although they never have been and never will be capable
of work. The dole does not deal with their problem at all. It is an
extravagant way of leaving them free to produce other degenerates. I
have already shown how the problem of mental defect is linked up with
that of Illegitimacy and Delinquency.

As I indicated at first, examining these unfortunate persons will do
more than protect the community from possible injury at the moment.
It is bound to diminish their number in the future. Every investigator
has found that heredity is the most prominent antecedent factor in
mental defect. Recently I investigated the records of a large group of
mental defectives and found that nearly 50 per cent. came from
families in which mental defect was rife and the whole stock practically
182 EUGENICS REVIEW.

valueless to the community. A few examples will make this clear:

1. A mentally defective boy, one of a family of six, all the rest of
whom are dead with the exception of one girl, who is deaf and dumb.
The father is a drinker, the mother an epileptic.

2. Another mentally defective boy is one of a family of four, all
the rest of whom are mentally defective. The father was a drinker who
died in an asylum.

8. Another mentally defective boy is one of a family of five,
three of whom are in an asylum, while another is in an institution for
mental defectives, so that all are either in such an institution or else
in an asylum. The mother is feebleminded.

4. Amentally defective girl is one of a family of eight ; another is
feeble-minded, while the six others all died early. The mother is
feeble-minded.

5. Another mentally defective woman is one of a family of thirteen; three others are mentally defective, one died of consumption at
fifteen, while four died in infancy, so the whole thirteen are valueless.

6. Another mentally defective woman is also one of a family of
thirteen, only one of whom is normal; altogether three of the family
are mentally defective; eight died in infancy and one at 14.

The importance of heredity in the matter is absolutely established.
Some investigators believe that the inheritance is so definite that it
follows Mendel’s laws of heredity. It is said to be a Mendelian recessive
character. If that be so it will take a long time to eliminate by segregation, because, being a Mendelian recessive, it will only appear when
inherited from both sides of the family. There will therefore always be
in the community large numbers of normal individuals who are carriers
of mental defect, and through whose agency the condition may appear
again when they or one of their descendants mates with some one who is
also a carrier. * Professor Punnet, for this reason, has estimated that it
will take eight thousand years to get rid of mental defect by segregation
or other drastic means. That statement has a very depressing effect on
some people, but personally I am not going to be deterred by it. To
start with, I am one of those who cannot accept the absolutely regular
and definite inheritance of mental defect. It certainly has an element
of truth in it, but it is not quite true. It is not in accordance with the
family records to which I have access. To start with, human families are
so limited in size compared with the families of animals, and still more
of plants, that we seldom see complete Mendelian inheritance. Even
if we admit that two carriers of mental defect who mate together will
have five mentally defective children in a family of 20, we must recognise that they are not likely to have more than four or five children
altogether, and if those five prospective mental defectives are booked to
come late rather than early in the family, none of them may ever
appear. Such a possibility is all the more likely when we consider the
other factors involved. Heredity is not the only thing to be considered. Those of you who had the pleasure of hearing those two
interesting papers by Dr. Tredgold and Professor MacBride at the
recent conference of the C.A.M.W. will know that environment has
great influence. Human beings have far more control over their environment than have animals. In some cases the germ plasm is so
Se

*See p. 114 of this number.
RACIAL DANGERS OF MENTAL DEFECT. 133

degenerate that repeated bad stock is inevitable, but often a favourable
environment turns the scale, and may turn the scale so effectually that
all will continue to be well, especially if the favourable environment is
maintained. Professor MacBride left us in no doubt as to the extraordinary effect of environment. Those of you who have not heard his
fascinating account of the changes that can be produced in a generation
in gold fish by bad Hygiene should get a copy of the paper from the
(C.A.M.W. He showed the disastrous effects of want of oxygen on the
developing embryo, and stated that one of the commonest causes of
mental defect in human beings was repeated pregnancies at too short
intervals. Those of us who are interested in Infant Welfare did not
require any convincing of the harm from rapidly repeated pregnancies.
They are just part of a vicious circle, occuring because the mother does
not or cannot suckle her child. This is of course all wrong, because in
19 cases out of 20—Dr. Truby King would say in more—the
mother can nurse her child if instructed properly. Well, I was
ready to accept Professor MacBride’s verdict in regard to repeated pregnancy, but I wanted to make sure. Accordingly I
looked through the records of a group of mental defectives. As
I said before, I found heredity accounted for nearly 50 per cent.,
but I also found that rapidly repeated pregnancy did account for
a large proportion—actually it was 20 per cent. It was not the
second most frequent cause, but the third. In my recordsI found, as I
rather expected might be the case, the second commonest cause of mental
defect was being the first of the family. This is an important matter,
which has not yet received proper attention. In recent years we have
been rather too ready to assert that injury at birth does not cause
mental defect. This is because we have been looking for gross lesions
‘of the head, fractures of the bones and so on. But two years ago,
Dr. Eardley Holland conducted an enquiry into the cause of still birth;
he showed that the commonest cause of still birth was not Syphilis, as
chad previously been thought, but injury of the internal structure of the
brain owing to difficult labour. The fatal injuries he found were in the
interior of the brain and did not show outside. Dr. Holland hazarded
‘the suggestion that in many cases where the injuries were not severe
‘enough to cause death they were still sufficient to cause serious mental
impairment. It is matter of common knowledge that first labours are
usually the most difficult and that often preventive operative
‘treatment in obstetrics is only undertaken because of the calamity at
‘the end of the first pregnancy. Fortunately great improvements are being
introduced in the practical training of medical students in obstetrics.
I believe one result of this will be to diminish the number of cases of
mental defect due to injury at birth. I may here seem to wander from
my subject, but I have not actually done so. Because if you first
realise that heredity is the most important element in causation, and
also realise that better hygiene, better ante-natal work and better
obstetrics will enormously increase the gain from segregation, you will
feel hopeful. These other factors are so important that I believe segregation properly carried out will produce notable effects in much less than
8,000 years. But for this we must have greatly increased accommodation. Just one word in conclusion. The tyro who approaches the
134 EUGENICS REVIEW.

problem of mental defect for the first time, nearly always thinks
sterilisation of mental defectives is the obvious efficient and economical
method of dealing with it. I would therefore remind you that the
Medical Committee of the C.A.M.W. unanimously decided that
sterilisation affords no solution of the problem. Those defectives who
could be sterilised must be segregated. The sterilised delinquent will
go on stealing and giving trouble to the police. Feeble-minded young
women could not be sterilised and then turned loose to spread venereal
disease broadcast. Properly applicable in a few cases, it can never be a
solution of our problem. In America it has been tried and found to be
almost valueless. Therefore segregation stands as the remedy.

Miss Evetyn Fox:
Honorary Secretary, Central. Association for Mental Welfare.

I am in complete agreement with what Dr. Potts has said
as to the urgent necessity for providing further accommodation for defectives in homes, institutions and colonies. There can be
no question about this either in the interests of the defectives themselves
or of the community. There should be in the country sufficient accommodation for all defectives whose low mentality or lack of control and
discipline or neglected condition makes segregation the only effective
means of dealing with them.

Amongst the defectives for whom the lack of institutions is most
harmful at the moment are the following :—epileptics who form a fairly
large proportion of the group; criminal defectives whose anti-social
tendencies bring them constantly before the Courts; low grade imbeciles or idiots who may really be an ‘intolerable burden’ on their
families; double defectives who are blind, deaf or paralysed as well as
defective. For these classes it is almost impossible to find accommodation at the moment and unless there is a considerable addition to the
present number of beds no cases of these types will be able to be dealt
with in the course of a year or two. The higher grade defective girl
who is likely to have or has illegitimate children can generally be found
a place for in an institution, but for these other cases there are practically no vacancies.

But there is another group of defectives for which schools, homes
and institutions are badly needed but of whom the public hear less.
often, the young trainable defectives, who with careful prolonged
training may afterwards be properly cared for and supervised in their
own homes or will make useful permanent members of institutions.

Only a very exceptional family in easy circumstances is able to
give the highly skilled training the feebleminded and imbecile child
requires. The number of poor parents who apply to the Local Authorities under the Act for help to get their children the special training they
so urgently need and which they recognise they cannot give themselves
is very considerable and it is a real tragedy to have to refuse them.
We, who are on Local Authorities, are obliged over and over again to
refuse this perfectly legitimate request of the parents to have their
defective child trained. In doing this we are not only penalising the
best parents but we are creating the most difficult class of defective
for whom in future, life in an institution will be the only possibility.
RACIAL DANGERS OF MENTAL DEFECT. 135

I feel very strongly about this not only from the point of view of the
danger to the community but from the misery which such refusal
entails for the defectives themselves. After years of licence, of drifting
about from one institution to another, prisons, workhouses, etc., it is
almost impossible for them to settle down happily to the life of an
institution, they cannot accommodate themselves even to the mildest
‘discipline, they cannot control their instinct to ‘“up and wander’’ away
whenever anything goes wrong. But take these same cases young and
you can give them a perfectly happy life in an institution, with every
chance of development up the limit of their capacity. If it is a
tragedy to neglect the defective criminal because we have no accommodation for him it is infinitely more tragic to ‘‘create’’ him because we
cannot deal with him when young. .

Having recognised the necessity of further institutional aceommodation for defectives let us consider some of the practical difficulties
which stand in the way of its provision. It is useless to approach
Local Authorities to build unless we realise what their difficulties are
and how they can be met.

Under the Mental Deficiency Act, Mental Deficiency Committees
of the County or County Borough Councils have laid on them the duty
of providing accommodation for defectives over 16 and for certain of the
lower grades of defectives under 16. Loca] Education Authorities have
to provide day or residential schools for feeble-minded children between
7 and 16 years.

The Local Authorities under the Act can only provide institutional
accommodation in various ways: (i) building or adapting an institution
themselves or (ii) jointly with another Authority; (ili) or they can
contract to send their cases to institutions run by other Authorities or
(iv) by. other Committees. An Authority providing an institution
under (i) may decide to make it large enough to take cases on contract
from other Authorities.

If however any practical steps are to be taken to induce Authorities
to make adequate institutional accommodation for defectives three
special difficulties must be reckoned with.

(1) The Mental Deficiency Committee itself is not paramount ;
its plans are considered by the Finance Committee of the Council
and its recommendations are finally subject to the vote of the
whole Council. The effect of this limitation of power is far-reaching for it means that any scheme for the welfare of defectives and
the safeguarding of the community will be considered not by
people interested in and cognisant of the importance of the problem, but by people who will have before them at the same time
many other schemes of social welfare. The Council which is
considering the provision of an Institution at the cost of say
£150,000 will probably also be considering recommendations of
the Housing Committee (backed by public opinion) for the expenditure of hundreds of thousands on new houses. The Council has to
weigh carefully the various proposals before it and has to consider
the fact that the public is not interested in Mental Deficiency and
that the rate payer is not in a spending mood.

(2) At the moment the building of institutions suffers from
186 EUGENICS REVIEW.

the same difficulties as the building of new houses, shortage of
materials, and shortage of skilled workers. I do not think it is of
any use to try and force an Authority to build when these local
conditions are so acute as to render building operations almost
impracticable. "

(8) The size of the Authorities themselves. To provide an
institution say for 500 defectives requires a local government area
with a population of from 250,000 to 300,000. No institution for
defectives can be satisfactory unless it is of sufficient size to enable
a proper classification of the inmates (unless it limits itself to one
type of case alone) but as Authorities have to provide for all types
of defectives this is not a practical proposition for them. Dr.

_ Tredgold’s figures for the different grades of defectives are as
follows :—In 500 defectives there are 30 idiots, 90 imbeciles, 195
adult feeble-minded and 185 feeble-minded children. The
following is a very rough classification of the population of the
Local Government areas from the 1921 Census :—

Counties. * Boroughs. Total. Population
under.
6 30 36 100, 000
17 20 37 250,000
16 8 24 500, 000
6 1 7 1,000,000
over
5 5 1,000,000

From these figures it will be seen that some 73 Authorities
will have to combine in one way or another to provide classified
accommodation for their cases.

In spite of these difficulties progress is being made; since April
of this year some six schemes for further accommodation have been
before different Authorities; they are not all passed but are being considered in detail. The majority of these are for institutions run by one
Authority but able to take some cases on contract from other Authorities. I would therefore put in a strong plea that all the influence we
possess be used to ensure a close co-operation between different
authorities. By this means we shall more readily ensure proper classification which is undoubtedly easier in large institutions than in
small ones of under 200. In large places the defective can be offered a
greater variety of trades and occupations, etc., and out of the number
one or more will surely be found to suit his capacity and which will
give him a chance of happiness. For if the community must be
safeguarded the defective has also a right to happiness.

I am on the Committee of an Institution where we have many high
grade cases; we are anxious for their sake to have an ‘‘open door’’
system and on the whole we have managed to secure this. Our girls
have a Guide Corps, their own Court of Honour. But this has only
been possible because the size of the i.stitution enables us to keep the
high grade cases apart from the others.

 

* The Lancashire County Boroughs are excluded, as the geographical county
of Lancashire has one Authority—the Lancashire Asylums Board.
RACIAL DANGERS OF MENTAL DEFECT. 137

A further problem is involved in the provision of additional institutions, the finding of a suitable staff. For various reasons the difficulties in the last few years have greatly increased. We do find it very
hard to get a staff who shew a right understanding of these boys and
girls. The work can be very trying, the defectives are often irritating and annoying and many modern men and women find institution
life in itself wearing, but it is of immense importance to the defectives
that they should have the right people to guide and control them. I
appeal to everyone interested in social work who comes across men and.
women with ideals of service to draw their attention to this branch and
to try and interest them in it. One place could open many new wards
at once but the right staff cannot be found.

In conclusion, if this meeting is to lead to any active propaganda
work for the provision of more institutions by Authorities it will I am
sure work more effectively if the propaganda is not merely general but.
is specially directed to meet the practical difficulties of the moment.

Mrs, NEVILLE Roufe said that the National Council of Women hoped to include these needs in their programme, and she pointed out that when the necessity
for accommodation is more keenly and more generally felt, it should be possible to
make considerable use of existing buildings. ‘The Eugenic conscience felt a twinge.
when it contemplated the supervision of defectives entering their own homes.
It is a question which needs very close study, for those whose interest has been
attracted to the racial aspects of this question—the crux of the situation is the proportion which the defectives are going to contribute to the next generation, and she.
felt that a very useful piece of work could be done if the Authority dealing with each
case could be brought to such an understanding of this question that the family.
history of each defective should be taken into consideration in allowing supervision,
those whose pedigrees showed inheritance might be the ones to have institutional.
treatment, and home supervision should be reserved only for those apparently due.
to some natal or pre-natal accidental cause. Even then, in view of the dangers.
of venereal disease, adequate control must be secured. Mrs. Rolfe then pointed to
the figures published in the American investigation of the immigrant population of
the United States. These figures appear in Laughlin’s Paper ‘*‘ America’s Modern
Melting Pot’’ which has been reviewed in a recent issue. In this connection reference is made to those which make an analysis according to the native country
of foreign-born parents from the defectives amongst the American-born.

The proportional number found amongst those coming from Spain, Portugal,,.
and Russia—countries where any attempt at the segregation of defectives is very
undeveloped, show an enormous preponderance.

Mrs. Rolfe showed that the importance of these figures lies in the fact that in.
these American-born children the factor of environment, to which defect is so.
often attributed, is practically eliminated.

At all events, environment is quite different to that of the Mother country..
Mental defect is in many forms shown to be a Mendelian Recessive, and while the
parents who are admitted are not themselves defective, in those countries where.
lack of segregation has allowed a great mixture between tainted and untainted.
stocks, the result is clearly seen in the young generation.

Lapy Nott-BoweEr:

I really came here to put in a plea for additional institutions for E pileptics..
Everybody here has probably had the same experience as I have had.

On the Surrey Joint Poor Law Committee, and Surrey County Council we would
like to have more institutions, we are always trying to get them, but our hands.
are tied.

The Surrey County Council is in an almost worse position: we are told that we.
may only spend this year what we spent last year, and must not attempt to deal
with any case which is not absolutely urgent, and the stringency with which this is.
enforced upon us convinces me that a very large number of cases go without control
138 EUGENICS REVIEW.

or institutional treatment. The cry of Economy is at the root of the matter, but
our present procedure is a false economy. We know that if we could only deal
adequately with these cases for a single generation we should have made some
advance in the well being of the whole country, we should also have made an enormous contribution to the health and well-being of those outside. It is not the
public authorities which are lacking but the Central Executive and ‘‘those above’”’

who seem extraordinarily blind.

Dr. FAIRFIELD wished to make two points:

(1) The difficulty of getting suitable attendants in these institutions may be
partly due to the extremely ill-advised campaign for lunacy reform going on at
present which is detrimental to obtaining suitable attendants, they think such
institutions unsuitable for respectable people.

(2) It is much easier to get proper classification in a large asylum, but a great
deal of very valuable work can be done in small homes, if patients are classified
before being sent. Local Authorities can do much in getting small homes for
certain classes of defectives, such as mothers and babies; the contact of the mother
and baby is found in the case of defectives quite valuable. Also small training
homes for more hopeful girls are useful.

Dr. MACFADYEN said:

I feel that the problem of Mental Defect is being very inadequately tackled.
The present administration of the law is almost worse than was our case before the
Act came into existence. I think that where cases are admitted into Mentally
Defective Homes, brought up with great labour to a slightly better condition and
then let out into the world, a very lamentable condition of affairs arises.

I hope that the question of sterilization will not be dismissed by saying that
tyros who have just started on the subject are anxious to have sterilization,
because they are damning us from the very start. I have been twenty years at
this work, and I suggest that the thing that we have to go for is a proper and
thorough administration of the Mental Deficiency Act from the point of view of the
Nation, not only from the point of view of making people happy. The real point
is whether it is going to help the Nation, or not, and we want to consider the question whether if these people cannot be kept in institutions for their whole life, some
such means as sterilization cannot be used. Then they could be allowed to mix
with the population, and there would be a great opportunity for treating the subject as it ought to be treated. I believe that Local Authorities are keen enough,
the general public is fairly keen, but we have to get at the Government of the
country, and ultimately to get at the Treasury.

Dr. TREDGOLD wrote:

In my opinion the need for institutional accommodation for mental defectives
is very great, both in the interests of defectives themselves and of the general community. Experience has fully shown that the majority of mental defectives are
not only more usefully employed in institutions, but that they are safeguarded from
dangers which beset them outside, they have the advantage of the companionship

of their kind, and they are really far happier.

Dr. BRACKENBURY wrote:

I do not think is it easy to exaggerate the importance of the matter you are
considering and I should be glad to lend any support I can towards securing a
practical improvement of the present lamentable position.

BERNARD HOLLANDER, M.D. wrote:

More homes are needed, more institutions, more industrial and farm colonies,
whereby to encourage voluntary segregation— voluntary not on the part of the
child but on the part of the parent. They are urgently needed, not only on humane
and social grounds, but also for economic reasons, for the neglected feeble-minded
in our midst are already costing the country a large sum for maintenance in workhouses, prisons, reformatories, rescue homes, inebriate and other establishments ;
whereas if adequate provision were made for them while still young, many could be
RACIAL DANGERS OF MENTAL DEFECT. 139

trained to honest labour, which would contribute something towards their maintenance and, by segregation, the great and costly peril of transmitting to succeeding
generations the hereditary tendency of mental defect would be diminished or
avoided.

Dr. Norwoop East writes:

I have no doubt that the institutional care of defectives with criminal tendencies
prevents a large number from becoming recidivists, and that the segregation of such
in proper institutions results in a large amount of crime being avoided, probably
more so than the actual number of defective delinquents would at first sight lead
one to suppose.

And it seems to me that any steps which will facilitate obtaining accommodation in defective institutions for this class of case must benefit not only the individual, but also the community.

Masor LEONARD DaRwIN in summing up from the chair referred to Dr. Potts’
account of the United States’ experience of Sterilization, from which the
audience might not gather the actual position. The difficulties experienced in
America have been legal, and are due to the Constitution. Each state has its own
State Law, and is also involved in the federal law—unless a sterilisation law is very
carefully formed, it may be found to be over-ridden by the federal law. For this
‘reason in some States medical men have found themselves unable to risk complying
with the State regulation ordering sterilisation of certain degenerate types.
Physiological or biological ‘‘failure’’ has not so far been alleged in those cases where
the method has been abandoned.
