MENTAL DEFICIENCY—II
The Sub-Cultural Group
By L. S. PENROSE, M.A., M.D.

(Research Medical Officer, Royal Eastern Counties’ Institution for Mental Defectives.)

in 1931, Dr. E. O. Lewis proposed the

name sub-cultural for that group of
mental defectives who represent the lower
part of the frequency distribution curve of
intelligence for the general population. The
hypothesis was the outcome of his observations made during his survey in England on
behalf of the Wood Departmental Committee. Lewis separated off from this group
what he termed pathological types of mental
defectives, that is to say, cases in which
mental deficiency is associated with some
form of gross physical disease or deformity.
The present writer finds it convenient to
include also in the pathological class cases
of psychosis, epilepsy, and severe neurosis.
These two groups, sub-cultural and pathological, are not mutually exclusive and may
overlap one another to any extent. The
pure unmixed sub-cultural mental defectives form about a quarter of institutional
cases. The problem of ascertaining causative factors in determining their condition
is therefore of great importance.

The sub-cultural group is not to be confused with the so-called ‘‘ social problem ”’
group. Although it is true that most of
the sub-cultural defectives to be found in
institutions are selected on account of some
kind of behaviour difficulty or social maladjustment, not all sub-cultural mental
defectives behave anti-socially. Probably
the great majority of the people whose
intelligence is sub-normal live usefully in
the community. But it might perhaps be
argued that, if such people are able to carry
on in society, they are not certifiable within
the meaning of the Mental Deficiency Acts
and are, therefore, not mentally defective.
They are, nevertheless, indistinguishable
from the certified mental defectives when

| N his address to the British Association

judged by their performance at standardized
mental tests and their general ability.

In order to study the causes of variation
in intelligence and its deviation from the
normal, in the sub-cultural group, it is first
necessary to exclude from the investigation
all cases in which physical disease is present,
for this may be a contributory factor. The
same applies to the mentally disordered or
psychotic cases. Specific types must also be
excluded such as mongolism, epiloia, or
microcephaly. There then remains a group
of defectives who are physically sound, but
who possess varying degress of dullness.

The present communication gives a summary of certain tentative results obtained
from the analysis of 100 families containing
sub-cultural mental defectives. A_ full
analysis of the data is being published in
the British Journal of Psychology. These
families were selected by the presence of at
least one child who is certified mentally
defective (under the care of the Royal
Eastern Counties’ Institution) and who
appears to be of the pure sub-cultural type.
The family is defined, for purposes of this
investigation, as consisting of the parents
and their immediate offspring only. The
average intelligence quotient of the defectives, through whom the selection was made,
was just 50. Their families were all investigated personally and every available member classed under one of the following four
headings, thus:

Arbitrary Class. Approximate I.Q.

I. Superior intelligence .... 125
2. Normal intelligence 100
3. Dull vee nee wee 7S
4. Mentally defective ...% 50

Unfortunately it was not possible to measure
the intelligence of many of the members of
these families by standardized tests. Great

289
290

attention was, however, paid to schoolmasters’ reports and these were compared
with estimates given by relatives, employers,
friends, and others.

Some of the causes of variability in intelligence are probably to be looked for in
hereditary factors; but the gradation of
intelligence in different individuals,* from
the genius to the imbecile, is steady and
continuous and we cannot hope to find, what
Goddard looked for twenty years ago, one
single mendelian character determining
these variations. But it has been shown by
Fisher that a great number of alternative
genes behave in certain respects approximately as a single character whose qualities
are intermediate between dominant and
recessive: that is, the heterozygous form
is intermediate, in respect of the character
under consideration, between the normal
and the homozygous.

It may seem worth while, therefore, to
test the data from these 100 families against
the hypothesis that a single gene determines
the variation in intelligence from one individual to another, given that the dull persons
in these families are heterozygous for a gene
which produces mental deficiency in homozygous individuals. It has been necessary
to correct the expected values of the proportions of offspring affected for each type of
parent from the simple mendelian ratios.
This is because the families are all selected
by the presence of at least one mentally
defective child. The genotypes are supposed
to be arranged thus:

Normal or superior AA Normal Genotype
Dull ABor BA Heterozygous _,,
Mentally defective BB Homozygous _,,

The accompanying table summarizes the
results of the comparison. t

* See Pearson, K.: On the Graduated Character
of Mental Defect. 1914. Questions of the Day and
of the Fray. Mendelism and the Problem of Mental
Defect, If,

+ Expectations can be worked out by the application of any method which allows for the circumstance that at least one member in each fraternity
is affected. The most satisfactory way of doing this
is by use of the following formula for the expected
number of affected offspring in such families.

Where > is the probability that an offspring is
affected in a given family and n,, is the number
of s-membered fraternities each containing at least

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ANALYSIS OF ONE HUNDRED FAMILIES

PARENTS OFFSPRING
(number of AA AB BB
matings of (normal) (dull) (meneach type) tally defective)
AAXAA Obs. 126 13 49
(45) Exp. (p=0)  =143°0 0°0 = 450
AAXAB Obs. 36 20 24
(18) Exp. (p=o) 31-0 31-0 18:0
AAXBB Obs. II 14 20
(12) Exp. (p=o) 0-0 33°0 12-0
ABXAB Obs. 8 12 17
(9) Exp. (p=) 7°8 15°6 13°6
ABXBB Obs. ° I 22
(9) Exp. (p=}) 0-0 8:6 14°4
BBxBB Obs. I 3 18
(7) Exp. (p=1) 0-0 0-0 = 220
Total Obs. 182 63 150
(100) Exp. 181°9 90'O 123°1

It will be seen that there is only
an approximate agreement between the
observed numbers of children in different
classes born to different types of parents and
the expected values. —The approximation is,
however, near enough to warrant the
assumption of the likelihood of multi-factorial inheritance.

It should be emphasized that results of
the type found here may be due to the
effects of environment. A study of the
familial incidence of rickets would probably
give a very similar picture, since parents
and children tend, on the whole, to have the
same diet and therefore to resemble one another as regards rachitic features. There
are, in fact, quite definite indications that
environment does play a part in the variation of intelligence even in this sub-cultural
group. For example, there is a tendency,
on the average, for the intelligence of the

one affected member, the expected number of
affected persons has the value,

pete i= (=p
The expected relative proportions of ‘the re
maining types in the fraternity will be unaltered.
Thus, in the case of both parents heterozygous,

i= Ds) ; children will be affected, two-thirds of

the remainder heterozygous and one-third of the
remainder normal.
MENTAL DEFICIENCY—THE SUB-CULTURAL GROUP

children born to mothers over the age of 35
to be lower than that of children born to
younger mothers. Moreover, seeing that the
class of defectives studied here is by definition the sub-group of normal persons, the
causes of variation of intelligence which
have been found, or are likely to be found,
among normal persons will apply also to this
group. The studies of Freeman, Holzinger,
and Mitchell are to be considered in this
connection.

ASSORTIVE MATING

Certain further points of interest have
arisen in the course of this study. There
has been no example found of a normal
female mating with a mentally defective
male, though the converse relation is fairly
frequent. Moreover, there is a much
stronger likeness between the parents in
respect of mentality than would be expected
from purely random mating, the correlation being + °44 +:°08. This observation is
in agreement with the view expressed in the
Wood Report that persons of poor intelligence tend to intermarry. It is also in
agreement with common sense. In five
instances the parents were consanguineous.
Owing to the extreme frequency of subcultural mental deficiency, it cannot be
inferred that this high incidence of consanguinity points to the presence of rare
recessive mendelian characters determining
the mental deficiency of the offspring. Probably the high incidence of consanguineous
unions is merely a further indication of the
tendency for like persons to marry one
another.

In view of the possibility of finding sexlinked genetic determinants for mental deficiency, as suggested by several investigators
(Goddard, Rosanoff), the families of these
sub-cultural persons were examined criti
291

cally for evidence of such factors. It was
found, for example, that a closer association
existed between mothers and children, in
respect of mental ability, than between
fathers and children. By itself this criterion
of sex-linked factors is inadequate, for a
similar result could be produced either by
errors in allocating paternity or by environmental effects due to greater association of
the offspring with the mother than with the
father. It was, however, also found that the
daughters were more like the fathers in
mentality than were the sons, and this fact
seems to point more definitely to sex-linked
factors, but the matter cannot be settled
until a great deal more material has been
collected.

Two warnings are necessary against
making hasty inferences from the data
summarized in this paper. First, apart
from the question of the accuracy of the
assessment of the mentality of the members
of the families, it must be remembered that
those labelled mentally deficient are not
necessarily so within the meaning of the
Acts, because the Acts are based on criteria
of social efficiency : the designation here is
simply to be taken as an estimate of I.Q.
Secondly, any conclusion which may be
drawn applies solely to the causation of pure
sub-cultural mental deficiency, i.e. to the
group which apparently forms one quarter
only of the defectives in an institution. The
writer himself would, therefore, go little
further than to say that the investigation
summarized in this paper points to the
multi-factorial nature of the genetic determinants of intelligence. This has, of course,
long been suspected, but the application of
this hypothesis to the interpretation of the
families of the sub-cultural mental defectives does not seem to have hitherto received
attention.

ey”

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 4.
