THE TREND OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE’
By GODFREY THOMSON, D.C.L,, Ph.D., D.Sc. |

HAVE during my lifetime had a great
| cca to do with the selection of children

at II or 12 years of age for higher forms
of education, and a good deal to do with
the further selection which goes on at about
17 for entry to universities and colleges. I
have however been very much worried by
the fact that this process has an undesired
and undesirable effect. It is intended, in
all good faith, to be for the good both of
the individual and the community, for it
endeavours to educate each child in the way
most likely to suit his ability and talents,
and therefore most likely to make him
happy, and this is also the way most likely
to enable those talents to be of use to the
community.

The Educational Sieve

But actually it has also another and
regrettable result, especially in the case of
the girls. The children chosen at II or 12
to enter on a longer and more difficult course
of education are likely, on the average, to
marry later (if at all) and to have fewer
children (if any) than those who are not
chosen.
those chosen later to enter colleges and
universities. The men will marry later than
they otherwise would have done, and a large
proportion of the women will not marry at
all. In short, the educational system of the
country acts as a sieve to sift out the more
intelligent and destroy their posterity. It

is a selection which ensures that their like .

shall not endure.

It is clear that we nevertheless cannot do
away with this selection of the most intelligent for the highest kind of education. It
would indeed go on in some measure even
were all our machinery of tests and examinations and interviews to be abolished.
Somehow we must try to make social changes
which will remove the influences causing

_* The Galton Lecture delivered before the Eugenics
Society on February 14th, 1946.

This is still more the case with 
more highly educated people to marry late
and have few children. They are not greatly
deterred from having children, I think, by
any fear of having themselves to give up
some material luxuries. They are somewhat
deterred by the fear that a family of children
will take away time and energy from their
scholarly or scientific occupations. In the
case of women they may indeed know that
they will not as mothers and wives be able
or even allowed to continue these occupations. Most of all, however, they are
deterred by the fear of not being able to
educate a large number of children well.

My interest in the quantitative connection
between intelligence and fertility dates from
1921, when I tested a large number of
Northumberland children and noted facts
which seemed to suggest such an association.
Since then, usually in conjunction with colleagues or students working under my
guidance or in collaboration with me, I have
made several experimental inquiries planned
to elucidate this problem.

Intelligence and Size of Family

‘My general conviction is that there is a
negative correlation between the “‘intelligence ”’ of a child of about eleven years, and
the size of the family of which he or she is
a member, and I am fairly sure that the
correlation coefficient is approximately
—o-25. Of its causé I am much less certain,
but I think it is largely due to the later
marriages of intelligent people, their restraint in producing fewer children, and the
inheritance of their intelligence by their
offspring.

Caution is necessary because it is very
difficult to disentangle, in the estimate of a
child’s “‘intelligence,”’ that part which is his
mborn potential intelligence, and that due
to his education, his home, his environmental chances. I do not myself think that
environment and social inheritance explain
more than a fraction, at most half, of the

9
10 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

negative correlation actually observed, but
it is difficult to test this. I shall describe
below some attempts I have made to do so.

First however let me expand my statement

that (whatever may be its cause) there is a
negative correlation of about —o-25 between
intelligence as measured by an intelligence
test and the size of the family to which the
tested child belongs.

This is not a fact obvious to casual notice.
Indeed the man on the street will usually,
in my experience, deny it and vigorously
proclaim the many advantages, even the
intellectual advantages, of belonging to a
large family. An inverse correlation of

—0°25 between size of family and intelli
gence leaves however plenty of room for

cases where large families are intelligent and

small families dull. It only implies that
about 60 per cent of the families are in
agreement with the tendency, leaving about
4o per cent of cases of discrepaficy. No
less than 20 per cent of the families, in spite
of the prevailing tendency, would be above
the average both in size and in intelligence,
and 20 per cent would be below the average
in both. | ,

If we construct a grid or chequerboard
table, showing along its one edge the size
of family, and along the other edge the
grade of ‘intelligence of the child who is
tested, then although the column of the
largest families will show many with low
intelligence, it will show some with high intelligence, though not so many; and vice
versa, some members of small families will
be stupid, though more will be clever.
There are therefore plenty of exceptions to
the general tendency.

Casual observers moreover, and even
people like teachers, or journalists, or
clergymen, do not see the whole population,
but only a selected part of it. They know
secondary school children, or slum children.
Their acquaintances tend to belong to a
class with large (or with small) families,
tend to belong to a certain occupational or
social stratum, and so on. That is to say,
they are unacquainted with the whole of the
data. Suppose we take such a part, where
all the families are below average in size

and above average in intelligence. That is

the part of the data, for example, which will
represent the relations, friends, and acquaintances of most of my hearers to-day. If we
calculate the correlation between size of
family and intelligence using only such a
truncated grid, we find that it is, in this or
any restricted sample of the population, so
low as to escape casual notice entirely. Such
selection always hides differences. But in
a sample of the complete population, taken
from slum and from suburb, from clerical
and from manual occupations, from town
and country, the negative correlation is
unmistakable.

An Early Experiment

My earliest experimental approaches to
our problem were indirect, and showed a
negative correlation between the tested
child’s intelligence and the status of the
father’s occupation on a scale such as the
Taussig. Since it was known that there
existed a differential fertility among occupational groups, a negative correlation
between the child’s intelligence and the
number of his sibs could be anticipated.
In the years 1925-6 I planned.a direct
attack on the problem and was assisted by
my student Dr. H. E. G: Sutherland. Our
subjects were about 2,009 elementary school
children (two nearly complete age-groups)
in the Isle of Wight, about 400 boys of the
Royal Grammar School, Newcastle-uponTyne, about 400 pupils of Moray House
Demonstration School, Edinburgh, and 30
boys from Ryde Grammar School in. the Isle
of Wight. The size of family was ascertained by enquiry from tlie child tested.

. Only living children will, therefore, as a

rule, be included. .

* Taking the elementary school children
first, the percentage above average intelligence sank steadily, and with only one reversal, from 66 per cent among the only
children, to 39 per cent among those belonging to a family of over seven. The percentages, as the size of family increased,
were 66, 64, 56, 54, 49, 41, 34, 39. The

data from the grammar and the demon
stration schools were not in discord with this
THE TREND OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE II

general result, but, owing no doubt to being
already selected samples, gave in themselves
much lower correlations.

The chief blemishes in this research were
(i) the use of group tests, which are more
diluted by acquired verbal facility, especially
reading ability, and (ii) the difficulty of the
(possibly) unfinished families. This second
difficulty however probably leads to an
underestimation of the correlation. For if
a child of eleven years is one of a small
family it is probable that no more children
will be born. But if he is a member of a
large family it may be still further increased
—though clearly much depends on his place
in the family. Since the large families in
this research are therefore more likely to be
unfinished than are the small families, the
negative correlations found are more likely
to be underestimates than overestimates.

A Socially Homogeneous Group

We were chiefly concerned to test ‘the
possible explanation that the phenomenon
of negative correlation is due to family circumstances and not to inheritance. Dr.
Sutherland and I next therefore measured
this correlation in a socially very homogeneous group, namely coal-miners working
“at the face.” The fathers of this group
all belonged to the rank and file of coal
hewers, everyone holding any kind of a
distinguishing position, even of the lowest
grade, being excluded. In 1926, 60,000
school children between the ages of 11 and
13, forming two age-groups attending elementary schools in the West Riding of
Yorkshire, were given a group test of intelligence and were asked about their father’s
occupation and the number of their brothers
and sisters. In 3,096 cases the father was
a coal-miner. The correlations obtained
were, in spite of the very homogeneous
home conditions, still significantly negative.

Fatherless Children
It next occurred to me that I might

obtain further insight into the problem if I

took a group of fatherless children, in whose
case the size of family was at least in part
accidental, due to the father’s death. I

found in 1930 in Edinburgh 123 children
born in 1916 or 1917 whose fathers had fallen
in war before these children were a year old.
Dr. Sutherland gave a group intelligence test
to these, and also to a control group of 116
children with living parents, each child being
matched by one of the. same sex, same
size of family, same age and same school—
as far.as this proved possible. ‘The correlation of intelligence with size of family was
in the fatherless group —o-1q, in the control
group —0:26. The difference is however not
statistically significant ; the numbers were
too few.

If the sole cause of the usual negative
correlation were the foresight shown by intelligent parents, and if in our particular
group of 123 children the size of family were
entirely an accident, one would expect no
negative correlation in this group. As it is,
though the correlation is smaller (i.e. nearer
zero) compared with the control group, the
diminution is not statistically significant.
This experiment therefore fails to give conclusive support to the explanation of heredity though it points in that direction. And
we must remember that even in the case of
these fatherless children the intelligence of
the parents may have influenced the number
and, the spacing of the children up to the
time of the father’s death, and produced the
negative correlation found.

At the same time we searched our Yorkshire data and collected 724 fatherless
children (though not in these cases necessarily
fatherless from birth) and a control group
of 581 with living parents. The correlations
between size of family and intelligence were
practically the same as in the Edinburgh
groups, i.e. the fatherless children showed
a smaller, but not significantly smaller,
negative correlation.

Shepherd Dawson’s Data

After 1931 for several years I engaged i in
no further researches on this question, but
then Dr. R. R. Rusk, of the Scottish Council
for Research in Education, called my attention to data left by the late Dr. Shepherd
Dawson and suggested that one of my
students might work it over. This was
12 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

done by Gerard S.A. O’Hanlon. Over 1,200
children between the ages of 5 and 8 years,
whose parents were moving. from a slum to
a new housing area, had been given an
individual Binet intelligence test. From
these 1,239 cases Dawson had found a correlation of —o-19. After some years they
were retested, by which time the number
still traceable was only 293 and it is these
which form the subject of O’Hanlon’s paper.
Other information, in addition to the ‘size
of family, included room space, nutrition,
income, mother’s age at marriage, and years
married when this child was born. The raw
correlation between 1.Q. and size of family
(total number of births) was —0-207. When,
by the mathematical device of partial correlation, it was estimated what this correlation
of —o-207 would be in a group homogeneous
in all the other factors mentioned above
(room space, nutrition, etc.) the value found
was —0: 203, that is, the correlation was even
more pronounced.

It will be noted that in this research the
test used was an individual Binet test. It
is therefore less open to the criticism that
education, and not native intelligence, is
being measured.

If we use these results, and similar results
from other workers, as data from which to
estimate whether the intellectual average of
our race is sinking from generation to generation, an important point to remember is
that in all the experiments quoted so far the
families have been ascertained through a
child of the family, and therefore childless
marriages are omitted entirely. Nor are those
potential parents who have not married included in the sample. It seems possible and
indeed somewhat probable that these members of a generation—the childless—are, on
the average, of rather high intelligence (consider, for example, the large band of unmarried women teachers). If the tendency
is for intelligence to rise as we go from large
families to those with few children, with two
children, with one child, it seems very possible that it will continue to families with
no children ; that is to say, that the unborn
children of the unmarried and the childless
would have been, on the average, yet more

intelligent (though we must remember that
the childless group of adults, unlike the
groups of parents ascertained through one of
their offspring, will contain adults incapable
of being parents). If this is so, then a
negative correlation of —0o-25 does not fully
indicate the strength of the forces tending
towards a deterioration of intelligence generation by generation. It is true that in a
very important research Fraser-Roberts,
R. M. Norman, and Ruth Griffiths found
“only ” children a little less intelligent than
children with one sib, but they attribute
this largely to the fact that illegitimate
children were usually returned as only
children. They felt sure that the decrease
in average intelligence with size of family
was really linear. They are further of the
opinion that almost all sources of bias or of
error, especially sampling error, would lead
to estimates of the negative correlation that
would be too low.

The Bath Experiment

Their article is in my opinion the best
that has been written on this subject because
of the completeness of the sampling and the
excellence of the statistical work. My
samples were in several cases fairly complete age-groups ; but theirs can be said to
be practically quite complete, all children
(except a mere handful) whose homes were
in Bath and whose birthdays were between
September Ist, 1921, and August 31st, 1925,
being ascertained, 3,401 in number, of whom
3,362 were actually tested, most of the
missing 39 children having meanwhile left
Bath and some having died. The Advanced
Otis group test was used, but 1,271 of the
children had also been given an individual
Binet test, so that a check was possible.
The Binet I.Q. indeed “showed a significantly higher association with sib number
than did Otis I.B.”’ There was thus: “no
suggestion that the verbal group test gave
too high an estimate because of a possible
social bias.” |

The statistical procedures: adopted were
excellent—they were discussed by the
authors with Professor R. A. Fisher—and
the conclusions are conservative. The correTHE TREND OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE 13

lation coefficient in which we are interested
here was —0:224 (living children only included in the family size).

It is clear that if there is a negative corre‘lation between size of family and intelli‘gence, and if the conditions causing this are
_allowed to continue, then the average in‘telligence will sink generation by generation.
There is indeed some direct evidence that
this is so, for example E. O. Lewis’s investigation. Various calculations have been
made based on correlations such as I have
to-day discussed, calculations which do not
ask whether the cause is to be sought in
educational hawdicaps (which can be removed by legislation) or in genetic changes,
but estimate the difference in intelligence
quotient between a parental and a filial
generation due to all causes. These calculations show an alarming decline of at least
two points of Binet I.Q. per generation, and
probably more.

The first such calculation, made by a
method arithmetically somewhat similar to
that about to be described, was, as far as
I have been able to ascertain, published in
the Journal of Educational Psychology for
1927, by Lentz, who divided each group of
children by the number in the family, to
obtain a distribution representing the parental generation. But the assumptions on
which he apparently based his procedure
were, it seems to me, erroneous, for they
implied perfect correlation. between parental
and filial intelligence. In his book The
Fight for our National Intelligence (1936)
Raymond Cattell also uses the above method,
and further estimates the distribution of
intelligence in the next, as yet unborn,
generation by muliiplying each group of
children by the number in the family,
assuming in addition, it would seem, a
perfect correlation between parental and
filial fertility. However, both these assumptions of perfect correlation are unnecessary,
and an arithmetical procedure identical with
Cattell’s second plan, but with other and
much more reasonable assumptions, has today the support of Professor R. A. Fisher.
I shall describe it in what I believe would
be in effect his own words. It depends upon

a comparison of the average I.Q. of famslies
(counting each family once only) and the
average I.Q. of all the children in these
families. The former is an unbiased estimate
of the average I.Q. of the parents, the latter
an unbiased estimate of that of their children.
The difference is the decline.

Indirect Calculation of the Decline

It is desirable I think to dwell for a while
on this calculation, for it may seem at first
sight to be performing the impossible, since
it purports to estimate a decline in intelligence merely from tests administered to one
generation. But first let me give an
example, using the data from the Isle of
Wight already referred to. There were in
all 1,924 children tested, 840 in one year
and 1,084 in another. The latter were a
more nearly complete age-group and I shall
confine the calculation to them. It is shown
in Table I. Column (@) shows the number
of children actually tested, and since only
one year-group was concerned, this 1,084 is

also the number of families.’ True, there

may have been some twins among the 1,084,
or some siblings born within a twelvemonth
of one another, but such cases must be few.
Column (bd) gives the number of children in
the family, including the tested child, and
column (c) the average I.Q. of each group

 

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE I
AVERAGE I.Q. OF PARENTS AND CHILDREN IN 1,084
FAMILIES
@ @ © (2) (e) (f)
No. of No. in Product No. of Product
families family I.Q. ac children ce
II5 I 106-2 12,213°0 II5 12,213°0
212 2 105°4 22,344°8 424 44,689-6
185 3 1023 18,925°5 555 56,776°5
152 4 I015 15,428-0 608 61,712°0
127 5 99°6 12,649°2 635 63,2460
103 6 96:5 9,939°5 618 59,637°0
88 7 (938 8,254°4 616 57,780°8
toz2 = (8)*_—-95°8 9,771°6 816 78,172°8
" 1,084 109,526:0 4,387  434,227-7
Mean= 101-04 Mean=98-98

* Really “over 7.” Using 8 will give a slightly
underestimated figure for the decline.

Estimated average I.Q. of the parents wos = TOL"04
Estimated average I.Q. of all their children... 98-98
| Decline 4-06
14

of children. In column (d) the average I.Q.
of all these children is found to be 101-04. *

This value is taken as the estimate of the
average I.Q. of their parents, on the very
reasonable assumption that the average I.Q.
of all parents will be the same as the average
I.Q. of all their children if they each have the
same number of children. Here each family
is represented by one child, not specially
selected, and therefore representative.

There is no assumption about the value of
the correlation coefficient of parental intelligence with filial intelligence. This would
have to be known if an estimate were required of the intelligence of the parents of
any specified size of family, for in that case
the phenomenon of regression, which is
dependent upon the degree of correlation,
would have to be taken into account. But
when the average I.Q. of all the parents is
estimated, regression plays no part. I have
to thank Dr. D. N. Lawley for clearing up
this point for me in discussions.

To return to our table: column (e) shows
the total number of children of those
parents, obtained by multiplying together
columns (a) and (8). Then the average I.Q.
of all these 4,387 children is obtained by
multiplying the I.Q.’s of column (c) by the
numbers in column (e), adding, and dividing
by 4,387 as is shown in the last column.
The assumption is again made here that the
one child tested in a family is a fair sample
of that family, and his I.Q. an unbiased
estimate of the average I.Q. of the family.
The child tested is in no way specially
selected, and is equally likely to be above or
below his brethren in intelligence.

The results of such calculations, of which
a number have been reported, are remarkably
in agreement, and with few exceptions give
values for the decline in intelligence ranging
from slightly below 2 points to well over
3 points per generation. The most widely
known are those on the data of Dr. Raymond
Cattell, gathered in Leicester, and on the
data of Dr. Fraser-Roberts and his coworkers, gathered in Bath. These agree
more closely than I at one time thought.
The decline given by Cattell on page 42 of
his book The Fight for our National Intells
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

gence is 3-1 points of the units of his test ;
but I deduce from his diagram on page 269
of his article in the British Journal of
Psychology for January 1936 that’ the
standard deviation of these units was about
21, so that in Binet units his 3-1 would
become about 2°3 points of decline. The
Fraser-Roberts data give a decline in Otis
units of 4-14 points, estimated by Fisher to
be equivalent to 2:04 Binet units. These
estimates make no allowance for the existence of individuals in the parental generation
who were childless, and are therefore probably underestimates. Further, they do not
seem to make any allowance for the fact—
and I think it is a fact—that the number of
years between generations is smaller for the
class of parents who have large families,
and larger for the parents of small families.
If this is so, the values are again underestimates.

On the other hand, these estimates lump
together all the possible causes which may
have created the negative correlation between
size of family and intelligence, and assume
that these causes will continue to operate,
whether they are social, and remediable by
social and environmental change, or are
genetic, and remediable only by selection.
We however are very interested to know

whether the causes are environmental or

genetic. It was towards elucidating this
that I planned my experiment with the
children fatherless from birth.

The distinction between the two categories
of cause is not sharp, for the adverse genetic
selection which we fear to be going on is
itself due.to the social environment, at least
in part. But a clear distinction can be

‘drawn between an explanation which-attri
butes the lower intelligence of large families
to biological inheritance from their parents,
and an explanation which asserts that their
lower scores are directly due to the largeness
of the family, due for example to the overcrowded home with no opportunity for study,
due to the greater poverty when the wage
has to support more children, due to the
fewer books, the slummier district, the less
well-staffed school in such a place.

The kind of social reform which the second
THE TREND OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE 15

class of explanation would call for may differ
from the kind of social reform which would
be needed to reverse the deterioration due
to actual selection for poor mental inheritance. A flat rate of family allowance, for
example, might make matters better environmentally, while further increasing ‘the
adverse selection.

Heredity or Environment ? ©

Much therefore depends on the answer to
the question how much of the scatter of intelligence in our population is due to inheritance, and how much to differences in
schooling and education. About this there
has long raged acute controversy, which has
recently flared up again in America, after a
period during which it was generally agreed
that from 50 to 80 per cent of the scatter
was due to-heredity. That fairly quiescent
period followed the appearance of the 27th
Yearbook of the (American) National Society
for the Study of Education, which was devoted
to this problem and contained papers which,
while conflicting, did so on the whole only
within the above limits.

In 1940 however there appeared the 39th
Yearbook of that society, among the articles
in which there is much greater disagreement,
between (one might say) a Californian school
headed by Lewis Terman and the late
Barbara Burks, claiming a very large influence for heredity, and an Iowa school,
headed by George Stoddard and Beth Wellman, denying this and making big claims
for schooling. Among the kinds of research
which are used in attempts to distinguish
between nature and nurture are correlations
between intelligence scores of identical twins,
between foster children and foster parents,
foster children and true parents, children
brought up in a homogeneous environment
like an institution, and so on. The Iowa school
base their conclusions mainly on large increases in I.Q. following nursery school and
infant school education, which are not confirmed by other investigators, and are
criticized as being either due to the inaccuracy and overhigh standard of baby
tests, or to selection and statistical errors in
the treatment of the resulting data. The

2 nee

differences of opinion are honest, and
although I for my part think that the Iowa
researches are unreliable, it is clear that we
are far from being sure.

Of the 2 or 3 points of decline of I.Q. per
generation which the differential birth-rate
data indicate, we are therefore unable to
say with confidence how much is due to
heredity and how much to environment.
When, in & memorandum to the Royal
Commission, I said that I feared the decline
was one point, I meant one point due to
heredity and to selection. It may well be
more, but I hardly think it can be less.
Particularly emphatic seems to me the fact
that while the correlation between the intelligence test scores of siblings is about °5,
that between all twins is about -7, and
between twins after removal of all pairs
where sex, bloodgroup, or other criterion
indicates a double conception, this correlation rises to about -9. This last rise in
particular seems inexplicable except by a
genetic explanation, and suggests that a
considerable part of what we call intelligence is inherited. Its genetic background
is probably complex and in all probability
a large number of genes are concerned.

That the mode of inheritance of intelligence is important in considering this matter
has been illustrated by Professor J. B. S.
Haldane by the analogy of the “ eversporting ’’ strain of stock. Since about
Queen Elizabeth’s time “double” stocks
have been known, the doubleness, which is
recessive, being due to a Mendelian gene (or
perhaps a pair).

The doubleness is due to all the sexual
organs of the flower becoming petals, and
so double flowers are entirely sterile. The
single flowers, in the ordinary strain, are
either pure singles, which have only single
offspring, or hybrid singles, which throw
some doubles. In the ordinary strain therefore the proportion of doubles grows less
and less as the generations follow one another
—as we fear intelligence will grow less and
less in human beings.

But in the “ ever-sporting”’ strain, each
generation is composed of approximately
half singles and half doubles. Though the
16 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

doubles are sterile, the singles of a generation always produce offspring who are in
half the cases doubles. If mankind were
like this, and intelligent people (double
flowers) were quite sterile, still unintelligent
people (single flowers) might produce a full
quota of the intelligent, generation after
generation. .

I am afraid however that mankind is not
like this. We are not divided sharply into
intelligent and unintelligent, as stocks into
doubles and singles. Intelligence ranges
gradually, step by step, from genius, through
the average man, down to the defective, and
the distribution is approximately normal or
gaussian, and is therefore probably due not
to one but to many genes. The explanation
of the ever-sporting phenomenon in stocks
is that the “‘ singleness ”’ gene, in that strain,
is lethal to pollen grains, and so all the
surviving pollen bears the doubleness gene.
Some human genes concerned with intelligence may possibly act like the gene causing

singleness in stocks—which would slow down.

the drop in I.Q. per generation. But it is
surely unlikely that many do, indeed I think
it unlikely that any do.

-However that may .be, and whether the
decline calculated from the differential birth
rate be genetic or environmental, it is in
either case a serious matter for the nation.
If the lower intelligence of the members of
large families is an educational result due
to the overcrowding and poverty of the
home, it could, with goodwill and suitable
legislation, perhaps be cured in half a century. If it is genetic and inherited, a
longer time will be needed to restore the
loss, if indeed it can be restored, for although
social conditions may alter so as to equalize
the birth rate over the range of intelligence,
it would be necessary to do more than this,
it would be necessary to create a differential
birth rate in the opposite direction, in order
to recover what has been lost.

Need for a Direct Experiment

It is comparatively easy to obtain support
for the kind of reform needed to equalize the
cultural and educational handicaps of large
versus small families. Some of these re
forms might also assist in equalizing the
birth rate, though others, however desirable
for other reasons, might even accentuate it.
It is much more difficult to obtain support
for reforms tending to eugenic progress,
partly because the man in the street thinks
them impracticable, but largely because he
does not believe in the alleged decline in
intelligence. He is very sceptical about
conclusions concerning the difference of intelligence between two generations when
these conclusions are based entirely on
measurements made on only one generation.
He demands a straightforward measurement
of two succeeding generations, and I sympathize. Actual measurement of two successive generations is desirable, indeed essential, and I would urge all who are in a position
to facilitate such an experiment, or to contnibute towards carrying it out, to do so.

Even when measurements on two succesSive generations aré made however, there
are still difficulties in the way of interpretation. The testees will probably be school
children of about the age of eleven, because
that age, before children have scattered into
different kinds of secondary. school, is the
time when a large random sample can most
readily be obtained. The sampling would

_ have to be equally complete in both genera
tions, if the pedant will allow me to qualify
the word ‘‘complete.” If, for example,

-defectives in special schools were included in

the one case but excluded in the other that
would queer the comparison. Then there
is the effect of migration. There may have
been an influx of children of a new type or
a different race or social class into the district
or country. Further, the children of the
later generation may have become accustomed to intelligence tests, and be thus
enabled by familiarity with the situation to
score higher marks than their fathers did
when children. These.and others are real
difficulties. They should not however deter
us from making the experiment with such
precautions as we can devise. The question

awaiting a decisive answer is of such im
portance that it would be worth while to
go to much trouble, and to spend money
freely, in order to settle it. I hope that
THE TREND. OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE VY

this may be done in our time. If the decline
is as rapid as Cattell fears, it should be
detected (if the conditions can be equalized)
in a, period of even five years if a group of
50,000 children can be tested; and even if
it is much less rapid, it should nevertheless
be detected by an experiment on groups of
100,000 over fifteen years.

Factors of the Mind

I turn now to a different aspect of my
subject. In the words of Karl Pearson,
“‘ Galton created the subject of correlation,”’
and from correlation has arisen that branch
of psychology in which I am most interested,
and in which alone I can perhaps claim a
certain measure of competence beyond the
average—I mean the factorial analysis of
human ability. I would like to devote a few
minutes to explaining what it is, and how it
may turn out to have a bearing on eugenics.
_ An intelligence quotient measures, more
or less reliably, the powers of mind in a kind
of linear fashion, as though all minds were
alike except in the height of intelligence to
which they can rise. But everyone knows
that minds differ also in other ways, and
that two persons with the same intelligence
quotient may have nevertheless very different kinds of mind—the one man may be
a poet and the other an engineer. Mathematically speaking, one might say that the
mind has not one dimension but many, and
that the I.Q. is only a sort of volume of the
mind which does not give any indication of
its shape. These dimensions or directions
of the mind are the “ factors ’’ spoken of in
factorial analysis, which is based on a table
of a large number of correlations between
different mental activities.

Before we can have correlations we must
have quantitative measures of the qualities
to be correlated, and these are provided by
the scores in different kinds of tests, some
logical in nature, some with mechanical
apparatus, some with words and some without, some using geometrical figures, some
numbers, some drawings of right and left
hands to be identified quickly, some based
on codes and cyphers, and so on, an apparent
medley of all kinds of tests.

When a number of persons have been
submitted to say three or four dozen of these
diverse tests, which a priori appear likely
to call upon different powers of the mind,
correlations between the tests can be calculated. There will be a large number of
such correlations which can most conveniently be entered in a square table with
the names of the tests written both along
the top edge and down the side. Certain
regularities then become apparent or can
be discovered by suitable mathematical
analysis.

In the first place, the correlations are
mainly positive. Desirable qualities tend
to be positively correlated in men. If we
compare ability to supply the missing conjunctions in a piece of prose with the ability
to say quickly whether the wheel in a
mechanical model will turn this way or
that when the lever is actuated, we find
that these abilities apparently so different
are positively correlated—perhaps not very
highly correlated but still positively.

Clearly we can therefore attribute this
tendency, if we like, to a general factor
linking all mental activities, and British
psychologists generally do so—the factor is
Spearman’s g. But it is not necessary to do
so, and American psychologists, following the
lead of L. L. Thurstone, for the most part
do not use a general factor, but analyze the
correlations immediately into group factors,
as also the British psychologists must do
with the residues of correlation left after the
associating effect of the general factor has
been removed.

The group factors are more or less the
same to whatever school the factorial
psychologist may belong. As the Americans
at the moment have the lead in this work I
shall in illustration mention some of the
factors L. L. Thurstone and his co-workers

claim to have isolated. The chief are a

space factor, a perceptual factor, a number
factor, and two different verbal factors.
British psychologists also recognize a verbal
factor, though they have not split it into two,

and a ‘‘space”’ factor, believed to be much
the same as a “ practical’ factor found by
others.
18 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

A Possible Compensation ?

If it be true that there is going on a
steady fall, generation by generation, in that
intelligence which we measure or estimate
by our present-day intelligence tests, may
there not perhaps be compensation, it may
be asked, in an increase in some other form
of intelligence which may be more suited to
the needs of the future. For example, is
it possible that although verbal intelligence
is decreasing, mechanical intelligence is increasing ? There is against this hope the
fact that nearly all if not all correlations
between mental tests are positive. This
seems to make the hypothesis improbable,
but it does not make it impossible, for it is
conceivable that this fact too is changing,
and, that the selection which is going on
generation by generation, owing to the
differential birth rate, may land mankind
in an epoch when what we now call intelligence is actually correlated negatively with
what will then be called intelligence. |

I do not myself share this view. I think
that intelligence is much more one thing
than such a view would suggest. It is true
that in the adult it takes different forms,
due mainly in my opinion to his education
and the influence of the environment in
which he passed. his formative years, though
possibly also due to inherited powers which
mature only in adult life. But although
intelligence expresses itself in different forms,

in its highest aspects it is always concerned
with abstractions and concepts and relationships. Practical intelligence, as it is called, is
of considerable importance in the world: but
theoretical intelligence is of immeasurably
greater importance. The clever garage mechanic may improve a motor-car engine.
The student of thermodynamics or of atomic
physics is much more likely to make the
motor-car engine obsolete and replace it by
a more efficient engine. And such men
think in abstractions, often clothed no doubt
in symbols of some sort or another, symbols
which may be verbal, or mathematical, or,
like Faraday’s tubes of force, more mundane
and materialistic, but symbols nevertheless,
the real values with which these minds are
operating being abstract relationships. I
think there is a power of thinking abstractly
which we can recognize in some of our fellow
men whether they be chemists or classics,
artists or mathematicians, craftsmen or
administrators ; and that though these men
of high intelligence (as I shall call them)
may, whether from education or heredity,
possess different factors of the mind, they are
alike in operating with them at a high level.
This level is what I call intelligence, and it
is, I fear, being steadily lost to Europeans
by the selecting power of the differential
birth rate, those who possess it tending
to have fewer children than those who
don’t. |

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXVIII, No. 1
