PHYSICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS
OF CONSTITUTION
By W. LINFORD REES, M.D., B.Sc, M.R.C.P., D.P.M.

UST as men have always tried to judge
J mental and moral qualities by the
\J external configuration of their fellow
beings, so have physicians, from the time
of ancient Greeks, tried to find relations
between physique and susceptibility to
disease. The former activity led to the
development of the science of physiognomy
and the latter to the development of the doctrine of the humoral basis of temperament.
Aristotle in his book Physiognomica tried
to justify the universal and popular concept
of a correlation between the external lineaments of man and his mental and moral
characteristics. His work was revived in
the sixteenth century by della Porta, and
again in the eighteenth century by Lavater.
These works, however, are speculative to a
ludicrous degree, and based on a minimum
of observation. In the late eighteenth and
early nineteenth centuries the study of
physiognomy was deflected by the studies
of Gall, Coombe and Spurzheim into the
now discredited science of phrenology.Parallel in development to the study of
physiognomy was the study of the humoral
basis of temperaments. Hippocrates (460-377
B.c.) regarded health as being due to the
optimum mixture of humours, and disease to
a disturbance of this relationship. The
humours were blood, lymph, black bile and
yellow bile, corresponding to the four
primary elements, fire, water, earth and air,
from which (according to Empedocles and
Pythagoras) all substances were constituted.
Galen (A.D. 129-c.200) described nine temperaments which he regarded as being due
to various humoral mixtures. He described
various physical characteristics associated
with these temperaments, the perfect temperament being characterized by physical
symmetry. The Galenic theory of temperaments constituted a general theory of disease

23

causation and attempted to explain individual differences in behaviour. Galen’s
teaching influenced medical thought for
many centuries, and was taught by Thomas
Laycock, professor at Edinburgh, as late as
the eighteenth century.

With the rise of knowledge of bacteriology
and cellular pathology, interest in the constitutional aspect of medicine steadily declined, and up to the latter part of the nineteenth century constitutional study had made
little significant progress since the time of
Hippocrates. The modern recrudescence of
interest in constitutional medicine is mainly
due to the pioneer work of Benekein Germany
and Di Giovanni in Italy. Beneke in 1878
published data on the measurements of the
various internal organs and the variations
in size associated with age, disease and
somatic type.

Di Giovanni, during the same period,
founded the Italian School of Clinical Anthropology. He described various physical types,
but went to the extreme of trying to prove
that the cause of the morbidity of an organ
resided in its special morphology. His work
was continued by Viola, who regarded the
occurrence of antithetical physical types as
being due to the interdependent growth of
trunk and limbs. He found that the greater
the development of the trunk the smaller
would be the limb development and vice
versa. He described a megalosplanchnic
type with large trunk and short limbs, a
microsplanchnic type with small trunk and
long limbs, and a normosplanchnic type
which lies midway between the other types,
and shows a harmonious development of
trunk and limbs. Pende described various
endocrinal sub-types to these main types,
thus reviving the humoral theories of
temperament of the early Greco-Roman
writers.
4 _ THE EUGENICS REVIEW

A great impetus was given to constitutional research in psychiatry by Ernst
Kretschmer, who, in 192I, propounded his
theory of the biological affinity between the
psychic disposition of manic depressives and
the pyknic type of body build, and that of
schizophrenes and the leptosomatic, athletic
and certain types of dysplastic physique.
The pyknic type is characterized by pronounced development of the body cavities,
and, in general, by excessive breadth in
relation to length; the athletic type by
strong development of skeleton and muscular
system and by wide and projecting shoulders,
and the leptosomatic or asthenic type by
deficiency in thickness compared with length.
- In this paper the term constitution is used
in its wider connotation, and refers to the
sum total of an individual’s physical, psychological and physiological characteristics, all
of which are mainly determined by heredity,
but influenced in varying degrees by environmental factors.

Classifications of Physical Type

The tendency to classify individuals, an
ancient and deep-rooted trait of human
‘nature, aims at reducing the manifold individual differences to some degree of order.
Hippocrates recognized a dichotomy in
physique and described a habitus phthisicus
and a habitus apoplecticus, roughly corresponding to the modern leptosomatic and
pyknic types. Since this time there have
been numerous classifications of physical
type, based on physiological, dietetic, immunological, morphological or developmental
characteristics, e.g. the digestive, muscular
and respiratory-cerebral types of Sigaud ;
the herbivorous, normal. and carnivorous
types of Bryant (1916) ; the gall bladder and
ulcer types of Draper (1928) ; the eurysomic
and leptosomatic types of Wiersma (1933) ;
and the endomorphic, mesomorphic and
ectomorphic types of Sheldon (1940). The
main point of interest is not the diversity of
classifications, but the fact that these
observers, many unknown to each other,
have described more or less corresponding
types of physique.

Investigations by the writer and others

show that the various indices of body build
are ‘‘normally” distributed, showing a

‘continuous variation from the extreme lepto
some to the extreme pyknic type, indicating
a leptosomatic-pyknic continuum, rather
than the existence of discrete and independent types.

Sheldon (1940) distinguished 67 somatotypes on criteria based on the relative
development of endodermal, mesodermal
and ectodermal structures. These types are
really parts of the normal continuous variation of physique bracketed by definite
boundaries. Pearl’s (1936) classification of
physique into asthenic, intermediate and
pyknic types is both simple and satisfactory,
and is in keeping with the concept of a
continuous variation of physical habitus.

Indices of Body Build

As there are no sharp natyral dividing
lines between physical types, the points of
demarcation between the types are, of
necessity, arbitrary. Diagnosis of physical
type by impression, being a subjective procedure, has inherent disadvantages, and the
need for satisfactory objective methods of
distinguishing physical types is widely recognized.

To meet this need various indices of body
build have been devised. A comprehensive

list is given by Tucker and Lessa (1940).

Many of the indices seem to have little
scientific basis (e.g. that of Pignet), and
there has been little work carried out to test
their validity.

New light has been thrown on the subject
by factor analysis. Though factor analysis
E2d proved useful in the study of mental
growth and temperament, the technique has
only recently been applied to the study of
physique. It was first used by Burt (1938)
and later by Cohen (1938) and Hammond
(1942).

Using a larger group and a greater number
of physical measurements than previously
investigated, Dr. H. J. Eysenck and the
writer have recently carried out a factor
analysis of some twenty-one physical traits
on a _ group of 200 soldiers. All the
physical measurements were found to be
PHYSICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF CONSTITUTION 25

positively correlated, indicating the presence
of ‘a growth factor determining the general
size of the body.

When the effect of this factor was removed
from the intercorrelations a second factor
became apparent. The second factor is
bipolar, expending itself in length in some
individuals (e.g. stature, length of limbs)
and in breadth, width and circumferential
measurements in others. This factor is
responsible for the existence of two antithetical physical types, namely the slender
and the broad or the leptosomatic and
pyknic types.

The measurements having greatest saturation with the second factor, and therefore
most useful in discriminating types, were
stature, transverse chest diameter, chest and
hip circumference and sagittal chest diameter. Stature and transverse chest diameter
have the greatest saturations for the positive
and negative aspects of the type factor, and
as the saturations of both with the general
factor are similar, an index such as

_ Stature
Transverse chest diameter

should prove efficacious in the objective
diagnosis of somatic habitus.

It is interesting to note that the two
factors of growth revealed by factor analysis
correspond to the two types of growth
(isogony and heterogony) found by Huxley
(1932) in lower animals.

Physique and Temperament

Of great interest to psychology was the
extension of Kretschmer’s theory to include
normal personality types. He traces the
gradation of characteristics from the pathological schizophrenes through the schizoid
to the normal schizothymic personality.
Similarly he demonstrates :a gradation of
characteristics from the manic depressives
through the cycloid psychopath to the
normal cyclothyme. He maintained that
schizoids and schizothymes tend to have
leptosomatic, athletic or certain dysplastic
physiques, whereas cycloids and cyclothymes
tend to have a pyknic habitus.

This alleged relationship between physique

and personality has not yet been clearly
established. The investigations of Pillsbury
(1939) and Kraines (1938) do not support
the theory, whereas Wertheimer and Hesketh’s (1926) does.

Recently published is the work of Sheldon
(1942), who determined correlations between
a large number of psychological traits and
found that they tended to form three
clusters in which the traits showed positive
intracorrelations, but negative correlations
to the traits of the other groups. He regarded
these groupings as indicating the three
primary components of personality which he
named viscerotonia, somatotonia and cerebrotonia.

Viscerotonia is characterized by relative
love of comfort, pleasure in digestion, greed
for affection and approval and reed of people
when in trouble. The personality seems to
centre round the viscera. _

Somatotonia is characterized by an assertive posture, energy, need of exercise,
directness of manner, unrestrained voice,
over-maturity of appearance and need of
action when troubled.

Cerebrotonia is characterized by restraint
in posture, quick reaction, sociophobia,
inhibited social address,. vocal restraint,
youthful intentness and need of solitude
when troubled.

Sheldon’s (1940) work led him to conclude
that there were three primary components
of physique—endomorphy, mesomorphy and
ectomorphy. When endomorphy predominates the digestive viscera are massive and
highly developed. In predominant mesomorphy, somatic structures (bone, muscle
and connective tissue) are in the ascendancy.
Ectomorphy is associated with fragility,
flatness of chest and delicacy throughout the
body, with a relatively slight development of
visceral and somatic structures. He finds
that there is a correlation of + -79 between
viscerotonia and endomorphy; + -82 between somatonia and mesomorphy; and
+ -83 between cerebrotonia and ectomorphy.

These findings indicate a much higher
correlation between physique and temperament than hitherto found by other workers.
26 | . THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Intelligence

Considerable research has been carried
out on the relationship between physique
and intelligence with the main object of
affording aids to the assessment of the
latter. The consensus of the results indicated that the correlation between physique
and intelligence is too slight to be of any
value in diagnosis.

This is confirmed by a recent investigation
by the writer in which correlations were
calculated between intelligence grade on the
Progressive Matrices test, and twenty-one
absolute measurements and four indices of
body build. The correlations were small,
the highest being + -17, and all were in the
realm of chance. :

Effort Syndrome

_ Since the condition was first described by
Da Costa in 1871, various endogenous and
exogenous factors have been postulated to
explain the pathogenesis of effort syndrome.
The relative importance of endogenous (constitutional) and exogenous factors varies
with the individual case.

The morphological aspect of the constitution of soldiers suffering from effort
syndrome has been investigated by the
writer. A detailed anthropometric examination of 240 successive admissions to the
Effort Syndrome unit of an E.M.S. neurosis
centre was carried out, and the results
compared statistically with those obtained
from a similar investigation of a control
group of 100 normal soldiers. The significant differences found in breadth and length
measurements and body-build indices showed
that the effort syndrome group was significantly more leptosomatic in somatic habitus
than the control group.

Body build seems to play a part in the
development of effort syndrome. Comparison
of the development of the syndrome in
‘leptosomatic and pyknic patients revealed
striking differences. In leptosomatic patients
constitutional factors were predominant, as
shown by lifelong duration of effort intolerance, hypochondriasis and general neuroticism, whereas in patients of pyknic build

the effort intolerance was usually of recent
onset and mainly precipitated by extrinsic
factors such as febrile illness or severe enemy
action.

Neurosis
A study of the relationship betwee
physique and neurosis was carried out on a
group of 450 neurotic soldiers successively
admitted to Mill Hill Emergency Hospital.

Body type, determined by the

Stature
Transverse chest diameter

index, was correlated with some 200 psychiatric trait ratings.

It was found that leptosomes showed a
marked tendency to the affective group of
symptoms, i.e. anxiety, depression and
obsession, while pyknics showed a tendency
to hysterical symptoms. Leptosomes showed
a higher incidence of schizoid personality
traits. |

The results are not presented as final proof
but as evidence both confirmatory and
suggestive of a constitutional basis to
neurosis and of complex relations between
physical type and personality.

Psychosis |

An anthropometric investigation was
carried out on a group of forty-nine schizophrenes and a group of forty-two manic
depressives in order to test Kretschmer’s
hypothesis of the relationship between psy:
chotic type and physical type. :

Statistical comparison of twenty-three
absolute measurements and eleven bodybuild indices showed that the manic depressives were significantly larger in sagittal
chest diameter, bicristal diameter, transverse chest diameter, hip and chest circumference ; seven indices showed statistically
significant differences indicating that the
manic-depressive group was significantly
more pyknic in somatic habitus than the
schizophrenic group. The best indices for
discriminating the two groups were Stromgren’s index and
PHYSICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF CONSTITUTION 27

Stature
Sagittal chest diameter

These findings confirm Kretschmer’s hypothesis of the affinity of schizophrenia to
the leptosomatic physique, and of manicdepressive psychosis to the pyknic type of
physique.

The relationship between schizophrenia
and leptosomatic body build has been given
greater significance by the work of Kallman
(1938), who showed that the predisposition
to schizophrenia is transmitted by a single
recessive genetic factor, and that the development of the various clinical forms
depends on the degree of constitutional
resistance which the affected organism is
able to put up by means of its system of
defence mechanisms. He states that the
evidence is strongly in favour of a hereditarily weak reticulo-endothelial system as
the anatomical basis of the genetic predisposition to schizophrenia. Now the
reticulo-endothelial system is derived from
the mesoderm, and Sheldon (1940) and others
have shown that persons of leptosomatic (or
ectomorphic) physique have a relative deficiency in mesodermal structures. Though
these interrelations are of great interest and
probable significance, it must be borne in mind
that Kallman’s hypothesis of an hereditarily
weak reticulo-endothelial system as the anatomical basis for the genetic predisposition to
schizophrenia is at present speculative, and
further research will be required before the
hypothesis can be accepted.

Studies of constitution have become of
increasing interest to the physician. In order

to study constitution he has been obliged to
pay more attention to physique because it
can be more accurately measured than any
other constitutional attributes. There are
many branches of medicine in which studies
of bodily habitus have proved clinically
valuable. In the field of mental illness the
detection of certain bodily types has been
found to influence diagnosis and prognosis.
Bodily habitus has to be given due weight
by the physician in assessing a case and
cannot be safely ignored in the matter of
eugenic prognosis.

REFERENCES _

BRYANT, J. (1916) Boston med. surg. J., 174, 412.

Burt, C. (1938) Brit. J. med. Psychol., 17, 158.

CoHEN, J. I. (1938) J. ment. Sct., 84, 495.

DRAPER, G. (1928) Human Constitution, Baltimore.

HAMMOND, W. H. (1942) Man, 42, 3.

Hux LEY, J. S. (1932) Problems of Relative Growth,
London.

KaLiMaNn, F. J. (1938) The Genetics of Schizophrenia, New York.

KRAINES, S. H. (1938) J. nerv. ment. Dis., 88, 309.

KRETSCHMER, E. (1921) Physique and Character,
English translation by Sprott, W. J. H., London..

PEARL, R. (1933) Constitution and Health, London.

PENDE, N. (1928) Constitutional Inadequactes,
Philadelphia.

Pitispury, W. B. (1939) J. abnorm. (soc.) Psychol.,
34, 400.
SHELDON, W. H. (1940)
Physique, New York.
SHELDON, W. H. (1942) Varieties of Temperament,
New York.

TuckKER, W. B., and Lzssa, W. A. (1940) Quart.
Rev. Biol., 15, 265. |

WERTHEIMER, F. I., and HESKETH, F. B. (1926}
Medicine, 5, 375.

WiersMA, E. D. (1933) Bodily Build, Physiologicat
and Psychological Functions, Amsterdam.

Varieties of Human
