INTELLIGENCE AND FAMILY SIZE OF
COLLEGE STUDENTS

By JAMES MAXWELL
Moray House, Edinburgh

(With a comment by Dr. H. Himmelweit)

REVIEW, 40, pp. 77-84, July 1948), Dr.
H. Himmelweit reported a_ negative
correlation of the order of r= — 0-13 between
the Intelligence Test scores and the size of
the sibships of 450 students attending the
London School of Economics. It has been
the custom to administer to the incoming
students of Moray House Training College a
verbal group Intelligence Test known as
Moray House Adult 1. As a result of the
Issues raised by the 1947 Scottish Mental
Survey and by Dr. Himmelweit’s findings,
the students taking this test were asked to
state both the size of their own sibships and
the size of the sibships of their parents.
These students, 401 in number, were a
fairly homogeneous group. Six only were
men, the remainder being women who were
entering upon a three-year course of training
as non-graduate teachers. All had obtained
the Scottish Education Department’s Senior
Leaving Certificate, awarded after five years’
successful secondary education, but none
had proceeded to the University. There is
not therefore much variation of educational
standard achieved. Virtually all were within
the age range of 17-20 years, the average age
being just over 18 years. Though no information about the social class was obtained, it is
known that the great majority of these
students come from what can in general
terms be described as middle-class homes.
The students tested were those entering on
three successive years, 1948, 1949 and 1950,
all being tested at the end of the first term
of college training. The test given was one
of 100 items, the mean score of the 4o1
students being 67-3, with a standard deviation of 150. In terms of IQ, this gives a

| N an article published in 1948 (EUGENICS

mean of about 117 IQ, with a standard
deviation of 10-5 IQ.

In Table I below are given the data for the
size of the students’ sibships and the size of
the students’ parents’ sibships. In all cases
either the student or the parent is included
in the sibship. The size of the parents’ sibship was obtained by averaging the paternal.
and maternal sibships.

TABLE I
SIZE OF SIBSHIPS OF STUDENTS AND STUDENTS’ PARENTS

Mean size
of sibship| °%

 

 

 

 

Moray House 2°47 1°47 401
Dr. Himmelweit ... ase 1°72 1°56 45°
Scottish Mental Survey
(11-year-old children) ... 3°75 — 74,386
Mean size
of parents’| o No. of
sibship cases
Moray House +4 5°3 3°86 320
Dr. Himmelweit ... ans 3°6 2°35 450
Scottish Mental Survey ... not known

There is a difference between the Moray
House students and the London School of
Economics students in respect of both
students’ family size and parents’ family size,
the figures for the London students being
smaller in both cases. Both groups of
students, however, appear to come from
smaller families than the unselected group of
Scottish eleven-year-old children tested in
the 1947 Scottish Mental Survey. Explanation of the differences between the London
and Moray House students is not possible in
view of the limited amount of data available.
Rigour of selection, parental age and social
class may be influencing factors.

The relationship between family size and
Intelligence Test score is given in Table II.

209
210

TABLE II
CORRELATION BETWEEN FAMILY SIZE AND
INTELLIGENCE TEST SCORE

Students’ family size by test score

 

No. of
z cases
Moray House ... .+-| +0-03 + °05 401
Dr. Himmelweit ‘ ...| —O°13 + °05 450
Scottish Mental Survey
(11-year-old children) ..| — 0°28 70,200

Parents’ family size by students’ test score

No. of

r cases

Moray House ... ...| +0°04 + °05 348
The results for the Moray House students
fail to show any correlation between family
size, though a negative correlation was
obtained from the Scottish Mental Survey
data, and a smaller negative correlation by
Dr. Himmelweit. Similarly, the correlation
between student’s test score and parent’s
family size does not, for Moray House
students, differ significantly from zero.
Finally, Dr. Himmelweit reports a correla
tion of r= +0°02 + -05 between students’ |

and parents’ size of family. The corresponding value for Moray House students is
r= -+o-10 + -06. Both values do not differ
significantly from zero.

It is not possible to draw any conclusions
of general application from a group highly
selected for intelligence. The results show,
however, that within such a group the
relationship between Intelligence Test score
and family size is in the one case nonexistent and in the other case very tenuous.

Dr. H. Himmelweit comments :

Mr. Maxwell found no relationship between
family size and intelligence in his inquiry on
Scottish students, in contrast to the negative, though small, correlation which was
obtained in a similar investigation on London
students. Differences of this kind, especially
when the relationship between the two
variables is likely to be a slight one, are
probably the result of an interplay of two

/

 

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

factors, namely, differences in the composition
of the two groups and differences in the
methods used to estimate intelligence. The
groups differed from one another with regard
to age and sex. The Scottish sample consisted of younger students who were nearly
all women. The London sample, which
included a considerable number of exservice men and women, contained a higher
proportion of men and of students who were
above 20 years of age. It is unlikely, however, that these differences would account
for the discrepant results which were
obtained.

While there is not sufficient information to
indicate the other ways in which the two
groups differed from one another, there is
evidence that the methods of determining
intelligence differed considerably.

In the two investigations the students’
intelligence was assessed in rather different
ways. In the Scottish inquiry the assessment
was based on the results of one verbal test
only. In the London study the assessment
was a more searching one and was based on
the combined results of eight tests, four
verbal and four non-verbal. It is conceivable
that only such a comprehensive assessment
will bring to light the relationship between
the two variables, especially when investigating groups which are relatively homogeneous
with regard both to intelligence and size of
family.

In the London inquiry correlations between
size of family and intelligence were worked
separately for the four verbal tests and also
for all eight tests combined. In the former
case the correlation was significant only at
the 5 per cent level (— 0-098), in the latter
case it was significant at the 1 per cent level
(—0°133). These figures provide some confirmation of the view outlined above. It
would be of interest to determine whether a
similar relationship between intelligence and
size of family could be shown to exist for the
Scottish group of students by basing the
assessment of their intelligence on a number
of tests.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLII, No. €
