“EBUGENIC” EXPERIMENTS CONDUCTED
BY THE NAZIS ON HUMAN SUBJECTS’
By C. P. BLACKER

HAT I am talking to you this evening

on this painful subject is due to a

request I received four years ago. In
July 1947, I received from Lord Moran a
letter saying that the Prime Minister of the
day, Mr. Attlee, had asked him to be
chairman of a committee to investigate the
_war crimes of German doctors. A mass of
‘material had been collected ; the evidence
in special fields ought, he thought, to be
considered by authorities in those fields.
Would I read the evidence concerning
eugenics, and let his committee have a
report embodying my opinion as to the
scientific value of this evidence, if any ?

I replied that I would do this, and shortly
after, I received from the War Crimes Group,
North-West Europe, several massive folios
of documents. It is upon the contents of
these that this paper is based.

Rarely have I performed a more distasteful
task than the preparation of the first report.
I did the work in 1947, during my summer
holiday which was partly spoiled thereby.
Why, it may be asked, now rake up this
matter? Why revive memories of terrible
things best forgotten? The answer is that
the events I am going to describe are widely,
though I think erroneously, connected with
eugenics ; indeed, eugenics has suffered much
because of them, and they should be frankly
faced.

Let it first be understood that I do not
regard myself as in any sense an authority on
German war crimes. The account I am going
to give is based on documents, mostly
photostatted, which deal with but a small
segment of a wider subject. I have not read
the reports of war trials, wherein further
information, particularly on the scale of
the experiments, may have been disclosed.
There may be present here this evening
people who can supplement or even correct

* Paper given to a Members’ Meeting of the Society
on December 14th, 1951.

0

what I am going to say. I hope that such
will contribute to the discussion.

The documents which came to me consisted mostly of translations of correspondence held during the war between leading
Nazis and the persons concerned in directing
the experiments. There were also several
affidavits sworn after the war by Germans
and non-Germans. And there were some
fairly long reports by English and American
writers. The material varies in trustworthiness. The documentary information is
authentic—that is tosay, the letters, memoranda, etc., were actually written between 1940
and 1945 by various Germans, mostly Nazis,
implicated in war crimes. Of the reports in
English I may mention one which was
particularly helpful. It is entitled Sterilization and Execution of Patients suffering from
Nervous and Mental Disease and was written
by Major Leo Alexander, whose information
was mostly obtained from ten Germans who
were carefully interviewed in Munich, Heidelberg and Limberg, and from various documents mostly found in institutions with
which these ten people were connected.
The reports in English by Major Alexander
and others are well-produced and wellconsidered documents, prepared by men
whose attitude was as objective as possible
in the circumstances which prevailed when
they were at work, and who wanted to reach
the truth.

The affidavits, on the other hand, were
mostly sworn by people who had suffered
some serious mutilation or injury, such as
sterilization, castration, or other experiment ;
they felt passionately about their experiences
and they were not cross-examined. There
was quite a lot of hearsay in the affidavits
and there may have been some involuntary
mis-statements. Indeed, they contain here
and there contradictions.

The final information which emerges about
the results and the scale of experiments is,
10 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

for several reasons, incomplete. Thus the
Nazis took some pains to disguise the more
reprehensible of their doings. They concealed
under euphonious pseudonyms, as you will
hear, the identities of the special organizations formed to carry out these activities ;
and they deliberately falsified, in returns and
reports, what they were actually doing.
Moreover, when, in 1944 and 1945, allied
troops were advancing on Germany from
both sides, incriminating documents and
material were destroyed, and many people
who. knew too much were deliberately killed.
I could give examples of the last two ways
in which tracks were covered.

In what sense, we may ask ourselves, is
anyone entitled to regard these atrocities as
connected with eugenics ? Some people relate
the Nazi doctrines about race to eugenics.
These doctrines encouraged people of
supposedly Nordic or Aryan race to glorify
themselves as the possessors of lordly or
Promethean qualities ; they also inculcated
a contemptuous loathing of supposedly
inferior races. This indoctrinated contempt
was turned into a cult which taught that
certain classes of people should be. treated
like animal pests. No more compunction
should be felt about their extermination than
should be shown, for example, to rats. It was
permissible to vivisect them like rats and
to kill them in order to stock anthropological
museums with their skeletons. Certain
German criminals were placed in a similar
category. The following is a macabre
example of the way in which human beings
were regarded as commercial assets, like
farm animals. A certain Dr. Hirt, of Strasbourg, wanted subjects for an experiment
with a phosphorous-containing gas, and
arrangements were made by a SS official
called Sievers for the work to be done at a
concentration camp at Natzweiler. But the
authorities were unco-operative. I quote
from a memorandum submitted by Sievers to
Rudolf Brandt :

I was surprised that we are to be charged for
the use of prisoners. ... When I look back on the
tests conducted at Dachau, I have to praise

emphatically the understanding and generous
manner in which our work was supported.... In

Natzweiler, on the other hand, they are trying
to make money on these experiments.

Galton, as you will remember, defined
eugenics as “‘ the science which deals with all
influences that improve the inborn qualities
of arace ; also with those that develop them
to the best advantage.” Galton further
declared, in the passage which is now printed
on the cover of our REVIEw, that eugenics
was, in essence, a merciful creed, to be held
by men endowed with pity and kindly
feelings. It is therefore both unjust and
deplorable that the word eugenics should be
connected with Nazi racialist practices. But
unfortunately the connection has been
established in the minds of many people,
including the War Crimes Commission which
sent me the folios.

These documents relate to three measures
which should be distinguished. The first
is the practice of sterilization under the 1934
German Act; the second is the euthanasia
of the chronically insane and congenitally
defective ; and the third is the use of human
beings for experiments designed to discover
a cheap and wholesale method of sterilization. But the last-named experiments
constitute but one category in a large range
of experiments performed on human beings.
These were carried out on many medical
and other problems including spotted fever,
the use of drugs in the treatment of certain
infections, war gases of various kinds,
including blister gases, the making of sea.
water drinkable, and the altitude at which
it was safe to begin a parachute jump.
Freezing and decompression experiments of a
particularly revolting kind were here
involved. Experiments were even performed
on the technique of suicide. It will be recalled
that several leading Nazis—including, I
believe, Himmler and Goering—killed themselves by means of capsules of prussic acid.
These were perfected on inmates of Ravensbruck: a phial of prussic acid was crushed
between the victim’s teeth. A certain doctor
named in the folio admitted doing an
autopsy on such a victim.

I will now say something about the three
measures which were regarded by the War
Crimes Commission as having a bearing on
“ EUGENIC ” EXPERIMENTS CONDUCTED BY THE NAZIS II

eugenics. First comes the practice of
sterilization under the 1934 Act. The
provisions of this Act were restricted to nine
mostly medical conditions, which were
generally regarded as hereditary; and the
Act enjoined on German doctors the duty of
notifying to a “‘eugenic court” every
sufferer from these nine conditions of whom
he might take cognisance in the course of his
practice. My information before the war was
that the provisions of this law were being
strictly observed, and that few, if any,

people were being sterilized outside the nine |

conditions specified. Race was not among
them.

But the information now available tells a
different story.

A letter dated March 3rd, 1938, from the
Gestapo Office, Cologne, relating to a
petition from a man in the matter of the
sterilization of his ward, contains the following passage :

Conforming with higher directives, all
descendants of occupying troops of foreign blood
were sterilized in the summer of 1937. As a
result of this measure the child named, fathered
by an occupation soldier, was also sterilized.
Since no documents are available, it cannot be
stated with certainty if the guardian [named]
was at that time informed about the sterilization.
Furthermore, the sterilization did not depend
on the permission of the guardian.... I may
point out that the matter is secret and may
under no circumstances be discussed in public.

_ It will be remembered that, after the first
world war, coloured French troops were in
occupation of the Ruhr.

I also have an emigration certificate of a
woman, a German national, who, in 1947,
emigrated to the U.S.A. The certificate states
that her father was a Moroccan corporal in
the French Army, and that, on June 22nd,
1937, she was sterilized on racial grounds.

Another document emanating from the
Office of Chief Counsel for War Crimes,
United States Army, summarizes the letters
of twenty-six people who were sterilized for
absurd reasons. Here are three examples.

One man was asked to name Hitler’s,
Goebbels’ and Goering’s birthdays. He could
not answer these questions, and stated that
he was not interested in such matters. His
sterilization was ordered.

A girl of sixteen was sterilized for answering the question ‘‘ What comes after the
Third Reich ? ’”’ with “ The Fourth.”

A man was sterilized for his remarks about

- Hitler’s and Goering’s neglect in procreation.

I should add that these declarations were
submitted in hand- or typewritten letters.
There is no evidence that the statements
made in these letters were verified. ~

I now come to the application of
euthanasia to the chronically insane and
congenitally defective.

Before the war (summer of 1939) the
principle of euthanasia was secretly approved
by Hitler for these two categories of people.
Orders were given, firstly, for the merciful
killing of tncurably insane persons according
to a:specified procedure. Superintendents of
all mental hospitals in the Reich were
required to fill out a questionnaire for each
patient in their institutions. Copies were sent
to four “experts ’’ whose unanimous vote
resulted in the patient being transferred to
an institution where he was kept under
observation for a period of from one to three
months. If the physician in charge of this

“observation institution ’’ agreed with the
four experts that the patient was in fact
incurable, the latter was sent to another
institution—a so-called euthanasia institution—where he was killed by injections of
various kinds or by gas. Hermann Brack,
a prominent Nazi, is reported as declaring :
“To the best of my knowledge, about fifty
or sixty thousand persons were killed in this
way in the period from autumn 1939 to the
summer of 1941.’

These activities were medically directed
by Prof. Dr. Carl Brandt. He disguised by
means of euphemisms the nature of his
killing organization which was known by
such titles as “‘ Reich Association—Hospital
and Nursing Establishment,’”’ and “‘ Charitable Foundation for Institutional Care,”’
and “General Patient Transport Corporation.”’

These activities were treated as most
strictly secret. But in the words of Professor
Bumke, ‘‘ While nobody was supposed to talk
about it, the sparrows were whistling it from
the roof-tops.”” According to information
I2

supplied to Major Alexander by a doctor
who worked in an institution at Wesloch,
near Heidelberg, suspicions were aroused

by the simultaneous dispatch to relatives of ,
, a period of one to three months to an observa‘tion centre before being sent elsewhere to be
liquidated ; and for the most part these

patients of a uniformly worded notification
of death. When several such stereotyped
notifications were received in the same
district by relatives of different patients who
had been transported at about the same
time to an unknown destination, conclusions
were naturally drawn and there was much
indignation. According to this German
doctor, the mass killing of patients in special
killing centres was discontinued in the middle
of 1941 because of the wave of public
protests; a policy of extermination by
starvation in the institutions themselves,
without transfer to a special killing centre,
was then substituted. But I know of no
documentary evidence supporting this
alleged change of policy about which, to my
knowledge, only one doctor made statements.
There may have been other reasons, as will
be seen in a moment, for closing down the
euthanasia programme for the chronically
insane; and there are also reasons for
doubting that the chronically insane were
deliberately starved to death.

The second category of people for whom
euthanasia was secretly approved before
the war consisted of children who were born
mentally deficient or physically deformed.
Doctors and midwives taking, cognisance
of such children were under obligation to
report them to a central office whose officials
decided on their fate. We are told that the
Director of the Central Office (it belonged to
the Ministry of the Interior) was expected
to ask for the consent of the parents. I do
not know how long this programme continued or how many children were liquidated
under it.

Extermination Programme

Whatever, then, we may think of the prewar policies of the Nazis as to sterilization
(which was in part made public) and euthanasia (which was kept entirely secret) the
available documents suggest that these
measures were carried out, at the start at
least, with a certain discrimination. A

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

subject as to whom a compulsory sterilization
order was made had, in theory at least, the
right of appeal to a “‘higher eugenic court,”
and the incurably insane person was sent for.

‘people were mercifully killed.

' But these discriminations (such as they
were) were swept away some two years after
the war had begun. Indeed, there is reason
to think that the euthanasia programme,
which, be it noted, was carried out on
Germans no less than others, was initiated
in the summer of 1939 because Hitler had it
in mind to make war in the autumn of that
year. Thus Hermann Brack declares in the
document above quoted that ‘“ Hitler’s
ultimate reason for the establishment of the
euthanasia programme in Germany was to
eliminate those people confined to insane
asylums and similar institutions who could
no longer be of any use to the Reich. They
were considered as useless objects and
Hitler felt that, by exterminating these socalled useless eaters, it would be possible to
relieve more doctors, male and female,
nurses and other personnel, hospital beds
and other facilities, for the Armed Forces.”’

But the materials submitted to me suggest
that it was not till the autumn of 1942, i.e.
till Russia had been invaded and an
“Eastern Question’”’ had arisen, that a
decision was reached to exterminate whole
populations. A document dated September
14th, 1942, purports to summarize, in the
form of a memorandum, a discussion between
Dr. Goebbels and a person named in the
document which was sent to me in incomplete
form. An item of this memo reads as follows :
“With regard to the destruction of asocial
life, Dr. Goebbels has the opinion that the
following groups should be exterminated.
Jews and Gypsies unconditionally, Poles who
have to serve three-four years of penal
servitude, and Czechs and Germans who are
sentenced to death or penal servitude for
life or to security custody for life. The idea
of exterminating them by labour is the best.”’
This policy, be it noted, is not restricted to
“ EUGENIC ” EXPERIMENTS CONDUCTED BY THE NAZIS 13

Jews and gypsies: it includes Germans
condemned to life sentence.

How far the decision to efface these groups’
was an extension of the practice, begun in the:
summer of 1939, of destroying the incurably
insane and the congenitally defective andi.
deformed is not clear from the documents.:
Hermann Brack in the affidavit already
quoted goes on to say that, in 1941, he’
received an oral order to discontinue the.
euthanasia programme ; he was then asked |
to send the personnel relieved of these duties °
to Lublin where they were placed at the ,
disposal of Brigadefuhrer Globoknic. Brack :
' the steps by which these methods came to be

says: ‘‘ I then had the impression that these

people were to be used in the extensive ,
Jewish labour camps run by Globoknic. :
Later, however, at the end of,1942 or the |
beginning of 1943, I found out that they were
used to assist in the mass extermination of ;
the Jews which was then already common :
‘ main information as to results is contained

knowledge in higher Party circles.”

Mass Sterilization

The mass sterilization or castration of
races and specified groups seems to have been
approved because of two different considerations. The first was the extermination
programme, which was conceived on a very
large scale; indeed it- was thought to be
applicable to millions of people. The second
was the need of the Reich for foreign labour.
To the original proposers of mass sterilization it seemed wasteful to kill off so large a
number of potentially useful workers. Thus
Dr. Adolf Pockorny, of whom more below,
wrote to Himmler in October 1941: “ The
thought alone that the three million
Bolsheviks, at present German prisoners,
could be sterilized so that they could be used
as labourers but be prevented from reproduction, opens the most far reaching
perspectives.”’ :

But the operations (vasectomy and
salpingectomy) which implemented the
Sterilization Act of 1934 were thought to be
too slow and laborious for use in the manner
that was now being envisaged. The two
operations mentioned above sterilized but
did not castrate the patients. The distinction
between the two processes seems to have

been regarded as unimportant for the new
purposes. What was now needed was a
cheap method which could be used on a
mass scale, irrespective of whether the
subject was merely sterilized or castrated
as well. Three methods were tried on inmates
of concentration camps, but without satisfactory results. These methods were the
following: the use of Caladium Seguinum ;
the use of X-rays; and the use of sclerosing
substances. They will be considered in that

order in what follows. But a general observa
tion should first be made. It is that the
documents in the folio give a better picture of

used than of their value as proved by use.
They describe the initial and formative stages
of the development of the three methods.
They do not describe their actual applications. We are not told on how many people
they were tried, nor with what results. The

in an affidavit obtained after the end of the
war from Rudolf Brandt, who is not to be
confused with Dr. Karl Brandt who has
already been mentioned. Rudolf Brandt
thought that, even for the purposes for which
they were intended, the three methods in
question were of small value.

Caladium Seguinum

This is a plant which is said to grow in
tropical Brazil. It was the subject of a paper
by Doctors G. Madaus and E. Koch published
in 1941 in the Journal for General Expertmental Medicine. The sterilizing effects of
Caladium had been investigated by these
authors in 1937 on frogs and mice with unsatisfactory results. Further experiments
were carried out in 1939-40 on rats. The
results were not such as to justify hopes. In
some male rats ‘‘ impotence ’’ was produced
and in some females sterility. The general
conclusions were preliminary and tentative.
There is no reason for thinking that the work
would have attracted general attention had
it not been for the action of a Dr. Adolf
Pockorny, a specialist in skin and venereal
diseases, who, in October 1941, wrote to
Himmler drawing attention to the work of
Madaus and exaggerating its possibilities
14 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

as an instrument of mass sterilization.
Pockorny suggested that Dr. Madaus be
told not to publish any more such articles
(‘the enemy listens !’’), that the plant be
cultivated in greenhouses, that immediate
research on human beings (criminals) be
promoted, and that bio-chemical inquiries
be made with a view to synthesizing the
“ effective chemical substance.”’

Himmler took action on March roth, 1942,
saying that he was interested and that
contact should be made with Dr. Madaus,
who should be offered ‘‘ possibilities of doing
research on criminals.’”” On August 24th,
1942, it was suggested that the necessary
human experiments be carried out “on
the persons of the inmates of the Gypsy
camp of Lackenbach in the lower Danube.”
On September 7th, 1942, the transfer of
experiments is announced to another
concentration camp apparently situated at
Lichterfield-West ; and on October 14th,
1942, suggestions were made for the synthetic
production of Caladium Seguinum. The
cultivation of the plant in a large hot-house
was also ordered on June 11th, 1942.

Here the documentary narrative ends.
That the efforts to grow the plant in hothouses and to make it synthetically were
unsuccessful is suggested in the affidavit
above mentioned by Rudolf Brandt. He
states: “As a result of Pockorny’s suggestion, experiments were conducted on
concentration-camp prisoners in order to test
the effects of the drug. Simultaneously all
efforts were made to cultivate the plant
in large quantities. .. . Hot-houses were
used with a certain amount of success to
cultivate this plant and the experiments
were continued. I don’t believe, however,
that it was possible to produce sufficient
quantities of this drug to make a large-scale
application possible.”’

The Use of X-rays

The proposal to use X-rays on a large scale
for purposes of sterilization — or rather of
castration, for that is their effect—seems
to have originated with Hermann Brack
whose affidavit has already been quoted.
In this same affidavit Brack declares:

‘In 1941 it was an ‘ open secret ’ in high
party circles that the powers that be intended
to exterminate the entire Jewish population
of Germany and the occupied countries. I
and my collaborators . . . considered this
intention of the party leaders not worthy of
the German nation and mankind in general.”’
They therefore proposed another solution
which was to deport all Jews to a far-off
place. The island of Madagascar was
suggested ; but the proposal was not
acceptable. ‘‘ So we reached the conclusion
that sterilization would be the answer to the
Jewish problem.’’ Two further documents
throw light on the part taken by Hermann
Brack. The first, dated March 28th, 1941,
suggests that as many aS 3,000-4,000
persons could, by means of X-rays, be
sterilized per day. ‘‘ One practical way,’
he suggests, ‘‘ would be for instance to let the
persons to be treated approach a counter
where they would be asked to answer some
questions or to fill in a form which would
take them two or three minutes. The
official sitting behind the counter could
operate the installation in such a way as to
turn a switch which would activate the two
valves simultaneously (since the irradiation
has to operate from both sides).”

The second document is a letter dated
June 23rd, 1942, to Himmler. Brack writes :
‘““ Among ten million of Jews in Europe are,
I figure, at least two-three million of men
and women who are fit enough for work.”
These, Brack suggests, could be sterilized or,
rather, castrated. “‘ Sterilization, as normally
performed on persons with hereditary
diseases, is here out of the question because
it takes too long and is too expensive.
Castration by X-rays, however, is not only
relatively cheap but can also be performed on
many thousands in the shortest time.”

Various documents throw light on the use
of X-rays for castration. The first is an
affidavit by a young Pole born in 1920, an
inmate of Auschwitz, who was transferred
to Birkenau to be X-rayed. He says:
“We had to undress and our sexual organs
were placed under an apparatus and kept
there under the apparatus for fifteen minutes.
The apparatus strongly heated the sexual
“ EUGENIC ” EXPERIMENTS CONDUCTED BY THE NAZIS 15

organs and the surrounding parts, and later
on these parts began to show a black colour.
After this treatment we had to work again
right away. After some days, the sexual
organs of most of my comrades became
purulent and they had great difficulties in
walking. In spite of this, they had to work
until they collapsed and those who collapsed
were sent to the gas chambers.” Later—
about October 1943—this man was marched
back to Auschwitz where he was anzsthetized by spinal injection and castrated
by operation. ‘‘ Both testicles were taken
off.” Various documents quoted below
suggest that this man’s testicles may have
been removed in order that the effects of
the X-rays might be microscopically
examined. |

Another document is an affidavit by a
French surgeon, Dr. Robert Levy, who in
October 1943 was appointed surgeon in the
central infirmary at the concentration camp
at Birkenau. He declares: ‘‘ In September
1943, before I was appointed surgeon, I was
present at the selection of 100 Polish Jews
aged from twenty to twenty-four years, in
good physical and mental health.... All
these young men were later admitted to the
infirmary for grave sickness. They had great
deep ulceration of the scrotum, of the
inguinal region, and of the inside part of the
thighs. Some of them declared to me that
they had been treated by X-rays in
September 1943 to be sterilized. I found
that others had one or two testicles lacking
following a surgical operation performed in
September 1943. Some of them had been
treated before the operation by X-rays in
order to find out the effect of the irradiation
on the microscopic sections of the testicles.
... During 1944, all these sick men either
died or they became victims of the selection
for the gas chamber according to their
incapacity for work and their prolonged stay
in the infirmary.”

Sclerosing Substances

. The folios contained seven documents
which are copies of letters to and from
Dr. M. D. C. Clauberg who is described as the
chief physician of the gynecological clinics

of two hospitals in Upper Silesia. The
correspondence covers the period between
January 11th, 1942, and August 6th, 1943.
In a letter dated May 30th, 1942, to Himmler,
Dr. Clauberg, in effect, asks for Himmler’s
support for the establishment of a Research
Institute for Biological Propagation. This
seems to have been a fairly ambitious
project involving the establishment of a
farm and of clinical departments wherein
animals and human beings were to be used
for miscellaneous researches on nutrition,
the treatment of sterility, and methods of
sterilization.

Subsequently written documents mention
only the experiments on sterilization: the
farm, the work on nutrition, the research on
sterility drop out or else the relevant documents were not sent to me. In a letter to

Himmler dated June 7th, 1943 (written

more than a year after the letter previously
quoted), Clauberg writes: ‘‘ The method I
contrived to achieve, the sterilization of the
female organism without any operation,
is as good as perfected. It can be performed
by a single injection made from the entrance
of the uterus in the course of the usual
customary gynecological examination as
known to every physician . . . if my researches continue to have the same results
as up to now—and there is no reason to
doubt that—then the moment is not far off
when I can say: by one adequately trained
physician in one adequately equipped place
with perhaps ten assistants . . . most likely
several hundred, if not even 1,000, women
can be sterilized per day.”

About a year before this letter was written
a decision was reached by Himmler to place
Auschwitz camp at the disposal of Prof.
Clauberg as an experimental station.

There the narrative ends. But Rudolf
Brandt, in the affidavit previously mentioned,
refers to the matter. He declares: ‘“ Dr.
Clauberg developed further a method for the
sterilization of women. This method was
based upon the injection of an irritating .
solution into the uterus. Clauberg conducted
widespread experiments on Jewish women
and gypsies in the Auschwitz concentration
16 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

camp. Several thousand women were
sterilized by Clauberg in Auschwitz.”

The experiences of a woman born in 1912
to whom Prof. Clauberg gave his injection
are described in an affidavit made after the
war. This woman, who was an inmate of
Auschwitz, declares :

“A second physician, Professor Dr. Clauberg, performed operations on women and
girls in Block ro at Auschwitz during the
period I was there, from April 1943 to June
1943.... Dr. Clauberg made X-ray pictures
of the uterus without narcosis while the
patient was conscious. The operation
performed by him was very painful. ... This
doctor introduced a fluid into the uterus
which, according to the patient’s statements,
burned horribly. The operation lasted about
ten minutes. The abdomen of the victims
began to swell after the operation as if they
were pregnant. In order to save their lives
many patients preferred treatment by Dr.
Clauberg to an extermination transport to
Birkenau, for every six weeks the victims
were subjected to another operation so that,
during this period, they felt safe from the
extermination camp at Birkenau. The
victims of Dr. Clauberg’s operation suffered
from constant abdominal pains and
menstruation ceased.”’

It seems probable that the preliminary
X-ray examination of the uterus above
described was effected by a radio-opaque
substance designed to establish the patency
of the uterine cavity and tubes; and that
the subsequent six-weekly examinations,
conducted after the introduction of the
sclerosing substance, were designed to test
its non-patency. Nowhere in the folio are we
told what was the substance which Dr.
Clauberg injected.

Mention should be made here of the
injection of a sclerosing substance into the
testicles of men, though there is nothing to
show that Prof. Clauberg was connected with
this procedure.

The relevant statements are made in a
document written in French. When the
French entered Strasbourg after the war,
they were informed of an organization
belonging to the SS directed by Dr. Hirt to

whom I referred earlier. A close connection
existed between this organization and a
concentration camp at Struthof. In the
laboratory of the Faculty were found fiftyfour slides of human testicles, which, according to the inscriptions, related to seven men
of which two were probably boys of from
thirteen to fifteen years of age. The appearance of these slides strongly suggested that
the testicles had previously been injected
with a toxic and irritating substance.
Tubules damaged by the injections were
found juxtaposed to undamaged tubules.
The histological examination was conducted
by Dr. C. Champy. In the refrigerated room
(glaciéve) were found several cadavers of men
who had been castrated. Doctors Champy
and Risler, who furnish the report, conclude
with the following general remark :

“ We have all heard the recital of atrocities
committed everywhere by the German
occupying forces. But one could still believe,
for the honour of humanity, that they were
the acts of men intoxicated by alcohol or
excited by battle, in any case of brutes
without education. The fact is that intellectual men, doctors, were able to devote
themselves to such work which lasted over a
period of months and gave them time to
think. ... We add that this experiment,
when carried out on the human, presented
no particular interest and that its results
would have been equally valid if carried out
on animals—supposing that they had any
scientific interest of any kind.”

The folio also contains an affidavit by a
Frenchman who declared that, on January
7th, 1944, he was deported to an extermination camp at Watzweiler-Struthof. Among
other experiences, he described the following:

“Dr. Haagen also ordered the injection
of sclerosing substances into the testicles of
certain detained persons to further his
research in complete sterilization of human
beings. I, as well as several of my comrades
deported with me, were subjected to other
injections, of which at the time we did not
know the contents and which have made us
sterile to this day.”

There is no information as to how far the
use of sclerosing substances on women at
“ EUGENIC ” EXPERIMENTS CONDUCTED BY THE NAZIS 17

Auschwitz by Dr. Clauberg and on men at
Struthof by Dr. Haagen were parts of the
same plan. The two operations would have
different effects: that on the testicle of the
male, to be effective, might work like a
castration ; and that into the uterus (not
the ovaries) of the woman should not.

The following are the main conclusions
I submitted to Lord Moran’s Committee :

Three crude attempts to devise a cheap
and effective method of mass sterilization
or castration were, between 1942 and 1944
inclusive, at the instigation of Himmler,
Brandt and others, tried out experimentally
on the inmates of concentration camps by
German doctors. The following remarks are
applicable to all of them :

(2) It was not necessary to use human
beings. Animal experiments would have met
the purpose just as well.

(6) No results of the slightest scientific
interest are recorded; nor in my opinion
were any likely to have resulted even if more
time had been available.

(c) The experiments failed in their primary
purpose of providing a cheap method of mass
sterilization or castration. None of the three
methods was found to be applicable on a
large scale.

(4) The documents in the folio do not for
the most part carry the accounts of the three
methods in question beyond the preliminary
stages. There are no progress reports and no
account of the results. It is, in my opinion,
within the bounds of possibility that further
research on Caladium Seguinum, unreported
in these folios, may have been carried out
in Germany, and that the drug may later be
found to have some usefulness. But much
more research would be needed to carry the
matter beyond the preliminary and tentative
stage reported by Prof. Madaus in his paper
published in 1941.

What, in conclusion, are we to think of
these various measures? Here are some
suggestions. It may be thought, firstly, that,
on a scale of turpitude, the euthanasia of
the insane ranks lower than the vivisection
of human beings. We may recall that among
the insane and defective were included more

D

Germans than non-Germans, and, if the
account of mass starvation given by one
doctor on what seems to be unsubstantial
evidence is rejected, these people were
mercifully killed. The idea of merciful
killing is not unknown in this country ;
indeed, a society exists to promote it, on a
voluntary basis, for people suffering from
incurable and painful illnesses. The principle
of the inviolability of human life goes by
the board in wartime, when it is our object
to kill as many as possible of the enemy,
and when human life is held cheap.

But the vivisection of human beings falls
into an entirely different category. There is
much to suggest that the experiments which
I have described were planned and executed
by a small caucus of which Himmler was the
chief. These men took much trouble to
conceal what they were doing ; indeed, they
sometimes falsified the actual happenings by
misleading returns and spurious certificates.
Those responsible were no less concerned
with the reactions of their own people than
with those of their country’s military
enemies. Indeed some Germans took risks
in denouncing these atrocities. Thus Major
Alexander quotes the Bishop of Munster as
having said in his pulpit :

Who has knowledge of a murder and does not
announce it becomes punishable himself. I have
personal knowledge of 300 murders which have
been committed, and I herewith proclaim and
denounce them publicly.

Disgust and condemnation, we are told,
were widely expressed, but fearfully and
sotto voce. It was dangerous to criticise.
One doctor declared that he had protested
against these activities: ‘‘I used to stick
my neck out almost to the point of being
sent to a concentratibn camp.” Many
leading scientists, moreover, refused to
participate. Thus Professor K. Kleist, of
Frankfurt, said of the extermination programme for the insane that it was all done in
great secrecy. “‘ They never dared to bother
me,” he said, ‘‘ they knew that I would not
have any part in it. It was a lie organized
by the state. The whole system depended on
enforcing silence by tyranny. To say anything against it was equivalent to suicide,
because a word about it would have meant
18 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the concentration camp, which meant
death.”

The impression is derived from the
irresponsible manner in which the properties
of Caladium Seguinum were investigated,
and the still more irresponsible way in which
numerous men and women were X-rayed,
injected, and subsequently castrated, that
the organizers of these barbarities had no
scientific training or status. These men strike
one as belonging to the type of person who,
by reading digests of science in popular
journals, comes to imagine himself a scientist.
By such, the performance of experiments,
however ill-conceived and futile, is thought
to be scientific. This is the view of ignorant
and uneducated people who look upon
science with superstitious reverence.

There is, perhaps, a grain of comfort in this
thought.

In the last 150 years there has been no
dearth in Germany of able scientists ; and |
we know that, during the last war, original :
- mouth to mouth.

work, parallel to our work on the atomic
bomb, was done by such men on rockets and
other V weapons. A comparison between
these achievements and the inane experiments I have described, suggests that
German scientists of weight and repute,
such as Professors Bumke and Kleist, held
aloof from these activities of the SS. I donot
know enough about the other fields in which
vivisection of humans was conducted to say
whether, in them, reputable scientists held
aloof.

Germany, moreover, has no monopoly of
wicked and cruel people. These exist in all
countries, though they may perhaps be more
numerous in some than others. We have our
own quota of psychopaths, criminals and
criminal lunatics, as anyone can recall if he
thinks of the crimes of violence and the cases
of ill-treatment of children of which the
Press continually informs us. I have no
doubt that one could find, amid the gangs
of our own and of the big American cities
which traffic in narcotics and deal in the
white slave trade, men and women as vile
as those I have been talking about. There
exists in all countries a minority of people
who delight in cruelty. These used to flock to

executions and tortures when such were
publicly performed, and they would, I have
little doubt, now do the same if they had the
chance. The African slave trade, in particular the capture and transportation by sea
of the slaves, was carried out with a brutality
which sometimes defied description. Yet
there was no lack of men in all countries,
our own included, to take part in this
lucrative trade.

Between the years 1933 and 1945,
Germany’s most degraded specimens found
their way to power. Two or three malignant
geniuses at the top provided the inspiration ;
below them was organized a sinister and
obedient hierarchy of men, the personnel of
the SS, in whom callousness, in so far as
this was not naturally inborn, was inculcated :
by training. Many of their atrocities were

carefully concealed and were, I believe,

largely unknown throughout Germany,
though rumours of fearful happenings in,
certain baneful places were whispered from

It is possible to believe—and indeed I
personally believe—that there exists among
the general rurf of German men and women
no less kindness, neighbourly feeling, sympathy and goodwill than exist among the
people of other countries. The central
problem which this evening’s recital presents,
is, as I see it, that, while all countries have
their quota of malignant and wicked people,
most succeed, by means of public opinion,
judiciaries, police and psychiatric services,
in restricting the harm these do. Many are
confined in prisons and criminal lunatic
asylums, and those at large are mostly
recognized for what they are.

The tragedy of Germany raises complex
problems of psychology, tradition and
history, which can be much discussed. The
Germans are a sentimental and idealistic
people, capable of great self-sacrifice. But
their idealism readily transforms itself into
fanaticism—a change for the worse to which
all countries are liable during and after
revolutions. Tribal fanaticism enjoins the
killing of members of rival tribes, as we are
reminded by the Old Testament. Religious
fanaticism enjoins likewise of adherents of
“ EUGENIC ” EXPERIMENTS CONDUCTED BY THE NAZIS 19

rival religions : it is good to kill unbelievers
and infidels. In wartime it is difficult for the
best of us not to become, in this sense,
fanatics. One of our leading men of letters
proclaimed, during the first war, that the
only good kind of German was a dead
German. This is the fighting soldier’s creed
and here it did not long survive the armistice
of 1918. German idealism is labile and
degenerates perhaps more easily than the
idealisms of other Western peoples into
fanaticism.

The particular tragedy of Germany is that
from the ranks of its worst psychopaths and
criminals emerged gifted men who were
acclaimed as_ leaders ;
insidiously flattered and beguiled their unperceiving fellow-countrymen with myths
and promises that they were lifted into
sovereign power where they promptly established themselves in an iron tyranny ;

that these so»

and that when the enormity of what had
been done was later disclosed, it was too late.

One final remark. Some of you may think
that, in view of how irrelevant to what we
understand as eugenics are the human
experiments I have described, the title of my
paper is misleading. You may think that
I should have referred to “so-called”
eugenic experiments. Perhaps I should.
But the inexorable fact remains that whatever our own views may be, the word
eugenics has, through the events I have
described, suffered degradation in the eyes of
many people and organizations, including
the War Crimes committee which assembled
the documents which were sent to me.

It ts a pleasure to thank Professor
Alexander Kennedy for suggestions which
helped me in preparing this paper; also
Lord Moran for permission to discuss the
material sent to me by his committee.

The American Journal of Human Genetics

A quarterly record of research, review, and bibliographic material relating to heredity
in man, and to the applications of genetic principles in medicine, anthropology,

psychology, and the social sciences.

. Edited for the American Society or Human Genetics by C. W. Civriranatay, University of California, in
collaboration with C. N. Hernpon, M. T. Macxuin, H. W. Norton, Bronson Paricg, N. F. WALKER
and A. S. WimNER.

Volume 3

WAARDENBURG, P. J. : combining devel

CONTENTS

Number 3
opmental anomalies of the eyelids, eyebrows and nose root with

cw syndrome
enta: defects of be iris and head hair and wie congenital deafness. (Dystopia canthi medialis et punctorum
Pema 1 Henrechroraie titra tatalie

ium lateroversa, Hyperp! supercilii medialis et

circumscriptus pilorum (leucismus, poliosis), et Surditas congenita

icis nasi, Hs

talis sive ialis, Albinismus
(surdimutitas).) Part

COTTERMAN, C. W.: Some statistical peobieny posed by Waardenburg’s data on dystopis canthorum and associated.

STEINBERG, ARTHUR G., BECKER, S. WILLIAM, Jun., FITZPATRICK, THOMAS B., and KIERLAND, ROBERT R.:

A genetic “and statistical ‘study of psoriasis.

REED, S. C., CAMBIER, R. K., and APPLEN, J. E.: A colour vision anomaly showing holandric (Y-linked) transmission.
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHY OF HUMAN GENETICS, 1951, Part I.

ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION, $8.00—SINGLE NUMBERS, $2.50

Subscriptions and inquiries

 

regarding membership in the Society should be addressed to Dr. S. C. Reed,
Dight Institute of Human Genetics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minn.

Eugenies Review, Vel. XLIV, No. 1
