DISCUSSION

‘*“ MENDELIAN HEREDITY IN MAN”

DEAR SIR,

In the April number of the EuGENIcs REVIEW Major
C. C. Hurst gives some interesting data relating to the families in
Burbage, Leicestershire. As Dr. Oliver, in his lecture reported in
the same issue of the EUGENICS REVIEW, pointed out that the production of female twins to male twins is as two to one, it occurred
to me that the causes which he gives therein, such as the splitting
up of the fertilised egg-cell to form two embryos, etc., may act as
a deterrent to the development of the male qualities, or as an
impetus to the female qualities of the embryo, and, if this is the
case, it may be possible to find other indices of the causes of male
and female, besides that of twinning. With this end in view I
have studied the tables given by Major Hurst, with the result
given below. As my interest in Eugenics is of recent birth, I do
not know whether I am merely dealing in coincidences, or, if
they are something more than coincidences, whether others have
pointed out the same facts before.

In the tables on Eye Colour I notice that the average
brown eye colour of females is generally larger than the average
of the males in the same family, the only cases where the average
brown eye colour of the male offspring is higher than that of the
female offspring being where the first born is a male. To
explain the exceptions it occurred to me that this may be due to
one of the following reasons: (a) an increase of brown pigment
with age, thereby causing the eldest born to have the darkest
eyes; (b) parental exhaustion, causing the youngest to have the
least brown pigment. A closer study of the data, however,
revealed that the second born had generally the darkest eyes,
also that practically twice as many females as males had the
highest grade of eye colour of their respective families. It
also showed that the distribution of the sexes was different;
the parents with the highest brown eye colour having for their
first born a female, whilst generally parents with a lower brown
eye colour had a male for their first born. In the case of
the second child there seems to be about an equal tendency
for it to become female. In the case of the third child it is
generally a male in the case of high brown, and a female in the
202 DISCUSSION

case of the lower brown eye colour, whereas the tendency is the
other way about in the case of the fourth child.

In the tables dealing with Ambidexterity and Left-handedness one is struck with the number of males exhibiting the
peculiarity as compared to females, the proportion being
practically as four to one. One is also struck with the general
resemblance that the distribution of the sexes in the various
families bears to that of the lower brown eye colour, the most
important difference being that there is a greater tendency for the
third child to become a male.

With reference to the tables on Musical Temperament,
I notice that non-musical mothers give birth to more than twice
the number of daughters than sons, and nine-tenths of the
daughters are non-musical like their mothers, whilst threequarters of the sons are musical like their fathers. Taking the
table as a whole we find that nearly half of the daughters are
non-musical whilst less than a third of the sons are nonmusical. As faras regards the distribution of the sexes, where the
father is non-musical and the mother musical, the order seems to
be somewhat similar to that of the lower brown eye colour,
whilst in families having musical fathers and non-musical
mothers the order is more like that of the higher brown eye
colour. That the musical temperament should be inherited
mostly by sons is only what one would expect after reading Sir
Francis Galton’s Inherited Genius, wherein he shows that
only one-tenth of the relations of eminent musicians exhibiting
eminent musical ability were females.

From a genealogical chart of a short fingered family given
in the Mendel Journal of February, 1911, I find that short fingered
fathers have families where the sexes are distributed in the main
like those of the low brown eye colour, whilst the families of
short-fingered mothers have families like those of the higher
brown eye colour. In other words, if a short-fingered father
had a child that took after him as regards sex, then his shortfingered sister’s child of equal numerical order would be of the
same sex as its mother.

Is it possible that brown eye colour, left-handedness, musical
temperament (or absence of it), thumb-fingerness are indices of
causes influencing the distribution of the sexes by accelerating
or retarding the development of female or male qualities?
Similarly since more females than males inherit the tendency to
insanity, has this inheritance a tendency to retard the development of male qualities in the embryo? If so, one would expect
that insane parents, especially insane mothers, would give birth

to more girls than boys.
Yours truly,

ERNEST BRADBURY.
Cheadle, Cheshire.
DISCUSSION 203

‘‘ HEREDITY AND THE JEW”

SIR,

As considerations of space prevent me from answering
Dr. Salaman’s letter in detail, may I be permitted to make the
following brief remarks. Whilst trying tgimpugn my arguments,
Dr. Salaman, I submit, has not refuted my facts.

1. The so-called Jewish face is not a homogeneous, but a
heterogeneous complex of features, which cannot be scientifically
defined. It is impossible to estimate Jewishness; this cannot,
therefore, at the present stage of our knowledge serve as a basis
for scientific enquiry.

2. Assuming that dominance is not necessarily complete (a
fact I am weil aware of), it does not account for the result that
48 per cent. of my cases showed complete dominance of the
Jewish type. In his paper Dr. Salaman attributed the abnormal
cases to error of observation and to race-mixture, and not to
irregularities of dominance.

These are the facts.

How to explain the disappearance of the Jewish type under
certain conditions of race-mixture, is a matter of theory. Dr.
Salaman’s theory is by no means the only possible one.

In conclusion, I am at a loss to see where Dr. Salaman
found abuse in my criticism. Certainly none was intended by
me.

S. HERBERT, M.D.

Manchester.

DEAR SIR,

Most people agree that insanity is the chief cause of
bad breeding, and of most of the misery in the world. If
any reform is mentioned, it is always being suggested that
because the great mass of the people do not know the meaning of
the word “ Eugenics,” therefore, we should not yet attempt to
legislate to right a great injustice.

In 1867 Ruskin proposed to look after the marriage of. the
poor, but the marriages of rich and poor alike require to be
regulated if our race means to hold its place in the world.
No reasonable man or woman, if they know there is insanity in a
family, will deliberately marry into that family, and have
children who might lose their reason, because sane people love
their offspring. But with our present marriage customs no
man or woman can be sure that they are marrying into a healthy
family. It is a well-known fact that those suffering from
hereditary insanity do their utmost to hide it, and parents tell
the most barefaced falsehoods to get their children married.
Yet we still talk of the “ Bonds of Holy Matrimony.” Where
is the holiness if one or the other contracting parties goes
204 DISCUSSION

through the ceremony with deceit in his heart? Because that
is what it means, if there is an incurable hereditary disease being
concealed.

We have Societies for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals,
etc., etc., but we maintain a system of easy marriage which
produces the most refined cruelty to children. I say children,
because one born of parents mentally afflicted remains a child to
the end of his days.

The writer is closely related to a charming girl who was
placed in an asylum when she was eighteen. She is now thirty,
and she is there for life. That poor girl never hurt or wronged
anyone; she is trulya martyr, because the relations of one parent
at least knew what they were doing when they allowed her
mother to marry. This case is not a solitary one, there are
hundreds and thousands like it. Now the least we can do, and
the sooner the better, is to have people medically examined
before marriage ; and in cases where there was known hereditary
disease each party should be notified, and in many cases
prevented, or at least dissuaded, from having children. It is
only justice to let each man and woman know before marriage
whether they are healthy and fit to have children; and if they
are not healthy let them know the risk they are going to run, for
the children’s sake.

‘* MENS SANA.”

The following extracts are taken from a covering letter and a
jeaflet published by a Purity Society of Indiana relative to the
Sterilisation Law of that State.

Dr. H. C. SHarpP writes as follows:

As to the workings of this law in the State of Indiana, I
must say they have been most satisfactory. Our Commission
has been very careful in its selection of men who come under the
provisions of this law beyond question. However, in many
instances we have operated on many against their will, and over
their vigorous protest ; but in every instance, in the course of a
few months following they have either communicated to me
verbally or by writing their hearty approval of the operation,
claiming that it has relieved them of a great deal of nervousness,
enabled them to sleep and increased their physical energy.

From my knowledge of these organs I can understand how
all these results would naturally follow the operation.

There is another thing that I wish to call to your mind,
which you can use or not as you may deem advisable—that is,
after the vas deferens has been severed you may by a second
operation repair it and re-establish the original function.

Since October, 1899, I have been performing an operation known as vasectomy. . . Thisoperation is indeed very simple
DISCUSSION 205

andeasy to perform. I doit without administering an anesthetic,
either general or local. It requires about three minutes’ time to
perform the operation, and the subject returns to his work
immediately, suffers no inconvenience, and is in no way impaired
for his pursuit of life, liberty and happiness, but is effectively
sterilised. I have been doing this operation for nine full years.
I have two hundred and thirty-six cases that have afforded
splendid opportunity for post-operative observation, and I have
never seen any unfavourable symptom. . . There is no disturbed mental or nervous condition following, but, on the contrary, the patient becomes of a more sunny disposition, brighter
of intellect, ceases excessive masturbation, and advises his
fellows to submit to the operation for their own good. And
here is where this method of preventing procreation is so infinitely
superior to all others proposed—that it is endorsed by the subjected persons. All the other methods proposed place restrictions—and, therefore, punishment—upon the subject; this
method absolutely does not. There is no expense to the State,
no sorrow or shame to the friends of the individual, as there is
bound to be in the carrying out of the segregation idea.

There is a law providing for the sterilisation of defectives in
effect in Indiana, and it is being carried out at the Indiana
Reformatory. I regret very much that it is not being followed
up in the other institutions of the State, but there is no doubt
that it will come about in a very short time. This law reads as
follows:

A Bill for an Act, entitled An act to prevent procreation of confirmed
criminals, idiots, imbeciles, and rapists; providing that superintendents and
boards of managers of institutions where such persons are confined shall
have the authority and are empowered to appoint a committee of experts,
consisting of two (2) physicians, to examine into the mental condition of
such inmates.

Whereas, Heredity plays a most important part in the transmission of
crime, idiocy, and imbecility ;

Therefore, Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of
Indiana, That on and after the passage of this act it shall be compulsory for
each and every institution in the State entrusted with the care of confirmed
criminals, idiots, rapists, and imbeciles, to appoint upon its staff, in addition
to the regular institutional physician, two (2) skilled surgeons of recognised
ability, whose duty it shall be, in conjunction with the chief physician of the
institution, to examine the mental and physical condition of such inmates as
are recommended by the institutional physician and board of managers. If,
in the judgment of this committee of experts and the board of managers,
procreation is inadvisable and there is no probability of improvement of the
mental and physical condition of the inmate, it shall be lawful for the
surgeons to perform such operation for the prevention of procreation as
shall be decided safest and most effective. But this operation shall not be
performed except in cases that have been pronounced unimprovable:
Provided, That in no case shall the consultation fee be more than three (3)
dollars to each expert, to be paid out of the funds appropriated for the
maintenance of such institution.
