INTELLIGENCE AND FERTILITY

The Scottish 1947 Survey *
By Professor Sir GODFREY THOMSON, D.C.L., Ph.D.

Chairman, The Scottish Mental Survey Committee

HEN this lecture was written for

\ x / delivery to a Members’ Meeting

of the Eugenics Soctety I was unaware that it was the custom to publish
such lectures in the Review. Before consénting to its publication I have obtained
the consent of the Scottish Mental Survey
Committee, and of the principal co-workers
whose results are mentioned. But I have
asked that the diagrams shown at the
meeting should not be reproduced, for they
should be accompanied by much more
detail than I could give in a talk. Their
general nature is easily grasped from the
context.

I had some hesitation in accepting the
invitation to address you on the Scottish
Survey to-night, and that for two reasons:
One meeting of Section J of the British
Association at Newcastle dealt with this
matter, and I feared that another meeting
might be superfluous. And secondly, I
am only the chairman and leader of a band
of people whose work enables me to give
this lecture whatever interest it may possess,
and I do not wish to usurp their claims in
any way, or to anticipate the publication of
their full papers. However, I felt that
courtesy and gratitude to the Eugenics
Society demanded my personal report, and
so here I am.

I would like to speak for a comparatively
brief period and thereafter answer questions
and hear, I hope, criticism and advice.

The Scottish Mental Surveys

May I first remind you briefly of the
main results of the repetition in 1947 of the
Scottish Mental Survey of 1932, results
already published in my article in The
Times of November 17th, 1948, and with

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on
October 25th, 1949.

163

full details in the Survey Committee’ s first
report, The Trend of Scottish Intelligence.*

Both in 1932 and in 1947 we tested a
complete age-group of Scottish elevenyear-olds. In 1947 the Registrar-General’s
estimate of their number was 80,300. Of
these, the Survey schedules were completed
for about 95 per cent, and the group test
score was recorded for 70,200, those missing
being mainly the absentees on the days of
the test. This was about the same proportion as in the early Survey, or a trifle
better. The group test was exactly the
same in both Surveys.

Two random samples of the children
were chosen to give further details: the
36-day sample and the 6-day sample—
the latter being part of the former. The
36-day sample was composed of all the
children born on the first, second, or third
day of any month in 1936, who were visited
in their homes; the 6-day sample was
those born on the first day of the even
months. Most of the extra information
I have to give you now, over and above what
has already appeared in print, will concern
the 36-day sample of over 7,000 children.

Group and Individual Testing

The steep descent of average score in the
group test with larger and larger families
was fully confirmed, both in the group
testing of the 70,200 children and in the
individual testing, by the Terman-Merrill
test, of the 6-day sample of about 1,200
carried out by Mr. Kennedy Fraser and
numerous helpers. The graph showing the
group test scores for different sizes of family
is shown on several of the diagrams which
have been distributed.t May I, in passing,

* University of London Press, published on August

19th, 1949.
¢ It is shown on p. 108 of the published Report.
164

ask for all these diagrams to be returned at
the end of this meeting, partly because I want
to use them again, and partly because I do
not want any premature publication of the
details shown on them.

In spite of this apparent multiplication
of the less intelligent, there was no evidence,
in the average scores of all children in 1947
compared with 1932, of any general decline
of intelligence. Indeed, the group test
score in 1947 was actually higher than in
1932, 36°7 points against 34°5, out of a
possible 76. The individual test scores
were somewhat inconclusive because of the
different forms used, the Stanford in 1932
and the Terman-Merrill in 1947; but.a very
careful statistical comparison which Dr.
Fraser Roberts has carried out gives no
reason for assuming any change in I.Q.
either way.

Intelligence and Family Size

We are left, therefore, with the apparent
paradox that although the less intelligent
seem to be multiplying more rapidly than
the intelligent, yet the average intelligence
does mot seem to be sinking. Various
hypotheses have been advanced to account
for this, and one is already answered in
the Report. It was the surmise that later
born children in a family are progressively
less intelligent, or tend to be. With our
large numbers we could investigate this
separately for each size of family, and found
it unconfirmed. We are still enquiring into
the reason for a very slight superiority of
the first-born and last-born in each size of
family, but this small difference is quite
insufficient to account for the general drop
in I.Q. as families of larger and larger size
are considered.

Influence of Environment

One obvious hypothesis is, of course, that
the whole phenomenon is environmental
in origin and that no selection is, in fact,
going on. The suggestion in this hypothesis
is that the large families are not unintelligent
because they are in so many cases the
families of unintelligent and thoughtless
parents, but because their very size con
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

stitutes a handicap. Other things being
equal—for instance wages being equal in the
two cases—the father of one or two children
can give them better schooling, buy them
more books, give them more room for
private study, and supply better food,
clothing and holidays than can the father
of six. It seems indeed very probable, on
general grounds, that these influences may
explain at least part of the phenomenon,
and a general improvement in welfare.
between 1932 and 1947 could explain the
improvement in the group test score.

Test Sophistication |

There remains in the mind, however, an
uneasy fear that environmental improvement may be only masking a hidden selection going on behind, a steady selection
which might in the long run defeat any
temporary environmental improvement. Especially is this fear increased by the possibility that the children of 1947, though
perhaps less intelligent in reality than those
of 1932, were more accustomed to tests
and were thus able to make a better score.
In short, were the 1932 children handicapped by unfamiliarity with test-procedure, and the 1947 children helped by
being used to such questions? Tests have
been widely used in the intervening years ;
and, moreover, newspapers, children’s journals, school reading books, and the B.B.C.
have all used freely the type of item which
appears in a group test such as we used.

Some further as yet unpublished results
lend some support to the view that test
sophistication may explain the rise. Nine
of the Scottish Education Authorities had
used tests very little, while fourteen of
them had used them a great deal, previous
to 1947. Among the former, the 1932 and
1947 scores were 35-0 and 35-4, a very
small difference. Among those where tests
had been much used the rise was from 35-9
to 39-1, a significant improvement.

Mr. Maxwell has also examined the performance in the 1947 test of those boys and
girls who had been subjected to a somewhat
similar test earlier in the year, or in the
previous year, by their Education Authority,
INTELLIGENCE AND FERTILITY

and finds that they get better scores than
the others. But theré is a serious snag here.
For these pupils had been tested a year
earlier than routine demands for reasons
connected with their intelligence, either
because they were put forward as precocious
by their teachers, or because they were, on
the contrary, backward and needed diagnosing. They were a selected group, and
not a random sample of the whole.

We find such difficulties on every hand
when we try to probe further into environmental influences. So often there is also
conscious or unconscious selection.

The English Survey

At this point I would like to interpolate
some remarks about the English Survey,
somewhat similar to the Scottish one, which
has been carried out from Moray House by
Mr. W. G. Emmett. The results of this
Survey have not yet been published, but a
paper by Mr. Emmett will appear soon.

The English Survey differed from the
Scottish in several respects. It concerned
only ten districts, and not the whole of
England, and, furthermore, the time between
the two tests was only about ten years and
not fifteen as in Scotland. Also different
tests were used in the different districts.
31,728 children were tested on the first
occasion, and 28,505 on the second. The
numbers were therefore about forty per
cent of the Scottish numbers.

In one respect, which concerns what I
was saying about test sophistication, the
English Survey had the advantage over the
Scottish one, for in England there is little
or no reason to think that the children of
I947 were any more familiar with tests
that their predecessors of a decade earlier
had been. All the ten English areas had
already used tests before the first of our
Survey tests, in some cases for many years.

The general result from England is that
the boys show a fall and the girls a rise,
while both together show no change. As
far as this evidence goes, therefore, it does
not appear that a change in test sophistication explains the absence of a decline.

165

Let me now return to the Scottish investigation. |

Intelligence and Social Class

Another line of enquiry is to ask whether
the negative association between family
size and I.Q. is found within each social
class, or whether it is only due to differences
in test performance between social classes.
There have been in the past enquiries which
suggested even a positive connection among
graduates of Harvard and Yale. But that
was before intelligence testing was available. Where tests have been given to
socially homogeneous groups, the negative
association has usually, and as far as I
know always, been found to persist. This
is now fully confirmed by our Scottish data.

Mr. James Maxwell, one of the chief
workers engaged on the analysis of the
Survey data, who has already at the British
Association quoted the figures I gave for the
more and less sophisticated areas of Scotland
—sophisticated I mean in the sense of
familiarity with tests—has supplied me
with preliminary figures for each occupational level of the 36-day sample, from
some of which I have made the graphs on
the sheets which have been passed round.
It will be seen at a glance that in every
case—with the possible exception of farmers,
where the curve is irregular at its two ends—
in every other case, I say, the graph descends
at much the same slope as it does for all
the 70,200 children. The numbers of cases
are of course much smaller, for they refer
only to the 36-day sample, and to separate
occupations within that sample, so that
zigzagging of some of the graphs is only to
be expected.

The occupations of the fathers were
ascertained by visitors to each home, some
of them in very remote parts of Scotland.
Very careful instructions were given to the
visitors, and very few of the families declined to co-operate. These instructions
were based on previous experience in other
Surveys, and the questions aimed at ascer
taining not only the generic name of the

occupation, but the father’s status in it.
For example, an answer “‘engineer”’ is
166

insufficient, and the visitor asked further
what kind of engineer, whether professionally qualified, and (if an employee) whether
paid weekly or at longer intervals? The
visitors were warned to make no enquiry
about the actual salary or wage. The
coding of the answers was done by Professor D. V. Glass, who has wide experience
of such.

There is, of course, a general decline in
average score from professional and salaried
classes, through skilled manual workers,
down to unskilled. The curves are at different levels on the diagrams in your hands,
but the slope is everywhere similar. The
general decline in the 70,200 children,
while partly due to differences between
occupational classes, is also clearly due in
part to a decline in I.Q. with size of family
within each class. The bearing of this on the
environment versus heredity problem is not
clear, but it seems at least to be consistent
with the assumption of a genetic cause, the
assumption that at least some selection is
going on.

Age of Mother

Among the facts ascertained about the
36-day sample was also the date of birth of
the mother, and it was hoped that this might
throw light on some aspects of the enquiry.
There were 766 mothers born before Igoo,
659 born after 1914, and over 5,000 born
in between. Comparison of the two extreme
groups showed that the children of the older
mothers did better than those of the younger,
35-9 to 34-1. This superiority was found
in each separate size of family, as one of the

diagrams before you shows—and it also _

shows the usual decline in I.Q. with family
size in both groups.

But it is unsafe to draw the naive conclusion that the children of older mothers
do better in tests, and wrong to take the
inferiority of the younger mothers’ children
as evidence of a decline in the successive
generations. For in the first place, the
families of the younger mothers are quite
likely to be incomplete, whereas those of the
older mothers are almost certainly finished.
The former families are possibly, therefore,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

really large families not yet finished, potentially large families, one might say. The
younger mother curve perhaps ought to be
moved a place or two to the right, which
would abolish the difference between the
two curves. If this is the explanation,
heredity rather than environment is supported. For the younger mother families
are less intelligent, although xot yet large.

Occupational Status of Father

But other snags come to light when we
examine the occupational status of the
husbands. The higher occupational and
social grades are much more represented
among the husbands of the older group,
in part, perhaps, because the young husbands
had not yet had time to rise into salaried
positions or to become employers rather
than employees. But in part because the
professional classes, who marry later, are
simply not represented among these young
parents. These young mothers had borne
the child whom we tested at the age of
twenty-two or earlier, and that is unusual
in the higher occupational groups. The
one cause suggests environmental, the other
hereditary explanations. The whole comparison warns us how careful we must be
not to jump to conclusions.*

Twins

We have not been able, or have not yet
been able, to do anything towards separating
fraternal from identical twins, except by
considering the two groups of like-sexed
and unlike-sexed twins, the latter being
of course only fraternal, not identical.
My present remarks, however, apply to the
whole group of twins, of whatever sex.

In each size of family it will be seen that
twins are inferior to the whole group of
70,200. This may be a fundamental fact
due either to the setback of twinning, the
greater nutritional handicap in the prenatal period, or some other cause. But it 1s

* And later calculations, since I wrote the above,
show that the mean score is higher in the groups
between these extremes, the highest average being
achieved by the children of mothers born in the years
1905-9, who were therefore from 27 to 31 when the
tested child was born.
INTELLIGENCE AND FERTILITY

possibly fictitious, for there is definite
statistical evidence in our data that the
birth of twins tends to stop the growth of
a family. Twins are often the last-born,
no further pregnancies being adventured
upon. Being the last-born ought not in
itself to be a handicap, for I explained
earlier that the last-born seems to share
with the first-born a slight advantage, only
very slight, but undoubted.

But if the twin birth puts an end to the
family, which is, as it were, a “‘ might-havebeen-larger’ family than it actually is,
then possibly our family size in our diagrams is, for the twins, less than it was
going to be; just as, in the case of the
younger mothers, the size of family is in
many cases no doubt less than it zs going to
be. So perhaps our twin curve needs also
shitting to the right. I only labour this
rather subtle and, you may say, very
unreal point, in order to show what difficulties stand in the way of sharp and
clearcut conclusions.

I have given the scores of the twins
separately for each size of family, because
the fact that their inferiority persists in
each size disposes of another surmise,
namely, that their inferiority in general
average was due to the greater frequency
of twins in large families. Clearly the
chances of a twin birth are proportionately
large in large families. But evidently, as
the curves show, this is not the cause of the
twins’ lower scores.

Mr. Barclay, another member of our
group, has analysed further this apparent
defect of twins in the test score. He finds
that it persists in every grade of occupation,
at every age of mother, and whatever the
density of the home may be (the ratio,
that is, of persons to rooms).

He has, however, called attention to
an apparent deficiency in ascertainment of
twins in our enquiry. Assisted by officials
of the Registrar-General’s department, and
beginning with the recorded number of
twin births in 1936, he finds, on making
allowance for mortality, etc., that we
should expect many more twin pairs than

167

the 525 we have records for. This is being
looked into.

Physique and Family Size

Leaving now the twins, I turn to the connection, if any, between physique and size
of family. Here Mr. Maxwell’s sorting and
calculating has barely begun. We have the
weight of each child in the 36-day sample
and have sorted out weight against size of
family for the girls. There is a drop over
the sizes of family I, 2, 3 and 4, the mean
weights being 72:0, 70°0, 69:0, and 68:2 Ib.
Thereafter, there is no steady change and for
families of ten the weight is still 68-2 lb.
There is a hint of nutritional influence in
the first four numbers.

Again, we have information about the
number of rooms and the number of
residents in each home, and the differences
in weight are in the direction we would

expect. The average weights are, for the
girls of the 36-day sample :
Number Mean Weight®
Less than I person per room 293 73°13 Ib.
I but less than 2 » oo» 1,434 7o°r6 ,,
2 » » 3 1,106 67°37 »
3 or more 654 65°93 »
3,487

It is sad to think that 654 of these 3,487
girls live in such overcrowded homes, and
are, possibly in consequence, half a stone
lighter in weight, on the average, than the
293 who have abundant space, and probably
other advantages.

Differential Birth-rate and Intelligence

One of the theories put forward to explain
the absence of a decline of intelligence
despite a differential birth-rate is not environmental, but purely genetic. Professor
Penrose has illustrated this possibility by
constructing a highly simplified model of
a population in which these phenomena
could coexist. Fundamentally, such theories
depend on postulating a very low birth-rate
for parents of the very lowest intelligence,

*I must emphasize that these are preliminary
figures and that checking and counter-checking, still

going on, may lead to some changes, but not probably
to large changes. .
168

and they arrange the proportions of each
level of intelligence so that equilibrium
continues from generation to generation.
It is a fact that human beings of the very
lowest levels of intelligence leave few or no
offspring. In many cases they are physically
incapable, in many cases they are confined
in institutions, in most cases they are
extremely unattractive in appearance; and
in other instances they do not come to
maturity, are possibly even still-born.
Whether their numbers are sufficient to
balance the differential shown by our
curves I do not know. It would be an
interesting and useful task for someone
to estimate their numbers, and to consider whether this reversal of the differential
birth-rate at the low end of the scale of
intelligence can in fact cause the average
to remain constant.

Position in Family

Perhaps, since time permits, I may at
this point return to the question of the
association, if any, of intelligence with
position in family. In our Report there
are given the mean intelligence scores for
each position in each size of family, and to
illustrate what I am going to say I have
had these figures passed round for families
of four and of seven:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Position Number Mean
I 2,612 36-15

2 2,855 34°63

3 2,908 34°40

4 2,567 36°31
10,942 35°32

Position Number Mean
I 154 31°48

2 293 30°40

3 517 27°79

4 570 29°81

5 ‘617 27°61

6 584 28-81

7 607 32°04
3,342 29°45

 

 

You will see in these figures the phenomenon I mentioned earlier in passing, namely,
that in each size of family the first-born and
also the last-born scores rather more than
the children in between. This is found in

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

every size of family except size eight, where
the first-born is not so good. For the first four
families the advantage of the first-born and
the last-born is definitely highly significant
in the statistical sense. For larger families,
where it is still found, there comes in a
difficulty of selection of the sort I have
already said queers so many of our calculations. It will be remembered that all our
children are aged eleven. The early positions
in very large families are therefore impossible, and even in the families of size
seven you will see that the first and second
positions are insufficiently represented. The
154 in the first position, being eleven years
of age and having six younger brothers and
sisters, are members of families where the
children have come very close on each other’s
heels. Yet these 154 get a better average
score than the average member of a family
of seven. It is all very puzzling. Furthermore, there is a certain selection in the
mothers of these children as we go from
first-born to last-born. A mother whose
son aged eleven is the last-born of a family
of seven cannot be very young, whereas
if he is the first-born she may be. The
age of the mothers, in the family of seven
in our table, probably increases steadily
on the average as we pass from the first to
the seventh position in the family.

All this makes the drawing of definite
conclusions difficult, and I do not draw
any at this stage. We are, however, very
interested in the phenomenon and are
keeping it in mind as we go on with our
analyses. It is my experience in scientific
work that when one comes across phenomena
which puzzle, one is often on the verge of a
discovery, and I hope it may be so in this
case.

Further Experiment

I would like, finally, to say something
of our plans for further experiment. We
hope in the first place that our Survey will
be repeated, with improvements, in another
fifteen or twenty years. And secondly, in
addition to going on with the analysis of our
existing data, we want to follow up the 1,215
children of the 6-day sample throughout
INTELLIGENCE AND FERTILITY

their whole lives, to see what a cross-section
of the children of Scotland make of their
careers. Terman* of California has followed
up about a thousand Californians from
school to middle age, and a very interesting
book his report makes. But his were all
gifted children of high I.0. Ours, on the
contrary, are a fair sample of the whole
range of intelligence from the lowest (except
for the very mentally defective) to the
highest. Their Terman-Merrill I.Q.s range
from 173 down to 58. They are dotted
over the whole of Scotland, in cities and on
remote crofts and distant islands, and their
parents are of all classes and many occupations. ‘It will be a hard task to keep
touch with them after the compulsory
school age, but we intend to try to lose as
few as possible. The Nuffield Trust has
already given us a grant which will enable
us to do the absolute minimum necessary
to keep hold of them during the next five
years. We could, however, make good use
of more financial help, and if any of my
hearers are in possession of great wealth,
it would give me much pleasure to relieve
them of some of it for this purpose.

DISCUSSION

Mr. JAMES MAXWELL said that he would
like to comment on points that had occurred
to him whilst handling the Scottish Mental
Survey data. Sir Godfrey Thomson had
referred to the paradox of a rise in the
intelligence test score having been accompanied by a decline in average test score
with increasing size of family. He appeared
to favour the interpretation of this as a
decline in the average intellectual level of
the population which was being masked by
an improvement in environmental conditions.

One thing that had impressed him,
Mr. Maxwell continued, was the strong
influence of environmental effects upon
test scores. The children in 1947, for

instance, had had more experience of.

mental tests than those in 1932; and it

* Genetic Studies of Genius: IV. The Gifted Child
- Grows Up. Stanford University Press, 1947.

169
was quite probable that this “ test sophisti
-cation ’’”’ would have been itself sufficient

to account for most of the difference between the scores in the two surveys. Further,
the relationship between test score and the
socio-economic status of the home was very
marked. Again, it was probable that the
improvement in social conditions over the last
few decades had had the effect of raising
the national I.Q., as measured by tests.

It did not follow, of course, that this
was necessarily counteracted by a corresponding decline due to the negative correlation between intelligence and size of
family. There was evidence in the Report
of the Royal Commission on Population
that this differential fertility had existed
since the middle of the last century, and
probably earlier. Also, this tendency persisted in a remarkable manner through
such environmental influences as parent’s
occupation, degree of overcrowding, and
so on. It appeared likely that this might
be a natural phenomenon not necessarily
associated with declining intelligence. In
the U.S.A., Tryon had divided white rats
into two groups on the basis of their ability
to learn a maze. Over some generations it
had been observed that the “ intelligent ”’
group of rats had fewer offspring than the
“dull” group. Unless we were willing to
conclude that the intelligence of the white
rat population was declining, we could
not easily argue that the intelligence of a
human population was declining.

PROFESSOR P. E. VERNON said that, to his
regret, he had been associated only with
some of the earliest stages of the Scottish
Research Council’s investigation. He could
therefore, as an outsider, sincerely congratulate Professor Thomson and his collaborators on the brilliant work that had
been described. In particular, it was a
privilege for those present at to-day’s meeting to hear of some of the results which
might not reach publication for many
months. As others would be better qualified
to comment on the social and eugenic
implications of Professor Thomson’s paper,
he would prefer to draw attention to some
of the important advances in research
170

techniques made by the Mental Survey
investigators, advances which would be of
the greatest value for further studies in this
field. For example, proof had been provided of the effects of familiarity on group
test scores. Professor Vernon pleaded guilty
to having invented the term “test sophistication’ in 1938. Members of the Soctety
should certainly study the chapter by
Dr. Fraser Roberts in The Trend of Scottish
Intelligence. The way in which he bridged

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the gap between the 1932 and 1947 group
tests, via Stanford-Binet and TermanMerrill individual tests, was a beautiful
technical achievement. He had also established the important point that when the
intelligence of two populations was to be
compared, any group tests which correlated
fairly highly with an individual test could
be used, provided that the same individual
test was given to samples of both populations.

OCCASIONAL PAPERS
ON EUGENICS

EUGENICS IN PROSPECT & RETROSPECT

C. P. BLACKER

Price 1s. 6d.

INTELLIGENCE AND FERTILITY

Cyrit Burt

Price 2s.

THE TREND OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE
The Galton Lecture, 1946, by GopFREY
THomson, with a Symposium in 1947

by ALEXANDER CARR-SAUNDERS, CyRIL
Burt, LionEL PgnrosE and GODFREY

THOMSON.

Price 2s.

PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACHES TO THE
BIOGRAPHY OF GENIUS

Lewis M. TERMAN

Price 1s. 6d.

Fellows and Members may obtain these pamphlets
reduction of 6d. on the above net prices direct irom the

Eugenics Socicty.

THE EUGENICS SOCIETY
and

CASSELL & COMPANY, LTD.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLI, No. 4
