The Reduction of the Birth Rate asa Necessary
Instrument for the Improvement of the Race.
By Mr. Harontp Cox, M.A.

The Eugenics Education Society is one of the few societies in this
or any country that deliberately sets out to consider the well-being of
future generations. We nearly all of us tend, especially when acting
collectively, to think only of the present, of its interests, of its fancies,
of its passions. And when we take action on ideas thus formed we
may easily do infinite mischief to those who come after us. Whereas
if we had looked further ahead we might perhaps have fully reconciled
our passing interests with the more enduring interests of future generations. As its name implies, the Eugenics Education Society is specially concerned with the improvement of the race through good breeding. That this is a tremendously important aspect of the problem of
population everyone is bound to admit. But it is not the only aspect
that has to be considered. Even the most whcle-hearted eugenist will
assent to the proposition that parenthood is not the only factor in the
production of a fine race, whether of plants or of animals or of human

‘beings. The offspring of ideal parents may be brought up in such
conditions that they are unable to develop the qualities implanted in
them, and may grow up weak in body and mind. Should they also
produce children, it is at least possible that they will pass on not inherited strength, but acquired weakness. Reciprocally, the children
of unpromising parents may, if they are fortunate enough to be brought
up under specially good conditions, greatly surpass their fathers and
mothers in physical and mental qualities. Indeed except on this
hypothesis it is hard to explain how the human race could have succeeded in lifting itself out of primitive savagery. I need not however
elaborate the point, for I am sure that everyone here will agree with
me that however important good parentage may be, good environment
is also a necessary condition of racial progress.

At present a very large part of our population has the advantage
neither of good parentage nor of gcod environment. During the war,
and for some months after it, public opinion was much concerned about
the extent of our C3 population, as revealed by the army examinations
of potential recruits. The only novelty in these revelations was their
magnitude. For many years past the army medical officers have
found it necessary to reject a very large percentage of would-be recruits.
Dr. Brend in his striking book ‘‘Health and the State’’ (Constable &
Co. 1917) quotes the figures of recruits rejected in the year ending
Sept. 80, 1912. The total number examined was 47 ,000 , and 223 out
of every thousand were rejected.

The evidence collected by the military authorities during the war
$4 EUGENICS REVIEW.

necessarily covered a much wider area. In the year ending Nov. Ist,
1918, the last year of the war, no fewer than 2 ,425 000 men were examined. The army medical authorities were naturally anxious to pass
every man they could, yet they reported that only 36 per cent. were
fit to be included in Grade I comprising ‘‘those who attain the full
normal standard of health and strength.’’ Another 23 per cent. were
moderately good, but as many as 31 per cent. were only fit for clerical
or sedentary labour, and 10 per cent. were “‘totally and permanently
unfit for any form of military service.’’ Doubtless these bad figures
were partly due to the previous enlistment of a large proportion of the
best menof the nation. Nevertheless it remains significant that out
of nearly two-and-a-half million men examined, nct much more than
a third were found to have attained the ‘‘full normal standard of
health and strength.’’ Since the war we have returned to voluntary
recruiting. In the year ending Sept. 25th, 1920, the number of men
offering themselves for enlistment was 120 ,000, and nearly a third were
rejected for physical reasons.

These figures are sufficient to show what a long way our population
is removed from a high standard of physical fitness. As to its mental
fitness no similar record is by any means attainable; but incidentally
the army does throw some light also on this problem. If anyone will
watch a regiment of troops marching through the streets, he will
hardly fail to notice that the officers’ faces are on the average finer cuy
and more intellectual in appearance than the face of the men
who follow. The contrast is so striking that it cannot be misunderstood. It can only mean that the officers belong to a higher mental
type than the rank and file.

This contrast is not confined to the army; it runs through our social
life. We have in fact developed a small minority of men of an undoubtedly good physical and mental type. Their existence shows
what racial possibilities lie before us. But neither in mind nor in
body has the large majority of our population yet attained to the
standards which are evidently within the capacity of our race.

I contend that it is impossible appreciably to raise the physical
and intellectual standards of the mass of our people so long as the
present conditions of life continue, and J further contend that the only
practicable method of greatly improving present conditions is to reduce
the population.

The way in which an excessive population lowers the standard of
life in purely agricultural communities is obvious to everyone. The
resources of the soil are limited. We can, it is true, in certain cases
by improved methods of cultivation make two blades of grass grow
where one grew before, but we cannot continue that process indefinitely. Very soon a point is reached where the additional yield in
response to still more intensive cultivation is only an extra half blade,
and then perhaps only an extra tenth, and after a time no additional
yield at all, perhaps even a retrogression. And if the people who live
on that land continue to multiply they will presently find that there
is not enough food for all of them; some stomachs will be only half
filled, a lower standard of life will result, and the ensuing high death
rate will begin to balance the birth rate. |
THE REDUCTION OF THE BIRTH RATE. 85

Throughout the East this process is in constant evidence. At the
bidding of religion or as the result of mere recklessness, the peasant
populations of India and China produce children without regard to the
available means of maintenance. Asa result the masses are condemned
to exist ever on the verge of starvation. Their fate would be even
worse than it is, but for the cruel kindness of Nature who cuts off in
infancy the children who ought never to have been born. In these
dense peasant populations roughly one in four of the children born die
before they are twelve months old. When the harvests fail and famine
comes, Nature’s cruel kindness is aided by the parents themselves,
who kill their children to save them from further suffering.

In England the relationship between the means of subsistence and
the volume of the population is less easily visible. More than half of
our food is drawn from countries across the water, countries which
most of us have never seen and which we vaguely imagine to have an
unlimited capacity and willingness to supply us with all the food we
want. Perhaps they have the capacity, so far as acreage goes, but
we shall not get that food unless we can in exchange provide the people
of those countries with something which they want and at a lower
price than they can buy it elsewhere. During the greater part of the
nineteenth century we were able to do this successfully. England
was the first country tc develop steam machinery, and as a result we
were able to win markets all over the world fcr our manufactured gcods.
But what then amounted almost to an industrial monopoly has now
passed from us. Other countries have learnt to use the machines
which we invented and to practise the manufacturing arts which we
developed. Moreover the peculiar advantage which we enjoyed for
many years in the possession of cheaper sources of power than our
foreign competitors is no longer ours. Not only are foreign countries
now working coal seams of their own, or alternatively utilising the
advantages they possess in the natural supply of water power, but our
own supply of cheap fuel is failing. It is failing for two reasons, first
because in many cases we are compelled to work deeper seams than a
generation ago, and secondly because our coal miners refuse to be
satisfied with the low wages for which their fathers worked. The
miners want a higher standard of life; they want shorter hours of labour
and they want larger weekly pay bills. These demands may be fully
justified from the miners’ point of view, but they are absolutely
inconsistent with the maintenance cf a large population in this little
island. Cheap coal is essential not only to our manufacturing industries, but also to our shipping industry. Unless we can continue to
produce large quantities of coal at a low price we must curtail many of
our manufacturing and shipping activities, and in addition our poorer
classes will have to curtail their domestic comforts. In other words
either the miners must content themselves with a low standard of life,
or our national industries dependent upon cheap coal must be cut down.

Similar considerations arise in every other important industry.
Largely as the result of the war, which temporarily created an unlimited demand for mere muscle, manual workers throughout the
country have formed the idea that they ought no longer to be content
with the low standard of life which they previously accepted. I think
86 EUGENICS REVIEW.

they are right, not only from their own point of view, but also from the
point of view of the ultimate well-being of the nation. But few of
them have yet realised the necessary consequences of their new ideals.
Our population, I repeat, is dependent upon the maintenance of an immense overseas trade; that trade has to be carried on in competition
with all the world, and therefore can only be maintained if we sell more
cheaply than our rivals. They can purchase practically all the
mechanical advantages which we possess , and except ina few special
industries their skill is not appreciably less than ours. It is only by
reducing the cost of labour that we can hope to retain a large export
trade. In other words if we are to find employment in this country for
a large population the bulk of our people will have to be content witha
Jow standard of life.

Moreover the problem, which is sufficiently serious to-day, tends
to get rapidly more serious. For judging by the figures of 1921, the
excess of births over deaths in England and Wales alone is now well
over 1000 a day. Each day our little country is being called upon to
provide food and shelter and clothing for a thousand new persons. It
can noly be done by a further expansion of trade, and that is impossible without a reduction of labour costs, which must mean, if the
population continues to grow, a progressive reduction of the general
standard of living.

That seems to me an appalling prospect and absolutely at variance
with our national traditions and our true national ideals. The rapid
growth of population of England and Wales is quite a modern phenomenon. During many centuries our population was almost stationary
yet some of those centuries will stand out for all time in the history of
England. It was only towards the end of the eighteenth century that
our population began rapidly to expand. It was then, according to
present standards, extremely small. At the beginning of the nineteenth century the total population of England and Wales was still
under 9,000,000; in 1921 it was very nearly 38,000,000, a more
than fourfold increase in 120 years. I believe we should be a stronger
as well as a happier nation if we could halve our present figures.

This however is certain, that we cannot secure a general high
standard of comfort unless we reduce our numbers. If we attempt to
maintain a large population in this country with its limited natural
resources the bulk of that population will have to work very hard and
to live very meagrely, in order to meet the competition of rivals who
have now caught up the industrial start which we enjoyed for nearly
a century.

That is the problem of population as its presents itself to the
whole nation. The same problem faces every individual family much
in the same manner. An income that would suffice to maintain a
small family in an adequate standard of comfort would mean poverty
to a large family. This elementary truth is fully appreciated by our
upper and middle classes; it is also appreciated by the more intelligent
and more thoughtful members of the artisan class and by agricultural
labourers in many counties. In all these classes, either marriage is
postponed till the prospective parents are in possession of a sufficient
income to. bring up a family under decent conditions of life, or the
young couple marry and take measures to avoid having children.
THE REDUCTION OF THE BIRTH RATE, 87

The practice of conscious birth contro] in this country may be said
‘to date from about the year 1876, for in that year we had the highest
birth rate on record, and in that year also Charles Bradlaugh and Annie
Besant started a movement for the dissemination of knowledge of the
methods of preventing conception. At any rate since that date there had
been an almost continuous decline in the birth rate, and this was
emphasized during the war. Even in 1920, when we had what may
be called a post-war boom in marriage and maternity, the birth rate
was only 25 per thousand as compared with 36 per thousand in the
record year of 1876. It must not however he assumed that there was a
corresponding decline in the actual number of births, for the lower
rate was taken over a larger volume. There were actually 70,000 more
births in 1920 than in 1876. In 1921] there was a further fall in the
birth rate, but, broadly sneaking, the low birth rates of to-day are
producing as many children per annum as the high rates of a generation
ago. But these children are spread over a larger number of families ;
consequently they are able to receive more parenta! care and are brought
up in greater comfort. Asa result the rate of mortality and especially
of infantile mortality has been greatly reduced.

On the connection between a low birth rate and low infantile
mortality there is a wealth of statistical evidence from almost every
country in the world. It will here suffice if I refer to some figures
which were laid before the Birth Rate Commission by Dr. Stevenscn,
Superintendent of Statistics at the General Register Office. These
figures show the relative fertility and the relative infantile mortality
in different classes of the community in England and Wales. One
striking comparison drawn is between unskilled workmen on the one
hand and the upper and middle classes on the other. The fertility
of the unskilled workmen class is very nearly double that of the upper
and middle classes; the infantile mortality is exactly double. Taking
particular classes it is interesting to compare clergymen of the Church
of England, who have long abandoned tke practice cf having large
families, with dock labourers, who still maintain the practice. The
dock labourers produce two children and a third of a child for every
one child produced by an equal number of clergymen; but the infantile
mortality in the dock labourer’s family is three and a half times as
great as in the clergyman’s family. And yet the bishops condemn
birth control !

Nor is it only in the first twelve months of life that the death
dealing results of a high birth rate are visible. Among the poorer
classes it is impossible for large families to be brought up under conditions which will ensure to the children a fair chance of reaching manhood. Even if born healthy—-and many of the babies in the poorest
classes are born with apparently excellent physique—they fail to
acquire strength and either die young or grow up to be weaklings.
Investigations into the prevalence of tuberculosis made by an American
physician, Dr. Knopf, in 1916, bring out the interesting fact that in
large families the later born children are more liable to this disease and
to other diseases than the earlier born. The explanation is obvious.
The mother is weakened by rapidly repeated pregnancies; her power to
take care of her children is lessened as the number grows, and the
88 EUGENICS REVIEW.

family income rarely expands to meet the increasing number of mouths
dependent upon it.

These considerations by themselves suffice to condemn the big
families that are still common among the poorer classes in our large
towns. In addition we have to realise that a very large proportion of
our urban population is living under conditions which render almost
impossible the rearing of healthy children. Take for example the
description given of the slum districts of Birmingham in the report of
the Ministry of National Service for 1917-18 :—

**In parts of Birmingham there are not only too many houses
per acre without open spaces, but the houses are badly arranged—
huddled together in obscure unventilated courts, where the sun
scarcely penetrates, and in which it is impossible to obtain fresh
air. The houses in themselves, damp and dirty, are made worse
by insanitary conveniences ventilating into them. The filth of
years is stored between the floors and ceilings, ready to take advantage of the many cracks to spread all sorts of disease.’ The report
goes on; ‘‘It is stated that the death rate in such ‘black spots’ is
from 70 to 100 per cent. higher than that of other working class
districts inthecity. In this connection it is worth note that during
a very hot summer some years ago the infantile mortality rate in
some of the principal quarters of the city was almost 500 per 1000.’”

It may be argued that these slums ought to be swept away and replaced by decent houses, or alternatively that the population should be
moved to garden cities. But how is it to be done? Three years ago
when the mental balance of everybody was still upset by the strain of
the great war, our politicians launched a gigantic scheme for building
houses for the poorer classes at the expense of the State. The whole
scheme has now been thrown upon the scrap heap, after involving the
national exchequer in a loss of £10,000 ,000, a year, which will continue for 60 years. Yet the number of houses built is insignificant
compared with the needs of our present population.

It is in fact economically impossible to provide enough good houses
for all the people in England and Wales who are badly housed. To
undertake even a quarter of the work that is needed would involve a
charge upon the taxpayer that would ruin many of our industries and
would drive abroad people who were able to transfer their capital to
other countries. The result would be an intensification of the evil of
poverty, which itself is the main cause of the low standard of life
among such a large proportion of our population. This delusive
remedy must therefore be rejected. What remains?—-The very
obvious alternative that, instead of trying to produce enough new
houses to provide comfortable accommodation for an unlimited supply
of children, we should encourage the dwellers in these insanitary slums
to refrain from producing more children.

After all, is that an unreasonable proposition? In the middle and
upper classes men and women assume as a matter of course that they
have no right to bring children into the world except under conditions
which will give those children a fair chance of bealthy life. Why should
the poorer classes be assumed to have the right to claim exemption from
THE REDUCTION OF THE BIRTH RATE. 8

this moral obligation? A man has no right merely because he is poor
to inflict. upon his wife the needless suffering of bringing into the world
a child that is doomed to die before it has ceased to bea child. Nor has
aman, merely because he is poor, the right to saddle his fellow citizens
with the cost of maintaining children of his that nobody wants—not
even their own mother.

These elementary considerations would he instantly realised by
everybody if, instead of Jiving under the inequalities of circumstance
that necessarily result from the institution of private property, we were
all brought to one dead level of economic status by the establishment of
communism. It would then become apparent that only those people
must be allowed te breed whose offspring were likely to be of service
to the State. The control of parenthood is one of the first duties that a
communistie society finds itself compelled to undertake. In the
numerous communistic societies that sprang into being in the United
States in the middle of last century this problem was faced without
hesitation. In all of these societies, except one, rigid celibacy was
imposed upon the members of the society ; the societies were recruited
solely from the outside world. Inthe one society—the Perfectionists—
which permitted intercourse between the sexes, the governing body
selected couples whom it considered best fitted to add new members to
the society , and these alone were allowed to produce children. It will
be remembered that more than two thousand years ago Plato in sketching his ideal republic insisted on the importance of breeding only from
the best stock, and advocated abortion and infanticide as necessary
measures to prevent the multiplication of the unfit. If we were ever
to abandon, as the socialists desire, the system of private property
and individual liberty upon which our present civilisation is based,
the socialist legislature would find itself compelled within a very brief
period to pass drastic laws to limit the population.

The need for limitation springs in fact not from any defects in our
social organisation—numerous as they may be—but from the economic
and physical impossibility of maintaining an unlimited population ona
limited area. It is sufficient to point out that if we were to maintain
in this country the rate of increase recorded for the decade ended 1911
the population of England and Wales alone would in 360 years largely
exceed the present population of the whole globe.

Of course it will not continue to increase at that rate. Nature if
necessary will take care of that. But her methods are unpleasant.
She corrects a high birth rate by creating a higher death rate, and
incidentally she lowers the standard of life for most of those whom she
permits to survive. Her processes can be observed in any garden patch.
If seeds are sown too thickly the resulting plants are stunted in growth
and only a few survive. Space and good nourishment are as much
needed for the production cf fine human beings as for the production of
fine flowers and with human beings as with flowers the only finally
effective means of improving the type is to limit the numbers.

Some people imagine that the present problem of over-crowding in
England can be met by organising vast schemes of emigration to the
untenanted areas of our oversea empire. Anyone who will look at the
facts will see that the thing is impossible. One of the latest Australian
90 EUGENICS REVIEW. °

schemes for empire settlement provides for the raising of a loan of
£12 000 ,000 in three annual instalments by the Victorian Government
for the purpose of establishing British farmers on irrigation farms in
Victoria. It is estimated that with this sum of money ten thousand
farmers can be moved from Great Britain and established in Australia
in the course of three years. Suppose that each British farmer who is
enlisted under this scheme represents a family of five. The total number of persons moved would then be 50,000. But as I pointed out just
now the excess of births over deaths in England and Wales alone is
over 1000 a day. So that the expenditure of £12 ,000 ,000 spread over
three years would merely cover the normal increase in our population
for about seven weeks. Obviously such schemes as these can do
nothing to reduce our present excessive population; they will not even
appeciably diminish its continued rapid expansion. Moreover it is not
farmers that we want to remove from this country. We have not many
more than our needs require. The people that we can spare are the
millions that are herded together in our great towns, living under conditions that forbid the development of a healthy life. Their numbers
are ever increasing, while the population of our rural districts is declining or stationary. In the last thirty years the urban population of
England and Wales increased from just under 21,000 ,000 to just over
30 ,000 ,000 ; meanwhile the rural population slightly declined. At
the present moment 80 per cent. of our population is living in urban
districts, dependent for a livelihood on urban industries, and these
industries are dependent on foreign markets that are slipping from our
grasp. That is the problem which I began by pointing out to you, and
that is the problem to which I come back. There is no way of dealing
with it effectively except by a reduction of the birth rate.

That the results of voluatary birth control have so far been felt
only in the better classes of the community is true, and if the practice
of birth control were confined to those classes I admit that the effects
would tend to be dysgenic by reducing the proportion of well-born
children in the nation and increasing the proportion of the ill-born.
But birth control need not remain dysgenic. If we are to secure any
appreciable mitigation of the evils, economic, social and physical,
produced by the over-crowding of our country, it is essential that the
practice of birth control should be adopted by the whole of the population. There is no reason why any section of the our people should continue to produce children merely as the accidental result of the satisfaction of animal instincts. Human beings in every class ought to be able
to rise above that animal] standard, and tc regulate their families by an
intelligent consideration of the means which will be available for the
rearing of healthy children. It may be answered that at present some
sections of our population are not morally or mentally capable of this
amount of forethought. That may be so, but at least the nation might
abstain from encouraging their carelessness by relieving them of
financial responsibility for their conduct. In recent years instead of
insisting that parents must provide for the wants of their children, or
suffer inconvenience and dishonour if they fail to do so, we have
organised a system by which self-supporting and_self- -respecting
parents are taxed in order to maintain the unwanted children of the imTHE REDUCTION OF THE BIRTH RATE. 91

provident classes. In acting thus the State gives a premium to
animal carelessness and lays a penalty on human prudence. I believe
this process is called ‘‘social reform.’’

If it be asked how the whole of the population is to be induced to
follow the example set by the more prudent classes I answer that the
first requisite is the wide dissemination of the necessary knowledge. I
have been permitted to see many of the letters received by the
Malthusian League from poor parents in different parts of the country.
These letters show how eagerly knowledge is sought and how widely the
need for it is felt. One man writes :—‘‘We are very anxious to limit
our family and nct only us but a great many of our friends, but it is
getting the information as regards the methods that is the trouble.’’
Another man writes to say that he is in poor circumstances and his wife
is consumptive. He begs fur information, ‘‘as we have no desire to
bring suffering children into the world.’’ A woman writes to say ‘‘I
am about ten years married and have four of a family, and find it hard
enough to maintain them as my husband is only a labourer, and if he
could have prevented it we should have been content with only two.’’

These are samples of thousands of letters that the Malthusian
League receives. If its operations, or the operations of similar
bodies, could be extended a considerable part of the problem would
solve itself.

In addition it is desirable that the knowledge of how to prevent
conception should be presented to persons, and especially to women,
who have not the energy to write and ask for it. This could be easily
dene through the agency of the maternity centres which have been
established in most of our large towns. Women come to these clinics
for advice in all matters connected with maternity. Many of them pitifully ask for information as to how to prevent future pregnancies. But
I am informed that the persons who manage these clinics are afraid to
give this information, even in the case of women suffering from disease,
for fear that the Ministry of Health should take away the grant allotted
to the clinic. I do not know whether there is any real ground for this
fear. If so, I can only say that it appears to me extraordinary that a
government department which professes to have for its special aim the
improvement of the health of the nation should in effect be encouraging
unhealthy parents to multiply their offspring. It ougbt to be one of
the recognised duties of every maternity centre to teach the women who
take advantage of these State-aided institutions the best means of preventing the production of unwanted children. Only a very small
minority of women would refuse to take advantage of that knowledge.
No woman wants to have a rapid succession of pregnancies, and to grow
old before her time by being forced to give birth to children she does
not want. The woman’s interest in the matter is so direct and keen
that the immense majority, even in the poorest, classes could be relied
upon to take steps to limit their families if provided with the necessary
information. In this way the danger of birth control proving dysgenic
can be effectively obviated.

There remains one special problem of racial improvement with
which we in this country have not yet had the courage to deal, though
much has been done in the United States, namely , the problem of how to
92 EUGENICS REVIEW.

prevent the multiplication of the feeble-minded. In earlier generations
mentally defective persons were treated with scant. consideration and
often with sheer barbarity. As a result they died early. To-day an
immense amount of public and private money is spent in keeping them
alive and making them comfortable. We even spend large sums of
money on the literary education of feeble-minded children. People
who are engaged in the care of the feeble-minded, and who devote their
lives to this work with an enthusiasm which is admirable to witness,
will confess frankly that it is wasted effort, and declare that the only
really satisfactory treatment for most of the feeble-minded would be to
send them to a lethal chamber. That is an impossible solution of the
problem. In practice even those who by long experience are most convineed of the futility of preserving the lives of mentally defective
persons would shrink from deciding to bring those lives forcibly tu an
end. But while the sentiment of kindliness rightly compels us to
keep these unfortunates alive, nothing justifies the nation in permitting
them to pass on their defects to another generation. The Americans
have realised this and in many States laws have been passed authorising
the compulsory sterilisation of the feeble-minded. In some States, as
often happens in America, these laws remain a dead letter on the
Statute Book; in others they have been put into operation, but I am
informed that compulsion has rarely been resorted tu. If the person
has too little intelligence to understand the meaning of the proposed
operation, his or her relatives are ccnsulted before it is done. Altogether several thousand operations of this character have been performed in the United States, on children and on adults. Both for men
and women the operation is very simple and recovery is rapid; in the
case of men the general health is actually improved. This is a matter
to which immediate attention ought tc be given in this country. At
present the percentage of mental defectives in our popule tion is markedly increasing. Feeble-minded girls are easily seduced ; they go tc the
workhouse for their confinement; after a few months they are discharged, and within a year they are back again to be delivered of
another baby. To keep them imprisoned for life would be cruelly unjust, for often they are quite harmless. The obvious remedy is to
render them incapable of procreation. And the same consideration
applies to feeble-minded men. Here again I may remark on the curious
fact that though we have a Ministry of Health in this country, spending
over £20,000 ,000 a year of public money, it has not even touched this
problem.

In conclusion may I insist once more on the duty that we of this
generation owe to posterity. Our individual span of life is short; the
world is ours only for a tiny scrap of its long history. But our race
goes on, and out of gratitude for the many good things we have inherited
from the past, it is our duty to improve the inheritance of the future.
