372 EUGENICS REVIEW.

even very lowly organisms profit by experience and by habit perfect
their structure. Similarly in development, the racial habit of developing
in a certain way enables the embryonic organism to pass through in a few
days or months stages which took zons to evolve, and the earlier stages,
in which the habit is most firmly fixed, are those which are passed
through most rapidly and regularly. Such a conception of heredity, of
course, involves the assumption of the inheritance of acquired characters,
but it is pointed out that direct evidence for the inheritance of such
characters would of necessity be extremely difficult to obtain, since “ we
should not expect any clear manifestation of such heredity till the functions that have led to structures have passed far beyond the initial stage
where conscious control is essential to their performance.” A considerable part of the lecture is devoted to a refutation of Weismann’s arguments, and it is unfortunate that such recent work as that of Kammerer
and Tower is not mentioned in this connexion. Nor is there any mention
of Mendel, a serious omission in a lecture which is in essence a protest
against the purely mechanical interpretation of inheritance so much in
vogue in recent Mendelian speculation. If the modern student of
heredity is to be convinced that organic inheritance is a process akin to
habit and memory, he must be shown how Mendelian segregation and its
probable relation to the pairing and separation of chromosomes fit into
the mnemic scheme. That they may so fit in is quite possible, but a
work dealing with the subject which does not even mention the problem
cannot fail to leave some sense of disappointment in the reader.
LEONARD DONCASTER.

Davenport, CuHartes B. State Laws Limiting Marriage Selection,
Examined in the Light of Eugenics. Eugenics Record Office.
Bulletin No. 9. Cold Spring Harbour. June, 1913; price

40 cents.; pp. 66.
THE author classes the laws limiting marriage selection under three
heads: (1) “ Laws limiting the mental and physical condition of the
consorts;” (2) “ Laws limiting consanguinity in marriage;” (3) “ Miscegenation.” His method of examining them “in the light of
eugenics ” is to describe the results of a few matings of the kind prohibited in one State or another. It is, of course, impossible to arrive at
a satisfactory answer to the question whether such marriages should be
permitted or not by such a method, and indeed no very definite conclusions are arrived at. On the whole, Mr. Davenport does not appear
to favour eugenic restrictions in marriage, but he opposes them principally on the ground that they are likely to be ineffective, even where
they are biologically justifiable. Nevertheless, he outlines an elaborate
and expensive scheme for State eugenic control of marriage which
involves the employment of three sets of officials: (1) A State Eugenics

Board, consisting of “a trained biologist, a general practising physician

of experience, and a general practitioner of law of broad experience.”

These should be whole-time officers. (2) State official physicians, of

whom in a State like New York there should’'be about 500. Marriage

licenses would be issued by these after an examination of the physical
condition and family history of the applicants. (3) The field workers,
whose duty would be to investigate family histories under the direction
of the physicians. The Bulletin concludes with a useful appendix,
which gives a digest of State laws limiting marriage selection up to
April, 1913.

Ponsonby, ARTHUR, M.P. The Decline of Aristocracy. T. Fisher
Unwin; 1913; 7s. 6d. net; pp. 320.

MR. PONSONBY has selected an interesting object for his latest book. His

treatment of the matter is thoughtful and suggestive; it is clearly the

result of wide experience and careful observation. The early chapters
REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 373

sketch the main features of the changes which have taken place during
the last two centuries. The latter part of the book is concerned with
the aristocrat of to-day; separate chapters are devoted to various aspects
of the preparation for life which is the lot of the aristocratic classes at
the present time.

Taken as a whole, the book is a severe indictment of the aristocracy.
It would require a long discussion in order to attempt to estimate the
validity of the author’s criticism. One problem, however, is likely to
suggest itself to readers of this journal. In so far as Mr. Ponsonby’s
criticisms are justified, how far is it likely that a similar state of things
would come about however good the material might be of which the
aristocratic class is composed? In other words, how far are the influences which surround the members of this class responsible for that
with which fault is found? And we should probably wish to go further
and ask how far these surroundings could be improved and how far
they are apparently inevitable. Mr. Ponsonby has a very poor opinion
of the training which the children of this class receive; such defects,
however, can be remedied. What cannot be remedied is the fact that the
incentive to effort, the absence of which is the inevitable consequence of
assured position and of wealth, seems inevitably to be lacking from the
surroundings of a privileged class. And we are tempted to wonder
whether, however excellent the material might be, similar defects must
not always become apparent. A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS.

Horsley, J. W., M.A., Vicar of Detling; Hon. Canon of Southwark;
late and last Chaplain of Clerkenwell Prison. How Criminals
are Made and Prevented. London. Fisher Unwin; 1913; price
7s, 6d. net; pp. 299.

THE very title of Canon Horsley’s volume proclaims a breezy optimism
of outlook which is not too frequent in the literature of criminology,
and which appears doubly remarkable when it is borne in mind that the
author’s views, in so far as they are the result of experience and not
simply the expression of an exuberant temperament, are founded, as he
reminds us, on the retrospect of forty years in London, “spent in and
for the prison, the workhouse, and the slum.” Nor do the contents of
the book belie the suggestion of its cover. It does not pretend, of
course, to be in any way a Scientific treatise of the subject with which it
deals; it does not enter into subtleties of argument and speculation, nor
does it oppress the reader with catalogues of facts, and though a few
Statistics are scattered through its pages, it is clear that they are
introduced rather as concessions to custom than from any exaggerated
belief in their evidential value. The interest of the book does not lie
in fact in the positive data which it adduces, but in its general effect as
conveying the impressions left on an acute and active mind after many
years’ experience of the seamy side of modern urban life. Such impressions are apt, of course, to be very much coloured by temperament, and
this has to some extent been the case with Canon Horsley. But
even when due allowance has been made for this influence, the judgment
of so shrewd and so experienced an observer must necessarily carry
much weight. His work may, therefore, do good service in reminding
us of the truth that with criminality, as with other complex social problems, we must take account of environment as well as of native tendency; we need not, for all that, accept the view, which this book seems
sometimes to suggest, that the race of human pigs will entirely disappear
with the abolition of styes. However, even those who disagree most intensely with Canon Horsley’s opinions will be grateful to him for a
stimulating and entertaining, if somewhat discursive, work. wc
. C. S.
