INFANT AND MATERNAL MORTALITY
| By RICHARD M. TITMUSS

UR knowledge of the processes of
mammalian reproduction, and par
ticularly of human reproduction, is
still pitifully inadequate. We know far too
little about the zxtiology of reproductive
waste—i.e. about infantile and maternal
mortality, stillbirth, and prematurity—and
are even hazy about the magnitude of the
problems they constitute. We do not know,
for example: (1) the total number of deaths
directly and indirectly due to maternity, (2)
the true rate of infant mortality (by
order of birth and age of mother), (3) the
incidence of spontaneous abortions, and (4)
the size and structure of British families and
the relationship of mortality thereto. Defects
in the classification of infant deaths were
revealed recently by Miller(?) and until this
year we had no precise knowledge of the
ages at which child-bearing occurred.(*)
Even in such a simple matter as the crude
infant mortality rate, serious distortion may
arise owing to the time-lag between birth
and its registration. Thus the introduction
of an incentive to immediate registration
(e.g. rationing) might, by artificially inflating
the annual number of births by 70,000,
reduce the apparent rate of mortality in one
year by as much as 15 per cent.

These are serious obstacles to progress
from a medical repair scheme to a social
prevention service. Without the facts,
physiological, chemical, genetic, social .and
environmental, there can be no true comprehension of the causative agencies. In the
past we have often had to rely on a few
public-spirited workers for the garnering of
new facts or the employment of existing,
but unutilized, sources of information. To
this category belongs Mrs. C. M. Burns, the
author of a recently published study on
infant and maternal mortality.(°)*

*Infant and Maternal Mortality in relation to size of
Family and Rapidity of Breeding. With a Foreword by
Lord Eustace Percy. University of Durham. Price 5s.

The Problem.
information on:

(x) The influence of the age and parity

of a woman on

(a4) Her own chance of survival in childbirth.

(o) Her own chance of survival for five
years after child-birth.

(c) The child’s chance to survive till five
years of age.

(2) The. probability of the child’s death
occurring before or during birth, in the
first month of post-natal life, from
1 month to 1 year, or from 1-5 years.

(2) The influence of a high death rate at
any stage on later death rates among the
same group of children.

(3) The influence of the rate of reproduction on the chance of survival of mother
and child.

(4) The. possible effect of certain social
factors such as father’s occupation, housing
and legitimacy on the conclusions drawn
from consideration of the biological factors.

The material comprised the records of the
Health Visitors of the Maternity and Child
Welfare area of the County of Durham for
the years 1930-37. The major part of the
work concerns 17,049 births in 1930, the
history of the survivors for the first five
years of their lives, and the history of the
previous pregnancies in the families studied.
The text of the report is closely packed with
statistical matter and there are 76 Tables,
6 Diagrams and 12 Appendices. It is impossible in this notice to summarize the whole
of the investigation but we may record some
of the more important findings.

Infant Mortality. The study confirms,
indisputably, that too rapid breeding is
harmful to both mother and child, and that
very early and very late child-bearing are
also productive of high mortality. These
findings are not new but they emphasize
afresh how undesirable is the structure of

The investigation sought

85 |
86

a society in which in one class very early
marriage is provoked by maximal earnings
occurring at youthful ages, and in another
undue postponement of marriage results from
incomes being inadequate until middle-age.
The lowest death rates for considerable groups
were found among first, second, and third
children born to mothers between 20-35,
and fourth and fifth children to mothers
between 35-40. Of all children born alive,
first children had the lowest death rates.
The incidence of stillbirths per 1,000 total
births varied from 43 for first births, 26 for
second, 32 for third, rising thereafter to 64
for seventh and later births. Late children of
large families returned high mortality at all
stages, i.e. before, during and after birth and
up to five years of age. Throughout the
investigation it is shown that maternal age
and rate of breeding are of considerable
importance whatever the parity of the child.
Thus, at all stages, births to older women are
more frequently associated with stillbirths
and neo-natal deaths. Tables and diagrams
are provided which show (a) the number of
births in each group, and (0) death rates at
different stages (stillbirths, neo-natal, 1-12
months and I-5 years) according to parity,
maternal age, rate of breeding, legitimacy
and illegitimacy, type of area (urban and
rural), social class and rooms per person and
per family. The results of a study of previous
pregnancies of mothers who gave birth in
1930 are shown in tables of rates per 1,000
pregnancies according to parity, maternal age
and the incidence of miscarriages and stillbirths. Death rates among the previous
children are also given, including estimated
rates for ages up to five and twenty. The
influence of multiple births and the birth
weight of first children are also studied.
Part III of this book, which is concerned
with maternal deaths and mortality among
women of reproductive age, is similarly
complex in its study of the age, rank, social
class and other factors. The result of these
immense labours is a painstaking report, the
importance of which it is difficult to judge.
Statistical Problems. It is curious that
although over two-thirds of the work is
concerned with infant mortality, we are

' THE EUGENICS REVIEW

nowhere told the number of deaths on which
the report is based. It would seem, according
to the rates given, that there were approximately 2,452, of which 656 were stillbirths,
1,270 infant deaths, and 526 deaths at ages
1-5 years. A further calculation seems to
show that these figures include 108 deaths of
illegitimate children and 131 multiple deaths
(some of which were presumably illegitimate).
A total of 2,452 deaths divided into four age
groups (stillbirths, neo-natal, 1-12 months
and 1-5 years), divided again into birth-rank
up to 13 plus, and further subdivided according to maternal age, leaves a very small
number of deaths in each group. Furthermore, we cannot, in many of the tables, tell
the proportionate weight involved by the
inclusion of the deaths of illegitimate children
and of multiple births. ‘When the number of
deaths is so small (ranging in many cases
from 3-50) these and other factors may be
important. Thus one third of the births
under twenty were illegitimate, and multiple
births (the incidence of which apparently
rises with increasing birth-rank) must have
a considerable effect on the death rate
of later children. The influence of the
abnormally high twinning rate in Durham
in 1930 was not negligible, because it
produced 25 per cent of the excess infant
mortality and stillbirths over the rate for the
whole country.

The variable weight of these disturbing
factors coupled with the small number of
deaths involved makes many of the conclusions somewhat unreal. Thus a discussion
on illegitimacy (page 36) is based on 7 and 34
deaths; on stillbirths to mothers under
twenty (page 36) on 5 and 14 deaths; ona
comparison. of the mining and illegitimate
groups (pages 36-7) on 186 and 29 deaths ;
on mortality among second children to
mothers under twenty (page 32) on 1 and 8
deaths; and on stillbirth and neo-natal
rates among first pregnancies to the over 35s
(page 32) on g and g deaths. The arguments
in the text proceed from the death rates (it is
not always clear whether they are based on
live or total births), the number of deaths not
being shown either in the text or in the tables.
In a great number of cases the differences are
INFANT AND MATERNAL MORTALITY 87

not statistically significant and consequently
the tables and the conclusions must be
interpreted with caution. It is clear that if
any firm conclusions are to be drawn on the
wide range of problems covered by the report
the sample must be much larger—a task,
in terms of labour, beyond the capacity of
one individual.

The Influence of Overcrowding. From
what has been said about the basic material,
it is apparent that some of the conclusions
are insecurely based.- Thus, Mrs. Burns finds
no association between housing space and
child health. This is contrary to the results
obtained by other workers. D’Arcy Hart and
Payling Wnight(*) in their study of tuberculosis considered housing to be an important
factor, while the Registrar-General(5) found
a high correlation between mortality and
housing even when the two factors of latitude
and social status were held constant.
Stocks(*) in his study of child mortality
showed that density per room at constant
density per acre had the effect of increasing
mortality step by step with increasing
density. Tables 32-39 in the Durham report
which deal with housing are not altogether
satisfactory. In some comparisons the better
housed, in others the worst housed, register
the heaviest mortality. Again, however, we
do not know the number of deaths in each
group, although they must be small, nor do
we know whether or not the illegitimate and
multiple births are included. The disturbing
effects of rent and family income are not
studied, nor is there any consideration of the
diseases which resulted in death. The tables
combine urban and rural experience, yet
overcrowding in rural districts is, from many
aspects, a very different thing from overcrowding in congested urban areas. On
page 190 Mrs. Burns remarks that: “ after
the first month or so, environment plays an
enormous part in determining death rates.”
It is precisely because the infective diseases
become of such importance in this period of
a child’s life that, other things being equal,
housing conditions must play some part in
determining morbidity and ultimately mortality. Surely two adults and one child with
0.6 of a room each are less exposed to infec
tion than two adults and five children living
in the same degree of overcrowding ?
Although Mrs. Burns does not bring out the
point, her study is concerned with a population which, according to the RegistrarGeneral, is 52 per cent rural and 48 per cent
urban (the County Boroughs are excluded
from the investigation). This contrasts
strongly with the position for the whole of
England and Wales, where only 20 per cent
of the population live in rural areas, 34 per
cent in urban districts, and 46 per cent in
London and the County Boroughs (1931
proportions).

In 1931 Durham was the worst housed
county in England, and in the field covered
by the report the degree of variation in
housing standards must have been extremely
slight. Because, therefore, no association was
found between housing and child health in
Durham, it does not necessarily mean that
no such correspondence exists in the whole
of the country. Nor does it mean that there
is no association in Durham, for causes of
death, incomes, rents and other factors were
not studied.

Social Conditions. The infant death rate
per 1,000 total births in 1930 in the area
covered by the report was 77 (for the 16,500
births of known parity); in the whole of
England and Wales the corresponding index
was 58. The rate for children of all unskilled
classes in the country was a little lower than
that of Durham.

In discussing the causes of this excess
mortality Mrs. Burns concludes that, in
addition to housing, ‘“ geographical and
climatic conditions are not very important
in determining infant and child death rates
compared with other biological and social
factors.”” An analysis of the 17,000 births
further subdivided into three groups—
miners, other manual workers and blackcoated and independent workers—shows the
first group to have the highest mortality.
This is the nearest approach to a study of
economic causes, but unfortunately we do
not know what proportion of the fathers in
each group were unemployed, the duration
of unemployment and so on. In these days
of full employment it is a little difficult to
88 _ THE EUGENICS REVIEW

recapture the economic and psychological
atmosphere of the depressed areas in the
1930's, but it is important to do so in order
to understand the background of Mrs.
Burns’ work. Lord Eustace Percy in his
Introduction remarks that the _ report,
“rather understates ”’ the social disfigurement of the Durham coalfields. But, with a
little emagination, abundant material can be
extracted from the Local Unemployment
Index issued by the Ministry of Labour.
From 1927 to 1936 Durham never had less
than approximately 20 per cent unemployment ; from the end of 1930 it rose to over
30 per cent, and for considerable periods it
was over 40 per cent. In 1930 two areas had
over 60 per cent and three over 40 per cent,
and by 1933 14 areas registered more than
40 per cent unemployment. Over 70 per
cent of the unemployed men in Crook,
according to the Pilgrim Trust Report, (7)
had been without work for five years or more,
yet despite this the survey found a high
standard of home conditions. In addition to
this level of unemployment .the County
(exclusive of the County Boroughs) in
March 1930 had over 50,000 persons in
receipt of domiciliary poor relief, including
over 20,000 children. The rate per 10,000
population amounted to 523, which may be
compared with 95 for Surrey and 195 for all
counties of England and Wales. In view of
this background of economic waste it seems
a little unreasonable to state, in connection
with the attention given by the social
services to the large families, that “ despite
the care lavished on them they remain
relatively poor stock—individuals likely to
need constant care and attention throughout
life.’ And “‘an enormous amount is being
done for these families, but can they be made
more self-reliant ? ”’ |

The fact that when the investigation was
repeated in 1936 (for a smaller group covering 579 stillbirths and 845 infant deaths) no
great improvement in mortality was recorded
is not altogether surprising.

Another factor which deserved greater
emphasis is that of migration. It has been
estimated that some 226,000 persons left
Durham (including the County Boroughs)

between 1921 and 1935(’). This outward
movement must have been selective. In
other words, the young, the unattached, the
small families and probably the most fit and
enterprising would go in search of work elsewhere. Then again in 1931 there were only
965 females to 1,000 males in the County
(excluding the County Boroughs), as against
1,088 for the whole country. This emigration
would mean, among other things, that the
larger families would figure prominently in
Mrs. Burns’ enquiry. It would also mean that
the importance of the “social problem ”
group would tend to be exaggerated.

All these factors—economic conditions,
selective migration, the rural character of
the area, a high twinning rate and the
absence of any analysis of cause of death—
make it difficult to apply the lessons of the
Durham investigation to the country | aS a
whole.

The Influence of the Declining Birth Rate.
Mrs. Burns concludes that the improvement
in mortality rates over the last few decades
has been brought about mainly by the declining birth rate. Undoubtedly this factor has
been of some importance not only in producing better spacing of births and in easing
biological strains and stresses but in releasing
more income for a smaller family. But few
conclusions can be drawn from her comparison of the Durham material with the
Registrar-General’s Ig1iz report (on child
mortality by duration of marriage, maternal
age and size of family for the whole country).
In the first place Durham during the 1930’s
was, as we have shown, quite unrepresentative of the whole country, and, secondly, the
Igi1 .data were, as the Registrar-General
pointed out, unreliable owing to misstatement of age and omission of infant deaths. (°*)
Moreover, the Registrar-General’s data concerned legitimate and legitimized births
where the husband was returned on the
Census schedule, but in the Durham study
we do not know the basic composition of the
material. How closely the birth rate among
the Durham population (about 60 per cent
of those studied were mining families)
corresponds with that of the whole mining
community we do not know, but the report is |
INFANT AND MATERNAL MORTALITY 89

incorrect in stating that family limitation has
not spread to the semi-skilled and unskilled
classes. It is remarked that as these classes
“do not postpone first births markedly
family limitation must be brought about, as
already suggested for miners, by a more
adequate spacing of later births.”’ But as
Innes(?*) has convincingly shown, unskilled
and semi-skilled miners reduced their fertility
between 1921 and 1931 to a greater extent
than practically every other large occupational group in the community. During the
ten years the unskilled reduced their fertility
by 50 per cent ; the semi-skilled by 48 per
cent ; and mine owners and skilled men by 28
percent. By 1931 the fertility of the unskilled
men was only slightly higher than that of the
mine owners—a notoriously infertile group.
If, however, Mrs. Burns is right, then Durham
must be even more unrepresentative than
we had imagined, and the lessons of the report
can hardly be applied to other depressed
communities such as South Wales and the
North-West. In any case the report overlooks the fact that between I9II and 1931
the gross reproduction rate of Durham
(excluding the County Boroughs) fell by
0.86, as compared with the reduction of
0.51 for England and Wales. Indeed,
Durham registered the greatest fall of any
county in England.

That a high infant death rate (before,
during and after birth), functioning as a
“ weeding-out ’’ process, need not accompany
a relatively high birth rate is shown by the
vital statistics of other countries and cities.
Holland before the war had by comparison
with England an extremely low stillbirth
rate, while neo-natal and post-natal mortality
were also very low. By 1936 Amsterdam, for
imstance, had reduced neo-natal mortality to
16 per thousand live births. Yet the net
reproduction rate of Holland was, during the

1930's, far higher than that of Durham. Nor

has this low child mortality in Holland,
which has existed for many years, led to an
increased morbidity and mortality at higher
ages. And despite their greater fertility,
women of reproductive ages in Holland
registered far lower death rates than those
obtaining in England and Wales, Scotland,

Sweden, Norway and Denmark—all countries
of lower fertility. Moreover, the fact that
declining mortality cannot be entirely
attributed to declining reproductivity has
been demonstrated by Kermack, McKendrick and McKinlay(#) in their exposition of
generation mortality.

The Factor of Nutrition. The report allots
only four pages to this subject, which is
dismissed rather summarily with the remark :
“Whether great improvements in the food
and physical conditions of.the majority of
the people would greatly decrease the
numbers of the sick and unfit would seem to
be rather a matter for experiment than
speculation.”’ There is no recognition of the
established facts that sub-optimal growth,
liability to infection, dental caries, bone
defects, gastro-intestinal hypotonia, _liability to hemorrhage and other deficiencies
may be attributable to an inadequate intake
of certain vitamins. Some authorities indeed
now regard pregnancy as a diet-efficiency
test. Nutritional status can to-day be
measured objectively by urinary saturation
tests, blood tests, estimation of blood
hemoglobin levels, glucose-pyruvate tolerance tests, and other methods. There have,
too, been many conclusive experiments—
e.g. the Toronto(”) and Norwegian(15) experiments—on the relationship of diet to
the health of mothers and infants. Had the
Durham investigation studied the incidence
of the diseases from which the children died,
the need for greater emphasis on diet would
perhaps have been made clear. Furthermore,
any discussion of maternal efficiency cannot
be complete without some consideration of
vitamin Br deficiency and its relationship to
increased irritability, lassitude and general
deterioration in mental alertness. To sum
up, the inadequate references in the report
to dietetic matters cannot be justified in the
light of recent advances in the field of
nutrition. |

Medical Care. Mrs. Burns has much of
value to say about the association between
the availability of skilled care and attention
and both infant and maternal mortality. In
this she reinforces some recent conclusions
by Baird and Wyper (#4). ‘“‘ It may be noted,”
go . THE EUGENICS REVIEW

she writes, “that one of the outstanding
impressions received from studying the
records relating to some 50,000 women with
children was the very low standard of personal health which the women tolerate uncomplainingly. How far this tends to make
them overlook many of the minor illnesses of
children which may so readily become major
illnesses cannot be stated. But on general
grounds it might be expected to do so.”
There are a number of blemishes in the
report. The twice repeated statement that
“it 1s more dangerous to be a miner’s wife
than to be a miner ”’ is not true, as shown in
Columns 1-6, Table 7, of the RegistrarGeneral’s Decennial Supplement (Part IIa,
1931, Occupational Mortality). The assumption in Appendix 8 that deaths from tuberculosis at ages 20-45 can be divided equally
among the sexes is not warranted by the
known age and sex distribution of the disease.
The statement that ‘‘ the average marriage
age of the women of the country as a whole
is between 20 and 25, but is approaching the
latter figure,’ is not correct. In 1930 the
average for all brides was 26.47, and for all
spinster brides 25.50. Figure 3 on page 33 has
a birth number missing and in Table B on
page 238 the death rate given as 198 should
presumably be 98. Table LXIX and
Appendices 10 and II are somewhat unsatisfactory for the reason that they do not
take account of the much higher accident

rate among males than females, and that the

age distribution of violent deaths has
changed markedly since the middle of the
nineteenth century. Five of the references
given in the text are not included in the list
at the end of the book and it is to be
regretted that there is no index.

Summary. The report ends on a pessimistic note. Professor David Burns in a
strongly worded Conclusion states that the
population trend will mean that “‘ the earners
will have to be taxed or otherwise contribute
towards the upkeep of (a) the fewer young,

(6) the more numerous aged, and (c) the
increasing number of the unfit.” The last
named, he remarks, “are the misfits of
civilization who at present form about Io per
cent of, our population and on whom most
of our social services concentrate. They will
form about 30 per cent of the next generation |
and, if the present fertility rates of this
“submerged tenth’ are continued, in two
generations we will be flooded with unskilled
labour that industry cannot absorb, unfit
people to crowd our hospitals, misfits for our
asylums and prisons, and, worst of all, the
great army of the ‘ just not well’ struggling
on amid circumstances a little too hard for
them.”’

It is a pity that an otherwise valuable
report, comprising much new material (on
a great proportion of which we have not been
able to comment), should contain some
blemishes ; should erroneously attempt to
apply the experience of one abnormally
circumstanced community to the whole
country, and should end on a note more
reminiscent of the nineteenth century than
of the potentialities of the twentieth.

References:

(1) Miller, F. J. W. (1942), Lancet, 2.

(2) Now available in Registrar-General’s Annual
Review, 1938, Part II, Civil.

(3) Burns, C. M. (1942). Infant and Maternal Mortality in Relation to Size of Family and Rapidity of
Breeding. Dept. of Physiology, King’s College, University of Durham. Pp. 247. 5s.

(4) D’Arcy Hart, P., and Wright, G. Payling (1939).
Tuberculosis and Social Conditions a England.

(5) Statistical Review, Text, 19

(6) Stocks, P. (1934). Proc. Roy Soc. Med., 1145.

(7) Men Without Work. 1938.

(8) Minutes of Evidence (18) of the Royal Commission on the Geographical Distribution of the
Insured Population. 1938. *

(9) Fertility of Marriage, Part II, 1923 (page xlviii).

(10) Innes, J. W. (1941), Millbank Memorial Fund
Quarterly, Vol. 19, No.

(11) Kermack, W. oO. McKendrick, A. G.,
Money P. L. (1934), Lancet #,1..

(12) Ebbs, J. H., Tisdall, F. F., and Scott, W. A.
(1941), Nutrition, 29, 515.

ae 3) Utheim-Toverud, K. (1939), Acta paediair., 24,

and

tes) Baird, D., and Wyper, J. F. B. (1941), Lancet, 9.

 

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXIV, No. 8.
