THE EUGENICS REVIEW.

The Sub-Man.

By R. AuSTIN FREEMAN,

The conditions of life to which primitive man is subject are substantially identical with those of other animals, and indeed, of all other
organisms. ‘Fhe small aggregations which form the most simple
societies are mere multiples of individuals, in which no radically new
factor is introduced by the association. The emergence of such factors
awaits the development of at least the beginnings of civilisation.

Those conditions of life which thus affect equally early man and
the lower organisms, are characterised by a rigid individualism. Disregarding such exceptional forms as the compound zoophytes and
certain social insects (which, however, form no real exception to the
rule) every organism is strictly individualist. Under natural conditions, collectivism is virtually unknown.

Since the point is of importance, and since the word ‘*individualist’’ is frequently misused , it may be we!l to define the sense in which it
is now being employed. By individualism I mean a state in which
each individual is economically self-contained, securing its existence
by its own activities and obtaining for its own benefit the entire product
of those activities; neither receiving any contribution to its maintenance from any other individual nor furnishing any contribution to the
support of others.

Of the converse state—collectivism—a typical in tance is furnished
by our own bodies; which are made up of a multitude of structural
units—tissue elements—each of which contributes to a common
nutritive fund, which is the nutrition of the whole body; from which
general fund each unit draws its particular nutrition, irrespe*tive of the
magnitude of its own contribution.

Looking at the two states or systems of maintenance, that which
immediately strikes us is that whereas Individualism favours the welfare and survival of superior organisms which are perfectly adapted to
their environment, collectivism favours the survival of inferior organisms which are imperfectly adapted to their environment. An eminent
economist has recently referred to ‘‘the obvious advantage of lifting the
burdens from the weak and putting them on the strong’’; and possibly
this plan may have a symmetrical appzarance which wiil commend it
to the economist. But to the biologist it will be entirely unacceptable.
If it had been in operation in the past, the evolution of superio= types by
natural selection would have been impossible. If, when a favourable
variation occurred and an improved type of organism came into being,
the benefits of the improvement, instead of being applied to the superior
type to secure its survival and the establishment of a superior race, had
been forthwith transferred to the defective to enable them to survive in
spite of their defects ; there could have been no such thing as an advance
in type. Every favourable variation would have been cancelled as
soon as it appeared.

This is not Nature’s way. Under natural conditions, every
384 EUGENICS REVIEW.

organism maintains its own existence by its own activities. If it is
unable to perform those necessary activities it perishes and leaves no
progeny. A defective organism is thus eliminated as soon a° it appea’s,
and the surviving remainder consists exclusively of fit forms adequately
adapted to their environment. So, too, in the case of primitive man.
He is engaged in a continuous struggle for the bare means of existence.
He lives from hand to mouth, precariously and with difficulty. The
day’s food is the product of the day’s efforts, and if those efforts are
relaxed, he goes hungry. There is no surplus which can be passed on to
the idle, the incapable or the helpless. Outside the family, no collectivism is possible.

It is evident that in such a society, the defective individual has no
permanent place. As soon as he emerges from childhood his defective
qualities begin to take effect ; and they take effect upon himself. If his
deficiency is extreme he succumbs early to the hardships and perils of
primitive life. If he is less deficient, he struggles on for a time, but
fails to qualify for marriage, and leaves no defective offspring. It
follows that these primitive societies tend to be composed exc usively of
capable and energetic men, each of whom is an asset to the community ;
and since the more capabie are the more prosperous, and since prosperity
in primitive societies tends to be associated with more numerous
offspring, and since children tend to inherit the qualities of their
parents, the t ndency is for the more capable part of the population to
increase more rapidly than the less capable, that is to say , for the average
quality of the population to undergo progressive improvement. But
an advance in the quality of the units of a society involves an advance
in the society as a whole; and this advance becomes manifested in a
gradual emergence from extreme barbarism to the beginnings of civilisation.

The establishment of civilised conditions ushers ina change. Life
is now easier. The daily struggle for bare existence has ceased.
There begins to be a surplus of the means of subsistence which the more
fortuna e can share with the less fortunate. And with this easing off
of the struggle there has come a softening of manners; a growth of the
nobler sentiments of altruism, of charity, of sympathy; of a desire to
mitigate the sufferings of the weak and helpless. Religious precept
enjoins the prosperous, as a sacred duty, to make up out of their surplus
the deficiencies of the less capable. The defective individual has
become an object not only of pity but of care and solicitude. To protect him from the consequences of his own defects has become a pious
act which Religion duly acknowledges. ‘‘He that giveth to the Poor
lendeth to the Lord.’’

Here, then, is a visible transition from a rigidly individualist state
to one in which therc is a clear tendency to collectivism. But it is only
a tendency. There is no conscious acceptance of the collectivist
princ:ple. Almsgiving is still a voluntary act, and the gifts are
admittedly the property of the giver, of which he has the undisputed
right of disposal. Nevertheless, though it is only a tendency, it produces its inevitable effects; the unfit are enabled to survive; and their
survival perpetuates their defects and introduces an unfit element into
the population which was previously absent.
THE SUB-MAN. 385

The transition to the next stage—that of real Collectivism—is not
yet completed. In its final form of State Socialism or Communism it
has, up to the present, been adopted, in this countrv, only by certain
political theorists. But the principle has been accepted and is being
applied on a rapidly-inereasing scale. The voluntary gifts of the
charitable are now being replaced by compulsory contributions,
collected by the State from the relatively well-to-do and distributed
among those who are unable to achieve their own complete maint nance by their own unassisted efforts.

Looking at these changes broadly from the biologi al standpoint,
it is evident that thev represent the growth of conditions ever increasingly favourable to the survival of the unfit; and it is a matter of
common observation that such survival has, in fact, occurred. Nor is
it possible to doubt that as provisions increase for relieving the
incapable of the responsibility for their own maintenance, there will be
a corresponding increase in the number of persons demanding such
relief. And now, from the consideration of the conditions under which
the unfit class comes into being, we may turn to the consideration of the
individuals of whom that class is composed.

The unfit may be separated into groups in accordance with the
qualities which determine their unfitness. Roughly, and somewhat
arbitrarily, they may be arranged in two main groups: those whose
unfitness is due to some pathological condition, some gross deviation in
structure or function from the characters of a completely normal human
being; and those in whom such palpable abnormality is absent. The
former group, which will include the insane, the epileptic, idiots, imbeciles, deaf-mutes, certifiable mental defectives and those who are the
subjects of inheritable diseases and malformations, we are not at
present considering. Their increa:ing number and the social danger
that it represents are already attracting the very earnest attention of all
thoughtful persons. But the same cannot be said of the less conspicuous but far more numerous members of the other group. Yet, great as
is the danger to society from the multiplication of the manifestly
abnormal! unfit, it is small compared with that which arises from the
almost unobserved increase of those classes of the unfit which are
apparently normal; and to the latter we may accordingly direct our
attention with profit, considering first their characteristics and then
their influence on the community im a eugenic sense.

Since these individuals present no gross abnormality, it may
reasonably be asked, in what does their unfitness consist? In what
respects do they differ from the completely normal and the completely
fit? The answer is that it is simply a matter of deficiency, and particularly of deficiency in mental development. They are just inferior
human beings; defective mentally, morally and often physically.
They fail to attain the minimum quality which we associate with the
race to which they belong; they are probably inferior to the members of
any aboriginal race that is known to us. Their mental] faculties even
fall short of what we are accustomed to conceive as the human standard ;
and as we sometimes apply—not inappropriately—the term ‘‘Supermen’’ to the members of that illustrious minority which furnishes the
intellectual mot ive-force to society, so to these, who are as far below as
386 EUGENICS REVIEW.

(4

the others are above the mean, we may properly apply the term ‘‘submen.’’
Owing to the inevitable segregation of the social classes, the submen of our population are almost unknown to the majority of middleclass persons. A visit to the slums brings them into view, but there
they mingle with unfortunates of a better type, and commonly their
character is unrecognised, or is assumed to be the product of the environment. In pre-war days, before unemployment had become a recognised avocation, specimens of this class were to be met with on ‘he main
country roads, tramping in irregular processions from town to town,
from union to union, begging from passers-by , picking up unconsidered
trifles of derelict property or sitting by the road-side, boiling the teabilly, refreshing themselves from the scran-bag or sorting out the day’s
catch. Or they might have been seen, accompanied by a graduated
row of their offspring, slowly patrolling quiet streets singing hymntunes. But these were solitary specimens giving no idea of the actual
number existing. In the reception wards of prisons such as Holloway
and Brixton they appeared in larger bodies; but it was not until the
later years of the war that they came into view in really large numbers.
Then, when the Military Service Act assembled great aggregatious of
men, collected without selection from particular areas, one wa: able to
study them in solid masses, and under conditions peculiarly favourable
for observation. For the environment into which they were introduced was at least as favourable as that to which the earlier, volunteer,
units had been exposed, and thus comparison with the latter was made
easy.
In the last two years of the war, the large training camps contained
two types of units which were peculiarly rich in examples of the subman class. There were the home-service units formed of C.3. men who
had been rejected as unfit for general service; and newly-raised units
mostly consisting of under-age recruits, including the ‘‘young soldier
battalions.’’ The former were, of course, selected groups. They had
been weeded out and were admittedly unfit. But it is to be noted that
their military unfitness was based exclusively on their physical condition. Medical boards had no instructions to enquire into the mental
state of the men sent for examination. Unless a man were a lunatic,
an idiot or approaching the condition of an imbecile, his mental
quality was not within the scope of the inquiry. Accordingly there
was no reason to suppose that the mental quality of these men was
exceptional; a comparison of them with the men of the new units
tended to confirm this view. But if the level of intelligence that they
displayed represented anything like the average of that of the labouring classes, it suggested a profoundly disturbing state of affairs.
Naturally, the men were not all alike. They were not homogeneous
bodies of sub-men. But the average of quality, both mental and
physical, was alarmingly low and the proportion of abjectly unferior
types was disconcertingly large. a
In these latter cases it was often difficult to decide whether they
were to be regarded as normal or pathological. Admitted mental
deficiency approaching the imbecile type, which commonly came into
view when drafts were being examined, was definitely abnormal.
THE SUB-MAN. 3887

Cases of neurasthenia, of marked muscular tremor, of unexplained
nervousness, of emotional instability with a tendency to weep from no
apparent cause; the surprisingly numerous cases in which the persisence of infantile habits called for special provisions in regard to sleeping
quarters ; all these might be considered as borderline cases. But apart
from these more or less abnormal examples, there was a vast number of
men of whom one could say no more than that they were of comprehensively low quality—sub-men.

On the physical side their inferiority was not so noticeable. The
C.3. men were, of course, physically unfit—in a small proportion of
cases, owing to military injuries; but the majority had been defective
on enlistment. In the new units a fair percentage were quite normal
as to their bodily development, but in general they tended to be somewhat weedy and undersized. Their teeth were extraordinarily bad; so
bad that great dental establishments were attached to the camps for the
purpose of supplying dentures to those who were from this cause unfit
for general service. Apparently the condition was due to rickets in
early childhood, which, in its turn, must have been the result of neglect and injudicious feeding during infancy. And from the same
cause—neglect and stupidity—their feet presented all kinds of acquired
deformities such as displaced toes, multiple corns. callosities and misshapen nails. Finally, the general uxder-development was, in a
number of cases, associated with delayed adolescence, men of eighteen
or twenty having the stature and all the characters of boys of twelve or
even less.

But it was on the psychical side that the condition of these men was
so alarming. The general average was, as has been said, amazingly
low but a large proportion consisted of typical sub-men, little removed
from the recognised mental defective; and this type we may now consider in a little more detail.

His mental condition is almost unimaginable by an ordinary
educated person with fully developed faculties. It is completely
rudimentary. His mind is capable of taking in only the simplest
ideas and then only one at a time. As soon as a second idea is presented
the first is obliterated. He cannot take in a general idea even of the
simplest kind. He cannot grasp a principle; and if an attempt is made
to demonstrate it to him by a number of particular instances, the
attempt fails. The instances remain separate in hismind. He cannot
connect or compare them. He is incapable of the simplest generalisation. And since his consciousness will hold only one idea at a time,
and since propositions remain in his mind separate and uncorrected,
he is practically unable to reason and is insusceptible to proof or
demonstration. Evidence makes no appreciable impression on him
since the successive propositions of an argument are considered
separately, the connection between them remaining unperceived. He
cannot get beyond a particular case.

Owing to this rudimentary state of mind, attempts to train the
late R.A.M.C. units (which were formed mostly of C.8. men transferred from the Labour Corps) had to be to a great extent abandoned.
Lectures delivered to them were a farce. The utmost simplification
of the matter and the language failed to make instruction of this kind
388. EUGENICS REVIEW.

intelligible. When a lecture had been delivered, a few questions
made it clear that, not only had the men learned nothing; they had not
the faintest idea as to what the lecturer had been talking about.
Instruction that would have been easily grasped by intelligent children
was beyond the powers of these men. Moreover, to the difficulty of
communicating the matter itself was added the further difficulty of
achieving mere verbal intelligibility. The vocabulary of these men
was so limited, their ignorance of the meaning of quite ordinary words
was so excessive that it was extremely difficult to frame intelligible
sentences.

The great majority of these men were able to read and write in an
elementary fashion, but an appreciable number were completely
illiterate, and one man could not tell the time by a clock. The
illiteracy, by itself, was of no great significance. Fifty years ago
there were plenty of elderly persons of excellent intelligence who could
neither read nor write; and in the case of the sub-men, the accomplishment can be of little value. But in these instances, illiteracy was
evidence of excessively low intelligence, since it is practically certain
that it was not due to lack of instruction.

A question which naturally suggests itself is, how does the subman of our own race compare with members of aboriginal races? Some
thirty years ago, the present writer lived and travelled for a time in
various parts of West Africa and made the somewhat intimate acquaintance of the natives of those countries; and it was inevitable that when
he encountered, during the war, these great bodies of low-type
Britons, he should recall the peculiarities of his old aboriginal friciuds
and institute comparisons. .

Psychically, the British sub-man presents numerous resemblances
to the aboriginal negro, with certain important differences. The
resemblances are partly due to the crudity and simplicty of he conditions of life and the domestic habits, and partly to the undeveloped
state of the mind. The conceptions of cl anliness, for instance, are in
both those of the lower animals In their persons they are usually
clee in an ablu:ionary sense, but their recognition of the nature of
essential dirt isobscure. They will eat and drink from vessels in
common use, exchange pipes or water-bottles. and if thirsty, cannot be
prevented from drinking any water that may be available, even that
from ponds or muddy streams. There is a total disregard as to the
state of the hands. Sores, septic wounds, filth of all kinds are hand ‘ed
with no apparent perception of defilement, and food and drinking
vessels manipulated without anything more than the most per:unctory
cleansing of the hands.

Another primitive characteristic is the complete indifference to
noise. Like the African, the subman appears to be unconscious of
any disturbing quality in loud sounds. He can sleep or rest in the
midst of an uproar, and has no idea of stepping lightly or speaking
softly when he enters a ward or tent full of sleeping men. He appears
to enjoy noise for its own sake, and is never quiet excepting under
compulsion. He continually sings, whistles, stamps rhythmically,
drums on walls or tables, and makes noises with resonant objects or
executes hideous performances with a mouth-organ. On the other
THE SUB-MAN. 389

hand, he appears to be quite devoid of musical faculty ; although, on the
march, he bellowed unceasingly, his vocal efforts were usually quite
unco-ordinated with those of his neighbours, so that the joint result was
mere noise.

Another point of resemblance between the sub-man and the negro
is the frequency of stammering; and the cause in both cases seems to be
the same. The speech is voluble, hurried, of an imperfectly-articulated, ‘‘jabbering’’ quality and usually very loud; and in an assembly, all talk at once, cach struggling to make himself heard above the
shouts of the others. As a result, the effort of rapid speech tends to
outrun the matter and thus give rise to this defect of articulation.

But between the negro and the sub-man there are certain wellmarked differences. Thus the latter is mentally dull; he is helpless
and unresourceful ; he seldom has any kind of manual skill or knowledge
of handicraft, or. indeed, anv appreciable knowledge of any sort. He
is markedly deficient in self-control and in thrift and providence; his
manners are uncouth and discourteous and he has no conception of any
kind of social amenities or traditional observances.

In all these respects the negro is conspicuously superior. He is
usually vivacious, humorous, full of boisterous fun and high spirits.
He is scrupulously polite even to his equals. He never passes a
stranger on the road without a courteous greeting. He is punctilious
in respect of the traditional forms of salutation, and makes elaborate
enquiries as to the welfare of a stranger’s family. He steps off the
road into the bush to let a caravan pass and speeds the carriers on their
way with good wishes. Then he is far from lacking in accomplishments.
His knowledge of animals and his interest in their habits is remarkable.
He nearly always knows the principal constellations and the planets.
He has a good repertoire of myths and folk-stories, and at least some
acquaintance with the complex religious traditions of his tribe. He is
extremely handy and self-helpful. He can fish and catch game, he can
make a fire (without matches), he can cook his food, spin good yarn
from the wild cotton with a simple spindle-whorl, can carry on simple
agriculture, make and mend the implements that he uses, and can build
a house and thatch a roof. Specially skilled individuals practise more
advanced handicrafts such as that of the weaver, the goldsmith, the
stool-carver or the blacksmith; but the above simple arts are known
to and practised by practically all. From which it will be seen that the
aboriginal negro is economically self-contained. He can do all that is
necessary for his own maintenance; he can manage his own affairs
without assistance, and is a hardy, robust, energetic man.

From this comparison it is evident that the sub-man of our own
race is markedly inferior to the aboriginal negro. But the negro is very
definitely inferior to the normal European, as is clearly shown, not
only by the instructive intelligence tests that were used in the American
army during the war, but also by the fact that he has never produced
anvthing like an indigenous civilisation. The unavoidable conclusion
is that the sub-man is a degenerate form, inappropriate to our advanced
civilisation, or, indeed, to any kind of human society known to us.

The above brief examination of the physical and mental peculiarities of the sub-man suggests certain questions. We naturally wish to
3890 EUGENICS REVIEW.

know: First, what is his numerical strength; what proportion of the
whole population does his class form? Second, is that proportion
stationary or is it increasing? Third, are there any changes in the
condition of our society that can be traced to his existence? Let us
consider the first question.

The number of sub-men per thousand of the population cannot be
arrived at statistically. The class is not a homogeneous one. It
merges imperceptibly at the one end in that of the certifiable mental
defectives, and at the other in that of the less gifted part of the normal
population. Its size has to be arrived at by inference from observed
phenomena apparently associated with its existence. Thus our
personal observations of the great slum areas of London and the larger
provincial towns inform us of the existence of large aggregations of lowtype men and women. Then there are certain facts connected with
unemployment. Of the vast number of men who can obtain no work,
we learn that the great proportion belong to the category of unskilled
labourers. But what is an unskilled man? He is a man who has
reached the adult state without having acquired any special aptitude
for performing any kind of self-maintaining activity. He is capable
only of unskilled labour, that is to say, of muscular actions that are
common to all human beings. But such a condition implies an
abnormally low intelligence. There are no unskilled barbarians.
Aboriginal man is, as we have seen, furnished with all the skill that
is necessary to support himself and provide for all his needs. Even
the lower animals are not entirely unskilled, for each of them is capable
of performing efficicntly all those activities—often quite complex—
by which its own existence and that of its offspring are secured. It has
remained for civilised man to evolve a form that presents no specific
adaptation to its environment.

Again, there are certain public institutions of recent origin which
appear to assume the existence of vast numbers of relatively incapable
persons. Free education, including, if necessary, free meals and boots,
schemes for providing houses below their economic rents, school
clinics, maternity and infant welfare centres, old age pensions, health
insurance, unemployment pay; all these benefits assume the existence
of great bodies of persons who do not make complete provision for their
own support. They are of the nature of contributions produced by the
surplus energy and effort of the more capable and consumed by those in
whom these qualities are relatively deficient ; and their magnitude is a
measure of the size of the latte” class.

There are certain other social phenomena which lead the observer
to infer the existence in our society of great numbers of persons of very
inadequate intelligence, but their connection with political issues
renders them unsuitable for consideration in this place. But the facts
already noted seem to yield the conclusion that the sub-men form an
appreciable proportion of our population.

The second question, whether that proportion is constant or increas ing, may be dealt with summarily. The facts are familiar to the members of this society. The manifest probability that a man who is
deficient in self-control, in providence and in a sense of responsibility
for his own maintenance would tend to produce a large family is borne
THE SUB-MAN. 391

out by observation. The fertility of the different social classes is,
roughly speaking, inversely proportional to their capability of supporting their offspring. The lowest birth-rate is that of the rich and the
professional classes; the highest that of the mental defectives, the
submerged, the permanent poor and the casual unskilled labourers.
And it is to be observed that the superabundant fertility of the unfit is
being reinforced by an ever-increasing inhibition of eliminating
agencies. Under natural conditions the defective mental qualities
which tend to produce excessive fertility tend also to produce an
excessive infant mortality, by which the fertility is to some extent
cancelled. But this tendency is countered by the benevolent interference of the fit. The children of the sub-people become the objects of
public care and solicitude. with the result that the child-mortality is
being steadily reduced. Thus, while the increase is uncontrolled, the
elimination is being steadily inhibited. Under these circumstances
it is obvious that the proportion of the unfit to the whole population,
especially to the definitely superior part of it, must be rapidly increasing; and that if these conditions continue to operate, there must
presently be established an actual numerical preponderance of the unfit.

The third question, whether there are visible any changes in
society that are traceable to the existence of the sub-man, is not easy to
answer definitely. But there are certain appearances which seem to
suggest an affirmative. There is, for instance, the change in the type
of social co-operation as shown by the rapid growth of collectivist
institutions; institutions which have for their function the elimination
of economic inequalities by lifting the burdens from the weak and
putting them on the strong, as our economist expresses it. Such a
condition is evidently favourable to the weak—who have their burdens
taken from them—and unfavourable to the strong, who are thus made
to bear the burdens of others as well as their own. But, in a biological
sense, the strong are the fit, and the weak the relatively unfit. The
appearances therefore suggc.t a tendency for social organisation to
evolve in a direction which shall render it better adapted to the needs
of the unfit and less adapted to the needs of the fit; a change that might
be expected to occur coincidently with a relative increase of the unfit
and decrease of the fit.

Passing over other political changes and certain recent social
upheavals, not because they are irrelevant but because they raise contentious issues, we may note one or two social phenomena which bear
on this question; as, for instance, the disastrous effect on our literature, and especially on our periodical literature, of the vast, unintelligent, uncultivated reading public that: compulsory education has
brought into existence. The recent disappearance of ‘“The Athenaeum,’’ which we must all deplore, is an instance of natural selection
acting in accordance with an altered standard of fitness. Public
entertainments, too, show a tendency to become adjusted to a declining intelligence; in particular the ubiquitous picture theatres, which,
at enormous cost and by the use of elaborate means and appliances,
produce an entertainment which is frequently of almost incredible
puerility.

Considering these and other like appearances together with the
3892 EUGENICS REVIEW.

confused economic conditions now prevailing, the general lack of social
co-ordination and the mutual hostility of the different social classes;
noting the unparalleled spectacle of a population which is unable to
provide itself with habitations; and bearing in mind that these conditions coincide with a differential birth-rate in which number and fitness
are inversely proportional; it is difficult to avoid the conviction that
we are looking on a group of related phenomena which together indicate
a decline in essential civilisation. It has been stated by a distinguished
member of this Society that the rise and fall of civilisations in the past
has had little connection with germinal change; but if we convert the
proposition and consider the probable effect of unfavourable germinal
change on civilisation, it will surely seem incredible that a population
can decline in quality without producing a corresponding decline in the
civilisation which it had created when its quality was better.

It would seem as though something should be said as to the
possible means of averting the social danger created by the increase of
the sub-men. But the subject is too large and important to be raised
at the end of a paper. Whatever form the remedy takes, its purpose
must be to arrest the multiplication of this class; and whoever can
suggest an efficient remedy will be a benefactor, not only to mankind
at large but to the sub-man himself. For, of the man who comes into
the world unprovided with the means of securing his own welfare it may
be truly said that ‘‘he is born unto trouble as the sparks fly upward.”’
