THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and also the possible influence of relaxation of
natural selection through civilization. The supposed colour blindness of many mammals, pigmentation and colour vision, colour blindness
in art and industry, and colour naming in
different languages are among the further
problems considered in Chapter XII. It is not
necessary to add that this is a most valuable
book. R. W. PICKFORD

SOCIOLOGY

Benjamin, Harry and Masters, R. E. L. Prostitution and Morality. London, 1965. Souvenir
Press. Pp. x +495. Price 70s.

THIS BOOK IS sub-titled “A definitive report on
the prostitute in contemporary society and an
analysis of the causes and effects of the suppression of prostitution”. Some qualification of
these words is needed, however, if an accurate
description of its contents and the authors’
intention is to be conveyed. “Contemporary
society’” means, for all practical purposes, the
United States; and the reference to “the suppression of prostitution” discloses the theme—
for this is, in essence, a frontal attack upon the
official legal attitude of all the states in the
Union, which is Prohibitionist. The Prohibitionist system aims at the prohibition of prostitution
in all its aspects, and is now the policy of only
a few states other than America; most countries
favour the system rather confusingly termed
Abolitionism—that is, the abolition of all regulation of prostitution, whether specifically by
law or by the establishment of brothels and the
operation of a police des moeurs. Abolitionism
is the system favoured in this country, and the
authors regard it as the least obnoxious method
of dealing with prostitution by the conventional
means and processes of law; but in reality they
would accept nothing less than complete toleration of the prostitute and all her works, and their
final chapter, “‘Sex as Service”? indicates concisely their view of the matter. Most men, they
contend, need regular coition; but not all can
obtain it. The prostitute can offer a coital service
which could buttress the cooling marriage, assist
the therapy of the psychiatrist or physician,
minister to the prisoner and the member of the
armed services, and contribute to the education

az

of the young—if only moralists and the like
were not so blindly prejudiced towards her!

The case for toleration is supported by what
may be felt to be a needless volume of “‘pornography” (using the word in its strict sense).
Neither the material nor the tone are those of
a “report’”—an objective, factual statement in
the neutral language of a sociological document.
All aspects of American prostitution are racily
depicted, and are garnished with case histories;
we certainly learn a lot about the subject, but
it is not so certain that we are the wiser, or that
the authors’ plea for toleration is enhanced
thereby. The historical aspects of the question
are also briefly treated, but unfortunately the
complete absence of specific and detailed documentation makes it difficult to check the statements made, some of which appear to one historian of sexual relation to be of doubtful
accuracy.

The weakest feature of the book, however, is
that though it purports to deal with the moral
aspects of prostitution it never, in fact, shows
any sign of coming to grips with the real issues.
The word “morality” appears in the title, but
not in the index, and any references to the subject
are incidental. It is assumed that sexual gratification is an almost universal human need which
must be met, and the authors follow the logic
of their argument to the point of justifying a
““sex service for the female’. But this assumption
is not subjected to any rigorous criticism.
Coition, like all else involving two human beings,

is a personal relation—and one of a peculiarly

intimate and searching kind; yet there is no
discussion of the nature of relation as such, and
of sexual relation in particular—and no attempt
to examine seriously the contention that prostitution is essentially an exploitive relationship in
which man and woman betray their humanity.
It has been argued that coition should always
be an act of love (in other than the sentimental
or superficially romantic sense) and an expression
of a common life. Such a view of coition implies
an outright rejection of prostitution as a moral
act, and it has been seriously propounded by
others than the straight-laced fanatics whom the
authors condemn. It is a view certainly open to
discussion, and no book dealing with prostitution
and morality in a responsible way should neglect
REVIEWS OF BOOKS

to consider it. This and other moral questions
raised by prostitution should have been treated
with the seriousness that they deserve, and
curtailment of other material would have ensured that this was done without enlarging the
book.

SHERWIN BAILEY

Williamson, G. Scott, and Pearse, Innes H.
Science, Synthesis and Sanity. London, 1965.
Collins. Pp. 352. Price 45s.

THIS BOOK Is the work of two doctors who
inspired the Peckham Experiment which first
took off as a pilot project in 1926-29. This later
developed into the Pioneer Health Centre, a
scheme which combined the recreational amenities of a family club with facilities for education
in healthy living, regular medical overhaul and
supervision with an integrated approach to
positive health based on the study of the individual in relation to the ecological background
of the family. When the centre closed in 1951
from want of funds, Dr. Williamson began the
preparation of this book, but died before its
completion, since undertaken by the co-author,
his wife.

The Peckham Experiment was an immensely
important pioneering venture, which has paved
the way for far-reaching future developments
involving not only the National Health Service
but the whole matter of healthy living in the
widest sense.

When the scope, purpose and validity of the
National Health Service is being subjected to
scrutiny and reassessment, the light shed by the
Peckham Experiment is highly relevant and
significant. Despite some successes, the NHS
remains less a programme of promoting health
than of palliating disease, though the existence
of the large “submerged iceberg of disease”
shows how far it is from doing even that. It was
in fact the Peckham Experiment which was
largely responsible for first drawing attention
to the problem of unrecognized and untreated
disease. Thus figures drawn from overhaul of
the first and second 500 families examined,
revealed that only about one person in ten was
free from some disorder or other, although well

ER—C

over half imagined themselves well. The experiment also demonstrated how much could be
done to correct and prevent these common but
little appreciated deviations from optimum
health and fitness, by skilled medical supervision
and the inculcation of better hygiene and living
habits. When one regards the thousands of
millions squandered on drink, tobacco, gambling,
dissipation and frivolity, with misery, frustration
and impaired well-being as the outcome, it is
clear that the diversion of a few hundred millions
from those channels into health conservation
and promotion on the lines foreshadowed by
the Peckham Experiment might represent an
excellent bargain, from both the social and the
individual point of view.

This book presents the basic philosophy which
underlay the Peckham Experiment. Accepting
fully the contribution science has made to an
understanding of organic mechanisms, its authors
question the adequacy of the quantitative
approach to healthy living. Many qualitative
factors, including feelings, relationships and
activating motives remain poorly defined and
outside the scope of the essentially quantitative
methodology of science to-day. They claim that
qualitative as well as quantitative aspects must
be taken into account in relation to the wholeness that is health.

In synthesis alone lies the sanity which
maximizes the well-being of the individual in
integrating it with the interests of society. An
hypothesis combining these conditions is presented which is open to verification by experiment. In this there is offered a definition of the
dimensions of quality and of the conditions in
which it becomes manifest, and the possible
correlation of these dimensions with those of
the Space Time Realm is explored.

The potentiality and promise of the Peckham
Experiment sprang from the background of
hypothesis presented in this book, which deserves
consideration of all who are concerned to advance the ideals of positive health and creative,
integrated living. One may note with satisfaction
the promise of a further book which will review
in additional detail from the qualitative angle
the material which has been observed in terms
of that hypothesis.

HERBERT BREWER

33
