BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE”
By SIR MACFARLANE BURNET, M.D., E.R.

Director of the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Melbourne

ing remarks that, from the foundation

of the British Association and its
daughter societies, Association meetings had
always served as pulpits from which the
public could be offered enlightenment on the
achievements of science, uplifted by promises
of its future benefits or chastened by its
warnings. On this occasion he had sought
for a subject with real human relevance.
There had been a hundred years’ war against
plague and pestilence that had ended in
their almost complete control; with polio
now preventable, there was now no major
killing or crippling disease which human
effort could not reduce to insignificant
proportions. But a human problem almost
greater than the one that had been eliminated
had been raised—pressure of human overpopulation in the under-developed areas of
the world. This was the most important
political problem of to-day.

His final choice of topic had been strongly
influenced by the fact that it was more than
fifty years since a president of the Association
was a graduate of medicine. It had seemed
that this might be a suitable occasion for a
biologist with a medical background to look
at some of the current problems of medicine.
Sir Macfarlane continued:

S: Macfarlane Burnet said in his open
Medicine as Biological Science

Medicine is many things—it is an art, a
science, and an expression of human compassion—it is an ancient and honourable
profession, jealous of its status, its emoluments, and its solidarity—and it is deeply
conservative. When I look at medicine from

* The Presidential Address to the Dunedin Meeting
(1957) of the Australian and New Zealand Association
for the Advancement of Science. Reprinted from The
Australian Journal of Science (January 1957. Volume
19, Number 3a) by kind permission of the Editor and
Sir Macfarlane Burnet.

127

the scientist’s angle only, I am forgetting
much of what is most important. Nevertheless, the practice of medicine is perhaps the
most direct of all the channels by which the
advance of knowledge is applied to human
benefit. It is very hard to define science, but
for most purposes I prefer to believe that it
is the systematic exercise of human intelligence to find the most effective means of
satisfying human needs and desires. Health
and life are the basic needs of everyone, and
other scientists are justified occasionally in
wanting to know that medicine is making the
best practical use of the intellectual and
material weapons that science is providing.
What I am particularly concerned about,
and what I think should be brought forward
on such an occasion as this, are the medical
problems that have not been dealt with
effectively or are arising now as a result of
the new conditions of our scientific civilization. It is inevitable that the major changes
that have resulted from the virtual elimination of infectious and nutritional disease
should bring into the foreground a different
set of medical problems. The most obvious
change is a direct result of the increasing
average age of all civilized communities,
with its special emphasis on diseases of old
age, cancer being probably the most
important. Closely related is the increasing
importance of deaths in which genetic
factors play a predominant part. In a very
real sense the final objective of preventive
medicine is that all deaths should result
from the play of genetic factors only. With
every success in eliminating the environmental
causes of premature death we will see more
and more clearly the influence of genetic
constitution on health and length of life.
That influence is in fact evident already
in our hospitals and our institutions for the
mentally abnormal. Insanity and feeble
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, September 1957. 49, 3.
128 
mindedness in all their degrees and manifestations nearly all have a genetic component,
and often this completely dominates the
picture. Mental illness is a matter of supreme
importance but it is something that I am not
competent to discuss. If we confine ourselves
to the general hospitals we can cover a large
proportion of serious illness under two heads,
(a) cancer in all its forms, (b) premature
degenerative disease, especially cardiovascular.

Perhaps we can clarify some of the implications of medicine to-day by looking briefly. at
four typical patients to be found in any
general hospital in the Western world. The
first perhaps is a man in his forties who has
had a severe hemorrhage from a duodenal
ulcer, the second a woman of like age in
hospital for a gall-bladder operation. The
third is a man of fifty with a chronic cough
and an X-ray shadow suspected of being a
bronchial cancer, while the fourth is a man
of sixty recovering from a heart attack
(coronary thrombosis). Each of those
patients presents two problems. The immediate task for the doctor is to bring the
patient as quickly as possible back to the
fullest level of health that circumstances will
allow. Nowadays the treatment involved
will be based very largely and rather directly
on an attempt to remedy structural changes
by surgery and functional change by appropriate drugs. :

The second and far more difficult problem
is to assess the factors responsible for the

patient’s illness. When we are dealing with

cases like those I have mentioned, this side
of medicine may not seem very important.
The disease condition is clearly the end result
of circumstances acting over many years
which nothing now can alter. It is simplest
to forget the past and make the best shortterm compromise with fate that skill and

‘knowledge can devise. But if we are looking ©

at medicine as a facet of biological science
or as an adjunct to the social effectiveness of
the community, we must be interested
primarily in the causes and prevention of ill
health rather than in the individual and
immediate treatment of the patient.

For disease conditions like the four common

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

forms we have mentioned, it is not easy to
see how prevention can even be thought of.
There is, however, one general approach that
I think every good physician consciously or
unconsciously employs. If he is to appreciate
the patient as a complete human being and
to understand the causes of his disability,
he must assess three aspects of the patient’s
illness. These may be classed as environmental, genetic and psychosomatic.

1. Environmental. In nearly every illness
there is some recognizable impact of the
physical environment that has played a part
in producing it. This aspect may be completely dominant, as when a mosquito injects
the virus of yellow fever or a man is smashed
in a motor accident, or it may be no more
than an indication that cold weather has
accentuated the symptoms of a peptic ulcer.
In general, the more completely the cause of
a disability can be related to the environment,
the more readily is the condition prevented.

2. Genetic. There are very great inborn
differences in human beings which are quite
obviously highly relevant to the types of
illness from which they will suffer. Differences in physical build and temperament are
mainly determined by inheritance, and their
relative significance in relation to disease Is
a matter of current study, particularly by
those influenced by Sheldon’s ectomorph,
mesomorph, and endomorph classification.
In many ways this is just a modern systematization of the old-fashioned doctor’s
insistence on the importance of his patient’s
“constitution ’’ in determining his illnesses
and his response to treatment. |

3. Psychosomatic. The influence of the
mind on bodily disease is inescapable—in
America at least the concept has passed into
current slang—‘“ giving the boss ulcers.”’
Selye’s doctrine of stress has had a very wide
influence on medicine, and psycho-social
stress is a very real one. Equally important
to the doctor is an appreciation of the impact
of illness upon the patient’s mental and

| emotional life.

Orthodox medicine is still concerned
especially with environmental causes of ill
health and with the application of anatomical
and physiological principles to remedy it. It
BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE

is in this general field that the major successes
of both preventive and curative medicine
have been achieved. Psychosomatic medicine is gradually overcoming the initial
hostility that was perhaps mainly due to the
over-enthusiasm of its proponents, while
genetics still remains little regarded.

The Major Problems of To-day

In a lecture I gave at the Melbourne
meeting of A.N.Z.A.A.S., I spoke about the
future of preventive medicine, concentrating
particularly on those diseases whose incidence
was actively increasing at the present time.
These were dental caries, cardiovascular
disease, especially coronary occlusion, and
two forms of malignant disease, leukaemia
and cancer of the lung. All of these are
under active study at the present time, and
in regard to the three killing diseases the
picture is becoming progressively clearer.
All three seem to be related to significant
changes in ways of life.

Coronary disease, the typical cause of
death in our countries for men in the professional and executive classes between the
ages of forty-five and seventy, is not so confidently ascribed to worry and stress as it was
a few years ago. At the present time opinion
seems to be steadily firming that coronary
disease might be made much less common
by a reduction in the food intake of saturated
fats (animal fats and hydrogenated vegetable
oils) and in the amount of cigarette smoking.
Impressive evidence in both directions has
emerged in the last three years. It is still
conceivable that chronic emotional stress
plays a part, and it seems likely that there
is a genetic factor, if only in regard to the
difference between males and females. If
the current opinion is fully established, there
is interesting scope for preventive work, but
as the Lancet has recently pointed out, it is a
very much more“difficult matter to change
people’s food habits than to persuade them to
have their children immunized against an
infectious disease.

Lung cancer shows a steady and continuing rise in all civilized countries. In Australia
the rise for males has been about 7 per cent.
per annum for the last thirty years and shows

129

no signs of diminishing. The relationship to
excessive cigarette smoking has been fully
established but does not seem to be the whole
story. There may well be aspects yet to be
elucidated, but the present position seems
relatively clear and can be summarized as
follows: :

There are two types of lung cancer which
can be differentiated histologically; one is
rare and is found equally in males and
females. It does not appear to be significantly influenced by environmental factors,
It is the second histological type that has
increased so markedly in the last fifty years
and which is seven times as commonly seen
in men asin women. The incidence of this
type is sharply correlated with two environmental factors: (1) the intensity of cigarette
smoking; (2) urban as against country life.

I do not know of any competent pathologist who denies the statistically established
relation between the incidence of lung cancer
and smoking habits. The association with
cigarette smoking is fully established and is
supported by a great deal of confirmatory
evidence, both from studies of the early
changes in human lungs and from knowledge
of the general behaviour of cancer-producing
agents In mice.

The part played by city life is difficult to
assess because city dwellers on the average
smoke more cigarettes than country dwellers.
Some authorities, like Doll and Hill, are
sceptical of the importance of smoky city air.
Others, like Stocks and Campbell, present a
strong case for the view that the total amount

. of smoke inhaled from any source is what

matters. Smoke is only important because of
the carcinogens it contains—possibly 3-4
benzpyrene is the important one. Campbell
and Stocks believe that if you calculate the
total amounts of 3-4 benzpyrene inhaled
during a lifetime in a typical smoky city like
Liverpool and the amount taken in by
smokers of different numbers of cigarettes
per day, the conclusions fit quite well with
their hypothesis. If this turns out to be the
case, the significance of cigarette smoking
will simply be that cigarette smoke contains
a much higher concentration of carcinogen
than even the most murky city air.
130 —

’ The means of prevention are in principle

very simple: get rid of smoke from our cities ©

and cigarette smoking from our social habits,
and in 20 years deaths from carcinoma of the
lung would fall to their irreducible minimum.
I believe it is important that the residents
of every industrial city should press hard for
stringent control of air pollution by any type
of incomplete combustion. In democracies
any decision about cigarette smoking must be
left to the individual. There are, however,
straws in the wind. At the last meeting of
the B.M.A. in England a rule was adopted
against smoking during any of the scientific
sessions. This was a gesture made by a
majority of British doctors as a means of
expressing by personal example their conviction that the gradual elimination of
cigarette smoking is one of the major
requirements in public health at the present
time. In Sweden advertisement of cigarettes
and tobacco has been prohibited. |

Leukaemia deaths are also increasing, but
here there is as yet no clear reason visible
for the increase. Overdose of X-rays or
other penetrating radiation is the only
environmental factor that has been proved
to be capable of inducing leukaemia. I know
of nothing to suggest that the recent rise in
leukaemia deaths is due to the increasing
use of X-rays and the like, and the cause of
the rise is still a mystery. But it does direct
special attention on to the medical problems
that are being created by the dawning of an
atomic age.

Genetics in Medicine

In all of the conditions I have been mentioning there is an implicit recognition that
genetic factors are concerned in one way or
another and in varying degrees of intensity.
The fact that two of the diseases are lung
cancer and leukaemia is also a reminder of
another angle at which genetics impinges on
medicine. This is because the only general
hypothesis of the nature of cancer which
appears to be tenable at the present time
is the somatic mutation theory. On this view
the various types of malignant disease are
the result of a series of mutations occurring

THE EUGENICS REVIEW |

not in the reproductive cells but in the
somatic or body cells of various tissues.
There are still serious difficulties in applying
this theory to all aspects of cancer, but there
is certainly no satisfactory alternative interpretation.

It is inevitable, therefore, that there must
be a strong genetic flavour in what I have to

say. Probably present conditions do not

justify so much concentration on the genetic
angle. I can sympathize with the point of
view that there is so little we can do about
human inheritance that we might well forget
about it and concentrate on environmental
and psycho-social factors in medicine, but I
do not think that attitude will remain tenable
for long. The central theme of this address is
that- genetic aspects of medicine must
become progressively more and more important in the years to come.

There are three major reasons for this. The
first concerns something we take for granted
—the current pattern of family life. In the
last two generations in Western countries
the usual picture has been the family with
two to four children, all of whom survive to
adult life. From the human point of view
that is a highly desirable state of affairs, but
from the angle of the biologist interested in
long-term evolutionary trends it is something
which will lead eventually to a quite intolerable position. The teaching of evolutionary
theory in its modern form of population
genetics is quite unequivocal. Evolutionary
progress has only been possible because of the
mutability of genetic mechanisms and the
elimination by natural selection of those
mutations which diminish the bearer’s chance
of survival. There is good evidence from
breeders of every type of animal that
quality can only be maintained by consistent
culling of all substandard specimens.

Mutations are always occurring. It has
been calculated that on the average each
human being may have one mutant gene
that was not present in either of his parents.
More than 99 per cent of mutations are
mildly or seriously deleterious and the whole
history of life has been based on the ability
of stringent selection for survival to sort out
the tiny fraction of mutations that are
BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE ~

beneficial for the species. If we eliminate by
medical care and social security most possibilities of natural selection, a steady slow
process of genetic deterioration with increasing numbers of cases of overt genetic
disease is inevitable.

An interesting example of how this process
may become evident is to be seen in the
emergence in recent years of a condition of
great interest to the pathologist and geneticist—a disease with the clumsy name of
agammaglobulinaemia. This in fact means a
congenital absence of a substance in the
blood which is needed to allow the development of immunity against infection. Such
children in the past always died early from
acute infection or simple failure to thrive.
To-day a combination of antibiotics, occasional blood transfusions, and unremitting
care can keep such children relatively
healthy. There is much to suggest that there
are other genetic anomalies of the same
system with less drastic. but generally
similar effects.

_ The second reason for stressing the growing
importance of human genetics perhaps represents only a somewhat different way of
looking at the first: it is the existence of
differential fertility rates. All educationists
and psychologists know that intelligence
tests show a negative correlation between the
I.Q. of children and the size of the family
they come from. Children from large
families are on the average less intelligent
than those from small ones. Why this should
be so is still a matter of controversy and
many geneticists hesitate to adopt the
commonsense explanation that intelligence
has a large genetic determinant and that
under present-day conditions intelligent parents have fewer children than those of lower
intelligence. This may have to remain “ not

proven,’ but it seems to me that in the.

civilizations we know there is little to suggest

that health, intelligence, and enterprise are ;
commonly correlated with family size. If |

one believes, as I do, that such qualities are
highly influenced by genetic factors, then
we must never forget that the characteristics
of our successors will be determined essentially
not by the average genetic quality of our

E31

present population but by the quality of
those producing the majority of surviving
children. 7

The third reason is that the application of
various forms of ionizing radiation to human
use is increasing at a positively frightening
rate and can hardly fail to give rise to a whole
new series of medical problems, most of
them at the genetic level.

At the present time we are all highly
conscious of the impact of nuclear energy on
our world; from the biological and medical
point of view that impact is almost wholly evil.

Ionizing radiation has a wide variety of
damaging effects on living cells, but there is
only one significant effect—a disturbance of
pattern in the genetic mechanism of chromo
'somes and genes. It is a random type of

disturbance. A crude but useful analogy
might be to think of what would happen to
an automatic telephone exchange if a group
of inexpert marksmen were firing casual
bullets in its direction. The effect of any
single hit would be unpredictable, but almost
all hits would be damaging. Only by a
fantastically lucky chance can random
interference with an elaborate mechanism
improve its functioning. In one very important point the analogy breaks down. If the
damage produced in cells by radiation is not
too severe, the descendants of those cells
carry the same type of damage to their
genetic mechanism. It is inheritable damage.

Any cell can be damaged by penetrating
radiation, the likelihood of damage being
dependent on the type and amount of radiation received during the lifetime of the cell.
Serious damage which prevents any subsequent multiplication of a cell has no medical
significance. Lesser degrees of damage to
germ cells may also be of relatively minor
human importance, if the damage is such
that when fertilization occurs and development begins, the offspring is so distorted
that it does not survive to be born. It is
when the damage is physically speaking very
slight so that the eventual progeny is faulty
in just one facet that we find what we call
genetic disease. Haemophilia—a disease in

_ which repeated bleeding results from a weak‘ness in the blood-clotting mechanism—is the
132

best known human example, but there are
multitudes of others. I do not want to discuss
any detail whatever of genetics but it is necessary to mention that most defects induced in
germ cells by irradiation will give rise to recessive effects which will only become evident
when fertilization of the ovum by a spermatozoon carrying the same recessive gene occurs.
This is the basis for the well-known warning
that the effects of the atom bombs dropped
on Japan may not all be evident till many
generations have elapsed. One other point
that must be stressed is that the results of
radiation are cumulative. There is just as
much likelihood of harm if one unit of radiation is received each day for a year as if
365 units are received in a fraction of a
second.

Not only the germ cells are subject to
mutation. Any living cell will be similarly
modified by appropriate exposure to radiation. Any effect, however, will be dependent

on how many descendants it has. Mutations.

sometimes occur in the course of development
and involve only that proportion of the cells
in the grown organism which descend from

the cell in which the mutation occurred.

These are called somatic mutations and are
usually recognized when the mutation results
in the appearance of a colour difference over
portion of the skin—a so-called mosaic. But
somatic mutation can occur in any cell at
any time in the life of an organism. Always
the same rule holds: somatic mutation is of
no significance unless the cell concerned has
many descendants. It follows that when a
mutation occurs in an organism that has
reached full development, it is only significant
if it is of such a character that cells carrying
the mutation produce more descendants
than similar but unmutated cells.

_The most likely interpretation of human
cancer is that it is a result of a series of
somatic mutations, each of which removes or
diminishes one of the controls which keep the
cells of the body in their form and order. I
am not going to attempt to give the evidence
for this interpretation, but I think you can
see the grim logic of the biological situation
in which random mutations are always
occurring, either spontaneously or under the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

stimulus of radiation or mutagenic chemicals.
Cells whose descendants grow more rapidly
flourish and may undergo- new mutations
which again are only successful if they lead
further along the road to uncontrolled
growth, which is cancer. There are virtually
only two current interpretations of cancer,
the somatic mutation theory, which I have
described, and the virus theory, which
ascribes cancer to infection with very low
grade viruses. I can find nothing in the
recorded behaviour of natural or experimental cancer which is incompatible with
the first hypothesis, and a great deal which
makes the virus theory, in my view at least,
untenable.

On this view ionizing radiation should be a
potent cause of cancer, and it is. The early
radiologists suffered much from cancer of the
skin; now, with better protection but with
much more powerful machines, they show a
significantly increased incidence of leukaemia.
X-rays have been used diagnostically and
therapeutically for sixty years and more is
known about their effect than about any
other type of penetrating radiation. There
have been two unfortunate results of unwise
therapeutic use, the production of leukaemia
in a small but significant proportion ‘of
patients treated for a disease of the spine
(ankylosing spondylitis) and of cancer of the
thyroid in children given X-radiation for
supposedenlargementofthethymus. Human
experience with radioactive substances has
been more limited but the lethal potentialities are even clearer. Long ago, when
luminous watch dials were painted with a
composition containing minute amounts of
radium by girls who tipped their brushes
between their lips, there was a tragic sequel
of many cases of malignant disease of bone
amongst these workers. Of the modern
artificial radioactive elements, radiostrontium resembles radium in its capacity to
lodge in bone and provoke sarcomatous
growth. Leukaemia has been the only chronic
effect so far recognized as due to irradiation
from the Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombs.

Protection against Ionizing Radiation
In June last year the British Medical
BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE

Research Council and the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States both published authoritative reports on the dangers
of ionizing radiation. Both cover very much
the same ground and both come to virtually
identical conclusions, which I can try to
summarize under four headings.

1. All ionizing radiation, whether from
X-rays, radioactive materials or any other
source, is harmful and avoidable exposure
should be kept to a minimum.

2. At the present time the most important
source of ionizing radiation is the medical
use of X-rays; test atomic explosions are of
much less significance.

3. If atomic weapons are not used in
major war, the effect of atomic radiation in

the foreseeable future is not likely to have

observable medical results on people generally.

4. Increasingly difficult problems will
arise in connection with the safe disposal of
radioactive wastes from the industrial use of
atomic energy.

Interest in the medical problems of atomic
radiation has been responsible for a critical
re-examination of the light-hearted use of
X-rays in medicine and industry. As far as
an outsider can judge, the risk attaching
to brief diagnostic exposures not involving
the reproductive organs is negligible, although
the American committee recommends that
in the interests of improving knowledge any
X-ray exposures should be recorded in all
patients’ medical histories. Any type of
X-ray involving the pelvic organs in children
or adults within the reproductive period of
life should be considered very critically and
carried out only if it is absolutely essential
for the proper treatment of the patient.
Therapeutic use of X-rays should be limited
to the treatment of established cancer.

It should be possible to reduce the hazards
of medical uses of radiation to negligible
proportions, and there is every reason to
believe that in the factories concerned with
the production of nuclear weapons in America
and Britain, strict and effective precautions
against more than tolerable health hazards
are enforced. But the use of atomic energy
has only begun. We can hope with some
reason that we shall escape major atomic

133

wars, but unless history is meaningless, a
rapid and continuing increase in the use of
nuclear reactors in industry is inevitable.
With a rapidly increasing world population
demanding a greatly raised living standard,
it may soon become the only way to provide
the energy required. Those interested in the
long-term prospects of civilization know very
well that if the whole of the world adopted
an American standard of living our reserves
of oil and coal—our fossil fuels—might last
less*than a century.

Accidents and human carelessness are
unavoidable in industry. An illuminating
hint of the shape of things to come can be
drawn from two Australian episodes where
highly lethal capsules containing the radioisotope Cobalt 60 were left lying about to be
picked up by a workman, who suffered from
a serious burn, and by a child, who fortunately was only allowed to play with it for a
few minutes. Increasing use of nuclear
energy cannot fail to be associated with a
steadily increasing amount of short-term
and long-term biological damage.

But we must maintain a sense of proportion. I have already said that authoritative
present-day opinion is.that at the genetic
level the effect will be undetectable by any but
refined statistical methods for perhaps a
century or more, even if a considerable
absolute amount of genetic damage is being
done. The reason, of course, is that every
individual carries on an average about eight
harmful recessive genes, the accumulation of
many centuries of mutation. Muller calculates that it would také a major atomic war
to produce an effect that would be easily
visible within a generation. Similarly, the
immediate effect on individuals of an
increased exposure to radiation would, on
an overall scale, be relatively light. It is
said that radiologists on the average die five
years earlier than comparable professional
colleagues, and their likelihood of contracting
and dying from leukaemia is several times as
high. That plus a moderate increase of other
forms of cancer, probably in bone or other
unusual sites, is probably the sort of change
we could expect. On the short-term view it
is punishment that the community can
134.

easily absorb. The toll of death and ill health
from penetrating radiation apart from major
war is bound to be much less than we accept
from road accidents to-day. The reason for
putting it in a different category is the
cumulative character of genetic damage.
With modern medicine to cushion the effects
of natural selection every deleterious mutation sets going a process like a slowly spreading disease, progressively weakening all
generations to come.

Perhaps history will decide that the most
important result of the discovery of atomic
power is not its military or industrial importance but the attention it has drawn to the
importance of genetic processes for human
affairs. It is certain that we shall see an
increasing use of nuclear power as long as
civilization survives and raw materials are
available. As scientists and medical men we
must be adamant that there shall be no
reduction in the present high standards of
safety measures and that special precautions
-be taken against every conceivable catastrophe that may involve a nuclear reactor.
I do not think, however, that increasing
exposure to radiation is genetically nearly
as important as the two related processes
that I bracketed with it, the elimination of
selective survival as a result of medical care
and the influence of differential fertility. If
we are ever to devise measures to counter the
medical and social effects of genetic deterioration it will be immaterial whether the
mutations responsible were produced by
irradiation to-day or by natural causes any
time in the past thousand years. I believe
we can already see in outline what the
necessary measures will be. Both the official
British and American reports agreed that
at the present time the major need is more
knowledge of human genetics. We need to
learn a great deal more about the laws of
human inheritance and particularly to find
ways by which the existence of harmful
recessives in a person’s genetic make-up can
be recognized. Closely related to this is the
elaboration of ways by which the somatic
mutations which are steps along the road to
cancer can be recognized. For both purposes
a great deal more study of cellular behaviour

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in experimental animals and tissue cultures
will be needed to improve the background
against which the human problems must be
studied. But I should like to stress that the
human problems must be studied very much
as human problems—laboratory work on
animals can only provide clues. This holds
at both the levels of genetic change that we
have been considering—somatic mutation in
relation to cancer, mutation in the reproductive cells in relation to genetic deterioration.

In regard to cancer, the immediate need is
to sort out the various environmental stimuli
to somatic mutation, particularly those other
than ionizing radiation, and as far as practicable protect sensitive tissues from them.
Fortunately the reproductive cells are well
protected from anything but penetrating
radiation. But other mutagens and carcinogens can reach skin, air passages, intestinal
tract and other parts of the body in direct
contact with the environment. I have
mentioned what is known of lung cancer and
how this could be used as a means of preventing 90 per cent of it. There are hints that
some other types of cancer may be related to
controllable environmental factors, and
perhaps new opportunities for the prevention
of cancer may emerge in the future. Despite
great modern advances in cancer treatment,
the overall death rate from cancer has shown .
little change in recent years. As in every
other phase of medicine, prevention is better
than cure. At the present time the two most '
needed activities are the development of a
climate of opinion that will dissuade young
people from starting to smoke cigarettes and
careful control of all exposure to X-rays and
other forms of ionizing radiation.

In regard to genetic disease proper, the
important task is to find ways of recognizing
what is happening in human inheritance.
The most immediately promising approach is
to make increasing use of the opportunities
nature has provided in identical twins. I
have been very interested in this approach
and for the last two years we have had a
twin study in progress in Melbourne. Special
attention has been paid to the problems of
identical twins whose medical histories are
not concordant as one of the best ways of
BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE

analyzing the respective parts of inheritance
and environment in the production of
disease. I do not anticipate any great
contribution from a single unit, but I believe
that it is important to have twin study as
part of the set-up of every medical school.
Only by the accumulation of necessarily
unconnected pieces of information (for every
pair of identical twins is in one way or
another unique) will we get the information
needed about the genetic contribution to
disease. The more work going on, the more
likely are the overall results to be significant.
The other reason for such work is its extreme
educational value. More than anything we
need the balanced approach of the good
doctor who can by a combination of knowledge and subconcious wisdom assess the
relative importance of the environmental,
genetic, and psycho-social factors that have
produced the sick person in front of him; and
always on the basis of incomplete knowledge
make the wise decision that will be best for
‘his patient. I would hope that association
with twin studies where as nowhere else we
can sort out something of the relative
importance of nature and nurture, will
provide the best possible opportunity for
such a broad education in medicine.

Human genetics may seem a thoroughly
academic subject at the present time and

135,

perhaps will always remain so. On the other
hand, it holds the only answer to the
progressive genetic deterioration that at the
moment seems to be inescapable. Differential
fertility.is probably the most potent factor
in producing this deterioration but it is also
the key to its eventual reversal.

If in a hundred years’ time we have the
necessary knowledge it should not be
impossible by appropriate incentives linked
to new social conventions and taboos to
ensure that those carrying dangerous recessive characters had fewer children than
those with sounder inheritance. That admittedly is impossible now, but social conventions
have changed enormously in our lifetime and
they will change even more in the next
hundred years. If we are deliberately
accepting a situation which will steadily
deteriorate the genetic character of the
species, if we insist on the family of two or
three children who, thanks to modern preventive medicine will all survive to adult
life, then the only possible solution is to
provide a socially acceptable substitute for
nature’s ruthless elimination of the unfit.
Many things may arise to make such a
solution impossible, but I would still believe
that to find the knowledge which may make.
it eventually realizable is the most important
field of research that confronts us in medicine.
