REVIEWS OF BOOKS

battle, but whose principles may still be
vindicated by growing discontents within the
profession. |

Aphorisms and extracts from writings are
quoted in appendices. Several deal with the
insights which come to doctors: for example—

You will see men enervated by the intoxication of
success or stimulated to robust health by the smart
of failure. . . . You will often be able to interpret
men’s weaknesses, and your knowledge will make
you charitable; you will sometimes understand their
strength, and your insight will increase your
admiration.

Among the reflections on life and medicine,
none is quoted on eugenics. Yet those of us who
worked with Horder and know how much time
he gave to the Society’s affairs will be grateful to
his son for this piously conceived and wellwritten book.

Cc. P. BLACKER

GENETICS

Sharma, Arun Kumar and Sharma, Archana.
Chromosome Techniques: Theory and Practice.
London, 1965. Butterworth. Pp. x+474. Price
87s. 6d.

CHROMOSOME STUDIES HAVE become of such
importance in medicine as well as fundamental
biology that a comprehensive treatment of
chromosome techniques is now urgently needed.
The need is met by the present book. It deals
extensively with the chemical procedures as well
as with the biological application. It also deals
with the newest methods of autoradiography,
phase contrast microscopy and electron microscopy. There are forty-one useful photographic
plates. The bibliographies carry the work up
only to 1962. Not being as up-to-date as it should
be in this field is the book’s most serious shortcoming.
Cc. D. DARLINGTON

Whittinghill, M. Human Genetics and Its Foundations. New York, 1965. Reinhold. (London,
Chapman and Hall.) Pp. xvi+431. Price $8.95.

THIS BOOK SETS out to provide a textbook for
students “‘in the rapidly expanding subject of

human genetics’’. It easily succeeds in its aim.
The book is divided into four parts and is
written in a most refreshing and interesting
manner. It is profusely illustrated and contains
many original diagrams. As is expected with a
textbook, the earlier chapters are concerned with
the basic principles of genetics. The exposition
of such topics as the structure of DNA, the
cytogenetic basis of inheritance, the control of
genetic activity and the formation of normal and
abnormal tetramers of haemoglobin is clear and
concise. Regular chromosomal behaviour, sex
linked inheritance and the problems of linkage
studies are dealt with in Part II. The biochemical
pathways from gene to protein, marker genes,
and environmental influences are discussed in
Part III while the concluding chapters are
concerned with the many factors which have
affected and continue to influence the course of
human evolution. Spontaneous gene mutation,
structural and numerical chromosomal alterations, selection and random drift are presented
in a confident fashion.

The mathematics are kept simple. The author
introduces us with immense clarity into some
elementary statistical principles and even those
most allergic to mathematics cannot but be
impressed with the simplicity of the explanation
of x2, the conventional levels of significance and
the Hardy-Weinberg Equation.

The author, who is a Professor of Zoology, has
numerous interesting analogies drawn from
animal genetics, for example the male calico cat
which has a genotype XXY and is sterile is
equivalent to Klinefelter’s syndrome in man.
Several of the clinical sections are insufficient.
Pyloric stenosis is described as a “severe constriction of the valve between the stomach and
the intestine” and in considering the aetiology of
congenital dislocation of the hip, no mention is
made of the role of a generalized joint laxity.
One of the practical aspects of human genetics is
genetic counselling but this is not mentioned.
There would also be a case for enlarging the
section on the inheritance of common diseases
and on polygenic inheritance. Nonetheless, the
book has general value and may be recommended
to all those interested in human genetics.

NORMAN C. NEVIN
99
