EUGENICS SOCIETY

 

 

JUBILEE

THE fiftieth anniversary of the founding of
the Eugenics Society, under its first President,
Sir Francis Galton, was marked by a dinner
at the Savoy Hotel, London, on December
4th, 1957.

There were present some 146 people,
including guests of the Eugenics Soctety,
Fellows, Members and their friends, but a
number who had expected to attend were
prevented by illness, dense fog and the
serious railway accident that evening.

After dinner, the toast of the Soczety’s
guests was proposed by SIR CHARLES GALTON
DARWIN, K.B.E., M.C., Sc.D., F.R.S., the
President of the Eugenics Soctety, who said
that although it meant omitting some of the
most distinguished of them, he would, taking
the new edition of the Soczety’s Statement of
Aims as a guide, refer to a few of those whose
work could be related to the various categories enumerated therein. In the field of
human genetics he spoke of Professor Egon
Pearson, himself an authority on statistics,
whose father had been the chief successor of
Galton in the study of statistics and of
eugenics. Sir Charles then welcomed Mr.
Max Nicholson, referring to his brilliant
work on population as head of P E P, Colonel
Ahuja from India, where a difficult population problem is now being attacked and Sir
Clifford Heathcote-Smith who was active in
the matter of Commonwealth migration.
Turning to the list of Policies in the Society's
Aims, the President welcomed the many
representatives of the various Societies with
which the Eugenics Society co-operates.

Mr. E. M. NicHoxson, C.B., Chairman of
PEP, in reply, said that the Eugenics
Society had shown foresight in picking on

163

' cently, promising families.

DINNER

causes which were to become crucial matters;
those present at the founding of the Eugenics
Society could not have foreseen the scientific
developments which had since taken place,
it might be that by the time the onehundredth anniversary of the Society was’
celebrated the ordinary man and woman
would take as a matter of course eugenic’
policies which were now controversial, and
it was the duty of the Eugenics Society to give
a lead in these matters.

The toast of the Eugenics Society was then
proposed by Sir ALEXANDERCARR-SAUNDERS,
K.B.E.,M.A., LL.D., Honorary Past President
of the Eugenics Soctety and holder of the first’
Galton Medal. Sir Alexander said that the
Society, in fifty years, had accomplished
many specific things and influenced im-'

portant legislation; the Mental Deficiency

Act of 1912 was the result of successful
advocacy. by the Eugenics Soctety and other
bodies, as was the inclusion of Children’s
Allowances-in the Finance Act of 1928. Its:
voluntary sterilization recommendations
were to a large extent included in the Report
of the Brock Committee; :it had sponsored
and encouraged research and inquiries into
birth control methods, the social problem
group, morbid inheritance, and, more re-'*
The Society had
called together the Population Investigation
Committee in 1936 and had co-operated’
with Political and Economic Planning. Most
of these activities had been due to the energy
of Dr. C. P. Blacker, who was later to receive °
the Galton Medal—as he already held the:
George Medal, .this would make him a
“double G.M.” Sir Alexander looked forward to future specific action, and with Dr.
164

G. C. L. Bertram as General Secretary, he
felt sure that no opportunities would be
missed.

Mrs. M. A. PYKE, President of the Family
Planning Association, who was to have
replied on behalf of the Soctety was unfortunately unable to be present, and Mrs.
NANCY RAPHAEL was kind enough to read
her speech for her. Mrs. Pyke acted in a
dual capacity: The Soczety’s generosity to
cognate societies was well known, and it was
a splendid thing to be regarded as a cognate
society. She knew that the Family Planning
Association, the North Kensington Marriage
Welfare Centre, the British Social Biology
Council had greatly benefited, and through
‘them the Eugenics Society had been the
means of lightening the lives of many people.
The Soczety would never forget what it owed
to Dr. Blacker. Mrs. Pyke thanked Dr.
Carter for his five years as General Secretary,
she thanked the Soczety’s staff for organising
the dinner and all those present for coming
to it.

SiR CHARLES Darwin then rose to present
to Dr. C. P. Blacker the Galton Medal which,
he said, had been unanimously voted to him
by the Council. It was hardly an exaggeration to say that for more than twenty years
Dr. Blacker had carried the whole Soczety on

his shoulders, without becoming a tyrant |

but with the supreme quality of knowing how
to get willing service out of many good men
and true. For this occasion, he judged Dr.
Blacker by the measure once given by
Galton of what constituted good eugenic
standards—health, energy, ability, manliness
and courteous disposition. It might almost
suffice to look at him to judge of his health,
and in his day he had captained the Oxford
boxing team; he had always been a runner,
but the word energy referred not only to
physical but mental energy, and the latter

had been of great value to the Eugenics

Society. Many who were firm believers in
eugenics were willing tosit back, holding those
opinions but doing little about them, but

Dr. Blacker had always been getting on with |

the business, seeing what practical action
would be helpful and showing people what

might be done about it. Abzlity overlapped.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

much with what had just been said about
energy, but Sir Charles cited his various
writings, and in particular the important
book, Eugenics, Galton and After which had
been written a few years ago.

Manliness was rather a vague term, but
in Dr. Blacker’s case it was easily described
by looking at his military career. |

To illustrate a courteous disposition Sir
Charles said that his Uncle Leonard retired
from the presidency of the Soczety in 1929
at the age of 79 and Dr. Blacker became
secretary two years later. Nevertheless, he
had recognized the deep interest which
Major Leonard Darwin had in the Soczvety,
and every month or two he would travel
down to a remote part of Sussex to tell him
how things were going on. This was greatly
valued by Major Darwin.

The President then handed the Galton
Medal to Dr. Blacker, saying that he was
sure that a worthier recipient for it could
not be found.

Dr. C. P. BLACKER, M.C., G.M., M.A.,
M.D., said that the Medal had really been
earned by the splendid people he had worked
with since 1931, many of whom had become
his best friends. He traced the Socvety’s
history which fell, he said, into three periods.
It had originated in the fertile brain of Mrs.
Gotto, and the first period covered her and
Mrs. C. B. S. Hodson’s secretaryships. The
second period was marked by the receipt of
a large legacy, and in spite of being deluged
with applications for grants, Mr. Stanley
Bramwell and Mr. Clinton Chance had agreed
upon a policy of conservation of funds; with
Lord Horder they had formed a triumvirate
which had guided the Society for many years.
We were now in the third period, and many
of the Soczety’s. officers were known to all
present. Dr. Blacker mentioned many people
who had helped the Eugenics Society during
the past fifty years, both as officers and
members of the staff, and thanked them for
their support during his years as General

‘Secretary.

A full report of the speeches, with a list of
those present, will appear in the April 1958
number of THE EUGENICS REVIEW.
