ADAPTATION AND ADAPTABILITY.
By L. DONCASTER.

THE central problem of evolution is the problem of adaptation.
This is generally agreed, but it is not always recognised that
the word adaptation means, or may mean, two, or perhaps three,
very different things. We say that the shape of a stick-caterpillar
or leaf-insect is an example of adaptation, because by nature
these animals resemble their natural environment. In the same
sense many flowers exhibit remarkable adaptations to particular
methods of cross-fertilisation ; and innumerable other instances
of the same type could be given. We also, however, speak of
the colours assumed by the chameleon, or of the prawn Hippolyte,
as examples of adaptation, but in these cases the animal assumes
the appropriate colour to match the colour of the background,
Clearly this is a different type of adaptation from the last ; the
same chameleon may be brown, green or variegated at different
times, according to the colour of its surroundings, and the prawn
may exhibit a large range of colours, which are more or less fixed
in the adult, but which depend on the colours of the seaweed
among which it lived in its youth. Instead of being born with the
appropriate colour, like a baby Tern or Peewit, it assumes it in
response to environment. It adapts itself, instead of being by
nature adapted. It may be objected, of course, that the adaptation
consists not in the possession of a certain colour or pattern, but in
the power of assuming it, and in the examples mentioned this is
doubtless true. Neither the chameleon nor the prawn can assume
colours which are outside the range of the experience of the
species ; they have the power of adapting themselves to the various
normal changes in their environment, but have no _ indefinite
adaptability which enables them to match any possible colour on
which they may be placed. Their natural adaptedness, in fact,
consists in the faculty for assuming any one of a certain range
of colours, these colours being those which commonly occur in the
natural environment of the species. In both classes—that of congenital adaptation and that in which the species can modify itself
214 EUGENICS REVIEW.

in response to environment—it may therefore be said that the
condition is one of adaptedness, in the one case to a more or
less fixed natural environment, in the other to an environment
which is subject to a certain limited range of variation.

The question then presents itself: Is there no such thing as
true adaptability? Are all the examples of adaptive modification
undergone by organisms in response to changes in their environment or activities merely the result of a pre-existing adaptedness
which confers the power of meeting such changes as the organism
may naturally expect to experience? Or is it possible for an
organism to adapt itself to totally new conditions, conditions never
before experienced in the history of the species, and against which,
therefore, it is impossible that a special adaptive mechanism can
have been evolved by natural selection? This question is really
crucial for an understanding of evolution — and therefore for
eugenics—but it is one to which biologists have hardly given the
attention it deserves. It is not an easy question to answer, for,
though adaptability is so common, it is difficult to find examples
which cannot be ascribed to the action of a natural, pre-existing
adaptiveness, of an adaptive mechanism, in fact, which has been
evolved to meet the particular case.

There are, however, at least two classes of facts which seem
to point to the existence of true adaptability. One of these has
been chiefly emphasised by Driesch?, and to the second attention
has recently been called by Professor (Colonel) Adami in his
Croonian Lectures before the Royal College of Physicians?. Driesch
derives one of his arguments for the non-mechanical nature of
living things—a subject which does not concern us here—from
the phenomena of regeneration, and the same facts may be used
to show that true adaptability may possibly exist. He points out
that some early embryos, for example of sea-urchins, may be
divided in any plane, and yet each part, if large enough, will become
a complete larva. Now it is hardly possible that such a faculty
can have been developed by natural selection, for the division
of early larvz into two parts can hardly ever happen in nature, and
further, in other forms, such as molluscs or ctenophores, which

* The Science and Philosophy of the Organism. Vol. I. London, 1908.
2 Adaptation and Disease. Summary in ‘‘ Nature,” August 16, 1917.
ADAPTATION AND ADAPTABILITY. 215

are subject to an almost identical environment, the power of
complete regulation is absent. It seems clear, in fact, that in
general the power of regeneration is not at all strictly proportional
to the frequency with which a particular mutilation happens in
nature, and that the facts of regeneration may be used to support
the belief that true adaptability does exist.

We merely mention this group of facts, however, before passing
on to those which for our present purpose are more important,
namely the power of adaptation exhibited by animals to toxins or
other foreign substances introduced into the body. The simplest
case to consider is that in which the body is invaded by pathogenic
bacteria. When this happens, several results follow. Firstly,
leucocytes are attracted to the focus of infection, and in a severe
case the total number of leucocytes in the blood may be largely
increased. The leucocytes are said to secrete specific substances
(opsonins) which decrease the resisting powers of the bacteria, and
enable the leucocytes to ingest them. Secondly, if the bacteria
produce soluble toxins, the body reacts by producing corresponding
antitoxins which combine with, and neutralise, the toxins, and
further, the antitoxins are produced in excess, so that the animal
not only resists the toxic action of the bacteria, but becomes
immune to a subsequent attack. Thirdly, the body produces
lysins, substances which have the power of killing and ultimately
dissolving the bacteria themselves. Fourthly, it produces agglutinins, which render the bacteria motionless and cause them to
adhere together in clumps. In addition to these, there are other
reactions of the same general type which need not detain us. Now
the important point for our present purpose is that every one
of these adaptive responses is strictly specific, and is appropriate to
the particular species of bacteria which calls them forth ; so much
so, in fact, that by inoculating an animal with a particular strain
of bacteria, its serum develops antibodies which rapidly kill that
particular strain, but which may have no effect on other strains in
other respects apparently identical with it.

Since animals are subject to infection by bacteria, it might be
maintained that these responses were examples of specific “ adaptedness” to those germs to which they are commonly exposed, but
exactly the same phenomena are found to follow the introduction
216 EUGENICS REVIEW.

of various vegetable poisons, foreign blood corpuscles or other cells,
or blood-serum of other animals. Just as with bacteria, specific
anti-bodies of the same general kind are formed in these cases
Animals, therefore, seem to have the power of reacting specifically
to a quite indefinite number of foreign injurious bodies, and they
react equally well whether the foreign substance is one to which
the species is commonly exposed, or which is quite new to its
experience. Under these circumstances it is difficult to maintain
that the response is not true adaptability.

If, however, we admit the existence of true adaptability instead
of ascribing all adaptive changes to a pre-existing adaptedness, we
are driven to ask, may this not be an important factor in evolution ? In unicellular organisms it almost certainly must be so. It
has been shown that Bacteria and Protozoa can adapt themselves
to totally new conditions, and transmit the characters so acquired
to later generations. Quite probably new diseases arise from time
to time from this cause. In the Metazoa the problem is complicated by the separation of the germ-cells from the rest of the body.
But if the body is, so to speak, soaked in a new environment, may
this not ultimately reach the germ-cells? The germ-cells are undoubtedly peculiarly resistant to change, but if they are continually
exposed to the action of some toxin or other substance, may they
not react, like the other cells of the body, in producing an anti-body,
and if they have once learned to produce it, may they not go on
doing so when they form part of the next generation? Or, if they
fail to produce a suitable antidote, and suffer injury in consequence
may they not perhaps transmit the defect and so cause defective
offspring ? The work of Stockard? and of Pearl? on the effects of
alcohol is illuminating in this respect if it is to be accepted at its
face value. In guinea-pigs Stockard finds that prolonged absorption of small doses of alcohol leads to defects in the offspring, even
when only the male parents were alcoholic, and that these defects
are transmitted to the great-grandchildren of the alcoholised
animals. Pearl, on the other hand, finds that in fowls fertility is
reduced by alcohol, a larger proportion of eggs being infertile, but
that the eggs which are fertile produce larger and stronger chicks

* Amer. Naturalist Vol. 50, 1916, pp. 65 and 144.
# Journal Exp. Zool. XXII. 1917, pp. 125, 165, 241.
ADAPTATION AND ADAPTABILITY. 217

than the average of those from normal parents. He points out
that the apparent contradiction between his results and those
of Stockard may not be a real one; in the guinea-pig the
germ-cells may be injured, but not killed, and give rise to
defective offspring ; in the fowl susceptible germ-cells are rendered
incapable of development, while the stronger ones resist the
action of the poison, and so give rise to healthy chicks,

The old idea that the germ-cells are completely shut off from
any influence coming from the body is no longer tenable, and
though the influence of purely somatic ‘“‘acquirements” on the
germ-cells is probably non-existent, this does not necessarily apply
to conditions which affect the whole body in every part, such as
toxins and anti-toxins circulating in the blood, the secretions of
glands, and so forth. The germ-cells, like other cells, can hardly
fail to react to such influences, and if they react by any change in
the constitution of their substance, that change, one must suppose,
may be transmitted to the next generation. If, however, we may
infer from the facts of immunity shortly sketched above that the
changes produced are generally of a truly adaptive nature, then one
would expect that the germ-cells must also adapt themselves to
functional changes, and that in this way adaptive variations, germinal and therefore heritable, might come into existence. The
evidence, as yet, may not justify us in saying that this can happen,
but at least it may make us beware of dogmatic statements about
the impossibility of environmental changes causing heritable adaptive variation on the one hand, and of racial degeneration on the
other.
