SOME PROBLEMS OF POPULATION*
By A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS, M.A.

of the two committees which the Eugenics

Soctety is assisting to finance, namely the
Population Investigation Committee and the
Population Policies Committee. The first is
purely scientific ; it aims at ascertaining the
facts and analyzing them. The second is
intended to review the facts, and where
problems are found to exist, to suggest
policies to deal with the problems disclosed.
These two committees are complementary to
one another, the first being fact-finding and
the other policy-making.

| PROPOSE to describe briefly the work

Population Investigation Committee

The Population Investigation Committee
consists of twenty-two members of whom
half are on the committee by virtue of their
special knowledge of population problems ;
the remainder, all of whom also have special
knowledge of this field, represent other
organizations. The Eugenics Soctety has three
representatives, Lord Horder, Mrs. Hubback
and Mr. Julian Huxley. The remaining eight
societies have one representative each, and
Dr. Blacker is the honorary secretary. All
the funds which have been contributed from
various sources to this committee, with the
exception of {20 a year which is devoted to
salaries, go entirely to research. The Eugenics
Society provides the room for secretarial work
free and the London School of Economics
provides free accommodation for research
workers.

The Committee has done a great deal of
work in obtaining improvement in the system
of registration of births, marriages and
deaths. Other persons and other bodies have
been influential, but I think this Committee
may claim to have put more energy than any
other body into this particular objective.
We met with most cordial co-operation from
the Registrar-General. It was Parliament
and the Government whom it was necessary

* The substance of a paper read before the Eugenics
Society on May 16th, 1939.

to convince that reform was necessary. The
Population (Statistics) Act, which was passed
into law a little more than a year ago, has
made provisions under which certain information is collected which was not assembled
before. That information will enable us,
when it has been published and analyzed, to
ascertain the extent of differential fertility.
We shall be able to say to what extent any
group or class or occupation in this country
contributes to the future population. We
shall be able to tell as years go by how far
such differences as now exist between the
classes are increasing or diminishing.

I do not think that there is any greater
service this Committee could have rendered
to this Soctety and eugenics in general than
to have been influential in obtaining this
reform. Ever since the days of Sir Francis
Galton we, as eugenists, have been interested
in differential fertility, but we may fail to
realize how little we know about it; we are
apt to rely on birth-rate figures. Much more
data is required in order to understand the
position. Owing to the operation of this Act
we shall come year by year into possession of
the necessary data and we shall eventually
have really accurate information about this
matter.

The Committee is also interested in making
the census more useful to people who have
our particular problems in view. Once only
in the history of the British census, in I91I,
particulars were taken which gave information about the size of families in different
classes and occupations. That proved to be
of the greatest possible interest to us, but
that information is quite out of date. Those
questions were not asked in 1921 or in 1931 ;
we hope to ensure that they are asked once
again in 1941, and if we are successful we
shall have accomplished something of great
importance to eugenics.

The Committee has put in the forefront
of its agenda investigations into the situation
which governs child-bearing and child-rearing

IoI
102

in this country to-day. Under that head
come numerous projects of which I am only
going to mention two. First, the investigation into the cost of education in relation to
the size of family. The Committee entrusted
this task to Dr. Leybourne about eighteen
months ago. Dr. Leybourne is preparing a
book which we hope will be published in the
autumn. The second investigation, to which
I have alluded, comes under the head of
child-bearing and child-rearing : the problem
of housing in relation to family needs and
family size. This is a problem which is
bound to be of importance because of the
increasing Government activity in all fields
of housing in relation to the type of house
that is built, whether cottages or flats, in
relation to the location of houses as governed
by the Housing and Town Planning legislation, and in relation to the number allowed
in houses as controlled by the overcrowding
legislation. All these Governmental activities
in the field of housing have an obvious and
direct bearing upon the whole problem of
families in this country. We are fortunate
in obtaining the services of Dr. Elsas who has
begun the investigations which we anticipate
will take about two years.

The Population Investigation Committee
also considers it of importance to observe
and record what is happening in foreign
countries. Mr. Glass, the Research Secretary
of the Committee, has published a book
called The Struggle for Population, in which
he describes the trend of population in
several European countries, and the various
efforts made to increase the birth-rate. He
is now engaged upon a complete revision of
that work, which is likely to appear in the
autumn.

I want to dispel what seems to be a
common misapprehension. The Committee
concerns itself with the trend of population
and has in its publications used the calculations of Dr. Enid Charles and others concerning the estimated future population of this
country. These publications have met with
criticism which takes the form of saying that
the Committee has made prophecies about
the future population of this country, or has
adopted or sponsored other people’s prophec
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ies, and that its prophecies have already been
proved to be wrong. But the Committee has
never prophesied at all and therefore it has
not prophesied wrongly. All the Committee
has said is that, if the population continues
to move at a certain pace, it will be of a
certain size in future years. There were two
estimates in which the Committee was
specially interested, both made by Dr. Enid
Charles. One estimate was made on the
supposition that the pace on which the
population was going in 1933 would continue.

Another calculation was based on the
assumption that the pace would continue to
drop as it had been dropping for many years.
Certain critics point out that, if you take the
first estimate, the population is now higher
than her figure gives. This is true but Dr.
Charles was most careful to say that any
effect of migration into or out of the country
had not been taken into consideration. If
you look at the figure given by Dr. Enid
Charles in her first estimate, and the figure
estimated by the Registrar-General for the
population to-day, you will find that the
estimated population to-day is higher than
her figure by little more than the amount
that the population has gained by immigration. What has been happening since 1933
is that the population has been going at about
the same pace so far as births and deaths
are concerned. That is a very important
fact. It is not impossible that this long
continued drop in the size of the family has
very nearly reached its end, and that we may
have neared the point where the size of the
family is becoming stable. But we have not
got the data in our possession which would
enable us to say whether this is so. If however the Population (Statistics) Act had been
on the Statute Book years ago we should
already have the information necessary to
decide this point.

Population Policies Committee

The Population Policies Committee is a
joint enterprise with the P.E.P., which is
short for Political and Economic Planning.
They have published many interesting
reports on the Press, on the social services,
SOME PROBLEMS OF POPULATION

on housing and so on, but this is the first
time they have co-operated with any other
body or society. This joint committee aims
at producing a report on population policies.
It will take into account both the quality
and quantity of the population ; it is not
interested merely in quantitariate considerations. It will consider the qualitative as well
as the quantitative aspects in order to arrive
at a coherent social policy which aims at a
population adequate in quality and quantity.
This Committee will have to turn its attention to the practical policies which might be
put into operation to-day, and they cover the
whole field of social effort, the question of
Income Tax and its relation to family,
possible family allowances, housing, types of
housing, whether in town, country and so
on ; indeed the whole question of the social
services comes under review by such a
Committee. It is to be hoped that it will
have concrete proposals ready by the time
when the public will be interested in the
population problem.

Consideration of the work of these two
Committees leads me to a final reflection on
the position of the eugenic movement, its
past history, present position and future
prospects. The eugenic movement began
because Sir Francis Galton and others had
a profound belief in the importance of
heredity, both for individuals and for
society. That belief has proved to be well
founded. Before the War very few persons

103

had any suspicion that heredity might play
a part in producing the evils that had
attracted their attention and which they
wished to abolish. They had not rejected the
notion ; it was that the idea had not reached
them. To-day there are few people who have
not heard of eugenics and the possible and
probable part played by heredity in most
social evils. Nevertheless when the Eugenics
Society has tried to put forward measures of
eugenic nature, it has found it very difficult
to gain support for them, because only
immediate practical problems engage the
attention of political parties. But when the
population of this country begins to decline,
as it undoubtedly will before long (the date
cannot be foretold, largely because we cannot
even guess at the amount of immigration into
the country, or movement out of it), there
will be great public concern. Population will
then become an issue of the moment, and
measures will be demanded to deal with the
situation. There will be a great opportunity
for eugenics, an opportunity to insert
eugenic considerations into any measures
that will be taken for dealing with the
quantity of population. The time has not
quite come, but it is appropriate to begin
now considering the measures that could be
taken when public interest is aroused. That
precisely is what the Population Policies
Committee is attempting to do; before the
public is ready it is attempting to get a
programme together.

 

SCIENTIFIC BOOKS

Current and Standard ENGLISH, FRENCH and GERMAN Literature
in MEDICAL, CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL and PHYSICAL SCIENCE
supplied from stock, or obtained promptly to order.

A visit to this Department is respectfully suggested.
Please write for CATALOGUES, mentioning interests.

H. K. LEWIS & Co. Ltd.,

Phone: EUSton 4282 (5 lines)

136 GOWER STREET
LONDON W.C.1

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXI, No. 2.
