LABORATORY RESEARCH IN CHEMICAL
CONTRACEPTION*®

By JOHN R. BAKER, M.A., D.Phil.

Y work on chemical contraception,

which has been going on for seven

years, was undertaken at the suggestion of Dr. C. P. Blacker, and I wish at once
to acknowledge the debt of gratitude which I
owe him for the constant encouragement and
generous advice he has given so liberally
during this long period. All my work on this
subject has been done under the auspices of
the Birth Control Investigation Committee,
to which I am greatly indebted. My friend
Mr. Ranson, who has been working with me
during the last three years, will demonstrate
some of our results during the lecture. I find
it difficult—almost impossible—to talk intelligently about seven years’ work because
in the short time at our disposal we must
either devote our attention to a few of the
subjects which we have tackled, or else just
skim over the whole research, without time
for details anywhere. But before we can
begin at all one question must be answered :
“‘ What is the use of laboratory research on
chemical contraception ? ”’

CLINICAL AND LABORATORY TESTS
COMPARED

There are many who say that the only
useful tests of contraceptives are clinical
ones: that tests in glass tubes are useless.
Of course contraceptives must work in practice ; that is obvious. Nevertheless I contend that clinical tests have little scientific

* A lecture delivered before the Eugenics Society on
April 16th, 1935. Dr. Baker spoke from short notes and
there has been no attempt to recast the stenographic
record into “‘literary’’ form. During the lecture Mr.
R. M. Ranson gave a practical demonstration of experiments which had been specially designed for showing
to an audience. The sperms whose reactions were being
studied were projected upon a screen, so that those
present could see for themselves the efficacy of the
substances under test. In this way Mr. Ranson demonstrated not only the killing of sperms but also their
stimulation by chemical means.

127

value, because as soon as the investigator has
handed out the suppositories which he wants
tested to women who are prepared to test
them, he loses all touch with the experiment,
and can only record how many babies the
women have in a given time. He has handed
the experiment over to unscientific people to
perform during the most uncritical periods
of their lives! He does not know how often
copulation takes place; how long before
ejaculation the suppository is inserted on
each occasion, or even whether it is inserted
on each occasion ; whether any other contraceptive or abortifacient method is used;
whether the woman or man is temporarily or
permanently sterile ; at what period in the
cestrous cycle the copulations take place ;
how much vaginal fluid is present on each
occasion, or whether it is acid or alkaline ; or
whether the amount of semen is normal. The
experiment is entirely uncontrolled, and the
investigator really knows nothing. Clinical
tests would only have great value if they
could be performed with a vast number of
women, so that chance could be excluded.
Laboratory tests are fully controlled, and
the investigator knows exactly what is
happening throughout. Unfortunately there
is little encouragement for the poor laboratory worker. As I have been saying, some
doctors suggest that the laboratory tests are
no good. Further, there is not any great
keenness to give laboratory space for this
kind of work. We have worked for seven
years in one laboratory, but we are now under
orders to quit. We have never had facilities
for keeping enough animals. Our tests of
harmfulness are carried out on bitches, and
we are never allowed to keep more than two
at one time in the laboratory.
Manufacturers, again, are far from encouraging. When we find their products useless they are extremely rude ; when we find
them fairly useful it is worse still, for then
128

they put my name in advertisements. Two
German firms have been particular sinners in
this respect. One of them has even gone so
far as to print my name on a leaflet enclosed
with its product. Luckily things have turned
out well for me, and I am able to score off
these two firms. Their products came out
well in my early tests, but in my later
improved tests they came out badly ; so that
I am able to say that if anyone sees my name
on an advertisement, he may take it that the
product is unreliable!

AIMS OF THE INVESTIGATION

Now what have our objects been? First,
to devise tests for pure substances ; this has
been achieved. Secondly, to devise tests for
suppositories and ointments ; this has been
achieved. Thirdly, to invent improved,
harmless contraceptives. This has not yet
been achieved, but we are hopeful of ultimate success.

The details of our tests have been published in full; there is no unnecessary complication in them, but we have tried in
devising them to meet every possible objection, and it has been found necessary to
make the tests rather complicated. Thus, our
test for ointments is described in fifty-one
clauses. A manufacturer who did not like the
result of my test of his omtment told me that
his method of testing was better than mine.
His method was to mix one drop of ointment
with one drop of semen, and look at the
mixture with a microscope. It will be
immediately obvious that this test provides
no way at all of comparing different products, and is in every way completely useless.

A great number of quite useless suppositories are put on the market. One of them
consists of lactic acid with a fatty vehicle.
The lactic acid is supposed to be the spermicide. Actually it reacts with the vehicle to
make a neutral and perfectly non-spermicidal product. (This was demonstrated to
the audience by Mr. Ranson.)

How strong should suppositories be? I
suggest a “ factor of safety ’’ of eight; that
is, that all products should be at least eight
times as spermicidal as is_ theoretically
necessary. That is the factor of safety that

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

is normally used in aeroplane design to
guard against death. To guard against life,
an equal factor of safety should be required.
One manufacturer boasted to me that his
product always worked at a concentration
which worked out at a factor of safety of
one-third. What would we think of an aeroplane designer who made the parts of his
aeroplane only strong enough to support
one-third of the stresses occurring in normal
flight ? If one had two different suppositories, both harmless and costing the same,
and if one were more spermicidal than the
other, which would one choose? The answer
is obvious.

What are the advantages of chemical
contraception? The ideal contraceptive
would require no previous preparation, and
a perfect chemical contraceptive would fulfil
this requirement. But chemical contraception is also very important as a secondary
means of preventing conception, when occluSive pessaries are used. There can be no
doubt that occlusive pessaries used alone are
unreliable. A slit only 3, of an inch wide
between the rubber and the living tissue
would be sufficient to allow mnumerable
sperms to pass through without the slightest
hindrance. (This was demonstrated by a
model.) This shows the necessity of using
chemical methods in addition to the occlusive ones. But it is hoped that when the
perfect chemical contraceptive is invented,
occlusive pessaries will be unnecessary.

Most of our work has been done with the
sperms of the cavy. It is an extremely
fortunate fact that the sperm of the cavy
behaves, with the most diverse chemicals, in
almost the same way as the human sperm.

The first year of my research was mostly
taken up with inventing suitable fluids for
sperm suspensions. For the study of pure substances a fluid called buffered glucose-saline
was elaborated. This contains no protein,
and is used for the study of the direct effect of
substances on sperms. For practical purposes one wants to know how the various
substances will behave in the presence of
proteins, and for this purpose a fluid called
albumen-saline was elaborated. In this fluid
LABORATORY RESEARCH IN CHEMICAL CONTRACEPTION

sperms behave to the most diverse chemicals exactly as they do when suspended in
semen. Another fluid that we have used,
called phosphate-albumen, was designed for
the testing of acids. It has exactly the same
alkaline reserve as semen.

SPERMICIDAL POWER OF PURE
SUBSTANCES

We shall discuss first the test of pure substances. The object of the standard technique is to provide a figure for every substance proportional to its spermicidal power.
Every substance is tested at various concentrations in the series 2 per cent., 1 per cent.,
4 per cent., } per cent., etc., and its killing
concentration is found; that is, the lowest
concentration in that series that suffices to
kill all sperms in half an hour at the temperature of the body in four consecutive
experiments. Other workers have used the
time method instead of the concentration
method. That is, they have standardized a
certain concentration, and have noticed how
long the sperms take to die. The disadvantage of this method is that very spermicidal
substances kill so quickly that one cannot
separate them in spermicidal power unless
one uses a very low concentration, in which
case the weakly spermicidal substances cannot be graded because they take such a long
time to kill that the sperms would anyhow
be beginning to die by that time. In all our
recent tests we have insisted on the actual
killing of sperms instead of on their immobilization.

It is impossible in the course of an hour’s
lecture to do more than skate over the surface of what we have been finding out. But I
must mention a few of the groups we have
studied.

First of all, acids. These are weak spermicides ; dibasic acids are not more spermicidal than monobasic acids, nor tribasic than
dibasic. No inorganic salt that we have
tested is a strong spermicide except mercuric
chloride. Soap is equal in spermicidal power
to chinosol and quinine, which are respectively thirty-seven and twenty-seven times
as expensive. In the benzaldehydes, the

129

presence of OH and CHO in the orthoposition to one another (as in salicylaldehyde) confers high spermicidal powers. With
the assistance of Dr. J. M. Gulland, a specially
detailed study was made of the phenols and
quinones. In the phenols the para-position
of the two OH groups confers high spermicidal power. Alkyl side-chains increase
spermicidal power up to a certain length.
The most spermicidal substance known is
toluquinone, which immobilizes every time
at the extreme dilution of ,3, percent. Mr.
R. C. Burbank has recently been counting
the number of sperms in our standard suspensions, and from his results we are able to
say that it takes two thousand million molecules of the most spermicidal substance in the
world to kill one cavy sperm in half an hour.

I found one of the saponines to be highly
spermicidal, but I doubt its having practical
value on account of the probability of its
being harmful. One manufacturer put a
non-toxic saponine in his product as a result
of this discovery, but unfortunately his nontoxic saponine was also non-spermicidal!
No alkaloid tested has proved to be a strong
spermicide ; and sperms cannot be killed by
strychnine hydrochloride.

Our work has been very much criticized
on the ground that most of it has been done
with cavy sperms, not with human sperms.
However, as I indicated before, we carried
out quite an extensive series with human
sperms and found them almost identical with
cavy sperms in their reactions. I was interested at one time (some time ago now) to
see whether the sperms of some quite unrelated animal would behave at all similarly.
So I went to Plymouth, and made a study of
the sperms of the sea-urchin. For this in-—
vestigation I chose three closely allied substances—resorcinol, catechol and hydroquinone. These three substances have the
same chemical composition except that the
atoms are arranged in a different way in
the molecule. Now with cavy sperms, hydroquinone is much more spermicidal than catechol; and catechol is slightly more spermicidal than resorcinol. With the sea-urchin I
found exactly the same thing ; hydroquinone
is much more spermicidal than catechol,
130

which, once again, is slightly more spermicidal than resorcinol. This result is most surprising, but helps to show how ill-founded
were the criticisms levelled against us for
choosing the cavy for the greater part of our
research.

It has often been supposed that substances
which are strongly germicidal must necessarily be spermicidal, but this is not so.
Some substances which are strongly germicidal are scarcely spermicidal, and strong
spermicides are sometimes scarcely germicidal. (A lantern slide was exhibited comparing the spermicidal and germicidal powers
of certain substances.)

The presence of proteins greatly reduces
the spermicidal power of many substances,
especially mercuric chloride and_ soaps.
Acidity also affects some substances. For
instance, quinine is slightly less active in
acid solution. Methylhydroquinone is sixteen times as spermicidal in alkaline as in
acid solution. This may be of great significance if the contents of the vagina are ever
slightly acid after coition.

TESTS OF COMMERCIAL SUPPOSITORIES

Suppositories are tested first at the
standard concentration, in the proportion of
one suppository to 5 c.c of semen and 2°5 c.c.
of vaginal fluid. If all sperms are killed, the
suppository is tried again at S/2, and then, if
necessary, at S/4, and so on in this series
until sperms are no longer killed. Five
minutes are allowed for the killing to take
place. This short time has been decided
upon, as prompt killing is so essential in
practice. The details of the test have been
modified from time to time in response to
criticism, but we are confident that we have
now got a very reliable test. The results of
the test are rather depressing, for none of the
commercial products tested comes near what
we would desire; that is, none of them kills
at S/8.

Fats are often used as vehicles for suppositories, and there is some possibility that
the fats in themselves prevent conception.
It is often said that fat clogs sperms, but
anyone who has looked down a microscope at

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

globules of fat in a sperm suspension knows
that this is an impossibility, for surface
tension prevents the globules of fat from
applying themselves to the sperms. A sperm
could no more be clogged by melted fat than
a man could be clogged by a wall. Nevertheless it is possible that the melted fat forms an
actual barrier to the progress of sperms into
the uterus. |

The fact that commercial suppositories are
being tested is, I think, encouraging manufacturers to make certain that they contain
some spermicide, and it is to be hoped that
further improvement will take place as more
and more of their products are tested and
reported upon.

‘* HERBAL ”’ CONTRACEPTIVES

I have recently returned from the New
Hebrides, in the Pacific Ocean, where I was
the leader of the Oxford University expedition. In some parts of the New Hebrides
there are savages quite uninfluenced by the
presence of a few whites scattered round their
coasts. These people are extremely primitive, but they have methods of controlling
their population. My wife, who was a
member of the expedition, made a special
study of this subject. She made friends with
the savages, and for the first four months of
her friendship with them she gave them no
hint that she was interested in this matter.
Any such hint, given too early, would have
made it impossible for her later to have
obtained information. A woman has a great
advantage as an investigator of these matters
because it is probable that in no circumstances would the women disclose their
secrets to a male investigator. It appears
probable that the men can give little information on the subject, simply because they
know little or nothing about it. My wife was
able to obtain a great deal of information,
and the women claimed to use certain plants
as contraceptives, others as temporary
sterilizers, others as permanent sterilizers,
and others as abortifacients. The various
plant products are taken by the mouth. We
brought back with us the seeds of some of
these plants, and they are being grown under
LABORATORY RESEARCH IN CHEMICAL CONTRACEPTION

suitable conditions in England. We hope
later on this year to make a study of their
effects upon mice.

Although it is perfectly possible that there
is nothing at all in the natives’ story, yet the
matter seems worth investigation, especially
when one considers that nearly all plant
drugs were discovered in the first place by

simple people.

DANGER OF CHEMICAL
CONTRACEPTIVES

My friend, Dr. Carleton, has for many
years been making a study of the harmful
effects of chemical contraceptives. For this
purpose he prefers the bitch, because the
histology of the vagina of the bitch closely
resembles that of the human female. Rodents
are unfortunately unsuitable, as the vagina
has not got a squamous epithelium. Dr.
Carleton finds that most of the contraceptives
on the market are harmless, but there is one
harmful one, namely the quinine urea hydrochloride tablet, which causes necrosis and
sloughing of the epithelium. The discovery
of a new, harmless spermicide is greatly
retarded by our only being able to keep, at
the most, two bitches in the laboratory at the
same time. In Dr. Carleton’s standard technique one suppository is placed in the vagina
every day for twenty-eight days. Thus less
than twenty-five different suppositories can
be tested in a year.

13I

SPERM STIMULATION

During the course of our studies of the
spermicidal powers of substances, I noticed
that some substances actually stimulate
sperms to very active movement. Chief
among these is strychnine hydrochloride. The
allied drug, brucine hydrochloride, has
similar, but slightly less marked, effects.
Chloral hydrate has also some slight powers
of stimulating sperms. I am hopeful that
practical use may be made of this knowledge
in those cases where infertility is thought to
be due to sluggish action of the sperms. (The
stimulation of sperms by strychnine hydrochloride was demonstrated to the audience by
Mr. Ranson.)

It might be thought that stimulation
would be harmful to the sperms, but this is
not so. Mr. Ranson and I carried out a
series of artificial inseminations of cavies
with sperms which had been stimulated by
strychnine, and we obtained perfectly normal
young ones.

CONCLUSION

It is to be hoped that one day there will be
some form of Laboratory of Practical
Eugenics where all commercial products can
be tested for spermicidal powers and for
harmfulness, and where research for new
methods of contraception can be carried out
without any of the restrictions which are put
upon one when the work is performed in a
university.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVII, No. 2.
