CORRESPONDENCE

GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS IN HUMAN ABILITY

To the Editor, The Eugenics Review

Sir,—Professor Thoday is concerned in his letter in the September number of THE EUGENICS
REVIEW (59, 216) to insist on genotype-environment interaction in the explanation of any
phenotypic variable of incomplete heritability. He is right and I have argued and illustrated
this case in my Galton Lecture which appeared in the same issue. But I also say that many
of the unsolved problems lie completely within the social and moral arts and sciences. This
is also true and consistent with the first assertion. My son’s IQ is the outcome of genotypeenvironment interaction. But I am not concerned about this when I think how best to help
him master the new mathematics or decide whether it is right for him to go to a state ora
private school.

When we recognise the autonomy as well as the interdependence of the biological and
social studies we shall put our highly desirable co-operation on a firm footing.

A. H. HALSEY

Nuffield College,
Oxford

THE SURVIVAL OF THE FITTEST

To the Editor, The Eugenics Review

Sir,—I came across the following observation by Dr. William Hunter—brother of the more
famous John Hunter—in his Medical Observations and Inquiries, Vol. 6, p. 291 ‘‘Three
Cases of Malformation of the Heart” dated 1783. (Posthumous).

I shall venture a conjecture upon the scheme which the Author of our nature has
laid down for perpetuating animals. Many animals, from the imperfections of their
fabric, are necessarily to perish before the common natural period. This is compensated
by a great superfluity of number, and the most perfect and sound animal upon the
whole will have the best chance of living to procreate others of its kind. In other words,
the best breed will prevail, the sound constitution will have the preference in procreation, and the defective, weak or diseased line will be wearing out.

If this doctrine were as well known with regard to the human species as it is in
the breeding of horses, personal qualities would be more generally attended to in
match-making than they generally are. We everyday see preference given to rank or
birth or weight of possessions, at the expense of entailing diseases of body and mind
upon a race doomed to early extinction.

Perhaps these speculations might interest readers of THE EUGENICS REVIEW, antici
pating as they do the theories of Malthus, Darwin and Galton.
| P. D. H. CHAPMAN

21 Trinity Road
Bridlington

EUGENICS
To the Editor, The Eugenics Review

Sir,—
Man is gifted with pity and other kindly feelings; he has also the power of
preventing many kinds of suffering. I conceive it to fall well within his province to

299
