THE EUGENICS REVIEW.

THE RUIN OF ROME AND ITS
LESSONS FOR US."
By F. C. S. Scurtuer, D.Sc.

When our President announced to me last July that I had been
chosen to deliver the Galton Lecture for this year and suggested the
subject it was desired that I should treat, my first impulse was to
plead utter unworthiness. For much as I appreciated the honour
the Society has conferred upon me, how could I, a mere philosopher,
venture upon a subject so vast , thorny and difficult, which had engaged
the attention, and baffled the learning of a multitude of historians and
among them some of the greatest and best? However our President
would take no denial, and I therefore trust that you will pardon my
temerity and hold him, and not me, responsible for any inadequacy
or failure you may detect in my remarks in approaching so great a
subject. I can only hope that, if I guide myself by the researches of
the great historians who have attacked the problem, I shall not fail
completely. | |

On reflecting on my task the first point that seemed distinctly to
emerge was that possibly, in some minor respects, an ignorant but
open-minded philosopher might have an advantage over a learned
historian. For the latter is always in danger of failing to see the wood
for the trees, and apt to be reluctant to generalize freely from evidence
of which he feels too keenly the complexity, inadequacy and redundancy. He is moreover apt to be hampered by his natural respect for
his authorities and to demand explicit documentary support for his
interpretations, in the absence of which he simply declares the problem insoluble by historical methods. Hence a merely ingenious and
alluring theory such as that large tracts of fertile land became uninhabitable in the ancient world so soon as its mosquito population
became infected with the malaria germ, probable as it is, will make
little impression on him, because, naturally enough, no ancient evidence can be quoted in its favour. The philosopher on the other hand
is permitted much greater audacity in generalizing, and if he is openminded, as he by no means always is, may show much greater willingness to draw his evidence from every source. Nor will he be daunted
by the difficulty of his task; for to talk about insoluble problems is
part of his profession.

Accordingly one need not despair of gleanings, even when follow
*Galton Lecture delivered Feb. 16th, 1925.
2 EUGENICS REVIEW.

ing in the footsteps of giants like Gibbon and Otto Seeck, who spent
their life in the study of the most conspicuous case of a declining civilization, and produced the masterpieces entitled The Decline and Fall
of Rome and Der Untergang der Antiken Welt. To be candid, neither
of these great works seems to have completely solved the problem of
explaining why the Roman Empire fell, though both draw admirable
pictures of its protracted agony.

To Gibbon* the main reasons for the fall of Rome were military
disorders, and the rise of Christianity; but his adroit insinuations
against the latter fall far short of proofs. Whatever the truth may
have been about the communism and pacifism of the Apostolic Age, it
seems clear that in the second and third centuries the Christian Church
had ceased to be the socially subversive institution that might be
deduced from a literal construction of the Gospel precepts. If it is
true that the Christians did not provide an adequate quota for the
army, the reasons may well have been that the compulsory participation in heathen sacrifices, and in the dirty work the Roman emperors
expected of their soldiery, must have been distasteful to men animated
by Christian (or indeed any sort of) moral feeling. But it is a very
obvious explanation of the fact, if fact it was, that the strength of
Christianity lay in city populations which had become unwarlike long
ago. Lastly, the fact itself may be doubted; for it is hardly credible
that a military chief like Constantine could have imposed Christianity
on his Empire, if his army had not been largely favourable to the new
religion. And that the Christians, an aggressive proselytizing sect,
were devoid of pugnacity, is equally incredible; at any rate the proceedings of the Oecumenica! Councils of the fourth and fifth centuries
do not suggest that a lack of fighting spirit was the besetting sin of
Christian priests and prelates.

In any case the rise of Christianity cannot have been the real cause
of the decline of Rome; it was at most a symptom, one form taken by a
general movement away from the haughty, complacent and heartless
rituals of classical paganism towards a type of religion that had more
sympathy and consolation to offer to the human heart. If Christianity
had not satisfied men’s religious cravings, some other Oriental religion
with similar qualities would have prevailed, Mithraism, Manichaeism,
or perhaps even Buddhism. Lastly, a State which, like the Roman
Empire, does not impose conscription to fill the ranks of its army, but
relies on voluntary enlistment, can hardly complain if any class of its
citizens refuse to enter the army, and become unwarlike.

Otto Seeck investigates the problem of the collapse of ancient
civilization much more elaborately than Gibbon, and arrives at a long
array of causes which, he holds, contributed to the result. They
differ a good deal in weight and importance, and are not perhaps in all
cases quite consistent with each other; but they are all deserving of
attentive consideration.

I would enumerate them as follows: (1) the process which he calls
the extirpation of the best and illustrates by the story in Herodotusf of

* Cf. Decline and Fall, Ch. 88, s.f.
7 V.92. Cf. III. 48.
THE RUIN OF ROME. 3

the inquiry addressed by Periander the tyrant of Corinth to his friend
Thrasybulus, tyrant of Miletus, as to how he should maintain his power.
The messenger received no answer in words, but related how Thrasybulus had walked about his garden and kept on cutting off with his
stick the head of the tallest poppies. Thus the extirpation of the best
began with the slaughter and exile of prominent citizens by tyrants
and democracies in the Greek city-states, and with the maxim of
ancient state-craft that ‘a fool is he who having killed the father spares
the son’; it was continued by the proscriptions in the Roman Civil
wars, and the judicial murders of the nobility by the Emperors, and
completed in the Byzantinized court by the suppression of any one
showing any symptom of courage and independence.

- (2) The same process was, Seeck holds, carried on by the continuous warfare whereby Rome conquered the world. This first ruined the
Italian farmer when it took him away from his land for long periods,*
and then, when Marius, recognizing the facts, substituted an enlisted
professional army for the conscript citizen levies, rapidly selected for
extinction the boldest and most vigorous elements in the population.
By the time of Trajan Italy had become incapable of furnishing the
annual contingent of 700 recruits for the Praetorian Guard.

The Emperors aggravated the dysgenic effects of warfare by forbidding their Roman soldiers to marry until they were pensioned off as
‘veterans’ ; with the result that they only produced bastards with the
inferior (and largely barbarian) women who haunted the frontier
camps.f The barbarian ‘auxiliaries,’ on the other hand, who were
largely raised by conscription, were not forbidden to marry, and
naturally multiplied until the legionaries also had to be taken from
the more or less Romanized barbarians. When under Septimius
Severus the Roman soldier was allowed to marry, it was too late; the
mass of the population had become utterly unwarlike, and the soldiers
could only form a relatively minute caste, the human output of which
could easily be exhausted by a few of the murderous civil wars waged
between the rival pretenders to the imperial purple. And then again,
the losses could only be made good by recruiting barbarians.

(8) To depopulation Seeck assigns a much less prominent place in
the downfall of Rome and Greece than those historians who have
allowed themselves to be moved by ancient laments over the emptiness
of Greece and the desolation of the Campagna. Rightly, it seems to
me ; for writers like Plutarch, noticing how small and unimportant had
become the Greek cities that had once been great and populous, and
not knowing whither their population had gone, inferred it was extinct,
whereas in fact it had availed itself of the paw Romana tc diffuse itself
all over the Empire, and, in a businesslike way, had colonized richer
regions, in which it was easier to earn an ampler livelihood. There is
reason to believe, moreover, that the Greek world from the eighth
century B.C. to the fourth was greatly over-populated ; then Alexander
overthrew Persia, and delivered the East to Greek exploitation. The

' * Seeck, I, p.240.
* Ibid, pp. 261, 268.

{7 Seeck, I, p..265.
4 EUGENICS REVIEW.

resulting rush, though it represents the greatest era of Greek colonization, has hardly been noticed by modern historians, because it does not
happen to have been described by ancient ; but the Greeks remained in
Asia, until Mr. Lloyd George’s ill-judged incitement of Venizelos
ended in disaster a couple of years ago. As for the Campagna, Mr.
W. H. S. Jones’s mosquito-theory seems to be fully adequate to
account for its desolation. | .

' Seeck, however, though he does not believe in general depopulation, admits it locally, and draws attention to the ravages of the great
plague in the reign of Marcus Aurelius, and thinks it may have been as
devastating as the Black Death, which carried off from a third to a half
of the European population in the fourteenth century. Asa consequence,
redundant barbarian populations were admitted into the Empire, and
settled as colonists in the Danubian frontier districts—the beginning
of a dubious policy which altered the racial composition of the population, though it invigorated its blood. Seeck points out that after this
settlement depopulation ceases, the difficulty of recruiting diminishes,
and the army becomes barbarian in blood.

(4) Of this infiltration of rapidly multiplying neighbours into a
sparsely occupied region with a stationary population the Roman
Empire is of course a palmary example. It may be studied also in
modern France, which is constantly attracting Spaniards, Italians,
Swiss, Poles, Germans (by no means all Alsatians), and Belgians across
its borders. Provided, however, the foreigners do not pour in too
rapidly, and do not differ too widely from the native population, this
sort of influx does no harm, but rather the reverse, since the immigrants
will wish to be assimilated, and must be above the average in ability
and enterprise to make good in a foreign land. In this respect immigration is preferable to the otherwise similar process of internal selection which is silently going on within every country inhabited by
different racial strains with different rates of reproduction; for then it
is usually the inferior types which gain upon the better. At any rate
in the case of Rome there is as little proof as in that of France that the
process is a serious cause of decadence; the barbarians were only too
anxious to adopt Roman civilization, and being nearly all Nordics,
were quite as good stuff as the original Romans themselves.

(5) Far more importance attaches to a number of defects in the
social organization of the Roman Empire, proceeding partly from economic ignorance, partly from the causes which everywhere tempt to
misrule, partly from pride in past achievement and consequent conceit,
The imperial administration of the ancient world may at first have been
a great improvement on the republican; but in course of time it developed into gross, and indeed intolerable, misgovernment. Perhaps
the chief among the causes of this misgovernment was ignorance of
economic law, which was as crass, though more pardonable, among
Roman Emperors as it is among modern politicians. The tricks they
played, e.g. in interfering with the course of trade and in debasing the
coinage, were more violent, though less effective, than the expedients
of modern governments. They had a knack of decreeing economic
impossibilities, such as preserving the parity between good money and
bad, and enforcing it by capital punishment, and ‘maximum prices’
THE RUIN OF ROME. 5

were sustained by similar sanctions. The blood shed by such martyrs
to the integrity of economic law must have far exceeded in volume that
spilt for the truths of Christianity. Only it was shed in vain, for no
amount of adverse experience seems capable of convincing mankind
that economic law can no more be over-ruled than the law of gravitation. a

To the evil consequences of economic ignorance must be added, (6)
those of an atrocious system of taxation, which first beggared the tax‘payer, and then made his occupation hereditary in order that he might
not become free, even as a beggar, and habitually extracted arrears of
taxes by torture, and (7) a corrupt, excessive, and ever growing bureaucracy, which, with the army, devoured more and more of the public
income. : : ce

Seeck mentions also (8) an excessive respect for antiquity, and
(9), probably in consequence thereof,’a curious loss of inventiveness
and of the wish to progress. (10) The final result was an utter and
universal servility pervading all classes, though on his own showing
bishops like Ambrose of Milan and Cyril of Alexandria could hardly be
accused of this failing.

Now it is evident that this impressive list of causes of decay,
acting singly or in unison, could reduce any society to a very low ebb.
Still they do not seem to explain quite everything. They do not
explain why the decay continued without a recovery, and with hardly
an arrest, for over 500 years. Nor perhaps do they fully explain the
decay itself. For after all most of these causes of decay may be seen
operating elsewhere, without leading to a complete collapse. In
China, for example, they have merely produced a stationary civilization. Why should not Rome have remained stationary like China,
which has always tamed and absorbed her barbarian conquerors? The
only vital difference I can see in the two cases is that for 8000 years
China, irrespective of the quarrels of its dynasts, recruited her administrators by a competitive Civil Service Examination in the classics
which somehow picked out the best brains.

Apart from this some of Seeck’s causes of decay call for a little
comment. In the first place his notion of the Extirpation of the Best
needs a little more analysis. He does not explain by what standard
those ‘extirpated’ are the ‘best.’ They may be ‘best’, (a) in the eyes
of their contemporaries, (6) in the judgment of the historian’s subsequent age, which believes itself to be a better judge of goodness, or
(c) as judged by an absolute standard of value. The third of these
senses can no doubt be dismissed by the reficeLion that it would only
become available at the end of moral progress, when absolute and final
perfection had been reached. But the other two should be distinguished. For the elimination of those mistakenly considered best by
a corrupt society need not by any means be an unmitigated evil in the
interests of human progress. Nor is it impossible that the historian’s
judgment may be wrong, even though, like the rest of us, he is sure to
believe he is right. However, if we can assume the continuity of
moral progress, it will follow that the judgment of each later age,
though never infallible nor absolutely right, is at least better than that
of every earlier age.
6 EUGENICS REVIEW.

It should be noticed further that in any imperfect society there
must exist a discrepancy between the qualities judged ideally best and
those which are conducive to survival and success in life under the
actual conditions. As, therefore, the ‘best’ will not coincide with the
fittest to survive, a certain elimination of the best must always be
going on and give rise to complaints that the wicked flourish and the
righteous are worsted in the struggle for existence. But this process
need not do much harm. It need not prevent a growing convergence
of the fittest and the best. Hence the mere discovery of a social process which may be described as in a sense an extirpation of the best is
not enough to prove that a society is decaying. Actually moreover
Seeck’s use of the conception proves too much. He dates back the
extirpation of the best so far that it applies to the great age of Greece,
and he forgets that the extirpation of those conventionally reputed
best may sometimes be a beneficial process. For there is needed also
a social process which clears away the débris of corrupt aristocracies
which have grown effete and inefficient. That affords a sort of justification for revolutions like the French and the Russian.

Even apart from revolutions and the bloodthirstiness of tyrants,
it is probable enough that throughout antiquity the upper classes were
continually dying out, as is indicated by the growing rarity of the
Roman patricians in spite of repeated creations of fresh ones by the
Emperors.

But this is a universal phenomenon of all civilizations, though a
few families persist. The Princes Massimo still claim descent from
the Fabii Maximi, as is illustrated by the famous reply of the Prince
of the time to Napoleon’s insolent inquiry whether this descent was
genuine—‘I do not know, Sire; but the world has believed it for a
thousand years.’ No doubt also the decay of ancient aristocracies
was accelerated by their slave-holding habits; for slavery is a subtle
social poison most deadly to the master class.

On the other hand it should be remembered what a very small
portion of the population the aristocracy formed in ancient times, and
how difficult it was for ability to rise in a very rigid social order; there
must have been considerable amounts of it which were never extirpated,
because they could not rise to the regions where extirpation was
rampant. Finally, allowance must be made for the fact that social
standards in antiquity were so perverse and mistaken that extirpation
of the reputed best might well fail to be an adequate cause of social
decay.

Seeck’s second cause, persistent warfare, is undoubtedly a vera
causa. It may with some confidence be assigned as the chief cause of
the downfall of Athens, as of the decline of Portugal and Spain. For
in each of these cases a relatively small population was exposed to a
severe and long continued draining away to distant wars of its most
vigorous and energetic personnel. The Athenians of the fifth century
B.C. frittered away in futile and biologically expensive wars the human
capital which they had accumulated under the wise rule of the Pisistratids, whose pacific policy must be credited with most of the great
Athenians, who were born in theirtime, and ‘fought at Marathon’ with
very little loss to themselves. Portugal and Spain had not men enough
to control and colonize their vast possessions in the New World and
THE RUIN OF ROME. 7

the East without irretrievably impoverishing their home stock, and
the Spaniards in addition made the same mistake as the French subsequently, that of trying simultaneously to colonize the New World,
and to dominate Europe.

But it seems very doubtful whether the Roman Empire was a
similar case. Its area and population were far too large to be exhausted in this way, and for the first 200 years of its existence it only
waged a very moderate number of wars—far fewer than those the Republic had indulged in.

It seems preferable therefore to connect the growing decline in the
military efficiency of the Roman population with a phenomenon which
is quite general in ancient civilizations. Civilization in antiquity
seems for some obscure reason to have been highly toxic to the military
virtues. We find that everywhere, no sooner does a conquering tribe
become civilized, than it ceases to be formidable in war; and so though
civilized states were frequently overrun by barbarian conquerors,
their rule was usually shortlived. The history of Babylonia, Egypt,
India, China, Lydia, Persia, Gaul, is full of examples. The ancients
used to attribute this phenomenon to the growth of an enervating
‘luxury’ which departed from the good old simple and hardy manners
of ancestral conquerors, and it was probably the reason why special
warrior-castes were formed in so many ancient States (Egypt, Babylonia, India, Japan, and probably Assyria) to preserve, at least in
part of the population, the military qualities which had once been
general. In the Roman Empire also its formation can clearly be
traced. But the notion that Civilization, intrinsically and simply as
such, was necessarily fatal to the fighting spirit is surely refuted by this
very history of Rome. Home’s barbarian conquerors were somehow nos
enervated by luxury, but went on fighting after they got civilized, as
gaily, if not quite as ferociously, as ever. The fighting of the Middle
Ages is perhaps best regarded as a sort of sport of the nobility and
gentry, in the pursuit of which these classes not infrequently extirpated
themselves by their excessive zeal; yet the military qualities did not
become extinct, and whenever the working classes were admitted to the
privilege of shedding their blood on behalf of the various causes alleged
at various times to be worth fighting for, they were found to supply
cannon-fodder of undiminished excellence. Nor can it even be said
that the ‘Capuan luxury’ of great cities deprives men of their pugnacity; for in the late war it was found that townsmen made quite as
good soldiers as peasants. One may perhaps suggest that mediaeval
society had devised a method of sterilizing the more pacific portions
of the population by clerical celibacy, and that in modern society many
of its sports and games train up a certain taste for daring and danger,
which develops into military courage when the occasion arises: but
the phenomenon remains a puzzling one, and is deserving of further
study.

Lastly it should not be overlooked that ancient warfare was much
less dysgenic than modern. For not only had the brave and strong
better chances of surviving both the actual fighting and the hardships
and diseases of war, but the warrior class as a whole usually suffered
less than the civil population swept away by famine and disease. Thus
if in the next war the front will be a region of relative security, and the
8 EUGENICS REVIEW.

decisive factor will be the wholesale massacre of civil populations from
the air, as many believe, this will be a reversion to the former effects
of warfare.

(3) Depopulation is a subject on which vast amounts of nonsense
are habitually talked by excited people who clamour for quantity
without regard to quality, and do not trouble to distinguish between a
stationary and a declining population. But it is quite untrue that
any existing state, even France, has normally a declining population,
and it is likely that the ancient lamentations about depopulation were
equally hysterical.

For when one considers the enormous potential fertility man shares
with the other animals, and the rapidity with which accidental d pletions can be made good, it is hard to resist the conviction that under
normal conditions it is a biological certainty that there can be no
lasting depopulation. On the contrary, the world, even though it
may not be actually over-populated, must always be as fully populated
as the available food and social conditions permit.

It follows (1) that in normal times, when no additions are being
made to the sources of food-supply, human population must be as
stationary as animal life, and (2) that there must therefore always be
opreative in every human society checks on its potential fertility
sufficient to leave its numbers stationary. These checks are very
various in character, but as Professor Carr Saunders has fully shown’,
they always exist. History as a whole confirms these deductions, but
their consequences have been masked by the fact that the human race
has on the whole been progressive, and has used the best part of its
intelligence to increase its food-supply, thus enabling its numbers to
increase, though not usually with the unprecedented rapidity conditioned by the development of Science in the last century.

Conversely, if the normal equilibrium of a society is suddenly
assailed by a new danger, a war, a convulsion of nature, a pestilence,
the introduction of a new poison, vice, or disease, population naturally diminishes. But only for a time. For all these agencies of
destruction are more or less selective, and after they have swept away
the more susceptible, the survivors will grow more resistant ; thus there
will grow up some measure of natural immunity to the ravages of any
disease or vice.

All this must apply to the Roman Empire, as to any other society,
say a South Sea island which has the misfortune to be discovered by
Europeans, and is consequently flooded with vile liquor, compelled to
clothe itself in cotton goods, and infected with measles, influenza,
syphilis and other hitherto unknown diseases. The island savages,
whose native checks on population continue to act, will rapidly melt
away, and may almost die out, of disgust and discouragement (except
the half-breeds); but if the change in their habits of life is not too
sudden and radical, and unaccompanied by violence, a remnant will
survive, and will presently begin to multiply again. This has happened to the New Zealand Maoris, the American Indians, a hunting
population whose food supply was destroyed by the firearms of the
European invaders, and some of the Pacific islanders. It will probably

*The Population Problem.
THE RUIN OF ROME. 9

happen to the Australian aborigines, if they are not hunted down like
the Tasmanians and the Beothacks of Newfoundland. So with Rome.
It is likely enough that large tracts of the Empire were rendered
uninhabitable by the introduction of malaria, and enervating by that of
ancylostoma duodenale, the ‘hook worm’ , and that the cities with their
slums and vices had to recruit themselves from without, though it was
precisely in the cities of the Roman Empire that the Jews learnt to
survive, and to adapt themselves to slum life to an extent only surpassed
by the Chinese; but that depopulation went on continuously for 500
vears is too improbable to be rendered credible by the extant evidence.

(4) Concerning the effects of barbarian colonization little need be
added to Seeck. He himself thinks that it arrested depopulation, and
it ought therefore to have figured as a cause, not of decay, but of
rejuvenation.

(5) When we pass from the quasi-biological to the social and economic causes of decay, we get on to firmer ground. There can be no
doubt that they are adequate. No society, whatever its other excellences, can flourish if its economic basis is not sound, and if it sets
itself to defy economic law. A tribe of geniuses could not maintain
civilization, if its conditions were such that every one had to labour
all day for a bare living. A tribe of robbers cannot grow really rich
by robbery alone, though man’s predatory instincts are slow to recognize this law of nature. Needless to say the ancients did not. With
the exception of China, their empires were all, more or less, robber
states, that tricd to live upon slaves and tributes, and suffered accordingly. For the thing cannot be done without disastrously disorganizing the economy of those who try it, as our political wisdom is, very
tardily, beginning to recognize. That is the essence of the ‘reparations problem.’

How deleterious bad economics may become is vividly illustrated
by a pleasing anecdote Suetonius* tells about the emperor Vespasian.
When he was rebuilding the Capitol (burnt in the civil war) a mechanical inventor offered him a machine for moving large columns cheaply.
The emperor refused it, because he would not deprive the poor of their
work! Nowadays an emperor would not perhaps argue thus, but tradeunionists would, and they are more powerful than emperors.

Bad economics, bad taxes and bad bureaucracies we seem to have
with us always, like the poor, who are their end-product. But in
ancient times no remedies were known for these evils. Nowadays cures
for them are known, but it is not easy to mobilize the knowledge. For
it is not known to the people, nor to the politicians. It is the wellguarded secret of a professorial class which is induced, and indeed
compelled, by our systems of academic organization to express itself,
either not at all, or only in such technical terms as not to divulge it.

Still more subtle are the causes of decay lurking in extreme respect
for antiquity and spiritual conservatism. It is evident of course that
primarily and in itself this sentiment is a beneficial cause of social
stability. But if it is overdone, it becomes an insuperable bar to
improvement. And it is precisely the societies which can look back
upon great and glorious achievements in the past which most easily

 

* Vespasian, Ch. 18.
10 EUGENICS REVIEW.

succumb to this temptation. They become self-satisfied and insufferably conceited, and will not listen to any suggestion of reform. It must
have been to this spirit that was due the amazing fact recorded by Seeck
that for 500 years no improvement was introduced into the arms and
equipment of the Roman armies.* For the science of killing has been
on the whole the most continuously progressive of human activities,
and even throughout the Middle Ages, the armourer’s art was steadily
improving the quality of the weapons and the armour.

It is to the conceit of a civilization proud to excess of its past,
rather than to any intrinsic sterility of the human spirit, that we should
ascribe the lack of inventions which characterizes the decay of antiquity. The originality which invents novelties is always scarce, and
the way of the inventor is everywhere hard; but it is not usually cut
short with the prompt brutality displayed by Tiberius when an inventor
came to show him a wonderful glass vessel which could be bent without breaking and then restored to its former shape. The emperor asked
him whether anyone else knew his secret, and when he said no, ordered
his head to be cut off, in order that his invention might not cause a
slump in the value of metal vessels. Petronius, that most modern of
Latin writers, puts the tale into the mouth of his nouveau riche,
Trimalchio,t and his modernity is attested by the similar fate which
befell the invention of ‘toughened’ glass in moderntimes. Only the
glass manufacturers suppressed the invention, not by decapitating the
inventor, but by buying up his patent.

Despite such contretemps, we may extract from this anecdote the
essential difference between ancient and modern civilization. The
ancients did not believe in progress, and did not want to progress: we
do both. And, to some extent and in some respects we do manage to
achieve progress, however slowly and imperfectly. This is almost
the only encouraging feature about our condition, though our progress
remains superficial and precarious, and may easily go under in one of
the various social convulsions with which we are threatened.

If this explanation of the causes of deterioration in the Roman
Empire still seems inadequate to yield ‘the’ cause thereof—and it does
not seem so to me—the inquirer should be asked to reconsider an
important presupposition. He may have assumed that such things as
‘decay’ and ‘progress’ are unitary social entities, to which one or
more ‘causes’ can be assigned. But this isa mistake. They are both
resultants, end-products of an infinitely complex interplay of social
forces, and embody our value-judgments on their outcome. Consequently it is entirely possible that ‘progress’ and ‘decay’ may be
going on simultaneously in different parts or respects of the social
organism, and that a tendency which ‘caused’ progress hitherto may
presently become a ‘cause’ of decay. The social philosopher can
analyse out the various tendencies, and study their interaction in a
given society; but he is often unable to predict whether the society in
which they operate will as a whole be progressive or decadent. Hence
he should be willing to accept the lessons of history as to their adequacy, when it informs him that the society in question did in fact
decay.

* Seeck, I, p. 270.
{~ Conviv. Trim., 51.

 
THE RUIN OF ROME. 11

Similarly, it is simply a fact which we have to accept from history,
that there has been biological ‘evolution’ in a certain direction, and
that the qualities of the human material and the character of the social
institutions from which modern civilization started, have sufficed to
keep it ‘progressive’ up to date.

Finally, what about the lessons for us of the downfall of ancient
civilization? It is obvious that many of them are pretty plain and
pungent. Nearly all the causes of the decay of antiquity are still in
full operation to-day, and some have been aggravated. For example,
the pernicious contra-selection of the biologically less fit, which has so
far attended all civilizations, is a much greater menace now. For
whereas it did not seem feasible to regard as an irreparable loss the
destruction of the Roman nobility, so long as an at least equally competent ruling class could be drawn from the Nordic ‘barbarians’ , and
this class was in any case too small for its destruction to involve any
great deterioration in the race, the situation now is very different.
We can see no source of rejuvenation either within or without. Declining civilization is no longer surrounded by an ocean of vigorous untamed and unspent barbarism, into which it can take a tonic plunge.
All the social strata in which ability may reasonably be expected to
be generated are diminishing in number, and modern civilizations are
recruiting themselves from the feeble-minded and the casual labourers,
who are really unemployables for some reason or other.

Still there are grounds for hope. In the first place we know much
more than the ancients and understand what we must do to avoid
destruction. It does not follow of course that we shall be willing to
apply our knowledge intelligently, or to scrap the institutions, like
war, which are menacing our future. But we already know enough to
justify the prediction that if modern civilization perishes, it will be
Selo de se. Secondly we have an adequate motive for avoiding suicide.
We mostly desire to improve, and believe that improvement is possible.
Of course this faith and desire is not enough to produce improvement
automatically ; we must act upon it, and that resolutely and right soon.
To that end the first step will have to be to approach the existing
political organizations, and to impress on them that their programmes
all ignore the gravest causes of social decay. It will not be
easy to get them to listen to reason, for they all have prejudices unfavourable to eugenics. The Conservatives may be supposed to have most natural sympathy with the aim of arresting
the elimination of the best; but the party is fallmg more and more
under the influence of industrial potentates greatly interested in promoting the abundance of cheap labour. Also it cannot be denied that
the idea of eugenics is new, and therefore suspect. The Liberals on
the other hand, though not hostile to change as such, are not specially
favourable to science, and are tainted with a false humanitarianism
which aggravates, and doesnot cure, social maladjustments ; while the
Labour Party, though it ought to be the most reluctant to work for the
support of wastrels and parasites, has unfortunately got into the way
of regarding limitation of output as a legitimate way of raising the
social value of any product. We may therefore find ourselves preaching
to deaf ears all round, in which case there will be nothing for it but to
scrap them all, and to found a new party of eugenical reform.
