THE POPULATION REPORT

A STATEMENT FROM THE HIERARCHY *

The following statement was issued by the Hierarchy of England and Wales at their meeting in
Low Week at Archbishop’s House, Westminster

“ HE Report of the Royal Commission

on Population raises issues of such

gravity to Catholics, and indeed to

all Christians, that we feel bound to comment

upon certain of their recommendations,

especially as the Report is shortly to be
considered by Parliament.

“The Report is the product of long and
patient investigation of an extremely complex problem, and high tribute must be paid
to its authors both for their labours and for
the skilful marshalling of their arguments
and conclusions. We cordially welcome
references in the Report to the virtues of
family life, and support many of the amenities in relation to family allowances, family
services, etc., proposed for easing the lot of
married couples, in particular of those whom
the burden of life discourages unduly from
child-bearing. Unhappily, however, such a
tribute must be qualified by certain grave
criticisms—notably that nowhere in the
Report is there any recognition of the need
to take into account the spiritual nature of
man or the Christian conception of marriage.

“The major proposals of the Commission
are based exclusively on secular considerations. The Commission have rightly recognized that married couples stand in need of
help and advice in adjusting their physical
desires to their social and economic circumstances : but they seem to have overlooked
the fundamental truth that married persons
who turn to God in their difficulties will
receive guidance and strength to restrain
their desires to the extent appropriate to the
moment and their own circumstances. The
failure to recognize that this is so, and that
millions believe it to be so, disturbs the
balance of the Report and invalidates certain of its conclusions.

“The Commission, with their purely
secular approach to the problem, recommend
a plan by which the population should be

94

a

increased by about 6 per cent and thereafter
maintained at that level. To attain this
result they propose financial and other incentives and aids to encourage the parents of the
smaller families to have more children. This
is, in principle, praiseworthy but the Commission also recommend that all married
couples should be offered instruction in
artificial contraception. They appear to
assume, on grounds which to us seem insufficient, that such instruction will not prevent
a due increase in the smaller families, and to
ignore the strong likelihood that when
artificial contraception has become a Stateapproved method the smaller families may
become smaller still.

“ The principal object of offering instruction in artificial contraception is, however, to
limit the fecundity of the larger families.
This result would doubtless follow but it
may well be that the limitation would be so
extensive that it would lead to a serious fall
in the population.

“The success of the plan recommended
depends therefore on two expected developments—that the small families will become
somewhat larger, that the larger families
will become somewhat smaller, but not too
small. But what would happen if the small
families become smaller and the large families
become small families ?

“The plan can also be criticized on the
ground that it involves an assault on the
large family, an assault which the Commission appear to justify on the ground that the
smaller family tends to produce a more
intelligent type. This conclusion is reached
on evidence which seems to us inadequate,
but even if that conclusion could be accepted
with certainty, the further question remains
—is intelligence the only, or the principal,

* The report of this statement has been reproduced
from The Tablet of April 14th, 1951, by kind permission
of the editor.
THE POPULATION REPORT: A STATEMENT FROM THE HIERARCHY 95

quality that we should like to see in the
children of the future ?

“ It seems to us that the Commission have
attached too much weight to the evidence of
“intelligence tests,’ for even if those are
trustworthy in their own limited field they
do not reveal character or the whole personality. Intelligence and high character do
not necessarily run in harness, and we are
emphatically of the view that the Commis
sion have applied the wrong yardstick, and’

that any attack on the large family, based on
the presumed inferior intelligence of its
members, is misconceived and unjustified.
If intelligence and character can both be
achieved so much the better ; but of the two
character is the more important and he
would be a bold man who would deny that a
large family is a fine school for the training
of character.

“* Since the teaching of artificial contraception through the medium of the National
Health Service is an integral feature of the
plan proposed, we must condemn the plan
on that ground alone. We must proclaim
again that artificial contraception is intrinsically evil, contrary to the law of God and a
mutilation of the purpose and process of the
sexual act. That the practice is already
widespread, that it is accepted by a large
part of public opinion, in no way invalidates
the truth of the above statement or diminishes
our duty to publish it. That duty is emphasized by the manifest risk of injustice to, and
prejudice to the professional careers of,
Catholic doctors who are obliged in conscience to refuse to give the instruction in
artificial contraception which the Commission propose for inclusion among the
duties of medical practitioners under the
National Health Service.

“Though the worst feature of the plan
proposed is instruction in artificial contraception, we believe the whole concept to
be founded on false and pagan principles. It
is an example of that ‘excess of State
action ’ which the Holy Father has recently

condemned. Under it the State, in effect,
atrogates to itself the function and the right
to determine how many children—beings
with immortal souls—are to be born in these
islands. It is true of course that there is no
suggestion in the Report of any form of
coercion on married couples, but who can
doubt that, if the State is conceded such
wide functions as the Report envisages, the
door is opened to a steady increase of the
State’s claims and pretensions in this sphere,
even perhaps to the point of penalizing those
parents whose practice does not conform
with current State policy.

“Under the Commission’s proposals the
family is in effect to be used as a pawn in
population planning, for whatever measure
of solicitude there may be in encouraging
some parents to have more children and
others less, the real motive is not to benefit
existing families but to determine the size of
families in future generations. Even if we
could read the future, even if we could know
with certainty that a population of such and
such a figure would be best for Britain in say
fifty years’ time, such an invasion of human
rights, such an intrusion into the sacred
intimacy of the family circle, would not be
justified. It is even less justified when we
reflect that the hypothesis upon which the
Report is based may prove to be wrong and
that unforeseeable events may render the
population needs of a future Britain quite
different from those envisaged in the Report.

“For married couples to limit their
families, even by innocent means, in deference to a State-made scheme actuated by
economic motives, would itself be an abdication of their human rights and a surrender to
materialistic standards : and when the means
of limitation advocated and employed in the
scheme are not innocent but sinful there is
no course open to us but to condemn the
scheme outright and to direct the Catholics
of this country that it is their duty to do all
in their power by lawful means to prevent the
implementation of these proposals.”’

=————————————

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLII, No. 2
