Reports of the International Congress of
Eugenics held at New York in Sept., 1921.

To review the official publications of the International Congress
of Eugenics is an almost impossible task, simply because they contain
such a mass of information. If anyone either now or a hundred years
hence should desire to know where Eugenics stood in 1921 he could not
do better than study these four publications. There is no aspect of
Eugenics which he will not there find discussed, often from several
points of view, and a true picture of expert opinion on various genetic
problems is thus well presented. To any of our country men who attended the congress these volumes will be especially welcome, because
they recall such unbounded hospitality and so many pleasant gatherings. It is only those who were present who can form any estimate
whatever of the good effects of this congress, effects which I am convinced will be widespread and lasting. It served as a starting point
for fresh eugenic efforts in America, from which very important results
may be anticipated and it gave a definite impulse to the International
movement.

The first publication is a pamphlet giving a report of the proceedings of the Congress, thus giving us much important information.
Here the President of the Congress, Professor Fairfield Osborn, is
seen at its opening shaking hands with the President of the Eugenics
Education Society. What were the words which were then being
uttered is not recorded. Had the picture been taken at the end of the
Congress we might have felt certain that Major Darwin was telling him
how much it owed to his powerful, effectual, and stimulating influence.
The Congress could not possibly have been the success it was without
his personal backing and without his permission to hold its meetings
in the American Museum of Natural History. No doubt he would be
the first to recognise the loyal help which he its President received from
all who took part in its organization and management. It is invidious
to mention names yet it is impossible to refrain from placing on record
the debt which Eugenics owe to Mr. Madison Grant the Treasurer,
to Dr. Little the General Secretary, to Dr. Laughlin, Chairman of the
Exhibits Committee, and to Dr. Davenport, Chairman of the Publications Committee.

Here we are reminded that the first step which was taken in connection with this Congress was the acceptance by the Permanent International Eugenics Committee at a meeting held at the Rooms of the
Royal Society in October 1919, of an invitation received fr -m America
to hold the Congress in New York. Here also it is placed on record
how the international committee, henceforth to be called a Commission, was re-constituted in New York in 1921, how new rules for its
organisation were adopted, and how Major Darwin was appointed as
its chairman. Details of the expenditure on the Congress are also
given, which will be very useful for future reference.

‘‘Eugenics, Genetics, and the Family’’ is the title of the first of
the two large volumes in which the proceedings of the Congress are
410 EUGENICS REVIEW.

recorded. Here it is that the Reviewer begins to tremble; for it contains 53 separate papers. As compared with the Congress held in
London, one fact is especially noticeable, and that is the number of
papers on definitely genetic subjects. This hearty co-operation between Geneticists and Eugenists is a most hopeful sign for the future.
The American organizers were especially generous in their allocation
of time to their foreign visitors; with the result that two of the longest
papers in this volume are ‘‘Genetique et Adaptation,’’ by Dr. L.
Cuénot, and ‘‘The Consequences of War and the Birth Rate in France,’’
by Dr. Lucien March. Amongst the well known American contributors are the following:—Dr. Davenport, Dr. Jennings, Dr. Shull,
Dr. Loeb, Dr. Little, Dr. F. A. Woods, Dr. R.H.Johnson and many
others. |

**Kugenics in Race and State,’’ is the title of the second large
volume, which opens with.an excellent portrait of Professor Osborn.
Here again amongst the longest papers are to be found ‘‘La Race chez
les populations Mélangées,’’ by G. V. de Lapouge, and ‘‘Harmonic
and Disharmonic Racecrossings,’’ by Dr. Mjéen. Considering that
this volume contains over 50 papers, a generous amount of space is
allotted to British contributors even when they, to their great regret,
found it impossible to be present. Before such a mass of detail a single
reviewer must succumb; though it is to be hoped that some of the
articles will be discussed in detail by experts. Amongst the names of
prominent contributors are Prof. W. McDougall, Dr. F. L. Hoffman,
Dr. Salaman, Sir Bernard Mallet, Dr. R. Pearl, Vice-Chancellor
Adami, Dr. Tredgold, Mr. Popenoe, Prof. Ruzicka and many others.

The fourth publication somewhat smaller than the two last mentioned volumes, deals with ‘‘The Second International Exhibition of
EKugenics,’’ and is of great value as an indication of how a racial
exhibition should be organised. Certainly one of those who was
present at the Congress felt a keen regret that the time available made
it impossible for him to thoroughly study all the wealth of material
exposed for view at the exhibition; for no one could fail to profit
greatly by such a study. The volume concludes with a large number
of photographs of the exhibits, which are certain to have a stimulating
effect on exhibition committees at many an international congress in
the future. Eugenists are sometimes tempted to overlook the fact
that environments pass on their beneficial effects to posterity by a
kind of heredity of their own, and hence we may be sure that the seed
sown in New York will spring up in many distant cities without those
concerned in the least realising from whence they have drawn many of
their inspirations. The New York Committee were certainly not out
to win gratitude but merely to spread Eugenic knowledge in all directions and no one who was present can doubt that their success has been
very great.

?

, L.D.
EUGENICS, GENETICS AND THE FAMILY.
VOL. I.
Osborn, Dr. Henry Fairfield. American Museum of Natural History. Address

of Welcome.
Darwin, Major Leonard. Pres. Eugenics Education Society, England. Aims
and Methods of Eugenical Societies.
REPORTS OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF EUGENISTS. 411

Davenport, Dr. Charles Benedict. Carnegie Institution of Washington, Cold
Spring Harbor,N.Y. Research in Eugenics.

Cuenot, Dr. L. Professor of Zoology, University of Nancy, France. Genetique
et Adaptation.

Jennings, Dr. H S. John Hopkins University. Inheritance in Uni-cellular
Organisms .

McClung, Dr. C. E. University of Pennsylvania. Evolution of the Chromosome
Complex.

Bridges, Dr. Calvin B. Columbia University, New York City. Aberrations in
Chromosomal Materials.

Blakeslee, Dr. A. F. Carnegie Institution of Washington, Cold Spring Harbor,
L.I., N.Y. Variation in the Jimson Weed (Datura Stramonium).

Belling, Mr. John. Carnegie Institution of Washington, Cold Spring Harbor,
L.I., N.Y. The Attraction between Homologous Chromosomes.

Shull, Dr. George H. Prirceton University. Linkage with Lethal Factors in
the Solution of the Oenothera Problem.

Ruggles -Gates, Dr. R. Ur iversity of London. A new Type of Variability in
Plants.

Whiting, Dr. P.W. Child Welfare Research Station, State University of Iowa.
The Analysis of Genetic Differences through Raploid Parthenogenesis .

Muller, Dr.H. J. University of Texas, Austin, Texas. Mutation.

Zeleny, Dr. Charles. University of Illinois. Reverse Mutation.

Fisher,R.A.,M.A. Rothamsted Experimental Station, Harpenden, England.
Darwinian Evolution by Mutation.

Danforth, Dr. H. C. Washington University Medical School, St. Louis. The
Frequency of Mutation and the Incidence of Hereditary Traits in Man.

Legrand, Dr. Louis. Tunis, Africa. A Simple Explanation of the Hereditary
Mechanism.

Shull, Dr. A. Franklin. University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich. Sez
Determination in Rotifers.

Banta, Dr. Arthur M. and Brown, Mr.L.A. Carnegie Institution of Washington, Cold Spring Harbor. Some Data on Control of Sex in Cladocera.
Bagg, Dr. Halsey J. Hurtington Fund for Cancer Research and Cornell University Medical College, N.Y.C. Disturbances in Mammalian Development

Produced by Radium Emanation.

MacDowell, Dr. E. Carleton. Carnegie Irstitution of Washington. The
Genetic Significance of the Alcoholic Treatment of White Rats.

Cotton, Henry A.,M.D. N.J. State Hospital, Trenton. Inheritance in Mental
Disorders .

‘Terry, Dr. R. J. and Cady, Dr. Lee D. Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis. Comparision of the Incidence of the Supracondyloid
Process in Groups with Normal and Abnormal Mentality.

Lewis, Dr. Paul A. Philadelphia, Pa. The Relation of Heredity to Tuberculosis.

Loeb, Dr. Leo. Washington University, St. Louis. The Inheritance of Cancer
in Mice.

Little, Dr.C.C. Carnegie Institution of Washington, Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.,
N.Y. The Inheritance of a Predisposition to Cancer in Man.

Howe, Dr. Lucien. Buffalo, N.Y. Inheritance of Eye Defects.

Fisher, R. A. Rothamsted Experimental Station, Harpenden. New Data on
the Genesis of Twins.

Bonnevie, Kristine. Univ. of Christiania, Norway. Main Results of a Statistical Investigation of ‘‘ Finger Prints’’ from 24518 Individuals.

Hurst, Major C.C. Burbage, Leicestershire. The Genetics of Fecundity in the
Domestic Hen.

Meyerson, Dr. A. Boston, Mass. Inheritance of Menial Disease.

Rosanoff, Dr. Aaron J. Kings Park State Hospital, N.Y. Inheritance of Mental Disorders.

Seashore, Dr. Carl E. State University of Iowa. Individual and Racial
Inheritance of Musical Traits.

Stanton, Hazel M. State University of Iowa. An Experimental Investigation
of Musical Inheritance.

March, Dr.M. Lucien. Paris, France. The Consequences of War and the Birth
Rate in France.

Wright, Dr. Sewall. Bureau of Animal Industry, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture,
Washington, D.C. The Effects of Inbreeding on Guinea- Pigs.
412 EUGENICS REVIEW.

King,Dr.Helen Dean. Wistar Institute, Philadelphia. Is Inbreeding Injurious ?

Martin, Mrs Ruth Moxcey Woodbury, Conn. Initermarriage of Blood Relatives in Three Old New England Communities.

Spinden, Dr. Herbert J. Peabody Museum of Harvard University. Formal
Inbreeding in Human Society with South American Examples.

Anderson, Prof.W.S. University of Kentucky. The Effect on the Germ Plasm
of Isolation in a Mountain Section.

Rabaud, M. Etienne. Developement compare des produits successifs d’un méme
couple.

Banker, Dr. Howard J. Eugenics Record Office, L.I., N.Y. The Ideal Family
History.
Woods, Dr. Frederick Adams. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The
Conification of Social Groups. Evidence from New England Families.
Kimball, Sarah Louise. California Genealogical Society, San Francisco.
The Mayflower Pilgrims.

Banker, Dr. Howard J. Eugenics Record Office, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.
The Learned Blacksmith—An Aristogenic Type.

Izquierdo, Dr. J. Joaquin. M.S.A. Mexico City, Mexico. Breve Resena
Genealogica de la Familia Izquierdo.

Noyes, Dr. Hilda Herrick and Noyes, George Wallingford. Kenwood, N.Y.
The Oneida Community Experiment in Stirpiculture.

Butler, Dr. Amos W. Secretary. Board of Charities, State of Indiana, Indianopolis, Ind. Some Families as Factors in Anti-Social Conditions.

Lidbetter, Mr. E. J. London, Eagland. Pedigrees of Pauper Stocks.

Estabrook, Dr. Arthur H. Eugenics Record Office, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.
The Tribe of Ishmael.

Key, Dr. Wilhelmine E. Race Betterment Foundation, Battle Creek, Mich..
Heritable Factors in Human Fitness and Their Social Control.

Greene, Miss Elizabeth. Waverly House, N.Y.C. A Study of 150 Adolescent
Runaways.

Johnson, Dr. Roswell, H. University of Pittsburgh. Mate Selection.

Discussions of Papers read at the Congress.

EUGENICS IN RACE AND STATE.
VOL. IT.

Lapouge, Dr. G. V. de. Poitiers, France. La Race chez les populations mélan-.
gées.

Bean, Dr.R. Bennett. University of Virginia. Notes on the Body Form of Man.

Balwdin, Dr. Bird T. Director of Iowa Child Welfare Research Station, Uni-versity of Iowa. The Scientific Prediction of the Physical Growth of Children ..

Giuffrida Ruggeri, Dr. V. University of Naples, Naples, Italy. The Height-.
Weight Index of Build amongst the Italian Adolescents of 50 Years Ago.

Frassetto, Fabio. MHeight-Weight Index of Build or Robustness.

Frassetto, Fabio. Other Forms of the Law Governing the Relation Between
Stature and Weight in Adulis.

Mjoen, Dr. Jon Alfred. Winderen Laboratorium, Norway. Harmonic and
Disharmonic Race Crossings.

McDougall, Prof.Wm. Harvard University. A National Fund for a New Plan:
of Remuneration as a Eugenic Measure.

Hooton, Dr. E. A. Harvard University. Observations and Queries as to the
Effect of Race Mixture on Certain Physical Characteristics .

Vicari, E. M. Carnegie Institution of Washington, Cold Spring Harbor.
Hybridization and Behaviour.

Dublin, Dr. Louis I. Metropolitan Life Insurance Company. The Mortality of
Foreign Race Stocks.

Hoffman, Dr. Frederick L. Third Vice-Pres. and Statistician, The Prudential
Insurance Co. of America, Newark. Race Amalgamation in Hawaii.

Dunn, Dr. L. C. Storrs, Conn. Some Results of Race Mixture in Hawaii.
Fishberg, Dr. Maurice. New York City. Intermarriage between Jews and
Christians.

Salaman, Dr. Redcliffe N. Barley, Herts., England. Some Notes on the
Jewish Problem.
REPORTS OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF EUGENISTS. 413

Radosavlijevich, Dr. Paul R. New York University, N.Y.C. Eugenic Problems
of the Slavic Race.

Willcox, Prof. W. F. Cornell University. Distribution and Increase of Negroes
in the United States.

Hoffman, Dr. Frederick L., Statistician, Prudential Insurance Co. of America,.
Newark. The Problem of Negro-White Intermixture and Inter-marriage.

Darwin, Major Leonard, London. The Field of Eugenic Reform.

Mallet, Sir Bernard, K.C.B. Late Registrar-General for England, London,
England. Registration in Relation to Eugenics.

Pearl, Dr. Raymond. Johns Hopkins University. Some Eugenic Aspects of
the Problem of Population.

East, Dr. E.M. Bussey Institution, Harvard University, Boston. Population
in Relation to Agriculture.

Homles, Dr. S. J. and Goff, J. GC. Uh iversity of California. The Selective
Elimination of Male Infants under Different Environmental Influences.

Koegel, Otto E., D.C.L. Associate Counsel, U.S. Veteran’s Bureau, Washington. Common Law Marriage and its Development in the United States.

Ahluwalia, Goplji. The Hindu Ideal of Marriage.

Dilla, Dr. Harriette M. Smith College, Northampton. Control of Parenthood
in Relation to Eugenics.

Adami, George. Vice-Chancellor University of Liverpool, Liverpool, England
The True Aristocracy.

Laughlin, Dr. Harry H. Eugenics Record Office, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.
The Present Status of Eugenical Sterilization in the United States.

Binder, Dr. Rudolph M. New York University, New York City. Health and
Eugenics.

Knopf, Dr. S. Adolphus. New York City. Eugenics in its Relation to the
Tuberculosis Problem.

Saleeby, C. W., M.D. Londor. Preventive Eugenics—the Protection of parenthood from the Racial Poisons.

Fisher, R. A. Harpenden, England. The Evolution of the Conscience in
Civilised Communities in Special Relation to Sexual Vices.

Robinson, Daisy M. O. United States Public Health Service. Ieredity and
Venereal Diseases.

Pollock, Horatio,M. Statistician. N.Y. State Hospital Commission, Albany
N.Y. Eugenics as a Factor tn the Prevention of Mental Disease.

Paton, Dr. Stewart. Princeton University. Medicine’s Opportuntity.

Naccarati, Dr. Sante. New York City. The Morphologic Characteristics of
Psychoneuroses .

Sadler, Dr. William S. Director, Chicago Therapeutic Institute, Chicago, Il.
Endocrines, Defective Germ-Plasm, and Hereditary Defectiveness.

Groszmann, Dr. M.P.E., Educational Director. National Association for the
Study and Education of Exceptional Children, New York City. Some Limitations of Present Theories.

Fairchild, Milton, Chairman, The Character Education Institution, Washington,
D.C. Pure Science Work in Higher Eugenics.

Tredgold, Dr. A. F., F.R.S. Edinburgh, Scotland. Educability and Inheritance.

McDougall, Prof. Wm. Harvard University. The Correlation between Native
Ability and Social Status.

Dublin, Dr. Louis I., Statistician, Metropolitan Life Insurance Co., New York
City. The Higher Education of Women and Race Betterment.

Johnson, Miss Dymple Bryant. Fort Smith, Ark. The Life Stories of a Class
of 27 High School Graduates in Relation to Longevity and Social Progress.

Billings,W.C. The Medical Application of the Immigration Law.

Laughlin, Dr Harry H. Eugenics Record Office, N.Y. Nativity of Institutional
Inmates.

Calhoun, Dr. Arthur Wallace. White Plains, N.Y. The Economic Factor in
the Problem of Eugenics.

Wolfe, Dr. A. B. University of Texas, Austin, Texas. Eugenics and Social
Attitudes.

Ireland, Mr. Alleyne. Catskill, N.Y. The Nature-Nurture Issue in tts
Bearing on Government.
414 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Bedwell, C.E.A., Hon. Secretary, Society of Comparative Legislation, London,
England. Eugenics in International Affairs.

Gini, Dr Corrado. Rome,Italy. The War from the Eugenic Point of View.

Ramose, Dr. D. F. Utiversity of Havana. Homiculture in its Relations to
Eugenics in Cuba.

Haskovec, Dr. Ladislay, President, Eugenics Society of Prague, Prague,
Bohemia, The Eugenics Movement in the Cszechoslovak Republic.

Popenoe, Mr. Paul. Coachella, California. Eugenics and Islam.

Ruzicka, Vlad. The Significance of Casual Research in Eugenics.

Ruzicka, Vlad. A Motion for the Organisation of Eugenical Research.

Discussions of Papers read at the Congress.
