EUGENICALLY DESIRABLE TYPES
| _ A SYMPOSIUM

HE three papers that form this

| symposium were read at a members’

meeting of the Eugenics Soctety on

May 28th, 1946, with the president, Lord

Horder, in the chair. Dr. Newfield’s open
ing paper, in his unavoidable absence, was

read on his behalf by Dr. Blacker. A draft

had previously been sent out to the other

speakers in the hope of bringing out points
of agreement and difference.

Dr. Maurice Newfield’s Contribution

I should like to begin, if I may, with an
apparent digression and consider for a few
moments what are the characteristics of a
society that we would agree to call eugenic.
Obviously the definition of a eugenic society,
though difficult enough, is a far simpler
matter than the definition of a eugenic type
or individual. In the case of the individual
we start with an immutable genetic structure.
There he is with all his inborn qualities and
defects, and the most profound problems in
values may be involved in the. decision
whether, on the balance, he should be regarded as a benefactor or enemy of posterity.
But a society is different. It is a dynamic
structure whose evolution is very largely
within the control of its members. The
distribution of genes in society, unlike the
aggregation of genes in the individual, is not
something that is fixed once and for all; on
the contrary it changes from generation to
generation, with trends which can be studied
objectively by the methods of science and
influenced by the action that we take as
individuals or jointly as a community.

Taking my chance on a definition, then,
I would say that a eugenic society is one in
which the evolutionary trend is in the right
direction ; in which (if for a moment I may
be allowed to imply the existence of absolute
biological values without inquiring too
closely into their nature)—in which the
genes concerned with the transmission of the

finest qualities of body, mind and spirit are
widely distributed and perpetuated from
generation to generation ; and from which
the less desirable genes are as far and as fast
as possible eliminated. As I dictate these
words I am conscious that this is a cumbersome definition ; yet it has, I submit, one
small merit. It stresses our own responsibility for the direction and pace of our
biological evolution and suggests one criterion—on the long view much the most

important—for assessing the value of legis
lative and other changes in our social
structure.

All this, as I said, is a digression ; but it
will have been justified if, as I hope, it
throws some light on the far more difficult
problem of what constitute eugenic types.
And I ask you to note the plural—eugenic
types not the eugenic type. I do not think
there has ever been a time in history in
which it has been more important to make
this distinction than to-day. Between those
whose professed aim has been to create “ the
eugenic type ’”’ and thosé who can think only
of types or, better still, of individuals, there
are irreconcilable differences in social philosophy. In the one case the ideal is uniformity—a uniform excellence admittedly, but
nevertheless uniformity ; in the other it is
diversity, a respect for individual differences
with a profound distaste for the trend to’
standardization so plainly discernible, in
spite of a recent set-back, in our world today. :
There are of course some qualities, so
desirable in themselves, that their widest
dissemination must always be a major
eugenic objective—obvious examples are
good health and physique and high intelligence ; just as there are others, such as
grave mental and physical disorders, that
any society, however much it may foster
diversity, would be best without. But when
all this has been granted, it is still, I believe,
a eugenic ideal to tolerate and rejoice in

133
134

those differences between people and races
which add so much zest to the life of the
individual and contribute, by the crossfertilization of divergent cultures, so greatly
to the development of society.

The realization of this ideal calls for more
than ordinary tolerance ; and for the exercise of infinite understanding and charity in
the assessment of human qualities. Most of
us can get by well enough when the qualities
in question do not conflict with the prejudices of society or with those peculiarly our
own. The real test comes when we are faced
with the uncongenial or unusual—not with
the person who combines such virtues as
those set out in the Eugenics Soctety’s
Memorandum to the Royal Commission—
good health, intelligence, social usefulness,
freedom from genetic taints, and philoprogenitiveness—not with this paragon but
with the eccentric or rebel whose contribution, whether to his own age and generation or to posterity, may seem a doubtful
blessing. The test may be just as exacting
when the uncongenial or unusual qualities—
or when even admitted defects—are combined with other qualities unquestionably
eugenic.

This dilemma was discussed in THE
EUGENICS REVIEW in some editorial notes
from which I may perhaps be allowed to
quote.* Taking the various standards of
eugenic worth set out in the Soczety’s
memorandum the author of the notes conceded that ‘“ No one who has attempted to
define such standards will underrate the
difficulties of the task ’’; and then went on
to ask :

Is health the standard? If so, what place
is there for men and women of genius but
afflicted in body or mind? For John Keats
or Fyodor Dostcevsky ? Is it intelligence ?
There are few who would question this standard,
but are there no exceptions, for instance, robust
persons with manual skills but relatively low
I’Q’s? Is it social usefulness? How useful
is the dreamer, the iconoclast or disturber of
accepted social values? The Athenians of the
Fourth Century settled the question in the ease
of Socrates, but was it in a manner that would
be unreservedly approved to-day ? ? _And are

* October 1945, p. 89.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

there not conflicting views among Germans,
and not only among them, as to the social
usefulness of Adolf Hitler? Is it freedom from
familial disease and defects? But some such
genetic taints are not necessarily a serious
handicap, as, for example, diabetes mellitus
since the introduction of treatment by insulin.
Is it, in the sense defined in the Memorandum,
genophilia ? It is worth remembering that
among artists, scientists and saints, among
men and women who have devoted their lives
to the service of impersonal ends, this trait has
seemed rather less conspicuous than among the
generality of mankind.

More than a shade rhetorical, you wil]
agree, yet not I suggest without some
relevance to the theme of to-day’s discussion.
These and like instances may serve at least
to remind us of the divergence that may be
found between contemporary opinion and
the verdict of history; and I know few
better stimulants than this to the modesty
in judgment and tolerance of differences that
are among the highest eugenic virtues.

But this I think should be added. Tolerance must not be confounded with intellectual flabbiness. The one is a positive and
noble quality, the other a pusillanimous
evasion of the responsibility of judgment.
Because in some matters judgment is difficult, and must always be tentative, we are
not therefore entitled to the easy solace of
agnosticism even when social values and
scientific knowledge both point in the same
direction. The transmission of diseases and
defects—to take a simple example—is always
dysgenic; and the carriers of the corresponding genes cannot be classed among the
unquestionably eugenic types, however high
their endowment in other respects. And:
even though the advance of medicine has
brought many such diseases under control,
and is bringing more, that is hardly a reason
for regarding them lightly. Carr-Saunders
put this point far better than I could in his
Hobhouse Memorial Lecture on The Biological Basis of Human Nature.*

The large preponderance of harmful over
beneficial mutations, he said, is well established ;
but preservation of harmful mutations must
bring about genetic deterioration. No one can
really believe that if life could only be lived

* Oxford University Press, 1942. Price 2s. net.
EUGENICALLY DESIRABLE TYPES

with an increasing multiplicity of aids, it would
continue to be lived at all; the race would
perish because of misapplied ingenuity—ingenuity devoted to compensating for unsatisfactory genes instead of to providing sound
genes for each recruit to the race.

So far I have spoken only of diseases and
disorders which can—and I believe should
—be balanced against any genetical advantages. But no such question arises in connection with transmissible mental defect. I
can imagine no associated advantage so great
as to justify the deliberate conservation of
genes responsible for so much human misery.
One of our most eminent biologists remarked
somewhere that his lab. boy, though technicaliy a mental defective, was capable of
handling the most delicate scientific apparatus; and this fact was offered as an argument against the voluntary sterilization of
defectives or other measures for reducing
their fertility. We should all naturally
deplore any action that might dry up the
source of lab. boys for this eminent biologist ;
but I am sanguine enough to believe that
the supply could be maintained at a somewhat smaller cost to mankind. Mental
defectives are objects of compassion to all
right-minded men; and it is no service to
them or to society to suggest that their
perpetuation can have any biological value
whatever.

Among the standards of eugenic value set
out in the Society’s Memorandum, then,
intelligence is absolute; and I am not
impressed in the least by the old problem—
which to me is no problem at all—whether
it is better to be a pig happy or Socrates
miserable. But I should like, if I may, to
put forward three additional standards
which, though implied in the rest, seem to
merit separate mention and discussion.

The first is longevity. This character has
always been desirable but has now become a
necessity. Men and women growing up in
a primitive society could expect to enter
upon adult life in their teens—I mean adult
life economically and culturally as well as
sexually—and to live through the experiences normal to their period in the space of
a few years. There was little to learn and

135

do and a brief life was long enough to learn
and do them in. But in our complex civilization too many people die at the beginning
of their maturity; when having received
from society what it has to offer, they are
ready at last to offer a handsome return.
You will recall that Shaw, in his morality
play Back to Methuselah, solved this problem
in a characteristically Shavian manner, by
creating a long-lived mutation as a sport in
a short-lived society. But in real life mutations seldom arise quite so conveniently or
so beneficently—and it seems safer to take
advantage of the established facts about the
genetic transmission of longevity. The most
dependable recipe for a long life is well
known ; it is to choose parents belonging to
long-lived stocks. Nothing more difficult
than that. And it follows that persons who
come of such stocks fall, in this respect at
least, among the eugenic types and have
corresponding responsibilities to posterity.

The second standard is eugenic achievement. Any couple that has produced a
richly endowed family has assured itself, by
this most decisive test of all, an indisputable
place among the eugenically elect. This
point, so obvious when one mentions it, had
never in fact occurred to me until it was
made by Dr. Blacker in the current
EUGENICS REvIEW.* [I shall say no more
about it now; the idea and its implications
are ingeniously developed in Dr. Blacker’s
paper, and I urge those who have not read
it to do so.

I can best describe the third added
standard as the converse of the second.
Like the second it is concerned with lineage,
but this time not with offspring but with
ancestry. To put it briefly, and omitting
saving clauses, eugenic worth may be surmised from a history of high endowment
through a number of generations of both.
sides of the family.

There is a distinction that may conveniently be made here between socially
desirable. types and those that are eugenically desirable. The one usually implies the
other, but not invariably. Thus, the healthy

 

* April 1946, p. 25.
136

carrier of grave defect may faithfully serve
his own age and even, in a cultural sense,
the future ; but however great his talents,
it would be a misuse of language to class him
among the eugenic types. It is not less
true that among those who are a burden to
their own generation there are some who
eugenically are of the highest quality. The

criterion. here is to be sought not in the

manifest characters but in those latent in
the genetic constitution. Such a contrast
between genetic realities and outward appearances is seen—to take a striking example—
in some neurotic subjects. For while it is
true that psycho-neuroses are often an
expression of constitutional inadequacy,
their development can sometimes be traced
to excessive strains and other noxious
environmtenal influences upon a normal
constitution. Such unfortunate persons
might fail to provide their children with a
desirable social setting ; but if the stock is
sound (as estimated by a study of family
history) they may none the less endow them
with a constitution capable of withstanding
the defects of their environment.

I have chosen here an extreme case—in
which the genetical endowment should be
regarded as of greater eugenic significance
than certain undesirable characters manifest
in the subject himself; and I suggest that,
in like manner, the family history, in so far
as it bears on genetical make-up, must be
included with the standards set out in the
Soctety’s Memorandum.

The Memorandum does, of course, refer to
freedom from genetical taints; but this
added criterion is concerned, more positively, with the distribution through the
ancestry of special talents of body, mind or
character.

Anyone blessed with the qualities discussed in the Memorandum owes to his
forebears a debt which can only be completely repaid to posterity ; and the richer
the legacy from the past the more will there
be, in all likelihood, to pass on to the future.
As bearing on this point I may refer to
some genealogical studies by Mr. Bramwell,
from which it became apparent that the
chances of rich biological endowment were

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

closely correlated with the number of
talented ancestors in both lines.

It is said that Napoleon, when reminded
that by ancestry he was hardly qualified to
contract a royal marriage, replied, “J am
an ancestor.” The details are probably
wrong, but the point of the story is there,
and could serve as an inspiration to all highly
endowed persons. They may be, as I believe
all men are, ends in themselves; but they
are also potentially ancestors, who long after
their earthly course is run may be looked
back to with pride by their descendants.
That is to say, if they have any. For if the
eugenic types restrict their fertility, then,
no matter what their contribution to the
life and culture of their own time, or of the
future, they cannot be absolved of the guilt
of depriving posterity of its rightful heritage.

Mr. Geoffrey Eley’s Contribution

I was both interested and stimulated by
Dr. Newfield’s address and particularly
perhaps by his thought-provoking reflections
on longevity. . ] would only suggest in passing that it might perhaps be unwise to press
on along that particular line of experiment
in any society that is likely to, have a falling
population. The excess of the old over the
young would anyway be large enough, if not
too large, in such a society without its being
accentuated artificially.

My own approach to the subject under
discussion will be on simpler and broader
lines than Dr. Newfield’s, both because I am
much more the layman in this field than he
and because I feel that in the opening
stages of a discussion like this there is room
for examination of basic aims.

When I came to think over this subject
with a view to preparing my address I found
myself quickly coming up against a number
of simple issues. To begin with, ‘ Should
we wish to achieve any one particular type
of individual ?’’ The answer, of course, is
“No.” We are not aiming at breeding
cattle or poultry but at producing a sufficiently wide and varied range of types to
cope with the infinite complexities of modern
industrial society. Even the very simplest
thought along these lines leads one to the
EUGENICALLY DESIRABLE TYPES

conclusion that we need good leaders, good
lieutenants, good privates; good heads,
good hearts, good physiques ; artists, craftsmen and strong manual labourers.

I moved on to ask if one could not simplify
one’s approach to the subject by shifting
from types of people to certain basic
characteristics. Good health for instance.
At first blush we should all vote for good

health, yet if we could arrange for a popu
lation to be uniformly healthy and to remain
so throughout its life, we should risk depriving ourselves of some valuable, perhaps
outstanding, types. It is rightly said that
genius is akin to madness ; but apart from
that, imagination has been one of the chief
forces in the advances made by man. Blake
said “ What is now proved was once only
imagined.” Yet imagination is most active
in highly strung neurotic people and is most
active in each one of us when we are in our
most highly strung neurotic states. Galton
himself is an example of an outstanding
man who was highly neurotic; during his
life on two or three occasions he had what
were virtually nervous breakdowns.

Still, by and large, I think we have no
alternative but to vote for a population that
would start out with sound healthy constitutions. We cannot go far wrong along
those lines, for people withreally active minds
can in any case be relied on in due course
to damage theiy health sufficiently to enable
them and us to enjoy the benefits of the
resultant neuroses.

' So we aim for basic good health.

What about intelligence ?

This is a more difficult problem. As. we
are actually situated to-day I do not think
we can possibly have too great an increase
in the amount of intelligence available in
our society. Certainly the British people
could, I believe, use ten times the present
amount of ability available to it without
anything but advantage both to itself and
to the world. Actually in almost every
direction in which I look or inquire and find
men of high intellect at work, particularly
in the public service, I find them to be overpressed and overworked. If each of them
could be split into two equally good parts

who defend themselves.”

137

-their present tasks would only begin to be

adequately performed, and I believe myself
that Keynes’s famous multiplier (or something like it) would then come into force
and the activities of each new first-class
intellect would create the need for more.
Yet the fact remains that we could at
least in theory breed too many intellectuals.
Firstly, in a society made up exclusively of,
say, Aldous Huxleys, Laskis, Einsteins, or
Stracheys, who would mine coal, sweep
streets, plough the land, or perform the
innumerable dull routine services necessary
if our life is not to relapse into confusion ?
Secondly, even if you could get the necessary
manual and unpleasant work done by compelling intellectuals to tackle it, this could
only be achieved in an atmosphere of discontent and internal stress that would make,
in due course, for revolution and dictatorships and oppression. Thirdly, pure intellect alone is perhaps not quite all that it
is cracked up to be from the point of view
of making the most successful sort of society
in this world. To appreciate this point one
needs only to consider the extreme worldly
success that has been achieved by the
British—a success which has, I think, broadly
been in the interest not only of the British
but of the world as a whole. This success
has certainly not arisen from the fact that
the British are the most intelligent or intellectual people in the world. We can all
think of races appreciably better equipped
than ourselves in those respects. Indeed,
we might remind ourselves by a few quotations of the characteristics that eminent
foreigners have discerned in the English and
note how far removed their observations are
from suggesting that we owe our success to
intellectual pre-eminence. Voltaire, for instance, said “‘ The English people are people
Carlyle, a Scot,
said ‘‘ Of all the nations in the world’ at
present the English are the stupidest in
speech, the wisest in action.’”” Emerson, an
American, said ‘I find the Englishman to
be that man of all men who stands firmest
in his shoes.”” Washington Irving, another
American, said ‘“‘ He [the Englishman] is
like a stout ship which will weather the
138

_roughest storm but rolls its masts overboard in the succeeding calm,” (Incidentally, how apt that last quotation is when we
consider the way in which the British people
recently got rid of Mr. Churchill; or still
more the behaviour of the British between
the two world wars on the question of armaments and preparedness !) ©

This leads me to the point that even when
we are aiming for intelligence in this country
we should attach great importance to the
form of test by which we attempt to detect
its presence. Tests for quick wits devised
by cosmopolitan intellectuals might produce
a highly intelligent society but they would
not produce a British society with those
peculiar qualities which have made for its
success in the past. What we need would
be tests for some blend of high mental
powers with a sense of reality, tenacity and
courage. These tests should be devised by
an Englishman or a group of Englishmen.
What I have in mind might really better be
called an “efficiency test”? rather than an
“ intelligence test.”’

Bearing these points in mind I would
suggest that what we would want for our
ideal society in the way of intelligence would
be :

1. A good proportion of people of the
highest intelligence chosen by intelligence and efficiency tests.

2. A very substantial body of people
chosen by efficiency tests to fill the
“ good lieutenant ”’ class,

3. Astill larger body of people who would

‘be prepared and contented to perform

the great mass of honourable tasks
that are indispensable to the community if the wheels are to be kept
turning. This means a mass of moderately intelligent, sound, sensible fellows
of the kind well known to us in all walks
of life and usually referred to as the
salt of the earth. Some other criterion
than the intelligence or efficiency tests
used for the other jobs would be necessary in selecting this group. We
should need a test for tenacity, shrewdness and not too much imagination.
After all, what we are after is what one

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

might describe as a sound reliable
quoits player,

So far then we have opted for basic good
health and various types of intelligence,
character and practical ability. Even then
the problem is hardly broached, for there is
a great range of psychological types which
we should need to consider and which we
should require in different quantities and
degrees. I do not intend to go far into that
most fascinating field. No doubt other
speakers will do so, but I would like before
passing on to throw out a suggestion that
bears on two particular types, the individualist and the co-operator. In the past
big forward jumps in man’s knowledge and
control over the world have been due mainly
to the work of nonconformist individuals
fighting against an unfriendly group atmosphere. We have-only to think of such men
as Socrates, Galileo, Spinoza, Newton,
Malthus, Darwin, down to Einstein. I may
be wrong but J think I have sensed that a
change has been going on in recent times,
perhaps has indeed already taken place.
The change from the period when it was the
brilliant individual who was responsible for
the big forward move to a period in which
major forward moves may come. to be the
result of co-operative work, of group activity.
The sort of discussion groups, for instance,
that John Stuart Mill describes in his
autobiography as having been part of his
father’s training of himself and his young
friends have become increasingly more in
evidence since those days and have culminated in such anonymous yet significant
activities as those that have centred in
politics, for instance, around thé Round
Table or more recently around P.E.P. In
science also, it would appear to the layman
that the splitting of the atom and the production of its first fruit, the atomic bomb,
cannot be associated with the name of any
one individual but arises from group work
on an international basis, If I am right in
thinking that we have reached a turning
point in this respect then in future we shall
need fewer people of the nonconformist,
individualist, hero type and more personalityEUGENICALLY DESIRABLE TYPES

sinking co-operators. My own belief is, and

I stress that it is no more than a belief, that:

if we are to get through at all in the future,
let alone make some of the major big forward
jumps that le ahead of us, we shall need the
maximum amount of readiness to sink our

‘individual personalities and desires to cooperate for purposes and objectives that are
not only much greater than ourselves but
often greater than we could have conceived
of on our own.

All this so far has been in the realm of

examining an ideal target, clearing the
ground as it were for practical suggestions.
In ptactice, how can we begin to move towards such targets without becoming dictators and abandoning the essential respect
for liberty and the humility of outlook without which we cannot conceive of a livable
world? The Eugenics Society has advocated
various small negative targets and a very
{loosely defined positive target. It has asked
, that we should aim at encouraging that type
of person which “‘ produces by intention and
design a large family and provides for it a
happy and healthy home.” Dr. Blacker has
recently suggested another practical approach in his article in the current number
of THE Eucenics Review. Dr. Newfield
has added two more—the encouragement of
longevity and of families whose ancestral
heritage of distinction is high. These are all
modest practical suggestions. Disappointing as it may seem, I doubt if we can go
much beyond them, at any rate until such
time as we have solved the problems of
éectogenesis. Certainly if we are to think in
terms of advocating bolder forward strides,
we must do so with extreme caution and
humility, for in no field, in my view, is it
more necessary when considering practical
action to remember Cromwell’s famous remark to the General Assembly of the Church
of Scotland, ‘‘ Gentlemen, I beseech you, in
the bowels of Christ, think it possible that
you may be mistaken.”

Mrs. Barbara S. Bosanquet’s
Contribution
It was with feelings of great trepidation
that I accepted the honour of taking part in

139

this discussion. Mr. Eley has so ably said
most of what I wanted to say by way of introduction that I will gladly skip it and
plunge in, rush in rather, where neither he
nor Dr. Newfield trod, and try to discuss the
inheritance of some mental traits, and their
value. I am assuming that the word
“types ’’ means “‘ combinations of traits.”’
If the public ever thought that the eugenics
movement aimed at producing specific mental

SS

_ot physical or temperamenital “ types,” I

hope it does not think so still. At any rate,
it is unnecessary to disclaim any such
attempt here. .

There are three traits that I should like
to suggest are partly innate. First, this
matter of co-operation, of which Mr. Eley
has spoken as pre-eminently important. If
the atomic bomb was made by a vast cooperative effort, probably the biggest in
human enterprise, surety there is more need
—desperately greater need—now, than before
its creation, for co-operation between human
beings. We are told that we have only ten
or twelve years in which to work out an
amicable way of life between nations ; and
if that is so, it doesn’t give evolution much
chance. But assuming that the human race
will continue to exist, I suggest that an
esseritial eugenic trait is what I shall call the
social instinct. I know well what dangerous ground this is; ‘I have studied my
McDougall and John B. Watson. But I
still think (or maybe it is only a hunch) that
a ‘social instinct’ exists. It cannot be
measured, and the genes that influence it
can probably never be identified, but it does
appear to show itself in varying degrees in
the animal world, and to reach its fullest
development in man. Dogs most certainly
have something very like a conscience, and
so do cats; and Ernest Thompson Seton’s
true stories about wild horses and wolves
reveal an instinct that amounts sometimes
to real leadership and responsibility.

Criminologists can produce negative evidence about the inheritance of criminal
tendencies in identical twins, and I belteve
that anthropologists can tell of the growth
of a sense of co-operation in primitive tribes.

The development of this social instinct can

i
140

be watched in children. It could be defined
as a combination of the gregarious and selfregarding instincts, and in full flower it
becomes unselfish leadership. It cannot be
disentangled from its surrounding culture,
because it helps to create a certain environment or “ climate,” and this climate in turn
fosters its growth. We all know families
where the sense of responsibility runs strong
from one generation to another—the Frys,
Darwins, Wedgwoods, Cecils and Adamses.
Of course tradition plays a big part; but
unless there is a strong constitutional factor
at work, the tradition will not flourish.
Couples having this ‘‘ innate moral sense ”’
(the phrase is Galton’s) are more apt to
produce children who will build up the kind
of international order we need for survival
than couples without it.

A group of psychiatrists in Washington
recently held a discussion on how to secure
enduring peace. Their conclusion was that:
a cultural revolution was needed, centring
on the education of children. Children
learn, they said, by assimilating ideas and
example from significant elders, and only if
they are helped to grow up into truly mature
people can future catastrophe be averted.
General Chisolm of Canada led the discussion, and I should like to quote his
definition of maturity :

Basically it is an amalgamation of two
things: 1, dissatisfaction with the status quo,

which calls forth aggressive, constructive effort,
and 2, social concern and devotion.

The whole discussion left no doubt in my
mind that these distinguished men were
dealing with inborn social instinct, though
they themselves would not admit it. Their
whole emphasis was on environment, but I
think their noble quest would have been
strengthened if there existed a clear conception of the innate tendencies they were
dealing with. :

The second trait I want to discuss is
closely allied to the first, and in the same
highly debatable territory. Together with
an inborn tendency towards co-operation, I
think there is a temperamental factor having
to do with warmth of emotion. It is part of
philoprogenitiveness, but it is not limited

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to sexual and parental emotions. It governs
all personal relationships ; and people having
this factor, who have been happily brought
up, can form the close personal attachments
which we call sympathy and friendship.
Those without it tend to be “cold and
calculating,” and I have noticed that their
children have many difficulties. Often these
cold individuals are also highly intelligent,
and we see the budding dictator or tycoon.
Sometimes, also, what I have called the
“warmth factor’ is present, but high intelligence is not, and then we have a feckless
happy-go-lucky type. These are often
charming and have large families, but on the
whole they do not contribute to the glory of
our culture. But where you have warmth
and intelligence, you have the truly valuable
people. Churchill and Roosevelt are the outstanding figures of our day with this combination. Others that come to mind are Goethe
and Charles James Fox.

The third trait which I believe is essential
is even harder to pin down as a genetic trait.

It is what I should call “ serenity ’’—a harmony of the different faculties, which may

be possessed as well by.a reformer out on a’

crusade as by a shepherd watching his flock.

Another word for it might be contentment
—though here there is risk of its turning into
complacency. Perhaps it could be better
defined by its result, which is a sense of fulfilment. There are many jobs to be done
in the world, and our urban civilization tends
to make able young people dissatisfied with
the simple primary-producing jobs. This is
certainly due to social and economic factors,
and until society changes its attitude and
respects the primary producers, we shall not
have harmony in our culture and serenity in
individuals. The innate factor, if it exists,
does not have a chance, when you see
thousands of secondary school children
flocking to the cities for work at desks and
behind counters or machines, when they
would function far more satisfyingly on the
land, in the forests, at sea, or even under the
ground—though admittedly, under present
conditions, they do not.

This obviously leads to a discussion of the
values of our industrialized culture, with its
EUGENICALLY DESIRABLE TYPES

constant threat of war, and for that there
isn’t time.
what kind of society we aim at. What is
the desirable environment that the desirable
eugenic types are to produce, and be produced by? In what direction should racial
improvement be moving? The memory of
the past seven years, and the presentiment
of what our children may have to face, make
these questions inevitable. And they also
make inevitable the assumption that good
and evil do exist as realities, both outside
and within ourselves.

We have been listening for the past few
Sundays to philosophers and scientists debating the Challenge of Our Time. They
almost all agree that the social sciences must
concern themselves with moral as well as
biological values. Some of the speakers felt
that science held the key to all questions,
and given time, would unravel man’s moral
and spiritual problems as well as the physical
ones. The last two speakers (to my mind
incomparably the best) said that science is
not enough, even social science dealing with
ethical beliets and human values. Lord
Lindsay concluded that we must learn to
harness the scientific mind in the service of
the merciful heart. We cannot do with one
or the other alone; we need both. The
individual who has a merciful heart, who
truly loves goodness, will create a good
society in his personal relationships; and
for the larger organizations of society
scientific method is needed, to abolish want
and to organize peace ; but it can work only
through individuals.

Lord Lindsay ended by reminding us that
hope is a virtue which is all too often missing
in our present. state. In concluding, I
should like to try and offset those messengers
of despair who say “‘ What does it matter,
saying all this about good heredity ; people
are going to fall in love with the wrong
people, and nothing will stop them marrying.” As one critic of eugenics puts it:

A man is called upon to consider principles
of reason precisely at that crisis in his life when
his instincts and passions are most powerfully
aroused. He is confronted on the one hand

with carefully written monographs by Professor
Karl Pearson, and on the other with ‘‘ that

But we ave justified in asking

I4I

beautiful soul, clad in that perfect form, so
palpably ... made... to be loved.”

Certainly a man’s heart, once set, will not
be changed by having information forced
upon it. But the direction in which the
heart will set can be influenced beforehand
by education. The social sciences can give
us a chance to raise ourselves by our bootstraps, provided they acknowledge both the
wisdom of the mind and the deeper wisdom
of the heart. It is a question of acknowledging the primacy of spiritual values.
The social sciences investigate the innate
characteristics of man, and the way they
influence, and are influenced by, environment. Once certain fundamentals are

‘proved, it should be possible to formulate

standards that we want to achieve, and to
see that they are taught to all boys and
girls at home and in school. If it is true
that such profoundly important traits as cooperativeness, warmth of feeling and serenity
are, like intelligence and vigour, partly inborn, and if everyone knows it, then the
deepest instincts of men and women will
respond to this knowledge. Any girl worth
her salt is looking for the best type of man
to be the father of her children. It may be.
a subconscious search, but it goes on everywhere, all the time. And the same is true
of men—though. perhaps even more unconsciously.

We need be under no illusions as to the
speed with which a good society will result
from better marriages—and by “good
society’ I mean one where men will live
together in peace, because peace is a byproduct of true human relationships. If
wise and virtuous children only issued from
wise and virtuous parents, it would be much
more simple. It is true, such is the complexity of the gene structure, that many good.
children can and do come from not-so-good
parents; and many good parents have
children who are poor sdecimens. But by
and large it is true to say that desirable
eugenic types have desirable children. I
think this is what Galton meant when he
said that he was concerned with the religious *
significance of the doctrine of evolution, and
I think we have some grounds for hope.
