AUBREY LEWIS
M.D., F.R.C.P., Professor of Psychiatry, University of London

Fertility and Mental Illness”

NYONE WHO HAS THE HONOUR of deAizen the Galton Lecture has no
shortage of topics to choose from, if he
assumes that it is his duty to deal with a theme
that had interested Francis Galton. In the
amazingly wide range of subjects which aroused
Galton’s curiosity, fertility took a prominent
place, and so did mental disorder. But of the
fertility of those who fell ill in this way, he did
not write, as far as I know, and there has been
relatively little attention given to the matter
since his time: doubtless the volume of research
and discussion would have been greater if there
had been the initial stimulus of his ideas and
inquiries. I should make it clear that I am excluding mental defect and dealing solely with
mental disorders in this lecture.

* * *

A hundred years ago an audience such as this
would have taken it for granted that the connection between fertility and mental disorder
could be summed up in the word ‘“‘Degeneration”. The French psychiatrist, B. A. Morel, had
at about that time propounded a doctrine of
degeneration which had a strong theological
flavour. In some stocks or families, he declared,
a morbid deviation from the normal type could
occur, most often in the form of mental abnormality. It would then exhibit progressive
degradation. In the first generation the abnormality would become manifest as nervous
temperament, moral defect, instability and
excess (what we should call psychopathic
personality): in the second generation, gathering
strength, it would appear as severe neuroses,
alcoholism, general paralysis: and in the third
generation it would burst into full bloom as
melancholia, paranoia, hypochondria; a fourth
generation, if the stock survived so far, would
consist of people with idiocy, gross malforma
* The Galton Lecture delivered in London on February
19th, 1958.

og!

tions and other barriers to procreation. For
Morel degeneration was a process whereby
tainted stocks were firmly predestined to extinction through hereditary disease, a medical
counterpart to reprobation in the religious
sphere. His definition of degenerative conditions
indicates that decay and extinction of the stock
was an essential part of the concept. “Les
dégénérations sont des déviations maladives du
type normal de Vhumanité héreditairement
transmissibles et évoluant progressivement vers
la déchéance.”

The degeneration theory

Morel’s views, published in 1857, had great
influence and were widely accepted. They were
reinforced, as time passed, by the convenient
fallacy of ‘‘anticipation”, which seemed to lend
colour to Morel’s theory since if hereditary
disease appeared earlier in succeeding generations, it would infallibly extirpate the affected
stock: the neat model consisted of a first
generation characterized by senile dementia
supervening on a healthy adult life; in the next
generation came involutional melancholia or
depression asserting itself in the prime of life;
then in the third generation dementia praecox
came on in late adolescence or early manhood
(it was Morel who coined the term “dementia
praecox’’, with this connotation): and the fourth
generation, afflicted from birth with idiocy or
imbecility, was even more completely precluded
from reproduction than that which had preceded
it. This tidy scheme ignored much evidence, and
was of course linked to the notion of a general
polymorphous “‘neuropathic taint” which could
produce any one of several varieties of mental
disorder and defect. Indeed Morel held that “all
hereditary diseases are sisters”. In spite of its
weaknesses—not all of which could be recognized when it was propounded—his scheme
gained much support, outside France as well as
within it. Thus Henry Maudsley, then rising into

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1958, 50, 2.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

prominence, wrote in 1862: ‘“‘Such is the benevolent purpose of nature that no efforts whatsoever can perpetuate a morbid human type; for
although the offspring of degenerate parents is
a further degeneration, the evil soon corrects
itself; and long before man has descended to the
animal level, there comes an incapability of
producing offspring, and the morbid type dies
out. Insanity, of what form soever, whether
mania, melancholia, moral insanity or dementia,
is but a step in the descent towards sterile
idiocy.... It is almost impossible to avoid
expressing a grateful admiration of the wise, sure
and merciful provision of Nature by which
degenerate mind is so quickly blotted out.” The
theory thus eloquently expounded spread out
into literary and other non-medical circles. The
ancient argument about the relation between
genius and insanity was revived, and seemingly
illuminated: the genius and the madman were
both seen as degenerates, though the genius was
a dégénéré supérieur (or, as some now Say, a
creative psychopath), and both were doomed to
extinction. Lombroso gained for the theory
some anthropological backing and disseminated
it further; Max Nordau vulgarized it until it
became, like other discarded theories, a convenient vehicle for prejudice, superstition and
facile explanations. It did not die easily even in
medical circles, and I find that Adolf Meyer, one
of the most enlightened of modern psychiatrists,
wrote in 1895 that Morel’s description of the
successive stages of degeneration through which
a “degenerate” family passes, could well be
correct, adding: “I could indeed report as
corroborative several instances from my personal
experience...the scheme is most closely
followed by people that live for three generations
under the same conditions and where the child
is, in every generation, exposed to the same
poisonous influences.’ Karl Pearson gave one
aspect of it qualified assent in his Boyle Lecture:
*‘We are at present only reaching light on what
is a very important principle, namely, that stocks
exist which show a general tendency to defect,
taking one form in the parent, another in the
offspring. Neuroses in the parents become
alcoholism or insanity in the offspring. ...
Even now, I doubt whether it is absolutely
unscientific to speak of a general inheritance of

92

degeneracy.” And as late as 1926 a prominent
German psychiatrist, Hoffman, argued in favour
of progressive degeneration in families with
mental disorder.

By the turn of the century, however, the
fatalistic picture of diminishing fertility, decay,
and then extinction of the degenerate stock had
been pretty well dropped. An entirely opposite
and more alarming view took its place. Instead
of the picture of Nature—far-sighted, purposeful
Nature—wiping out the hereditarily diseased
and insane by a rapid, benignant reduction of
their fertility, man was now seen as the blind
agent of a social and biological process which
would increase the relative fertility of the
mentally ill, and consequently the total amount
of mental illness. If I had read a paper on
Fertility and Mental Disorder fifty years ago, it
would have been assumed, I think, that I would
address myself not, as in 1857, to the way the
mentally ill extirpate themselves, but to the way
they threaten to swamp the rest of society
through unchecked and probably increasing
fertility. That, at any rate, was what people
feared in 1907.

Fears of excessive fertility

The issue was stated, in moderate language,
by Dr. David Heron in his important Eugenics
Laboratory Memoir. After setting out his
findings, he concluded that “‘our present statistics
amply confirm the general result reached by
Pearson that pathologically abnormal stocks . . .
are not less but rather more fertile than the
normal stocks in the community. The eugenic
importance of this in relation to the insane
diathesis is self-evident, for within the community natural selection is largely suspended,
and the ‘insane’ restored to family life as
recovered.” And later, at the end of the Memoir,
he states plainly: ““There is no reduction in,
possibly rather an augmentation of, the fertility
of insane stocks, when compared with that of
sane stocks. ... The normal, or probably more
than normal fertility of the insane, notwithstanding their partial seclusion and high death
rate, and the fact that insanity is a disease largely
of middle life, must make us pause before we
acquiesce in the unrestricted return of the
‘recovered’ insane to family life.”
FERTILITY AND

Dr. Heron carried out his inquiries under the
stimulus of Karl Pearson, in whose laboratory
he worked, and Pearson expressed the same
warnings in more vivid and urgent language.
“To-day we feed our criminals up, and we feed
up the insane, we let both out of the prison or
the asylum ‘reformed’ or ‘cured’ as the case may
be, only after a few months to return to State
supervision, leaving behind them the germs of a
new generation of deteriorants. .. . Education
for the criminal, fresh air for the tuberculous,
rest and food for the neurotic—these are
excellent, they may bring control, sound lungs,
and sanity to the individual; but they will not
save the offspring from the need of like treatment.... They cannot make a nation sound
in mind and body, they merely screen degeneracy
behind a throng of arrested degenerates.”’ And
elsewhere in the same Lecture occur such
passages as “‘degenerate stocks under present
social conditions are not short-lived, they live
to have more than the normal size of family.
Natural selection is largely suspended, but not
the inheritance of degeneracy nor the fertility
of the unfit. On the contrary there is more than
a suspicion of the suspension of the fertility
of the fit.”

These uncompromising views were reared, so
far as the fertility of the insane was concerned,
on information about 331 families containing
at least one insane member who had been treated
at James Murray’s Royal Asylum at Perth. In
these families Heron found that the mean
number of children was 5-97; whereas in ordinary
English marriages lasting at least fifteen years,
the average gross number of children was 6:58,
from which he inferred that marriages in the
insane stocks (which had not all lasted fifteen
years) were at least as fertile as the sane. He
compared the number of children of insane
parents who had come into his series with those
recorded for a normal group—the Danish
professional classes—and found it the same.
The normal population, whose marriages had
lasted fifteen years or more, were therefore
assumed to have a lower fertility than the
parents in the families with an insane member.

Now these findings of Heron’s are, as he
recognized, based on a small material, and take
no account of the varieties of mental disorder:

MENTAL ILLNESS

thus general paralysis of the insane, other
organic cerebral affections, senile dementia,
cretinism, epilepsy, transient depression and
recurrent mania, are all lumped together. But
a more serious objection was brought forward,
first by Weinberg and soon after by Greenwood
and Yule. By taking an insane person always as
the starting point for study of the fertility of the
family or stock, i.e. of the patient’s parents,
Heron not only excluded all childless marriages
but unintentionally ensured that he would have
an undue proportion of large sibships since
large families have more individuals in them
than small families and therefore, other things
being equal, more often have an insane member:
in the Copenhagen material, on the other hand,
parents had been taken as the starting point for
the inquiry. When the appropriate statistical
correction was made (as by Popenoe in 1928)
the size of the insane persons’ sibships tended
to be smaller, not larger, than normal.

These objections, however, did not shake the
conviction, widespread among eugenists in the
earlier years of the century, that social and
medical advances, however excellent on humanitarian grounds, were in danger of promoting
the fertility of the insane, already high: consequently, it was often cruelly said, they would
allow the weeds to choke the garden.

In spite of the eloquence and authority with
which the issue was stated and the fervour with
which woeful implications were stressed, little
was done to amplify the meagre and contradictory data on which the argument rested.
Studies by a handful of American and European
investigators yielded some information, but it
was not until the nineteen-thirties that adequate
sophisticated contributions appeared. The first
of these was by Professor Gunnar Dahlberg, of
Upsala.

Systematic investigation of fertility in psychoses

Dahlberg was acutely aware of the excesses
to which eugenic enthusiasm had carried
Goddard, Jérges, Estabrook and Davenport.
He was alive to the gross statistical and genetical
fallacies besetting the interpreter of large
pedigrees. He was moreover by temperament
and outlook averse from the sombre measures
of compulsory intervention that were advocated

93
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

by ardent believers in the tares-choking-out-thewheat view of the matter. He therefore set about
his inquiry into the fertility of insane women
cautiously, and he drew no overbold conclusion.

His propositi were 2,200 women admitted to
the Upsala Mental Hospital in the period
1890-1929. Of these 1,219 had been under
observation until they had passed the age of
forty-five, and were therefore unlikely to have
any further children.

These women had borne in all 2,407 children,
i.e. the average number of children per woman
was 1:97, though of course the younger the
women had been when they were first admitted
to the mental hospital, the lower their number of
children: there is a steady gradient from 0-05
for women first admitted before the age of
twenty to 2:45 for women first admitted over
the age of fifty. Against the average of 1-97 for
these women could be set the average of 3-78
for the general population of Sweden. Insofar
as the insane have a higher mortality than the
sane, so that some insane women will not have
survived to the age of forty-five, the figure
arrived at in Dahlberg’s count probably, as he
points out, overstates the fertility of insane
women.

The proportion of single women among the
propositi could greatly affect the average in
Dahlberg’s sample of women observed until
past the age of forty-five. There were 551 unmarried and 668 married. This gives 55 per cent
married, whereas for the whole Swedish population 81 per cent were married. The married
women in his sample had borne, on the average,
3-32 children; for the unmarried the corresponding figure was 0-34. The fertility of the
unmarried women being so low, married women
are responsible not only for replacing themselves
and their husbands but also in large measure for
making good the reproductive deficit of the
unmarried. This the insane married women were
not achieving. Their failure to do so could be
attributed in part to the long period many of
them spent in hospital, debarred from the
possibility of conceiving: on this, however,
Dahlberg’s statistics could not throw light,
except to indicate that the fertility of the
insane married women had been lower before
their first admission to the mental hospital than

94

the fertility of sane women of the corresponding
age group, and that married women discharged
from the hospital at some time before the end of
their reproductive life had subsequently borne
either very few children, or a relatively large
number of children.

Dayton, in his analysis of 11,959 consecutive
discharges from two large mental hospitals in
Massachusetts between 1917 and 1928, had
made much the same observation as Dahlberg.
Both in the completed and the incomplete
families, the average number of children born
to married patients having at least one child
was decidedly less than the average in the general
population for each age-of-mother group. He
concluded that “‘the stock producing individuals
with mental disorder is not on the increase. It
appears that this stock is barely holding its own,
if not actually decreasing.”

Dahlberg’s notable conclusion, coinciding
with Dayton’s, is in direct contradiction of the
alarming view so prevalent in the first decade of
the century. His material plainly indicated that
mentally ill women, taken en bloc have subnormal fertility. But to take the mentally ill
en bloc is to ignore the genetic, pathological,
clinical and social differences between various
types of mental illness. It is, for example, improper to confound the fertility of those with
general paralysis—a disease which can limit
the fecundity of those affected, making them
impotent or sterile—with the fertility of those
with recurrent mania. There are, it is true,
difficulties in distinguishing between one form
of mental illness and another. Karl Pearson was
so well aware of this, and so impressed by the
frequency with which the same patient would
be differently diagnosed by successive doctors,
that he deliberately treated all mental illnesses
as one illness taking many forms. But methods
of diagnosis, though still defective, are more
satisfactory now than they were fifty years ago:
we have very good grounds for believing the
inheritance of the main mental disorders to be
distinct: and the natural history of these main
disorders is so different that we would expect the
reproductive behaviour of affected persons to
differ appreciably. Whether this expectation is
justified, can be discovered from three major
studies, of which the largest and most thorough
FERTILITY AND

was carried out by Professor Essen-MGller of
Lund.

His propositi were 4,904 persons, of whom
1,679 were manic-depressive, 2,509 were schizophrenic, and 716 were epileptic. They had all
been treated in the Munich Psychiatric Clinic
between 1904 and 1927. A series of 1,239 normal
married people was also investigated, for
purposes of comparison. The number of children
born to the propositi before the onset of their
mental illness was calculated separately from
the number born thereafter.

In the manic-depressive group the number of
children born before their illness, and subsequently, did not differ from the normal. In the
schizophrenic group, however, the number born
before the outbreak of illness indicated a curious
difference between the sexes: whereas the male
propositi lagged behind the general population
in the rate at which the birth rate fell during
the period covered by their marriages, the women
behaved in the opposite way, anticipating the
general decline. The schizophrenic men had had
much the same average number of children as
the rural population before 1904, but. a
higher rate than the urban population of
Munich: in the period 1904-1918 they had the
tate which the rest of the Bavarian population
had shown before 1904, and in the period
1919-1930 their rate had fallen only to the level
reached by the rest of the population in the
previous period 1904-1918. The schizophrenic
women, on the other hand, showed before 1904
the rate which the rest of the population fell to
between 1904 and 1918, and kept correspondingly
ahead of the trend in the ensuing period.

Essen-MGller emphasized, in the light of these
findings, that it is improper to talk of the
fertility of people with a mental illness: it is
necessary to take into account the social differences which affect reproductive behaviour at
different times. In a stable population, as it
appeared from his data, the fertility of married
manic-depressives and schizophrenic men before
the outbreak of their mental illness does not
differ from that of the rest of the population,
though the schizophrenic women have only
about half the fertility of normal women. But
when the birth rate begins to fall in the general
population, the schizophrenic men slowly follow

3—ER.

MENTAL ILLNESS

suit, while the schizophrenic women, starting
with a lower birth rate and declining more slowly
than the normal women in this respect, eventually have much the same rate as the normals.

In the number of children born after the outbreak of illness, the married schizophrenics confirmed the expectation that the circumstances
and effects of the illness would greatly reduce
their fertility: it fell by about 70 per cent when
due allowance was made for their age and the
duration of their marriage. The exception to this
finding lay in the schizophrenics who married
after their illness: their fertility approximated
to that of the rest of the population, a finding
which, taken together with the fact that these
patients had spent a relatively short time in
hospital, suggests that the schizophrenics who
had married after their mental illness had had
the disease in a mild form and had recovered.

In this matter of fertility before and after the
illness, Essen-MoOller’s material yielded an
interesting further point which illustrates the
great risk of jumping to conclusions in such
inquiries. He examined the fertility of his
propositi during the twelve months before their
admission to hospital. He found it higher than
expected. He then looked to see if the rate of
conception is raised shortly before the onset, or
in the early stages, of the illness: if so, an
appreciable number of the women would be
pregnant at the time of entry into hospital.
This was not the case: there was evidence that
in fact the rate of conception during the year
preceding admission to hospital was depressed.
It would seem obvious that if, shortly before
admission to hospital, conception was no more
frequent but births were more frequent, the
explanation must lie in the assumption that a
proportion of the illnesses were puerperal, i.e.
had been the outcome of childbirth. This easy
explanation, however, will not do. It was not
only the women who behaved in this way. The
married schizophrenic men also showed a rise in
births of live children during the three months
before admission. The most probable explanation—unless one invents a couvade-psychosis
—now becomes the socio-psychological one that
in both men and women, when a child is expected
admission to hospital is put off, wherever
possible, until the baby is born.

95
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Figure 1

GROSS REPRODUCTIVE
INDEX (R) OF MARRIED
SCHIZOPHRENICS.

AND MANIAC-DEPRESSIVES
RELATED TO NORMAL
POPULATION

Md A = maniac-depressive
Dp A = dementia praecox
Md K = Schizo-affective

Broken line ---- represents R
of normal population.

(From Essen-MOller, E. Acta
Psychiat., 1935. Supp. 8)

 

R. GENERAL POPULATION

From Essen-MoOller’s masterly study itemerges population, but that schizophrenics reproduced
that (in Bavaria at any rate) the fertility of significantly less than the general population;
patients with manic-depressive psychosis did not the disparity was greater when the general
differ appreciably from that of the general population had a high birth rate. In general the

96
FERTILITY AND MENTAL ILLNESS

total fertility of schizophrenics was between
one-fifth and two-fifths—at most between a
quarter and a half of the normal.

At the same time as Essen-Méller’s study, a
parallel inquiry was made in North Germany
by F. J. Kallmann. By agreement their methods
of enumeration were harmonized. Kallmann
limited his study to schizophrenics admitted to
a large mental hospital in Berlin between 1893
and 1902. He subdivided his propositi into two
main groups—those with hebephrenia or catatonic forms of schizophrenia, and those with
paranoid or mild forms. The former, with
typical or ‘“‘nuclear” schizophrenia, had on the
average only half as many children as the latter;
as they comprised 70 per cent of the propositi,
the average number of children for the whole
population studied was close to that of the
typical, less fertile group. The fertility of the
propositi, however grouped, was below that of
the normal population: the males averaged 3:1
children and the women 3-5 children for “‘completed” families. The averages obtained for the
prepsychotic period of marriages contracted
before the onset of illness did not fall far short
of these completed figures: for men the prepsychotic average was 2:7 children and for women
3-4. Almost all the offspring of schizophrenics
had evidently been produced before the illness
became manifest. The exception to this generalization lay in the sub-group of schizophrenics
who recovered from periodic or mild forms of
the disorder leaving few traces behind, so that
the patients resumed their normal lives in the
community; many of them married after their
first discharge from hospital and had an
appreciable number of children.

Kallmann sums up his findings in terms which
agree closely with Essen-Moller’s. ““The fertility
of schizophrenics lags markedly behind that of
the general population. ... We find the legitimate fertility rate lowered by 1-6 children in
comparison with the corresponding average
population.”

The only other large study which has provided
data on the fertility of schizophrenics has been
J. A. B66k’s thorough investigation of an
isolate, i.e. a population more or less shut off
geographically, which 1s relatively homogeneous
in its genotypical structure. He took the people

of a rural area in the extreme north of Sweden
which has had poor means of communication
with the rest of the country: the migration rate
was low: and marriages between first cousins
accounted for over 2 per cent of all marriages.
Through a painstaking combination of interviews and search through appropriate records,
all surviving persons who had had a major
neuropsychiatric disorder between 1902 and 1949
were identified and examined. B66k found that
the fertility of marriages contracted by the
schizophrenics (estimated as the average number
of children born per year, counting from the
year of marriage to the year when the wife
reached the age of forty-eight, minus the number
of years spent in hospital) was higher than in a
control group of mentally normal people in the
same area: the differences, however, were not
statistically significant. Now this finding is surprisingly at variance with Essen-MoOller’s and
Kallmann’s. It was only when B66k took all
schizophrenics, and not only those who were
married, that he found their fertility to be
appreciably lower (by 30 per cent) than that of
the normal population. The explanation lay in
the very large number of unmarried men (75
per cent) among the schizophrenics. It raises a
question of the utmost importance in the whole
matter: how far is the reproductive capacity
of schizophrenics as a group reduced not because
their illness lowers their fecundity but because it
lowers their chance of marriage.

Marriage rate and reproductive capacity

The high proportion of single men and women
among those in mental hospitals has long been
observed, and its significance debated.

Thurnam, writing in 1845, found that twothirds of the patients admitted to the York
Retreat had never been married, and that of
those who were married one-fifth had never had
offspring, and he emphasised that “many of the
cases occur in a class of persons, as regards
mental vigour, less likely to be married than the
average of the community at large. ... The
celibacy is to be regarded as an effect rather
than a cause.”

In all psychoses and at all ages the single outnumber the married among the mentally ill.
It can be inferred that this is far more evident

97
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE 1

MENTAL HOSPITALS: ADMISSION RATES PER MILLION 1951 CENSUS
Population by Sex, Age and Marital Status for Certain Diagnostic Groups, 1950

 

 

Diagnosis a Marital 75 and
LS.C. No. Sex Status 20- 25- 35- 45- $5- 65- over
Males S 974 2,204 1,387 586 219 60 —
Schizophrenia M. W. & D. 191 230 185 79 43 20 5
(300) Females S 762 1,617 ~# 1,160 590 206 93 13
M. W. & D. 187 296 255 170 104 44 10
Males S 104 360 673 ~=«1,005 953 617 145
Manic-Depressive M. W. & D. 73 139 267 456 666 491 160
Reaction Females S 187 534 953 1,268 1,331 723 194
(301) M. W. & D. 177 372 584 793 919 578 142

(From Registrar General’s Statistical Review of England and Wales for 1950-51. Supplement on General Morbidity,

Cancer and Mental Health.)

in schizophrenia than in other psychoses. If
standardized rates of admission per 100,000 per
year are calculated, it is found that in schizophrenia the rate for single men is 4-7 times as high
as for married men and the rate for single women
3 times as high as for married women: the
corresponding rates for manic-depressive patients
are 1-6 times higher for single men than for
married, 1:5 times higher for single women.
These are Scandinavian figures. The corresponding English figures, collected by the late
Dr. Vera Norris, are even more striking: e.g.
first admission rates for schizophrenia six times
as high for single men as for married men.

TABLE 2

AGE-STANDARDIZED RATIOS OF THE
FIRST ADMISSION RATES OF SINGLE (Rs)
TO THOSE FOR MARRIED (Rm) PERSONS

Men Women

Diagnosis Rs/Rm Rs/Rm
Schizophrenia .. .. 62 3-7
Manic-depressive psychosis .. 1:8 1-6
Psychoses of old age .. 23 1:6
Other disorders aa 3-0 1-5
All disorders 3°5 2:0

(From Norris, V. J. ment. Sci., 1956, 102: 467)

+ There are three possible explanations for the
predominance of the single among psychotic
persons: first, that because of their premorbid
personality they are less likely to get married;
second, that they have not been protected against
harmful stresses by the affection and other
advantages of married life; and third, that they
are more likely to be sent into hospital. In a

98

variety of studies the first of these explanations
has been shown to be far the most probable,
though the other two factors may play a part.
If then the personality of the patients militates
against their getting married, why are the single
so much more frequent among schizophrenics
than among the manic-depressives: and why
more frequent among males than females. The
answer is that the majority of persons prone to
manic-depressive psychosis commonly have,
before and between attacks, a sociable, responsive
personality that would not be detrimental to
their seeking marriage and being sought in
marriage. The schizophrenics have, as a group,
quite a different mental constitution: morbidly
seclusive, shy, sensitive, and socially awkward,
they may be heavily handicapped in making and

‘responding to any advances; the men show the

discrepancy between single and married more
than women because lack of initiative will
tell more heavily against their prospects of
getting married than the same quality would
reduce a woman’s prospects. This matter is
summed up by Odegaared, the Norwegian
psychiatrist who has studied it closely: “Certain
personality traits reduce the chances of getting
married, by making contact with the opposite
sex more difficult or less attractive, or indirectly
by blocking the way towards social and economic
success. Some of these traits are disproportionately common in persons who are predisposed
towards certain psychoses, or in the initial stages
of such disorders.”

There is another aspect of the relation between
mental illness and marriage. When Dr. Norris
FERTILITY AND MENTAL ILLNESS

looked into groups of patients who were comparable in previous history, length of follow-up
period, legal status, age, sex and diagnosis, she
found that single persons stayed longer in the
mental hospital than married persons. It may
therefore be inferred that they stood a greater
chance of becoming chronic hospital patients,
debarred from procreation.

The relationship of marriage to the time of
onset of the illness has been closely examined
by Essen-M6ller. He found that whereas before
the illness marriage was half as common in
schizophrenics as in normal people of their age,
it was only about one-sixth of the normal rate
after the illness in those who had been single
when they were first admitted to hospital. For
manic-depressives, before their first admission
the marriage rate was, as we have seen, almost
identical with that of the normal population, but
after the illness it fell to half the normal. It is
noteworthy that in a group of schizophrenics
whose illnesses had begun with clinical features
suggesting manic-depressive psychosis, the
prepsychotic marriage rate was as high as in the
manic-depressives, but after the illness it fell to
the same level as the typical schizophrenics. The
length of time before, or after, the illness does
not affect the frequency of marriage: thus schizophrenics as a group show the same lowered
marriage rate many years before the onset of
illness as they do in the period immediately
preceding their first admission.

All this points towards the personal characteristics of the patients, rather than their
enforced residence in a mental hospital, as the
main reason for their low marriage rate and
low fertility. It is reasonable to suppose that the
influence of schizoid personal characteristics
on marriage rate will operate differently in
diverse cultures, and under different social and
economic conditions. This is borne out by
Professor B6Gk’s finding in his North Swedish
population: the proportion of schizophrenic
women married was lower than normal (73 as
against 93 per cent) but not nearly as much so
as elsewhere. Professor BOOK attributes the discrepancy to the fact that this rural and isolated
population had been living under relatively
primitive conditions where selection of a wife
was influenced more by physical strength and

capacity for hard work than by psychological
oddities: there was moreover a constant shortage
of young women because of emigration. Though
not in itself of importance, the peculiarity of these
schizophrenics living within the Arctic Circle
is a warning against generalization based on a
few studies. Social factors may greatly alter the
picture. Another reminder of this lies in the
mortality figures for schizophrenics. In the big
German investigations carried out a quarter of
a century ago, declared schizophrenics were
found to have three times as high a mortality as
the normal population; tuberculosis was a very
conspicuous cause of this raised mortality—so
much so that a close genetical relationship was
postulated between the susceptibility to schizophrenia and to tuberculosis. Now tuberculosis
has ceased in most countries to be an important
cause of death in schizophrenics or indeed in
any group of psychotic patients. The change
could not have been foreseen, nor its implications for fertility worked out, unless the main
social and medical factors determining the
course of tuberculosis had been known. Although schizophrenia seems to be substantially
the same in form wherever it is met, no matter
what the ethnic and cultural diversities of the
people affected, any statement about the
fertility of schizophrenics must be qualified,
and for the present should be restricted to
populations of the same sort as the very few
that have been adequately studied in this regard
—almost entirely West European populations.
The effect of a low marriage rate was, as I
mentioned earlier, striking in B66k’s investigation. The intra-matrimonial fertility of his
schizophrenic propositi was actually higher
than that of his normal controls, but the total
reproductive capacity of his schizophrenic
subjects, married and single together, was
reduced to about 70 per cent of the normal,
entirely because of the very low marriage rate
of his male propositi: three-quarters of them,
you will remember, were unmarried. Schizophrenics evidently conform to the hope Charles
Darwin expressed in the Descent of Man: he
wrote that we must bear the undoubtedly bad
effects of the weak propagating their kind, but
there could be a steady check on this “‘by the
weak in body or mind refraining from marriage,

99
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

though this is more to be hoped for than
expected.”

It might of course be misleading to assume
that schizophrenics who remain single produce
no children. Essen-MOller, with his customary
thoroughness, looked into this matter. He found
that on the average one in eight of the single
women among his propositi had produced a
child; of manic-depressive women the corresponding figure was four. Kallmann,
counted as illegitimate all children born outside
wedlock, even though subsequently legitimized,
reports 162 such births among his propositi:
seventy-eight of his 537 unmarried female
schizophrenics had had an illegitimate child.
From these data it would seem that the number
of children produced by single women among
the schizophrenics is too low to affect appreciably
the figure obtained by investigating the fertility
of the married women. For men, the findings are
equivocal: Essen-MGller inclined to the conclusion that the schizophrenic bachelors had a
higher reproductive rate than the spinsters, but
Kallmann arrived at the opposite opinion.
Clearly it is more difficult to established the facts
for men than for women. In any case they do
not, on the information at present available,
alter the general finding that schizophrenics of
both sexes have a low fertility.

Since the fertility of schizophrenics is so low,
the question inevitably arises: how is it that
schizophrenia remains as prevalent as ever.
Three explanations are possible: (1) it is not, or
some varieties of it are not, of hereditary
causation; or perhaps (2), though the condition
is hereditary, the outwardly healthy carriers
reproduce at a higher rate than normal and
therefore compensate for the relative infertility
of those with the manifest disease; or finally
(3), mutations may be constantly replenishing
the otherwise dwindling supply of people
predisposed to schizophrenia.

Against the first possibility there is a convincing array of evidence. There is still
uncertainty as to whether schizophrenia is, as
B6oék holds, a matter of a major simple dominant
gene with a 20 per cent heterozygous penetrance,
or, as others believe, is a recessive trait; but as to
its being in its typical forms to a large extent genetically determined, there is little room for doubt.

100

who.

There remain, as possible explanations, the
occurrence of fresh mutations, and raised
fertility of heterozygous carriers. To inquire into
the latter hypothesis, Essen-Mdller took the
brothers and sisters of his schizophrenic subjects,
and ascertained how many of them had married.
The proportion of sisters who were married
was well below the average figure for the corresponding normal population: likewise with the
brothers in the younger age-groups, i.e. under
thirty-five. A similar finding was reported by
Mertens. In general the probability of marriage
in the siblings of schizophrenics is about twothirds of what it is in the general population.
How many children were the offspring of these
marriages ? Essen-MOller had no count of these,
but on indirect evidence concluded that not
only the frequency of marriage but also the
total fertility of these brothers and sisters was
subnormal. Kallmann arrived at a_ similar
conclusion.

It might be supposed that although the sibs
failed to confirm the hypothesis, the parents and
the children of schizophrenics might. Heron had
in fact stated that in his material the parents of
his propositi were more fertile than the general
population. But Weinberg and others demonstrated the fallacy in his method: as Greenwood
and Yule put it: ““The size of family is not, as has
been stated, abnormally large. On the contrary,
so far as the data go, they seem to support the
conclusion that the fertility of such stocks
[stocks containing one or more members
suffering from the disease] is below the average.”
Kallmann studied the fertility of the married
daughters of schizophrenics. He found that it
was much lower than that of the married sisters
of the patients (doubtless reflecting the general
fall in birth rate in succeeding generations) and
was belownormal. It must therefore be concluded
that, although the sisters and children of schizophrenic subjects transmit the predisposition to
schizophrenia, and do so to a serious extent,
their fertility is not sufficient to compensate for
the losses entailed by the low fertility of those
who manifest the disease.

Mutations
There is left, then, as an explanation of the
continuing prevalence of schizophrenia, the
FERTILITY AND

mutation hypothesis. The argument is now a
familiar one and is more easily tested where
dominant or sex-linked characters are in
question. For a probably recessive character like
schizophrenia, with a possibly deleterious or undetectable heterozygote, calculations are much
more difficult, and the assumptions on which
they are based more shaky. B66k has critically
stated this problem as it affects schizophrenia,
and from his North Swedish population has
derived a spontaneous mutation-rate of 5 x 10°
genes per generation. This is higher than Penrose’s estimate, which is 1 in 2,000. Much
depends in these calculations on the gene
frequency, which B6ék took as 7 per cent,
whereas Nixon and Slater recently assessed it at
approximately 3 per cent. Whichever provisional
figure is accepted, the spontaneous mutation
rate is considerable. It is well to bear in mind
Penrose’s warning that the rates now calculated
may be too high, when it is remembered that
suppression of even the most regular kinds of
dominart inheritance may mimic mutation,
different conditions may be grouped (in the
case of schizophrenia very probably are grouped)
under one clinical heading, and finally that
heterozygotes of recessive traits may have
formerly carried slight advantages. But even if
the accepted mutation rates are too high, the
occurrence of fresh mutations responsible for
schizophrenia on a substantial scale must be
inferred.

For manic-depressive psychosis, in which the
fertility of most of those affected does not seem
less than that of mentally healthy people, the
mutation rate is much smaller. Penrose assesses
it at 1 in 28,000 per gene per generation. Even
so the proportion of affected persons in whom
the condition is due to a fresh mutation would
be high (1 in 70) in each generation.

The possible effect of radiation in raising the
mutation rate for heriditary diseases has been
considered by the Medical Research Council.
Serious as this matter is, it is not strictly relevant
to the question of fertility under conditions
existing hitherto, with which we are concerned
here. It is, however, relevant to quote a passage
from the Medical Research Council Report:

We have expressed the opinion that from the
standpoint of the social load imposed, mental

MENTAL ILLNESS

diseases constitute the most important single
category of disease which is determined to a
marked degree by heredity and which is serious,
in the sense both of being highly harmful to the
individual and of making heavy demands on
medical resources. We are aware that this is only
an opinion and that others may have different
views. We believe, however, that it will be conceded by all that the mental diseases contribute
a very substantial proportion of the total number
of those suffering from _ serious hereditary
disorders.
This restrained statement indicates the gravity
of the problem of fertility in mental disorder,
quite apart from the alarming issues raised by
possible artificial increase of the mutation rate
for this group of diseases.

Fertility of neurotic persons

All the data I have been dealing with so far
concern the two major forms of insanity—
schizophrenia and manic-depressive psychosis.
About the fertility of those with neurotic
disorders there is practically no information.
The only published material I know which is
relevant comes from the Indianapolis Study—
Clyde Kiser and C. J. Westoff asked 1,444
“‘relatively fecund” couples a series of questions
about feelings of personal inadequacy. Most of
the questions are such as are included in
neurotic “inventories” and although by no
means indicative of illness, positive answers may
be assumed to indicate an anxious, depressive,
worrying, dissatisfied personality of the sort
which verges on neurosis. An index was constructed ranging from under fifty to 100 and
over, and the replies analysed statistically to see
if there was a relation between fertility and this
index. The findings were not clear cut. They
suggested a slight relationship between size of
family and feelings of inadequacy—the more
inadequate, the smaller the number of children;
but size of family was more closely related to
economic security than it was to neurotic
feelings.

In view of the extreme dearth of evidence the
following unpublished findings, for which I am
indebted to Miss Nancy Goodman, are of
interest. Miss Goodman looked into the fertility
of 375 neurotic married women of forty-five
years of age or more who had been seen at the
Maudsley Hospital in the years 1954 to 1957.

IOI
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE 3

NUMBER OF CHILDREN OF MARRIED NEUROTIC WOMEN AGED 45 AND OVER,
COMPARED WITH GENERAL POPULATION

 

MARRIAGES OF
1925-1929

Family Census
Non-Manual Manual

 

 

7 %
0 21-5 14-3
| 1 27°5 23-1
FAMILY 2 27-9 23-4
SIZE 3 12-8 15-1
4 5-5 8-9
5 and over 4-8 15-2

|
| 100 100

| MARRIAGES OF

 

 

1920-1924
Bethlem/ Family Census Bethlem|
Maudsley | Non-Manual Manual Maudsley
% % % %
14-3 18-3 12:1 25:0
34-3 25:3 19-1 22:4
18-6 26°6 21°7 27°6
17-1 15-2 16-6 13:2
5-7 76 10-8 6°6
10-0 7-0 19-7 5-3
100 100 100 100

 

(Goodman, N. Unpublished)

The average number of live children born to
these women did not differ greatly from that
shown for normal women in the Family Census
carried out in 1946 for the Royal Commission
on Population. In view of geographical limits
and difficulties of ascertainment it would be
unsafe to stress the apparent difference between
the neurotic women, especially of the 1920-24
marriage cohort, and the general population.
The same caution applies to the apparent preponderance of small families in the neurotic
women of the later cohort. The average age at
marriage of the neurotic women was three years
less than that of the average bride in England
and Wales, but this may reflect only differences
in “social class” composition.

The fertility of neurotic women as a whole

TABLE 4

PERCENTAGE OF SINGLE WOMEN
AMONG NEUROTIC WOMEN AGED 45
AND OVER, COMPARED WITH GENERAL
POPULATION

1951 CENSUS

Age England London Greater  Bethlem/

Group andWales H.C. London Maudsley
% % % %

45-49 15-2 21:3 17:2 19-9
50-54 14-8 19-9 16:8 21-0
55-59 15-5 19-7 17-0 11-6
60-64 15-5 18-6 16-4 (10-8)
65-69 16-1 17-7 15-8 (12-5)
70-74 15-9 17-4 15-7
75-79 16:1 18-3 16:3 (20-0)

(Goodman, N. Unpublished)

102

could, of course, be less than that of women in
the general population if a higher proportion
of them remained single. But no clear evidence
emerged that this is so.

The proportion of single women in the whole
sample (670 women) was 16-7 per cent, which is
the same figure as for Greater London; and for
the separate age groups the proportion was not
consistently or unequivocally different from that
of the normal population. This was disappointing. For if the fertility of the neurotic women in
this Maudsley sample had diverged from that
of the general population in either direction,
some plausible hypotheses could have been
suggested to account for it, in the light of
psychopathology and social data about women
and marriage—but there is nothing as yet to
explain.

It is necessary to say “as yet’, because this
may be an unrepresentative sample of neurotic
women. The exclusion of women who had not
yet reached the end of their reproductive life has
probably biassed the sample in the direction of
those who neurotic symptoms had not become
troublesome until middle age. Slater and Woodside who detected “a suggestion of lower
fertility in neurotics”, remark that the sexual
abnormalities associated with neurosis nearly
always “‘lie in an impoverishment of sexual life’,
inhibitions and frigidity. In keeping with this
view are the reports put forward by various
psychiatrists about the psychological causes and
mechanisms of sterility. The evidence in support
FERTILITY AND

of the latter, however, is extremely tenuous; and
in a society in which family size is deliberately
restricted, the influence of neurotic inhibitions
would be hard to distinguish from those of
prudence and rational restraint. At all events,
until we have a clear indication that the fertility
of neurotic persons, or of those with a particular
variety of neurosis, is restricted, explanations
are premature.

We have seen that mental disorder is not
associated with higher fertility than normal;
the commonest and gravest mental disorder,
schizophrenia, is indeed characterized by much
lower fertility than normal. The fears so strongly
voiced fifty years ago have little substance:
society is not in danger of being swamped by
increasing numbers of insane people. But there
is still cause for discomfort. Distressing and
disabling hereditary mental diseases are being
propagated, and it may well be that factors are
at work which will increase rather than diminish
the fertility of those who are mentally ill or who
can transmit the predisposition to mental
illness.

It is notoriously perilous to attempt predictions about the future size and _ genetic
composition of populations (Dorn, Glass,
Larsson). The effects of mutation, selection, gene
flow and genetic drift are hard enough to foresee:
harder still the effects of social, cultural, economic, therapeutic and political changes. Here, as
Robert Bridges said of the alternative to “‘purposeful and wise self-breeding’’, we see “‘complexity irresoluble in obscurity”. But I think
there are some recognizable shifts of opinion and
practice which could alter in an unwelcome
direction the reproductive behaviour of those
prone to mental illness.

Dangers and opportunities

Because of the irrational fears and misunderstanding about mental disorders which have
clogged progress and made the lot of the
mentally ill needlessly hard, great efforts are
now being made to instil into the public a more
sympathetic and informed understanding of the
nature and course of these illnesses. Such
activities, responsibly conducted, obviously do
much good. They could, however, result in a
rise in the proportion of married people among

4—ER .

MENTAL ILLNESS

those with schizoid personality or with a
history of manic-depressive attacks, because the
lesson that “‘mental illnesses are illnesses like
any other’ will have been so well learnt by the
public that existing social and psychological
barriers to such marriages will become much
weaker. I am aware that intrinsic biological
and psychological factors in the affected persons
may be much the most powerful determinant of
whether they marry, far outweighing conscious
beliefs and attitudes. But the findings of B6ok
to which I have referred, and Essen-MoOller’s
demonstration of the way in which the birth
rate of schizophrenics slowly or hastily followed
the trend downwards in the general population
suggest that extraneous influences cannot be
safely minimized. This applies not only to the
proportion of marriages among the patients and
the number of children they produced but also
to the fertility of their sibs and children: these
refrain to some extent from marriage and procreation for reasons which could be weakened if
there were widespread acceptance of the view
that mental illnesses are illnesses like any other,
without reference to the need for caution because
of the strongly hereditary character of some of
them. I wish enough were known about the mode
of inheritance of mental disorders and about
the factors which determine fertility, to offer
clear guidance to those who engage in education
of the public on matters of mental health and
mental illness: but in the light of present knowledge I think it is reasonable to urge that the
hereditary aspect of these illnesses should be
fairly stated, neither slurred over nor unduly
stressed. There is little doubt that it is now often
played down in mental hygiene campaigns: thus
the National Association for Mental Health
tells the public that “‘heredity plays a less important part in insanity than is popularly
supposed. ... This age-old question has not yet
been completely answered, but more harm is
done by worrying over possible inherited factors
than by the factors themselves” and goes on to
say on the following page, with contrasting
assurance, that “‘it is quite certain that the surest
defence against mental illness is to have a secure
and happy childhood”. Unfortunately the issue
is fogged by misunderstanding and the adoption
of an extreme position by some who concentrate

103
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

on the psychodynamic aspect of causation. ““The
genetic approach to the problem of schizophrenia and manic-depressive psychosis is not
so pessimistic, deterministic or sterile as many
psychiatrists are still inclined to believe....
Nor is there any conflict between a genetic
theory and the idea that psychological and other
factors may precipitate ... psychoses, which
appear in persons having a specific genotype.”
(B66k, 1952)

There is now a strong move towards keeping
the mentally ill in the community if at all
possible. The many virtues in this movement
need no emphasis. It coincides with a disposition
in psychiatrists to discharge patients from
mental hospitals soon after the acute symptoms
of their attack have subsided, even though
there is a recognized possibility of relapse within
a short time. The development of therapeutic
methods in the last twenty years has promoted
the tendency towards much shorter periods of
stay in the mental hospital. All in all, the
chances of a particular patient with schizophrenia or melancholia spending a substantial
part of his life in uninterrupted residence in a
mental hospital: are becoming much less. This
may increase the fertility of schizophrenics; it
seems unlikely, however, that it would greatly
do so, since, as I mentioned earlier, Essen-MO6ller
had found that there was little relation between
duration of hospital stay and fertility after the
onset of illness. The question is still open, and
important. We have unfortunately only the
German inter-war data to go on, which may not
correspond to post-war experience in various
countries.

Sterilization is a topic impossible to ignore
when discussing the eugenic aspects of the
fertility of mentally ill persons. We have, it is
clear, abundant evidence that many schizophrenics need no such surgical aid to sterility.
There are, however, also the manic-depressives,
with their approximately normal fertility. It is
generally agreed that sterilization would not
appreciably reduce the amount of schizophrenia
and manic-depressive psychosis in the population, even if it were carried out with the abominable thoroughness and compulsion which the
National Socialists employed in Germany. But
this does not preclude the employment of

104

voluntary sterilization in individual cases. Even
so severe a critic of many eugenic proposals as
Professor Haldane has said, of metabolic and
other abnormalities inherited as autosomal
recessives, that though negative eugenic measures
like sterilization would be of little value in
reducing the frequency of these abnormalities
“doubtless parents who have produced one
child with a grave recessive defect should
have no more children”. He advocates, of
course, persuasion and not compulsion, to
this end.

There is a place for persuasion and advice in
this matter of reducing the fertility of those who
have had a mental illness. I doubt, however, if
we know enough to advocate celibacy and
childlessness to many of those who seem to us
predisposed to mental illness, in the light of their
family history and constitutional traits: there
are too many opportunities for error in judging
that a “schizoid” or “‘syntonic”’ personality or
a particular bodily habit forebodes mental
illness, and there are too many valuable qualities
closely allied to supposedly premorbid ones, to
justify such a step in most cases. But once a man
or woman has been overtly ill with one of the
illnesses that are genetically controlled, advice
about having children may be called for: and it
may prevent much individual unhappiness. This
presumes, of course, restraint and sound judgment
in the advising physician—the antithesis of the
irresponsible attitude sometimes shown when
a depressed or neurotic woman is advised to
become pregnant so that she may have a child
to interest her.

There are, of course, psychiatrists who believe
that most of the evidence put forward in favour
of hereditary transmission of mental illness is
better interpreted as evidence of the paramount
influence of upbringing and personal relations
within the family. To them the fertility of the
mentally ill is of little or no consequence, except
insofar as the patient is likely, or unlikely, to
bring up her children well, in the light of accepted
psychodynamic principles. Such a view is unwarrantably one-sided. The fertility of those
with mental illness is important, and is not less
so because it carries implications that we cannot
fully assess at present because our information
about relevant biological, demographic and
FERTILITY AND

social facts is too scanty. Not only eugenists but
all compassionate and reflective people must
surely be concerned at an increase in the number
of children born to parents who are themselves
affected by a prolonged mental illness or who
are destined to become mentally ill—perhaps
many times—before they reach old age. Because
of this much further inquiry is needed into the
biological, social and psychological factors that
control fertility in the mentally ill.

Summary

A hundred years ago mental disorders were
believed to occur in “degenerate” families, which
tended to die out. By the turn of the century this
was replaced by the opposite view, that the
hereditarily diseased and insane would multiply
until they swamped the rest of society. Systematic investigations have shown the falsity of
these extreme views. Of the two commonest and
gravest mental disorders, manic-depressive psychosis is characterized by approximately normal
fertility, and schizophrenia by much lower
fertility than normal, largely because of lessened
capacity for marriage. Very little is known about
the fertility of people with neurotic disorders,
but there is no evidence that it differs greatly
from the normal.

The hereditary transmission of mental disorder
is still a grave problem, though often slurred
over in mental hygiene campaigns. Schizophrenia
is largely a hereditary disease or group of
diseases; since it remains as prevalent as ever in
spite of the relatively low fertility of those who
suffer from it, fresh mutations are evidently
replenishing the otherwise dwindling supply of
people predisposed to it: the same might be
said, though to a much lesser extent, of manicdepressive psychosis. Radiation may be raising
the mutation rate for these hereditary diseases.

We do not know enough to warrant our
making firm predictions or advocating celibacy
and childlessness to outwardly healthy people
who seem predisposed to mental illness, but
once a man or woman has been overtly ill with
one of the mental disorders that are genetically
controlled, advice about having children may be
called for: it should be cautious and should draw
on the best available genetic and psychiatric
information.

MENTAL ILLNESS
REFERENCES

B6Gk, J. A. A Genetic and Neruopsychiatric Investigation
of a jorth-Swedish Population. 1953. Acta Genetica.

Dahlberg, Gunnar. Die Fruchtbarkeit der GeistesAranken. 1933. Z’schr. f.d. ges. Neurol. u. Psychiat.

Dayton, Neil A. Size of family and Birth order in Mental
Disease. 1930. Studies in Quantitative and Cultural
Sociol. 24: 123
New Facts on Mental Disorders. Baltimore. 1940.
Thomas.

Dorn, H. F. Pitfalls in Population Forecasts. 1950. J.
Amer. Stat. Assoc. 45: 311

Essen-MoOller, Erik. Untersuchungen tiber die Fruchtbarkeit gewisser Gruppen von Geisteskranken. 1935.
Acta Psychiat. Suppl. 8. Copenhagen: Levin and
Munksgaard.

Die Heiratshaufigkeit der Geschwister von Schizophrenen. 1936. Arch. f. Rassen u. Gesell. Biol. 30: 367

Glass, Bentley. Genetic Changes in Human Populations.

1954, Advances in Genetics. 6: 95

Greenwood, M., and Yule, G. Udny. On the detereed of size of family. 1914. J. Roy. Stat. Soc.

Haldane, J. B. S. New Paths in Genetics. London. 1941.
Allen and Unwin.

Heron, David. A first study of the statistics of Insanity and
the Inheritance of the Insane Diathesis. London.
1907. Dulau.

Kallmann, Fritz J. The Genetics of Schizophrenia. New
York, 1938. Augustin.

Larsson, Tage. The Interaction of Population changes
and splereity. 1956/57. Acta Genet. et Stat. Med.

Maudsley, H. The Genesis of Mind. 1862. J. Ment. Sci.

Mertens, K. Untersuchungen tiber die Heiratshdufigkeit
der Schizophrenen und der Manisch-Depressiven
sowie deren Geschwister. Wiirzburg, 1939. Inaug.
Dissert.

Morel, B. A. Traité des Dégénérescences physiques,
intellectuelles et morales de l’espéce humaine. Paris,
1857. Bailliére.

Nixon, W. L. B., and Slater, E. A second investigation
into the Children of Cousins. 1958. Acta Genet. et
Stat. Med. 7: 513

Norris, Vera. A statistical study of the Influence of
Marriage on the Hospital Care of the Mentally
Sick. 1956. J. Ment. Sci. 102: 467

Odegaard, O. Marriage and Mental Disease. 1946. J.
Ment. Sci. 92: 35
New Data on Marriage and Mental Disease. 1953.
J. Ment. Sci. 99: 778

Pearson, Karl. The scope and Importance to the State
of the Science of National Eugenics. 14th Robert
Boyle Lecture. London, 1907. Frowde.

Penrose, L. S. Estimate of the Incidence of Cases of
Schizophrenia and Manic-Depressive Reaction due
to Spontaneous Mutation. Appendix E. Hazards to
Man of Nuclear and Allied Radiations. 1956.
H.M.S.O
Mutation in Man. 1956. Acta Genetica. 6: 169

, TS
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Popes, paul Fecundity of the Insane. 1928. J. Heredity. Weinberg, Wilhelm. Die Rassenhygienische. Bedeutung
19: 7 der Fruchtbarkeit. 1910. Arch. f. Rassen u. Gesell.

Repistrar General’ Statistical Review of England and Biol. 7: 684
Wales for the two years 1950-51: Supplement on Westoff, C. F., and Kiser, Clyde V. Interrelation of
General Morbidity, gant and Mental Health. Fertility and Feeling of Personal Inadequacy. 1952.
London, 1955. H.M.S.O. Milbank Mem. Fund. Quart. 30: 239

POPULATION STUDIES

A Journal of Demography

Edited by D. V. GLASS and E. GREBENIK

Vol XI No. 3. CONTENTS March 1958

G. ROWNTREE and N. H. CARRIER. The Resort to Divorce in England and Wales, 1858-1957

C. T. E. QuENSEL. The Interrelations of Marital Status, Fertility, Family
Size and Intelligence Test Scores.

Wotr Scott. Fertility and Social Mobility Among Teachers.

B. BENJAMIN. . Inter-Generation Differences in Occupation.

Book Reviews.
List of Books and Publications Received.

Subscription Price per volume: {2. 2s. Od. (U.S. $6.75, post free).
Price per part: £1. Os. 0d., plus postage (U.S. $3.25, post free).

Published by the POPULATION INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE, at the LONDON SCHOOL OF
ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE, 15 HOUGHTON STREET, Lonpon, W.C.2.

 

106
