THE HAZARDS OF NUCLEAR RADIATION

Medical Research Council. The Hazards to Man of
Nuclear and Allied Radiations.*

interest to many readers of the REVIEW

who have no access to the original

publication. The sections relating to genetics
are therefore summarized below.

[inter important document will be of

Measurement of Radiation

The biological effects of radiation are
closely related to the dose or quantity of
radiation received. The dose of radiation
might be described as the energy which is
absorbed in the small mass of tissue upon
which the radiation impinges. After some
types of damage by radiation, repair processes take place, and the rate at which the
dose of radiation is given becomes an important factor in determining the abnormal
biological effect. The effect of a dose of
radiation spread over a long period may be
much smaller than that of a smaller amount
given in a Shorter time. On the other hand,
with some forms of biological damage,
including the production of gene mutations,
recovery does not seem to occur and the
damage depends on the total dose and is
independent of the time in which this dose
is given.

The international unit of dosage of radiation is the Roentgen, which is abbreviated
to “‘r’’. The intensity of radiation to. which
we are ordinarily exposed from our natural
surroundings is about o'r r per year. The
destructiveness of different types of radiation,
for example, Alpha and Beta particles,
Gamma rays, X-rays, may be expressed in
relation to that of the equivalent amount
in terms of energy of gamma rays.

Genetic Effects of Radiation
Knowledge of the genetic effects of radia:

* London, 1956. H.M.S.O. Cmd. 9780. Pp. vii-++
128. Price 5s.6d.

tion is very limited. Any conclusions must
be regarded as provisional. There is little
direct information about the genetic effects
of radiation in man, and reliance must be
placed on animal experiments. This experimental evidence is itself incomplete, but is
consistent for the organisms which it has
been possible to study, and it is reasonable
to suppose that man will follow the same
general pattern. But animal experiments
cannot be taken as providing a secure basis
for quantitative estimates concerning man.

Ionizing radiations may affect reproductive cells in three ways; the cells may die,
their chromosomes may be broken, or the
genes may be caused to mutate. The first |
always, and the second usually, will termi-—
nate the lineage of the cell affected. Animal
experiments show that chromosome fragmentation may _ occasionally produce repeated malformations or abortions in the
descendants, but this will only occur if
conception takes place within a few months
of irradiation.

The third and most important effect for
later generations, gene mutations, are nearly
always harmful. They are very much more
common than chromosome breakages. Gene
mutations induced by artifictal irradiation
are not novel mutations. Man has always
been exposed to some radiation, artificial
irradiation increases the rate but does not
change the type of mutation.

There is no known threshold for the
induction of gene mutations by radiation,
any additional exposure, however small,
may be expected to raise the mutation rate
if only by a minute amount. Again, no
exceptions are known to the rule that the
effect in inducing mutations is proportional
to the total dose of radiation received, and
independent of the rate or intervals at which
this dose is given. In making calculations
allowance must be made for the fact that it

159

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1956. 48, 3.
160

is the dose accumulated before the average
age of reproduction which is important.

Effect of Doubling the Mutation Rate

The effect of doubling, for one generation
alone, the mutation rate for a condition such
as achondroplasia, where the gene is dominant, would be to double the number of
affected children born to unaffected parents.
Such children are the majority since only
about one in five achondroplasiacs reproduce.
But within five or six generations the number
of achondroplasiacs would have returned to
normal. The effect of a permanent doubling
of the mutation rate would be to cause
the incidence of achondroplasia to rise to
near double the present level over three or
four generations.

With a sex-linked recessive gene such as
hemophilia, doubling of the mutation rate
for a single generation would lead to a 29
per cent increase in the next generation
and then a gradual fall. A permanent
doubling would lead to a go per cent increase
over five or six generations. With a recessive
trait such as phenyl pyruvic amentia a
doubling of the mutation rate for one generation would lead to only aI percent rise in
the next generation, a further small increase
over the second generation and a slow
return to the previous level. A permanent
doubling of the mutation rate would cause
a Slow rise of about I per cent per generation
and so about a 50 per cent rise over fifty
generations. To estimate the rate of effect
of permanent doubling of the mutation rate
on separate groups of diseases it is necessary
to determine what proportion of them are
due to single genes.

Mental Defect

About half of the instances of severe
mental defect are estimated to be due to
single genes, the majority recessive.

Mental Illness

The genetic background of the two common
types of psychosis, schizophrenia and manicdepressive psychosis, is uncertain. But

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

since genetic predisposition plays some part
it is to be expected that the number of cases
would slowly increase until the limiting
value of about twice the original number was
approached.

Blindness

About three-quarters of all blindness of
early onset can be attributed to hereditary
causes and about half of this to single genes.

Effect of Increased Mutation Rates on
Hereditary Traits showing continuous Variation about the Normal

Most of the variations between human
beings is not discontinuous in the sense that
the population may be divided into many
normal and a few pathological individuals;
it is continuous with imperceptible gradations over a wide range. The hereditary
portion of this variation is believed to be
due to the combined action of many genes
which supplement one another in producing
their effects. In theory the basic effect of an
increase in mutation would be to increase
the amount of variation, to raise the number
of extreme types at the expense of the
central types. The little information available suggests that only a small fraction of
the heritable variation seen is due to new
mutations. A permanent doubling of the
mutation rate would therefore only very
slowly lead to a doubling of the heritable
variation.

With intelligence, a quality showing continuous variation, the effect of a permanent
doubling of the mutation rate would lead
in the long run over hundreds of generations
to a three- to five-fold increase of the
numbers falling short of an I.Q. of 70, the
level which is conventionally taken to be
the minimum requirement for normal schooling. There would not necessarily be a
corresponding increase in the proportion
of highly intelligent, as experience with
experimental animals suggests that an
increase in variation produces a disproportionately large increase in the direction
_. THE HAZARDS OF NUCLEAR RADIATION

opposite to that which natural selection has
been pushing the character. In man natural
selection has presumably been operating
towards an increase in intelligence.

Observation on Human Populations
_exposed to Radiation

The Atomic Bomb Casualty Commission
in Japan followed the results of 80,000
pregnancies to women in Hiroshima and
Nagasaki in the years following the atomic
explosions. They found no evidence of any
genetic effect on the offspring of men and
women who had received high doses of
radiation when compared with controls.
The possible exception is that there were
changes in the sex ratio of the children born
to those who had been heavily irradiated.*
There were not many individuals who
survived high doses, and from the nature of
the evidence a doubling of the congenital
malformation rate and a 50 per cent rise in
stillbirth rate following exposure of one or
other parent to 200 r might have escaped
detection.

The Radiation ‘‘ Doubling Dose’’ for

Human Mutation Rates

In animals, spontaneous mutations are
not due solely to radiation and so it cannot
be assumed that an extra amount of radiation equal to that received naturally could
double the mutation rate. It may well be
that the amount of mutation due to radiation
‘and the amount due to other causes varies
from one gene to another. Natural radiation
over about thirty years, which is approximately the average age at which an indi
vidual reproduces, is about 3 r. The Japanese

data do not contradict a doubling dose as
low as 3 r but could more easily be accounted
for if the doubling dose is higher. Evidence
from insects and mice tentatively suggests

that from 2-20 per cent of human mutations

*At Copenhagen in August 1956 at the First International Congress of Human Genetics, Professor J. V.
Neel reported that information from further pregnancies did not confirm this change in the sex ratio.

. 161

are radiation induced, so that the doubling
dose for humans will lie between 15 and 150
r, perhaps between 30 and 80r. It is emphasised that if an individual receives such a
doubling dose there is little risk to his own
descendants. A fraction of a population
can, without significant risk to their progeny,
receive doses which would be serious if
applied to the whole population.

Sources of Background Radiation

The chief sources of natural radiation are:
cosmic radiation, amounting to about 0'028
r per annum to the gonads at sea level,
terrestrial radiation from radio-active elements in rocks varying according to local
geology, 0:034 r to the gonads per annum,
and internal radiation from the radio-active
elements in the body, 0°023 r to the gonads
per year. In sum these sources amount to
little short of o'r r per annum—that is,
3 r over thirty years.

Radiation from the Appurtenances of
Civilization
The average amount received to the
gonads from diagnostic X-rays is about
0-022 r per annum, about a fifth of that
received from natural sources. The amount
received from radiotherapy is considerably

‘less but cannot be assessed. Wearing a

luminous watch gives about o-o1 r to the
gonads and an average dose from this source
is O‘OOI r per annum: Television sets contribute on the average much less than
O'OOI r per annum. Occupation risk, including that for those working for the Atomic
Energy Authority, contributes an average of
2°5 r per annum to the individual man and
woman actually exposed, but an average
to the gonads of the whole population of
about 0-002 r per year.: In sum the population in this country receives about an extra
25 per cent radiation in addition to that
received from natural sources, the most
important contribution coming from diagnostic radiation.

The contribution of atomic and much
162. ee THE EUGENICS, REVIEW

more important the thermo-nuclear devices Other Changes from Thermo-nuclear
exploded hitherto to the gonads of people’
in this country is likely to be 0.001-0.002 r
in the next fifty years. Continuous explo- Apart from the genetic dangers the most
sions at the rate of those over the past few obvious risk to health is from the accumulayears would give an individual in this tion of radio-strontium in the bones. A
country only about an average of o‘oor r per continuation ‘of firing at the present level
annum. But an increase in the rate of explo- would lead to an accumulation of about.
sions of thermo-nuclear (hydrogen) bombs tooth of the estimated safe dose.

would increase this amount correspondingly. C. O. CARTER.

Explosions

IN THE OCTOBER 1956 NUMBER OF

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY

Edited by Thomas Park, University of Chicago
ANTIGENIC TRANSFORMATION AS ADAPTIVE RESPONSE OF PARAMECIUM
AURELIA TO PATULIN, RELATION TO CELL DIVISION.
By Mary L. Austin, DoROTHEA WIDMAYER, and Lota M. WALKER, Department of
Zodlogy and Physiology, Wellesley CoHege, Wellesley, Massachusetts

CHROMATOGRAPHIC DIFFERENCES BETWEEN MALES AND FEMALES IN
DROSOPHILA MELANOGASTER AND THE ROLE OF THE X AND Y CHROMDSOMES .

By ALLEN S. Fox, Department of Zodlogy, Michigan State University, East Lansing.
Michigan

MODIFICATIONS OF TYROSINASE ACTIVITY DURING THE EARLY DEVELOPMENT OF RANA PIPIENS EMBRYOS
By Richard N. Stearns and Lester Goldstein, Department of Physiology, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York

AUDIOGENIC CONVULSIONS IN MALE RATS BEFORE AND AFTER CASTRATION AND DURING REPLACEMENT THERAPY

By Witu1am Bevan and Racpu McC. Cuinn, Department of Psychology, Emory

University, Georgia

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY is published quarterly in January, April, July and October.
Subscription 75s. per volume plus postage 4s. Single copies 22s. 6d. plus postage 1s.

THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS, 5750 Ellis Avenue, CHICAGO

Agents in Great Britain: CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS, Bentley House, 200 Euston Road, London, N.W.I

 
