VICTOR H.

WALLACE

M.D.Melb., F.R.C.S.Edin.

The Eugenics Society of Victoria

(1936
UMEROUS ORGANIZATIONS WHICH
Ne at promoting human welfare have

been thrown up by democracy from time
to time. Some have had a brief existence, some
have become firmly established as permanent
institutions in our society, and some occupy a
borderline position which means that their
survival and their dissolution and subsequent
revival are determined by fluctuations in popular
interest and support. It would seem that eugenics
belongs to the last class.

Inauguration

In Melbourne, on October Sth 1936, a large
and representative meeting was held under the
chairmanship of Professor W. E. Agar, F.R.S.,
of the Biology Department, University of Melbourne. The prominent social workers who
convened the meeting hoped to form a racial
hygiene association which would undertake
activities on many fronts. The people who
attended the meeting were interested in various
aspects of education and social welfare, particularly in sex education, the prevention and
eradication of venereal disease, the formation of
family planning clinics and the dissemination of
knowledge concerning eugenics.

The several problems which it was proposed
to tackle were discussed briefly. It was pointed
out by several speakers that good work in some
of the fields mentioned was already being done.
Professor Agar, while admitting that it was
necessary to pay due attention to all the subjects
on the agenda, said that it was doubtful whether
it was advisable to combine in one organization
all the aims suggested by the convenors. He
emphasized the fact that education in eugenics
is a special subject by itself.

At a meeting in the Melbourne Town Hall on

1961)

October 29th 1936, The Eugenics Society of
Victoria was born. Professor W. E. Agar, a
distinguished authority on genetics, was elected
President. There were many willing workers. We
were full of enthusiasm and high hopes as the
membership increased. We organized public
lectures and distributed a folder which set out
our objectives. The first three paragraphs of this
are worth quoting, because they show the
manner of our approach to the public.

The Science of Eugenics has for its object the
maintenance or improvement of the quality of the
human race, so far as this depends upon innate
inherited factors. This will be achieved if the future
generations are produced mainly by persons likely
to transmit good qualities of mind and body. The
general aim of Eugenics Societies is therefore to
bring about a state of affairs where persons of
superior natural endowments shall have a higher,
or at least not lower, birth rate than persons of
inferior endowments; and to ensure that persons
with gross defects of mind or body, known to show
a tendency to be inherited, should be discouraged
or prevented from producing children.

The quality of a human being is compounded of
two factors—the potentialities of development of
mind and body present in the fertilized ovum from
which he arose, and the environment in which
those potentialities had to manifest themselves.
One of the first tasks of Eugenics is therefore the
study of the relative influence of heredity and
environment in determining the differences between human beings in regard to traits of personal
and social value. Any judgment on the relative
fitness of persons for parentage must be based on
such knowledge; for inferiority due merely to
unfavourable environment can be removed by
altering the environment. This is not the direct task
of a Eugenics Society, but of other bodies concerned with Public Welfare. The direct concern of
Eugenics is with the other ingredient of human
quality, the potentialities of development possessed
by the fertilized ovum, which are inherited directly

215

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1962, 53, 4.
THK EUGENICS REVIEW

from the parents, or through them from more
remote ancestors. :

Already there exists a great volume of knowledge on this matter which it will be one of the
tasks of the Eugenics Society to study and bring
before the public. This knowledge is, however,
only of value as a basis for action, and ultimately
the aim of Eugenics is to use this knowledge to
improve, or at least save from deterioration, the
innate inheritable quality of the race.

Early Activities

Typical titles of the public lectures given are
the following: The Aim and Scope of Eugenics,
The Principles of Heredity, Mental Deficiency
and Insanity, Birth Control and Eugenics, The
Eugenic Outlook for the Future, The Relative
Influence of Heredity and Environment, The
Social Problem Group, Sterilization of the Unfit,
The Psychological Clinic and Mental Deficiency,
Eugenics and the Future of the Australian
Population, The Prevention of Mental Disorder,
Social Efficiency and Levels of Intelligence, The
Production of Superior Races, and a great
variety of other subjects.

Wherever possible lantern slides were used to
illustrate the lectures. The speakers were usually
professors or senior lecturers from the University
of Melbourne, consultant psychiatrists or people
who had a special knowledge of anthropology
or other subjects associated in some way with
eugenics. The lectures were carefully prepared
and always provoked numerous questions. I was
Honorary Secretary of the society from 1936 to
1961. I regret now that I did not try to obtain
from each lecturer a copy of his notes or even an
article for publication. All I have which relates to
the substance of the lectures is an album of newspaper cuttings. Due notice of the lectures was
given to the editors of our daily newspapers
and what was said at the lectures was very
well reported.

Our Society published two informative pamphlets, which were widely distributed: Eugenics
and the Future of the Australian Population by
Professor W. E. Agar; and Voluntary Sterilization for Human Betterment by Mrs. Angela
Booth.

In 1939, when the Mental Hygiene Bill was
about to be introduced in the State Parliament
our Society requested that it include provision to
make sterilization legal when it was volunteered

216

by persons suffering from mental deficiency and
mental disorders due to hereditary causes. Our
request was refused by the Chief Secretary, who
stated that “the records of the Department of
Mental Hygiene did not contain a single instance
of anyperson having sought permission to undergo the treatment.” This reply might seem
effective, but to us it was just another example
of the urgent need for more education in
preventive medicine.

We were greatly encouraged in our work when

we received from the Eugenics Society (England)

a generous donation as well as a consignment of
books with which to found a library. We derived
inspiration from THE EUGENICS REVIEW which
was a major factor in the strengthening of our
Society, membership of which included receipt
of this journal. We felt that we were now firmly
established especially as we had, as members of
our Society, prominent judges, senior University
professors and other highly respected citizens.

Birth Control and Australian Opinion

A burst of publicity resulted from an offer by
one member of our Society to give £100 towards
the cost of establishing a birth control clinic in
one of the poorer suburbs of Melbourne.
Immediately the Roman Catholic Archbishop
made an emphatic public protest. He declared
that it was a blot on Australia that the population was not increasing more rapidly. Sir John
Harris said “As Minister for Health I heartily
disapprove this proposal. I am totally against
it.” One newspaper challenged us to define
clearly what we meant by “the unfit” and
“‘persons of inferior endowments.”” Who were
we that we should presume to be the judges? It
attacked the proposal to establish a birth control
clinic and stated that “the most urgent problem
that confronts the world to-day is not how to
prevent births, but how to prevent poverty.”

The stir created by the proposal must have
been news overseas. Before the tumult had
subsided we received from Dr. Marie Stopes a
liberal donation towards the cost of establishing
the clinic.

Numerous letters were written to the editors
of newspapers. Most of them condemned the
proposal to establish a clinic. To understand this
reaction it is necessary to realize that Australia
THE EUGENICS SOCIETY OF VICTORIA

is the one remaining continent which is definitely
under-populated. It is stated that we need a
greatly increased population for the successful
defence of Australia, for the development of our
various industries, primary, secondary and tertiary, for the acceleration of our cultural progress
and to promote our general advancement and
thus increase our influence for peace and goodwill in the world. Of course, there are some
people who maintain that these aims will not be
achieved by a mere increase in numbers, but that
quality is more important than quantity. Nevertheless, over a long period of time, successive
Australian governments have made great efforts
to attract to this country immigrants from Great
Britain and the continent of Europe. “‘Populate
or perish” is the political slogan. Any activity
which would cause a diminution of the natural
rate of increase is therefore publicly condemned.
The birth control clinic was not established, not
because we were intimidated in any way by
public protests, but because instruction in contraception was not one of the objectives of our
Society. It would not have been practicable to
run a public clinic at which such instruction
would be confined to “eugenic’’ cases only.

Positive and Negative Eugenics

So many people in Australia take an interest in
the breeding of sheep, horses and other domesticated animals that they quite naturally think of
improving the quality of the human species.
Most people readily agree with the principle that
it is desirable that future generations should be
produced by persons likely to transmit good
qualities of mind and body. Difficulties arise
when the methods of accomplishing this objective are discussed. In our public lectures we had
little trouble over negative eugenics, the prevention of the birth of undesirable progeny such
as mentally defective children who become a
burden on the State. We found it more difficult
to outline a social policy which would promote
positive eugenics. It was not easy to convince
people that it should be possible to increase
greatly the proportion of offspring who will have
desirable qualities of mind and body. “You
cannot bribe people of superior mental endowment into having more children because so many
complex social factors are involved,” we were

told. However, we were glad to meet with active
opposition, which is better than apathy because
it stimulates frank discussion, and this serves the
cause of truth.

The Second World War and its Aftermath

The Eugenics Society of Victoria was full of
vitality until the start of the second world war.
The links between Australia and Great Britain are
very strong. When the Mother Country is at war
we are at war. People could not be bothered with
what they regarded as academic questions concerning the future improvement of the race.
They became deeply concerned about defending the British way of life. They
thought of immediate threats to survival
and not of future possibilities of racial deterioration. Attendance at public lectures dropped off
very greatly. The impact of the war affected our
Society to an increasing degree, and we decided
not to hold any more public lectures.

Despite the activity of German submarines
during the war every issue of THE EUGENICS
REVIEW reached us safely. As time went by the
REVIEW became the most important factor in the
life of our little Society. Spare copies were sent to
the Biology School of the University of Melbourne, where they were distributed among the
lecturers.

At the Annual General Meeting of our
Society, held in 1947, Dr. K. S. Cunningham,
Director of the Australian Council of Educational Research, was elected President. This
resulted in many new contacts being made, but
we did not organize any more public lectures.
We thought it would be a good plan to work
through organizations which were already well
established, rather than rent a hall and try to
attract an audience ourselves.

The Importance of Youth

Any Eugenics Society should set out to appeal
to youth, to attain its objectives by teaching the
youth of the nation, and to have as many young
members as possible. When our organization
was formed we did not have sufficient foresight
to concentrate on youth. Looking back over past
years one realizes that a Eugenics Society should
be something more than just another learned
society.

In the State of Victoria Medical Officers give

217
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

lectures in the School Teachers’ Colleges. The
syllabus of lectures shows that there are opportunities for teaching the principles of eugenics to
young people. Pre-Engagement Counselling,
Preparation for Parenthood and Marriage
Counselling are included in the list. If something
of what the teachers are taught gets through to
the senior boys and girls, then definite progress
would be made in a field where a knowledge of
eugenics would be most effective.

If we had our time over again we would
probably explore diligently all the possibilities of
imparting to young people a knowledge of
eugenics. Biology is taught in many schools and
colleges. What a wonderful opportunity to teach
the older boys and girls the principles of heredity
and their practical application for the purpose
of improving the inborn qualities of the race!

Conclusions and Results

It is difficult to assess the exact influence of any
particular group on the life of a community.
The Eugenics Society of Victoria did have an
impact upon public opinion. In certain respects
we were pioneers in this country and the subjects
which we presented to the public stimulated discussion and aroused controversy. We helped to
prepare the way for other groups which were
formed subsequently.

During recent years public lectures on human
reproduction have been given. Marriage counselling has become firmly established and is now
assisted by the Commonwealth Government. A
family planning clinic has been opened unobtrusively. The climate of public opinion has changed
and attitudes to certain social policies are not as
rigid as formerly. The pioneers played a definite
part in winning this freedom and in bringing
about this enlightenment.

As we did not wish to make our Society exclusive we kept our annual subscription low. It
remained at ten shillings from the day it was
formed until it was finally dissolved twenty-five
years later. The circular relating to “increase of
subscription,” sent out to all members of The

218

Eugenics Society (England) in August 1960
meant that, if we were to continue, our new
annual subscription would have to be £2. 12. 6,
Australian currency. We were later invited by the
General Secretary “to join the Society here as
individuals.” It was obvious that the Eugenics
Society of Victoria would not have a separate
existence much longer, especially with our
reduced membership.

As it was a matter which concerned every
member a postal vote concerning our future was
taken early in 1961, after an explanatory letter
had been sent out. No decision was made until a
reply had been received from every member.
There were many declarations of regret and the
hope was expressed that our Society might be
rejuvenated. Finally, however, it was decided to
donate what money we had (equivalent to £145
sterling) to The Eugenics Society (England)
because of the most generous help they gave us
when we were very young, because our subscription of ten shillings never did pay for THE
EUGENICS REVIEW which we received for so many
years, and because we were certain that the
money would be spent in accordance with the
aims and objects of our own Society. It was
decided to donate our collection of books to
Monash University, a new centre of learning
which is now building up its own library.

But that is not the end of the story. Imagine
our surprise and our feelings of gratitude when
we were informed by Dr. G. C. L. Bertram, the
General Secretary in the United Kingdom, that
the Finance Committee had decided that the
money which we sent as a donation would be
regarded as being held on trust. We have been
assured that, in the event of a successor society
being formed in Australia, there is a sum of
money in England available to be drawn upon
as a help in its early growth. That is an excellent
arrangement, and is deeply appreciated by us. I
would like to take this opportunity of letting
posterity know that financial help and kindly
guidance awaits some future Eugenics Society of
Australia.
