A NEW MOVEMENT IN FRANCE
By C. P. BLACKER, M.A., M.D.

birth control has been proscribed in
France since 1920. But in the last
eighteen months a movement led by an active
and eloquent lady doctor has been gaining

Pr understandable demographic reasons

momentum. Dr. Marie-Andrée Weill-Hallé

has formed an association auspiciously
called La Maternté Heureuse whose object
it is to get rescinded two articles (quoted
below) of a law passed in 1920. Her aims
deserve to be understood in this country.

France’s Demographic Position

France’s demographic history and background, which differ in important ways from
our own, must be taken into account in
assessing the new movement. France's
birth rate began to decline about a hundred
years before that of other Western countries.
In 1650 France contained nearly a fifth of
the population of Europe; in 1930 about a
twelfth. In 1800 France’s population was
second only to that of Russia; but in 1850
she was overtaken by Germany, in 1880 by
Austria-Hungary, in 1900 by the United
Kingdom and in 1930 by Italy. M. J.
Bourgeois-Pichat, a distinguished French
demographer, has shown that if France’s
fertility had held its 1770 level till 1880,
when our own birth rate began to decline,

her population would then have numbered ©

88 instead of 38 million.

During the later inter-war years France's
birth rate fell below her death rate so that,
immigration apart, her population was
declining. This seemingly disastrous movement activated long-standing forebodings.
These feelings were shared in attenuated

form by many in this country who saw in|

current French experience a forewarning
of what was in store for us. Our own misgivings, which were largely responsible for
the appointment in 1944 of our Royal

Commission on Population, were not effectively dissipated until the publication in
1949 of that Commission’s highly reassuring
forecasts. Adequate fertility rates in the
last seven years have still further assuaged
the misgivings of twenty years ago.

A Conviction Shaken "

In 1948 the members of our Royal Commission held consultations with French
demographers who then firmly believed that,
in their bearings on population policies,
humanitarian considerations were at variance with demographic necessities. In the
words of a memorandum of France’s Haut.
Comité de la Population (1946):

Experience has shown that all birth control
propaganda, in a circumscribed population,
carries with it a fall in natality much more rapid
than the recovery which can be expected from
a positive population policy.... The concern
for humanity which inspires it (the birth control
movement) must not make us forget vital
necessities, for the risk is not negligible of
seeing humanity disappear through an excess of
humanitarianism.

This pessimistic assessment—that widening familiarisation with birth control was
ineluctably followed by depopulation—has
scarcely been borne out by the events of the
last twelve years. In most Western countries,
what could be called contraceptive sophistication has spread; young people of to-day
are less inhibited and better informed than
their counterparts twenty years ago. Nevertheless birth rates have risen: Our own
position, discussed by Mr. Peter Cox in a
recent issue,* is now better (in the sense that
numbers are larger) than the Royal Commission on Population thought probable.
In the United States, where contraceptive

* Demographic Developments in Great Britain since
the Royal Commission on Population. EUGENICS
REviEw. April, 1955.

213

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January, 1957. 48, 4
214

sophistication is almost certainly more widespread than before the war, the annual rate

of increase during the decade 1940-50 (1-36.

per cent) was nearly double that of the
decade 1930-40 (0-70 per cent); the annual
rate of increase has been sustained since 1950
and the population of the United States is
now thought to be increasing faster than
that of India. But events in France naturally
have most weight with French demographers.
It cannot be said of France, as it can be
confidently .said of the United Kingdom
and. the U.S.A., that there has been an
increase in contraceptive sophistication in
the last twenty years. Nevertheless France’s
post-war upsurge of births (responsive to a
costly national programme of allowances
and other family benefits) has done something to mitigate, though not to remove, prewar misgivings. France’s annual rate of
increase of population for the five years
before the 1936 census was 0-03 per cent;

for the ten years before the 1946 census,

there was an annual decrease of 0°34 per
cent; while for the eight years before the
1954 census, the annual rate of increase was
0-66 per cent. In 1954, the rate of natural
increase (migration excluded) was, in France,
0°68 which was appreciably higher than
that of the United Kingdom (0°39 per cent).
The results of an ambitious population
policy have thus been satisfactory so far.
But can they be counted upon to persist?

Present Standpoint of the I.N.E.D.
The Institut National d’Etudes Demographiques (I.N.E.D.) is a state-sponsored
organisation with an impressive list of
publications to its credit, among them a
valuable book on eugenics written by Dr.
Jean Sutter.* During the last eleven years, the
Institute has produced a quarterly journal,
Population, to which attention has been
frequently drawn in this column. In the
April-June issue of last year (1956) prominence was given to an important article
entitled La Limitation des Natssances en
France which, we are told, has been jointly
produced on behalf of the Institute by
several authors who remain anonymous.

* TL’ Eugenique : Problémes—Methodes—Résultats. 1950.
Reviewed in this Journal, October 1950.

psychological).

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

But the capable hand of M. Alfred Sauvy,
the distinguished director of the I.N.E.D.,

-1s discernible.

Though the I.N.E.D. is keenly interested
in welfare, its main concern is. with
demography. Hence its statement pays
more attention to demographic issues
than to those humanitarian considerations
which weigh so heavily with would-be
revisionists of the law of 1920. But within
the demographer’s impersonal framework,
the discussion is balanced. A sincere effort
has obviously been made to present fairly
and impartially the relevant facts (mostly
numerical) and factors (many intangible and
A prefatory note declares
that the I.N.E.D. advances no doctrine.
“Its collaborators may have divergent if
not opposed ideas on religious and moral
questions and therefore on the propriety of
such or such legislation ’’; hence the article
does not aim at imposing an opinion on
the reader but seeks rather to enable him to
make up his own mind on the most solid
attainable basis of facts.

Among the considerations set out by the
I.N.E.D. are the following:

The recent upsurge of births is acknowledged as an event without which the present |
controversy would not have arisen. This is
understandable for while doctrinal positions
do not change, demographic events do. New
political orientations have a bearing: on the
one hand conservative groups, hitherto
‘“anti-malthusian ’’ (opposed to birth control) have in recent years been concerned
with the high costs of family services;
socialist groups on the other hand have taken
cognisance of recent changes of position
towards birth control in China and towards
abortion in the U.S.S.R. Formal depositions
have, moreover, been made that the law
should be changed by abrogating articles 3
and 4 of the law of July 31st, 1920 (see
below). :

The proposed abrogations, however, would

make fewer additions than might be supposed

to the contraceptive appliances now available. The main change, says the I.N.E.D.,
would be that the diaphragm would become
obtainable. There is nothing now to stop
A NEW MOVEMENT IN FRANCE

people using the rhythm method, coitus
interruptus or the douche (more familiar to
French than to English women); or what
are called ‘‘dual purpose’’ methods
(produits a double fin), which can be employed both with a contraceptive and a
prophylactic intention (prevention of
venereal diseases). Here are included antiseptics, gels, foaming and lubricating tablets,
etc. (But the article does not draw attention
at this point of its discussion to the fact that
Article 4 (see below) of the law of 1920,
which the reformers wish to abrogate, makes
it a punishable offence to designate, on a
label or by other means, the fact that such a
dual-purpose preparation is possessed of
contraceptive properties; and for some
reason the sheath, the most effective of
produits a double fin, is not mentioned in this
connection.)

Abortions would not be reduced as much
aS some people expect by the proposed
reform. Swedish experiences, presented by
Dr. Axel Westman to the Population Conference held in Tokyo during October 1955,
are here quoted.

Nor would illegitimate births be much
reduced. A table is given showing illegitimacy rates per hundred births in nine
western European countries; in some of
these countries birth control practices are
discouraged. and in others not. The rates
range from 16-5 in Austria (which has the
lowest birth rate of the nine) to 1-4 in the
Netherlands. The U.K.’s rate is 48,
France’s is 6°7 and that of Sweden, where
birth control is widely practised, is 9°9. For
the years’ 1801-50, moreover, Sweden’s
illegitimacy rate was 7-0 per hundred births;
but for the corresponding years of the
twentieth century (1901-50), when contraceptive practices were more prevalent,
the illegitimacy rate was 13°2—nearly
double the figure for the earlier period. If,
say the authors, we are justified in supposing
that illegitimate births are unwanted, these
figures do not suggest that contraceptive
sophistication reduces the incidence of
‘unwanted pregnancies.

Reasons are further given for doubting

whether the practice of abortion in France.

' causes many deaths or much sterility.

' modified the data ’’ about deaths.

215
But
“the use of antibiotics has profoundly
Nothing
is said about abortion as a cause of later
invalidism or ill-health.

The change in France's fertility pattern
was sudden and there is little doubt that it
was largely the outcome of the allowances
and other benefits conferred by the Code
de la Famille (July 1939). “‘ Our country has
experienced a sort of sudden mutation whose
date accords well with the passing of the
legislation of 1939.’’ But fertility is by no
means “‘ exuberant ’’; a birth rate of 18-8
per thousand in 1955 provides a margin of
about 10 per cent in excess of the level
needed for replacement.

The change having been sudden, the new
trend is still precariously based. The
I.N.E.D. stresses the importance of an
intangible psychological factor—public
opinion. The attitude towards the mother of
a large family has changed since 1939.
‘Formerly quipped, she has often since
been envied ”’; the priorities she now enjoys
have played their part in the change for the
better in her status. The proposed abrogations might have unfavourable repercussions
in the sphere of psychology and morale.
“ Legislative intervention of a kind opposed
to the current trend could be interpreted as
an implicit disavowal of these trends (which
favour the family) and might be followed,
sooner or later, by a calling of the latter into
question.”’ France is sensitised by her long
history of declining fertility; hence there is
a risk that the psychological or indirect
effects (in undermining morale) of the
proposed legislation might outweigh its
direct effects (in promoting maternal wellbeing).

Such legislation could also produce adverse
qualitative effects by widening the span of
differential fertility: contraceptive facilities,
which would be largely ignored by illendowed parents of numerous children,
would be sought by responsible parents. The
latter “‘ could more easily prevent the birth
of a fourth, a third, or even a second child ”’
than the former could prevent that of the
seventh child.
216

. To prevent the new legislation from
producing demoralisation by seeming to
counteract the trend of family legislation
since 1939, and also to prevent it from
lowering the fertility of better endowed
families, a special effort would at the same
time be needed to improve the education,
housing and general conditions of badly
situated families.

The central conclusion reached by the
I.N.E.D. is that caution is needed. The
available data while not precise enough to
point to a solution, nevertheless suggest a
rule of conduct: “Since our position is
unprecedented: and experimental, and since
another lapse in natality would probably
be irreversible (or very costly to reverse),
we would be wise to proceed step by step
and to feel our way towards Tealising the
diverse aims that confront us.’

The authors of the I.N.E. D. s report also
convey the impression that they are more
afraid of the “indirect’’ effects of an
injudicious or unrestrained propaganda, and
of possible excesses in the advertisement of
contraceptive materials, than of the “ direct ”’
effect on fertility of contraceptive practices.

A French Opinion-Survey
In the most recent number of Population,
the journal above-mentioned, are published
the findings of an inquiry into public
opinion in France about birth control.* One
of the two authors, M. Raul Samuel, we are
told, is a professor in the University of Chile.
The inquiry was prompted and is sponsored
by the I.N.E.D., whose advocacy of caution

in respect of. abrogating the law of 1920 is

endorsed by the two authors. The results,
not all of which are in entire accordance
with expectation, are interesting. They show
how differences of opinion on the proposed
abrogation follow scholastic, political, reli
gious, occupational and other cleavages and

-* Une Enquete sur l’Opinion Publique a l’Egard de
la Limitation des Naissances, by Alain Girard and
Raul Samuel. 1956.
‘number, .

Population, July-September

THE EUGENICS REVIEW ~

are also. associated with age and size of
family.

The inquiry is based on the replies, given
between May 2oth and June 30th, 1956 (less
than six weeks) by 2,432 men and women
aged twenty and over, distributed throughout France, to a large team of 221 investigators. The report was published in November. The task was thus put through with
what must be nearly record speed for peace
time. .Six months only elapsed between the
beginning of the investigation in May and
the publication of the results in November.
The investigators were so numerous that
each could actomplish his small task in a
short time. The I.N.E.D. can clearly work
quickly when it wishes. Background information was collected about age, marital
status, number of children, occupation,
religion and political affiliation. Questions

_asked on these topics were:

Do you belong to a religion? If yes, which? If
yes, would you consider yourself as practising,
not practising, or indifferent? If a general
election were held tomorrow, for which party
would you vote?

We are told that the question about
politics evoked more reticence than those
about religion. These “‘ background questions ’’ were supplemented by fifteen further
questions of which the first five were concerned with general knowledge. One of these
deserves notice. It asks: “‘ Have you ever

heard birth control mentioned?” (Avez-vous

entendu parler de la limitation des naissances?) More respondents replied No (49
per cent) than Yes (44 per cent). An analysis
of the affirmative responses shows that
newspapers, reviews and books were included
as possible sources of information.

These figures could engender misgivings
about the design and conduct of the inquiry.
How did the 221 investigators interpret this
somewhat indefinite question? Was it explained in the same way by all? And were
the respondents entirely truthful in’ their
replies? The authors seem to have had
doubts, for they draw attention to the misfit
between what is professed and what is ~

practised (le décalage entre le réalité et les
A NEW MOVEMENT IN FRANCE

déclarations du public concernant la limitation des natssances). French people, they
go on to say, have practised birth control for
150 years. The reader may wonder how far
this “‘décalage.”’ applies to the other
questions on the same topic.

In the remaining ten questions, opinions
were sought on the following subjects:
family and other allowances (allocations
familiales: are they approved, approved with
reservations, or not approved?); the present
French birth rate (is it too high, what it
ought to be, or too low?) ; sexual education in
school (a good or bad innovation?) ; marriage
guidance services (should these exist in
France?); birth control clinics (should these
be established in France?); doctors at child
welfare and maternity centres (should these
be allowed to give advice on birth control?) ;
the proposed abrogation of sections 3 and 4
‘of the law of 1920 (is the abrogation, whose
effect would be to widen accessibility to
birth control knowledge, approved or disapproved?) ; and the effects on the birth rate
of a generalised knowledge of contraception
(would there be no change, a slight fall, or a
pronounced fall?).

These are on the whole fair and nontendentious questions, though the last could
scarcely fail to provide ammunition for
opponents of the projected legal reform. It
might, perhaps, have been balanced by
another question such as the following:

Seeing that Britain and the U.S.A. have,
since the war, maintained fertility at a level
sufficient for replacement despite the wide
accessibility in those countries of facilities for
limiting births, do you regard it as possible that,
with similar facilities for limiting births as
widely available, and with present family
allocations maintained or if needed increased,
natality in France could similarly be maintained
at replacement level?

The presentation of the figures can be
criticised on the grounds that in the many
tables percentages only are shown; in but
two tables are the figures given on which
the percentages are based. One suspects
that, in a breakdown by political parties,
of which nine are recognised, some of the
groups must be small. We are given no clue
as to how small. The first table, however,

ar7

gives figures for the 2,432 respondents
according to distributions by sex, age,
residence, region and profession. The per-.

centages accord well with figures for France

as a whole, which suggests that much care
was given to the sampling problem. The
following are the main findings: :
Family allocations are perhaps not as
widely favoured as might have been expected.
A little over half (54 per cent) approve; but
another 34 per cent approve with reservations. Among these reservations are that
allocations may give rise to abuses such as
idleness, alcoholism, waste and irresponsible
breeding (‘“‘lapinisme’’). Some 17 per cent
of respondents mention these abuses, but
the percentages in the two relevant tables
do not quite tally. Ten per cent of the
respondents disapproved of the allocations.
The question on the birth rate elicited the
somewhat surprising result that 37 per cent
of the sample opined that the French birth
rate was too high. Opinion on this topic
varied with political party, the Poujadists
being those who most widely held this view
(48 per cent). Only 9 per cent of the sample

thought that fertility should be higher. The

authors comment on a change of opinion
since 1947 when, instead of 9 per cent, a
majority wished to see fetility higher. The
factors which the authors hold responsible
for the prevalence to-day of the belief that
the current birth rate is too high were “a
Malthusian outlook on economic affairs,
fear of strikes and of unemployment.”’ This
view is more widely held by workmen
(owvriers) than by other occupational groups
covered by the sample.

Sexual education in schools is approved
by a majority (57 per cent); 31 per cent.
disapproved and 12 per cent expressed no
opinion. Marriage guidance services are
supported by a majority—48 per cent in
favour against 33 per cent opposing. All
religious and political groups covered by the
sample agree in having majorities in favour
of marriage guidance. :

The establishment of birth control clinics
in France receives less support than might
perhaps have been expected. A bare over-all
majority is in favour: 45 per cent approve,
218
43 per cent disapprove. But among women
aged 20-49, who are separately tabulated,
the proposal finds more favour; 52 per cent
approve and 38 per cent oppose. There is

much variation among adherents of the nine >

political parties: communists are the best
disposed group (68 per cent approve, Ig per
cent oppose), and socialists run second.
The M.R.P. are in strongest opposition with
corresponding figures of 24 and 65 per cent. ©

That doctors in maternity and child:

welfare centres should be allowed to give
advice on birth control commends itself
more than does the establishment of special
clinics. Fifty-five per cent approve, 35 per
cent oppose; but more than double the
women aged 20-49 approve than oppose.
With respect to the abrogation of the
restrictive articles of the law of 1920—the
objective of Mme. Weil-Hallé and her
association—there is no preponderance of
opinion either way. The policy of status quo
and the policy of abrogation are each supported by 43 per cent of the sample. But
again women aged 20—49 aré more favourably
disposed to reform. Forty-nine per cent
favour abrogation and 38 per cent oppose it.
The opinions of party groups are divided
on the same general lines as over the issues
of special clinics and advice by doctors.
Among communists there: are more than
three times more supporters*than opponents
of abrogation; among the M.R.P. more than
three times as many opponents as supporters.
The last question deals with the effects of
the ‘proposed abrogation on France’s future
birth rate. A large majority (78 per cent)
opined that the rate would be lowered; 13
per cent only thought that no effect would
ensue. The authors of the report consider
that this finding has central importance.
Two other findings are noteworthy. The
first is not surprising; the second perhaps is.
Opposition to reform increases steadily with
age. The younger the respondents, the more
favourable they are to the provision of
knowledge and facilities and to Mme. WeillHallé’s projected reform. Half the women
of 20-34 suppost her compared to a quarter
of those aged 65 and over. The force of
tradition is hereby illustrated. .

_ THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The second and perhaps surprising finding
is that opposition to the reform increases with
the size of the family. It might have been
supposed that the degradation and poverty
often entailed by numerous children would
have disposed the parents to welcome the
reform of a law which penalised the practice
of birth control. But not so. Among those
respondents (married or widowed) who were
childless the attitude to reform was favourable in 50 per cent and unfavourable in 38
per cent; but among parents of four or more
children 33 per cent supported the reform
and 55 per cent opposed it. A partial explanation of this anomaly may be in terms of age;
the more numerous the children, the older
the parents are likely to be; and age is
associated with a distaste for reform. Another
possible explanation may be that old people
who have completed their reproductive
lives are grateful for the support they receive
from numerous:-children.

The finding on which the authors lay
most stress is the prevalence of the view that
abrogation of the law would be followed by
a lowering of the birth rate. They conclude
their report as follows:

The population being persuaded that the
publicity favouring the limitation of births and
the newly acquired institutional character of the
movement favouring limitation will have a
negative influence on natality, its attitude
towards fertility runs the risk of being changed
by these measures because of the psychological
reversal which must ensue.

If this is the major lesson to be learned from
this inquiry, it confirms the standpoint adopted
by the I.N.E.D. in the preceding number of
Population. Prudence must be recommended
to those responsible for action. They should,
in any case, have a clear idea of the final
objective they are pursuing in the sphere of
political demography.

The I.N.E.D. in 1956 compared with the
Haut Comité in 1946

Thus the position taken by the I.N.E.D.
has been conveniently fortified by the results
of its swiftly conducted inquiry. This
position, though cautious, differs from that
assumed by the Haut Comité in 1946. Birth
control, declared the Haut Comité, would, if
A NEW MOVEMENT IN FRANCE


widely practised in any country, be unavoidably followed by depopulation. The lotus
(of planned parenthood) could, they said,
indubitably mitigate suffering; nevertheless
it was invariably lethal.

This fatal outcome, the I.N.E.D. now
recognises, is not inevitable. Other countries
have eaten the lotus and have not perished;
indeed some almost seem to have benefited. France’s present position nevertheless
remains highly precarious. After a uniquely
prolonged history of declining fertility, she
has in peace time been confronted, as has
no other country in like circumstances, with
an actually declining population. But by
bold and costly expedients her fertility has
recently been hoisted to a level 10 per cent
above replacement. Can France’s economy,
like Atlas sustaining the heavens on his
shoulders, continue to bear the strain? Like
a patient making a suspiciously rapid
convalescence, the birth rate is now being
nervously watched. The family doctor and
the specialist (the politician and the demographer), the one equipped with injections of
strychnine, the other ready with expert
advice, are alert and standing by.

No risks, both say, should yet be taken.
The patient is not yet out of the wood. He
must learn to walk before he can run and,
above all, he should be protected from
sudden shocks. What is more, says the
anxious family doctor, we cannot yet be
entirely sure that the patient can continue
to pay for the very expensive treatment
which has suddenly galvanized him back to
life; and in any case the lotus, whose
physiological effects are not wholly predictable and whose virtues can be most injudiciously advertised, may prove a damaging
antidote to the stimulating treatment from
which he is now benefiting. The “ secondary ’’ psychological effects on the patient of
eating the lotus can, moreover, be more
demoralising, and are more to be feared, than
its ‘“ primary ”’ physical effects.

The Law of July 31st, 1920

_ This law, we are told, was hastily passed,
almost without discussion, during the troubled

219

aftermath of the first world war. It has:
seven articles. of which the first two are
concerned with the practice of abortion.
Articles 3 and 4, here relevant and given
below; are the ones which Mme. Weill-Hallé’s
association 1s seeking to abrogate.

Article 3. He will be punished by one
month to six months’ imprisonment and
by a fine of 1,000 to 5,000 francs who, with
the aim of anti-conceptionist propaganda,
will have, by any of the methods specified
in articles I and 2,* described or divulged, or
offered to reveal, procedures appropriate for
preventing pregnancy, or, further (offered)
to facilitate the employment of these procedures. The same punishment will be
applicable to anyone who, by any of the
means set out in article 23 of the law of
July 29th, 1881, will have yielded to propa
‘ganda against conception or against child
birth.

Article 4. By the same sanctions will be
punished infractions of articles 32 and 36
of the law of 21st Germinal, year XI, whenever secret remedies are designated, by
labels notices or any other means, as
possessing specific properties preventive of
pregnancy, even when the claims on behalf
of these properties are mendacious.

La Maternite Heureuse

The object of the association which bears
the above title is to abrogate the two articles
above set out. In the first of what is promised
to be a series of bulletins, published during
September 1956, Mme. Weill-Hallé, the
president of the association, declares her
position. Something, someone, she says,

* Article I is concerned with propaganda (in favour
of abortion); article 2 with the traffic in abortifacient
drugs and appliances. The following methods of
propaganda about abortion are made punishable in
article 1: public discourses; the sale, offer of sale
(public or private), exhibition, postering (affichage),
distribution to people’s homes or through the post or
through agents concerned with distribution and
transport, of books, writings, printings, announcements, posters, drawings, pictures or diagrams;
publicity given in the premises of doctors or selfstyled doctors.

Article 2 makes punishable the sale and distribution,
or responsibility for the sale and distribution, of
abortifacient objects or of objects purporting to be
abortifacients.
220

has been left out of the controversies in
which churchmen and demographers have so
vigorously participated—the woman. French
women, she says, are to-day confronted by
dilemmas. One of these is created by the
new responsibilities now being undertaken
on the plane of the family and through
women’s participation in the country’s social
life. Another is that acknowledged but
arbitarily dismissed by the Haut Comité in
1946—which should come first, Nation or
Family? But this, we are assured, is a false
dilemma, an artefact. If women are to play
a full part in social life, their new responsibilities entail the wife’s liberty to regulate
her conceptions—“‘a liberty on which depends
a large part of her equilibrium and dignity

and which conditions in similar degree the.

dignity and harmony of the home.” Attempts

to raise the birth rate by suppression have

failed. France’s savage legislation against
abortion has been a noteworthy failure.
Abortion, the volume of which in France it is
useless to discuss, is increasingly rarely
followed by death or invalidism. “ Happily
for the health of women and for the demographic future of the country, many abortions have no histories.” Nevertheless the
results are serious. ‘‘ Abortion, even if
desired by the woman, constitutes a profound
physical and moral frustration of her whole
being which can have grave after-effects.”
It is deplorable that. “‘ clandestine abortion
remains, at the risk and peril of women, as
the only safety valve which enables them to
avoid the birth of an unwanted child.”

Women, the bulletin affirms, will, if
treated as responsible beings, rise to their
responsibilities. The recent increase in
fertility is welcomed. “‘ For good Frenchmen
the question does not arise of wanting to
reduce a natality which has been so much
desired.’”’ Predictions about future movements in fertility are notoriously precarious.
M. Sauvy has reminded us of how the
twentieth century is surfeited with mistaken
previsions about natality. ‘‘ The factors now
operative are so numerous and so complex
that our best demographers are swimming
in open hypothesis (nagent en pleine
hypothese).”’

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

What, then, Mme. Weill-Hallé is essentially
expressing is a protest on behalf of
French women at being callously regarded
and irresponsibly treated by laws affecting
the intimacies of family life. Women are
not abusing the responsibilities now being:
extended to them in other walks of social
life; they will not doso here. A false dilemma
is being buttressed by a false assessment of
women. If liberated from the repressive and
outmoded articles of the 1920 law, they will
prove the baselessness of the demographer’s
misgivings.

The booklet further includes a_ useful
account of how the movement for reform has,
in a short time, gained momentum. It began
with a law suit in March 1955. There followed
a crescendo of discussion in the Press wherein
many newspapers and journals joined. And
in 1956 three propositions de lot have been
deposed by sixteen deputies. All these call
for the abrogation of the above-quoted
articles.

It would be interesting to know what are
the predominant reactions of the I.N.E.D.
to this proposal. Would the suggested
abrogation be regarded as too: big a jump?
Would it be likely to let loose the sort of
propaganda of which many demographers
are particularly afraid? It is possible that
M. Sauvy would prefer a more cautious
approach, such for example as the authorisation of doctors in maternity and child
welfare centres to give advice according to
their discretion. There was a 20 per cent
majority in favour of this proposal among
the respondents to the I.N.E.D.’s questionnaire; and the risks of irresponsible publicity
through advertisements and propaganda
would be less than with the more drastic
measure of abrogation.

A Relevant Inquiry

Mme. Weill-Hallé favours research, An
inquiry which, rather surprisingly, has not
been pursued as far as it deserves is the
relation between the mental health of
children and the size of their sibships. The
only child is apt to be spoiled and may
suffer later from this; the numerous children,
A NEW MOVEMENT IN FRANCE

many misconceived and unwanted, of
irresponsible parents are apt to be neglected
and soured. From the child’s point of view,
what is the best sibship size? The records
of pediatricians and child guidance clinics
might throw light on the matter.

Common sense suggests that, provided
the children are planned, wanted, welcomed
and properly cared for, the larger the sibship
the better for the child’s character and
mental health. In a large and well-knit
family, a child is taught to take its place.
For but a short time it is the centre of
attention, from which precarious position it
is displaced by the next child. It learns
early that others besides itself have claims;
and the edges of selfishness are early worn
down.

If it could be clearly shown that a child
benefits in mental health and character by
having two or three brothers and sisters,
a powerful argument would be placed in the
hands of those who fear depopulation—an
argument which carries much more weight
with parents than do the impersonal exhortations of demographers about maintaining
national levels of fertility. Economic considerations of a prudential character are
to-day mainly responsible for keeping down
the number of planned pregnancies. How
effective a counterweight to these prudential
considerations could we make out of the
argument that the first child should, in its
own psychological interests, be provided
with two or three sibs? Philoprogenitiveness
is no less powerful a motive than prudence.
Fortified by mora] encouragement, enlightened by a judicious publicity, and buttressed
by appropriate material aids, more could be

made of this sentiment, to the advantage of

both the individual and the country, than

221

has been done hitherto. From the standpoint
of countries placed in the low fluctuating
stage of the population cycle, where misgivings exist about the possibilities of
depopulation, this ‘ pediatric argument ”’
for a family-size of over two has a double
merit. Not only could it allay fears of a
quantitative decline below a desired level; it
could also assuage misgivings about quality.
These apprehensions are advanced by
conservative French demographers who
oppose the projected reforms. As mentioned
above, these contend that the best elements
in any population will be first influenced, and
the worst elements last influenced, by a
propaganda favouring birth control. The
opposite could be said of the pediatric
argument here described; it would appeal
most to the best elements and less to the
others. Its effects would thus be eugenic.
The proposed investigation would be delicate but not impossible. If the expected
findings emerged, the pediatric argument for
a family size of over two would, in an age of
increasing statistics-sophistication, be much
strengthened. Mme. Weill-Hallécould thensay ,
to the French Minister of Health and Population: ‘‘ Soft-pedal the argument that French.
mothers are behaving selfishly by permitting
France’s national level of fertility to sag.
Tell the mother instead—and get your
doctors at child welfare centres to tell her—
that the kindest and best thing she can do for
little Jean (or whatever her first-born child is

called) is to supply him with two or more

brothers or sisters.”’

The ‘‘ pediatric argument ”’ could become
a potent instrument in the hands of the
demographer concerned with positive
population policies; also in the hands of the
eugenists.
