EUGENICS IN THE AGE OF CROWDING *
By G. C. L. BERTRAM, M.A., Ph.D.

Introduction

HIS paper is an attempt to help
| perspective, rather than present facts,

and to draw attention to possibilities.
It includes an hypothesis which may have
a modicum of novelty.

We live in an age of enormous and unprecedented human population increase.
This mass proliferation of our own species is
now moderately well appreciated as a fact
by educated people, but its extent, causes,
repercussions and time scale are not. This
paper seeks to help understanding of the
repercussions. We must assume that, in
matters such as this, wisdom will ultimately
prevail and, if we would but use the faculties
which we have received from our ancestors,
that we can still in large degree be masters
of our fate. If we do not make this assumption life becomes unpromising indeed, both
for the individual and collectively.

The thesis of my argument is this in brief.
In_ differing ways and according to our
several capacities, in life we strive—some
for money, power and material advantage,
others more idealistic and discerning for
something much more—while the multitudes struggle without conscious awareness
of that for which they strive. I shall attempt,
‘first, an acceptable definition of our goal in
life—for without a conscious objective most
else has little meaning. I ‘shall then pass to
the actual facts of to-day’s world crowding
with a multitudinous mass of our own species.
I shall explain that this proliferation, in
terms of our goal in life, in general has no
obvious advantages yet many clear disadvantages. I then propose to enlarge upon
what I believe to be a valid, if novel,
hypothesis concerning the direct effects upon
the individual of high population density,
drawing parallels from other species. Further
disadvantages of crowding thus emerge.

* A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics
Socizty on January 22nd, 1958.

The reality of optimal populations will
then be enlarged upon, having regard to the
many revelant facts, and keeping in mind
our goal. After that I shall explain the
inevitability of the ultimate limitation of
populations—by means which can be described on the one hand as distasteful chance
and on the other as acceptable deliberation.

In so far as I hope you will have been
convinced of the essential truth of the
argument, I shall then proceed to assume
that acceptable deliberation is the choice in
the limitation of our species. At that point
comes the change from considerations. of
quantity to those of quality, for the limitation can be simply numerical, or eugenic in
intent. For the eugenic aspect to be pursued,
two particular attributes or facilities must
be available, the one contraceptive and the
other educational. And finally, into this
setting, intrudes the extraordinarily difficult.
matter of artificial insemination—with problems and possibilities far in advance of that
parochial little stir which now ruffles opinion
in this Christian island in connection with
subfertility.

Objective

Much is meaningless, in many. walks of
life, without the consciousness of a worthy
objective. The United Nations’ assertions
about human rights speak of certain of the

. essential freedoms without which worthy 
goals can scarcely be achieved by individuals
or groups. The goals themselves need
separate definition, and that is very difficult
indeed. Still we must try and, I believe,
many throughout the world, and of varying
religions, will subscribe to an objective
defined in some such terms as these. We
seek to provide that every individual shall.
be a loved. and wanted child, with a good
genetic inheritance, and born into circumstances that will allow it to develop to the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1958. 50, 1
42 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

full all the capacities with which-it is endowed; physical, mental and spiritual; and
that there shall be freedom for the individual
‘to use those capacities, in happiness, and in
the service of God and man according to the
dictates of the individual conscience. That
definition will, I think, serve our present
purpose, but even so it is still in a sense a
mere statement that we want to polish the
tools—what the tools then shall do we still
have not defined, but into those deeper
realms we have no present need to go. But
I would like to know—a research topic for
some brave enqguirer—the environmental
and genetic components of a conscience.
Here is still more scope for identical twin
studies.

Implicit in what I have just said is equality
of opportunity. I need not here expand on
the growing frequency and folly with which
equality of opportunity is mixed with a
muddled equalitarianism which quite falsely
assumes that all men are born equal—
though very few indeed will extend their
folly from the human to the equine and
assert that all racehorses are born equal.

I hope I have been able to indicate sufficient of the objective in life for our present
purpose—sufficient so that we can attempt
to judge whether we are more, or less, likely
to be able to approach the objective having
regard to changes in population, both
absolutely and from the point of view of
density in limited areas. The genetic aspects
will be for consideration later.

Crowding: The facts

We live in days of Primate efflorescence,
so far as Homo sapiens is concerned. The
scattered small numbers of human kind
throughout the world in past millennia
have burgeoned with astonishing suddenness—a world doubling in the last eighty
years and now with already 43,000,000 a
year net increase,* the next doubling may be
completed almost within this century, but a
generation and a half. This mushroom expansion, this human explosion, now truly

* This is the figure given on p. 2 of the United
Nations Demographic Year Book for 1956.

dominates our lives (even if many are too
blind to see it). Let us hope that “ sapiens ”’
is not so great a misnomer that this human
fruit will but burst in chaos and rot.

This is not the place to enlarge upon the
relationships between numbers and food and
resources. That has been admirably and
authoritatively set out in one of the largest
reports that PEP has yet published—World
Population and Resources, 1955—a project
made possible by grants from the Eugenics
Soctety and the Nuffield Foundation. I will
simply quote two sentences from that report
(p. 43): ‘“ The prospects for the next thirty
years, and thereafter, are extremely problematical. ... A thoroughly optimistic view has
no honest foundation, while the reverse is
useless, for it would kill that vigour, enthusiasm and faith upon which, in the last
resort, all progress depends.”

This is the place, however, I suggest,
briefly to describe an Oriental city of to-day
so as to imprint upon your minds the contrast between the facts of life and that goal
towards which we agree we strive. A comparison with other species is also necessary.

The greatest mammal and bird colonies
of the world I have seen, or some of them—
the fur seals of the Pribilof Islands, the
ringed penguins of Deception Island, the
guillemots of Bear Island, and likewise the
seething multitudes of fish of Southeast
Arabia. All these and many lesser sights
have filled me with wonder, eagerness,
interest, desire to wait and watch, and the
most stimulating satisfaction. Individually
and in company those animal hordes were
occupying just those natural niches to which
they were precisely fitted and adjusted by
evolution and inheritance. The health and
happiness of each individual was at its
summit—so far as human judgment is valid.
Life seethed yet soared to its specific peak.
All were temporary breeding congregations.

So tragically different, so devastating, so
degraded, are the generality of the larger
Oriental human communities. There the
individual is debased, biologically and spiritually, and personal health and happiness
are meagre ghosts of what they should be.

For me the slow descending flying boat
EUGENICS IN THE AGE OF CROWDING 43

alighting on the river, was like the hide of the
-bird watcher, allowing sights and panoramas
in mass and in intimacy, obtainable in no
other way except the hovering helicopter. I
could see the tiny forms scuttling or squatting, singly and in groups, on what seemed at
first sight to be the surface. They appeared
black and shapeless, as they moved among
the straw windbreaks and shelters. Further
examination showed deep crevices with more
creatures moving at several levels, in and
out of holes and along the bottoms of the
cracks. As descent continued, panorama
diminished as local magnification increased..
The dull midget forms became myriad, dark
and disordered, below, around and upon the
cliffs and arid crags of countless acres of
brown brick buildings, split by one great
sluggish stream, a great river that shall be
nameless here. This huge mammalian colony
was filled with myriads of our own species,
breeding men, women, and children in their
hordes. And in me it evoked nothing but
horror, sadness, and deep thankfulness that
I personally, by temperament and fortune,
was a member of a less gregarious section of
my species from a more northern land.

In that great colony there was no beauty;
there was no joy; there was simply life in
reproductive spate. Despite squalor and
under-nourishment, wretchedness and disease, life proliferated. There specific human
substance increased apace, unplanned, unhealthy, unwelcome to thinking men and
surely too to God.

In fact that colony was the poorest section
of a huge capital city, over which the flying
boat flew low to settle upon the bosom of the
great river whose flow of water is ultimately
responsible for this sad surge of human life.
This part of the man colony is a region of
five-storey tenement dwellings, with shelters
on their roofs, and here, it is said, human
reproduction per acre is the highest on the
whole world’s surface. Here six acres of
reproduction are piled upon one of mother
earth. A population of over 100,000 per
square kilometre has been estimated for the
most crowded areas. |

Excess fertility and gross mortality, hope
and despair, youth and disease, dance in a

mad whirl together. But fertility leads the
rout. She leads until some pestilence, famine
or other horror, pulls her down into that
whirl for a space before again she rises. So
it will continue until man takes thought,
controls his breeding in the interest both of
the individual and of the race, has regard for
inherited talents and not quantity alone,
and consciously strives for value and not for
volume.

Surely none of us can regard such an
urban mass as admirable? It has arisen: for
it no one has consciously striven as for a
goal. By its development what has been
gained?—another large black dot on the
population map of the globe; 100,000 tons
of extra co-existing human flesh; a huge
habitat for parasites; a vast maw into which
runs an ever-flowing but insufficient stream
of foodstuffs and other products of the
earth. Dignity, contentment of spirit, health,
education, sufficiency for active mind and
body, all are rare or absent. And that is not
to denigrate the brave activities of missionaries, teachers, health workers and the rest
who, through their fate or their dedicated |
idealism, strive to sweep back and purify the
flooding torrent with little brooms of zeal.
Their task is hopeless while the numbers
bound. The breeding proliferation surges,
and those ending their brief time among this
human midden are carried away to the
ancient burial grounds on the periphery.
The law has wisely decreed that burial shall
be within twenty-four hours of death, and
the number of keening funerals in the streets
is noticeably higher after a night of rain in
the cooler season—so tenuous is the hold
upon the thread of life to which so many of
our kind so desperately cling.

Whatever the simplicity, the harshness,
the rigour and the earthiness of the primitive
rural community, yet grows there some
little dignity, quiet closeness to the soil, and
a kind of symbiosis with other species of
animals and plants, a recognition of the
seasons and the stars, a continuity between
the generations. The primitive rural community, whether hunters, fishers, pastoralists or tillers of the soil, is no well-loved
paradise for its inhabitants, yet it is, I
440 | _. THE EUGENICS REVIEW

believe, very far removed from the hellish
squalor of the urban mass.

Turning now from all too horrid reality to
abstract considerations, let us remember
that in general the Primates are few in
numbers, living in small scattered groups and
family parties. A big colony of baboons may
perhaps run to several hundreds, and perhaps
a troop of monkeys in the treetops is sometimes of like size. But the great apes, our
closest relatives, are all family people.
Undoubtedly his abundance is the outstanding peculiarity of man when we compare
him with all the other mammals, and this
feature is astonishing indeed among the
Primates. Of course our own species has
many other oddities which surprise and
fascinate those who care to look, and not
only in the realms of speech, the making of
fire, the progress of religion and altruism,
indeed the attributes of Man—who all too
often thinks he is God.

No Advantages ?

It is indeed difficult to descry positive
advantages in immense numbers of human
beings contemporaneously alive. Certainly
there is a threshold population the building
up to which is advantageous. Fine buildings,
certain classes of manufactured goods, university centres and culture, a ferment of
ideas, all depend for their production upon
a population big enough to provide the
labour, the variety, the abilities, the urbanisation and the leisure for their growth. But that
threshold has long been achieved in a sufficiency of places in the world now that systems
of communication and record are available.

When weapons are relatively primitive,
and even when weapons are more advanced
and require huge labour forces for their
production, large human populations may
seem, desirable in a regrettable sort of way.
But this is the mere provision of cannon
fodder and its support. This kind of human
proliferation has no positive and admirable
advantage if we remember our agreed
objective in life. Are we past the days when
the mere multiplication of the urban is

required to withstand the barbarian hordes |

from afar? More likely is it, though difficult

of strict proof, that great: numbers now make
for wars far more than they are needed for
defence in wars. The apt analogy now
between nations is too often that of great.
trees planted too closely so that their

branches interlock, each damaging the other.

Markets for mass-produced material
objects we may all too often be. But surely
that can scarcely be claimed as an admirable
and positive reason for human multiplication.

Great Disadvantages

The fact remains—quite obviously once
educated minds have been directed to this
area of thought—that the immense human
numbers and proliferation of to-day have
great disadvantages in terms of our objective.
Great numbers indeed quickly swamp even
considerations of objective and render the
approach difficult indeed.

A little consideration will quickly bring to
mind a considerable variety of disadvantages
connected with great numbers of human
kind. There is no need here to enter into
detail over most of them.

High population in any region results in
special pressures upon the environment,
both biological and mineral, producing a host
of concomitant difficulties and unfortunate
circumstances ranging from soil erosion and
flooding, to silting and water shortages.
Though some of these troubles could be
avoided by greater use of the knowledge we
already have available. High population
density, too, provides the opportunity for
huge disasters, by flood, starvation or pestilence. With great numbers the latitude is
less when the rare extremes arrive of
environmental variations. |

Is it too cynical to suggest that much of
the great upsurge of human numbers in the
long run—if there is one—will be regarded
as having been the mere production of virus
fodder? We know all too well how agriculturally the growing of pure stands leads
to paradise for pests of every kind. Yet, of
course, control of pests by noxious pesticides
is little different from the now regular police
control of human mobs with tear gas—
though the police use lower concentrations
so as not actually to kill.
EUGENICS IN THE AGE OF CROWDING 45

' We move into the realms of subjective
judgment and personal emotion. It must

surely be reasonably clear that at low

population densities it is personally expedient to exist in reasonably co-operation with
one’s fellows and associates: then, as population density rises, soon a threshold may be
reached past which, in large degree, it
becomes expedient deliberately to compete
and attempt to overshadow one’s fellows.

A special disadvantage at the personal
level, springing from the abundance of the
human hordes, is the ever increasing problem
of finding solitude. Few of the wise would
deny the need—that, for the full development
of many personalities, a degree of solitude
and contemplation away from the many and
in community with earth and other species,
is at times essential. Yet already the world
probably contains many more than
I,000,000,000 people who have never been
alone to the extent of being even a hundred
yards away from others. Yet, can our agreed
goal be attained without at least the
opportunity for solitude?

It is apposite to quote from Gerald Heard
a striking passage from his Man the Master:

Few sights so quickly staunch humitarianism
and stun humanism, as the mere sight of too
many human beings—just seeing how many
human beings there actually are. The spate
of life proliferating along the Ganges: the

fecund density which spreads in China like a

fungous growth mantling even the broad rivers

themselves; there the actual triumph of the
life force, the actual biological achievement of

Homo sapiens, stir neither loyalty nor hope. ...

There is an awkward disregarded balance

between quantity and quality.... Beyond

sufficiency, plenty simply collapses into glut.

And life, too, the most precious of possessions,

it also can be debased by the cheapening caused

by unrestrained, unbalanced quantity.

Another possibility—take communism—
the debasement of the individual’s worth in
favour of the mass—Is communism an inevitable concomitant of increasing numbers?
There may well be a close connection here.
Certainly it is foolish to disregard this
possibility.

Optimal Populations
It is not the purpose here to dwell upon

the size of population to which a benevolent
dictator would properly limit the people of
the world, or of a single land. But passing
mention is essential of the optimal population, both as a concept and as an aim.*

Most must already recognize that there is a
difference between the maximum population
which can be supported and the best or
optimal population. For any particular
standard of nutrition and material well-being
chosen as desirable, there must be an
optimal population. The optimum may be
assessed on a world or a regional basis, and
it will vary in the course of time with
changes in environmental factors, productive
potentialities, technical skills, crop varieties,
the development of mutual trust between
nations, transport facilities, and so on. But
at any particular date there must be in fact
an optimal population (or perhaps an optimal
range of population). Any departure from
the optimum will inevitably be accompanied
by some degree of misery or reduced’
well-being.

So far, however, the exponents of the
theory of the optimum in population have,
in general, thought of the optimum only in
terms of food or economic advantage.t But
in fact there must, of course, be an optimal
population corresponding to whatever feature
or criterion may be considered especially
desirable or significant. Many feel that food
and material wealth alone afford an incomplete and inadequate basis for human
advance. Thus it comes. about that con-—
sideration must be given to problems of
value—that is to say once more to thoughts
about the objectives of life. If our objective,
as already described, is acceptable and
worthy, then populations—eventually we
must hope—will come to be limited in
accordance with it. The proper optimum is ©
likely in fact to be very different from an

* A part of these paragraphs is quoted from the
author’s Population Trends and the World’s Biological
—— Eugenics Society Occasional Papers, No. 5.
1940.

+ Plato in his Laws shows himself to have been well
aware of the value of an optimal population. For a ~
city-state he placed the optimum at 5,040 citizens.
His chief criterion was happiness, an attribute which
he well knew not to be directly proportional to economic
affluence.
46. a THE EUGENICS REVIEW

optimum determined solely on a basis of
food or material well-being or so-called
economic advantage. This matter of oppor“tunity for solitude may be important here.
Our present concern, however, is simply to
stress that the concept of an optimal population is valid; that it must become a deliberate
aim; and that it is likely to be very different
‘from the maximum population which might
be supported in life, if not in happiness and
wisdom. |

Direct Crowding Effects

I want now to put forward an hypothesis
which, if true, must be of great importance
and significance for humanity in these days
of monstrous population increase. In an
Occasional Paper of this Society I first
touched briefly upon this matter nine years
ago in a section entitled ‘‘ The Possible Effect
of Population Density on the Individual.”
I now want to enlarge a little on that. We
are here dealing with a realm which might,
loosely, be regarded as intermediate between
genetic and environmental, but which I
conceive to fall well within Galton’s definition of eugenics as “the study of factors
under social control which may improve or
impair the racial qualities of future
generations. ’’ |

We are all well aware of what has been
called crowd psychology, the short term
effect upon the individual and upon the mass,
resulting from temporary crowding and
heightened emotion. Panic, religious fervour,
a lynching, a battle, may all be regarded as
demonstrating something of the short-term
crowd effect. One may go further, and
suggest that this short term crowd influence
upon the individual, the enhanced excitement and the merging of the individual’s
consciousness of self in the mass emotion,
has had survival value—in times past if not
in times present. In our day, dictators are
masters of the art of twisting mass emotion
to political and fiendish ends.

Turn now from short term to medium
term crowd effects. Some years ago Dr.
Frank Fraser Darling did some research
upon the success of the breeding effort of
gulls in colonies of varying sizes. There has

I believe been later criticism of his work on
several grounds, but its general point was

‘that breeding seemed to be more efficient in

the sense of survival, and more precisely
simultaneous, in the larger colonies than in
the small. There was the suggestion that the
larger aggregations so raised the total of
sexual excitement that advantageous
simultaneity was achieved.

Likewise in the seals it might well be

argued that crowding—that is to say gregariousness—is correlated from species to species
with enhanced sexual effort and excitement
and simultaneity of pupping. Again, these
features presumably have survival value.
Likewise it may well be that with a good
many colonial or semi-colonial mammals
and birds, the co-presence of increased
numbers of individuals produces a useful
mutual stimulation.
- If, now, longer term influences are sought
they may be found in plenty. For example,
it is well known that the lemmings, of both
the great northern land masses, in their
populations follow a short cycle of years of
rise and fall, and that on occasion the peak
years are accompanied by remarkable
phenomena. These little timid nocturnal and
solitary creatures, living up in the hills and
on the northern tundra, in times of great
population increase become bold, travelling
by day and gregarious. The whole behaviour
of the individual changes. Charles Elton in
his Voles, Mice and Lemmings* gives some
remarkable examples of lemming migrations
and the massing of other rodents and their
changes of behaviour. He says “.. . when
the numbers are great, the lemmings go out
over the lowlands, crossing fields and lakes
and rivers and passing through busy towns,
until those that survive reach the coast ”’
and there they enter the sea and drown. The
few survivors repopulate the original upland
habitat.

Likewise locusts, upon which much experimental work has been done, have a solitary
and a migratory phase, transition from the
first to the second taking place at a moderately well defined level of population density.
At the change the locusts lay down fat, and

* Oxford. 1942, at pp. 213-4.
EUGENICS IN THE AGE OF CROWDING 4g.

‘develop the thoracic muscles, the activity
increases, and finally a mass migration
occurs. Here there seems to be evidence of a
definite density threshold.

The larger mammals, too, can provide
interesting examples. Instances have been
known, more particularly with the springbuck of south-west Africa, where populations
have built up over a period, presumably of
abnormally good rainfall for a few years.
Then comes a mass outbreak, and these
solitary timid creatures, banded together
into an astonishing boldness, have been
known to march as a mass through a modern
city, and to have pursued their way even to

the ocean and a watery grave like the

lemmings.*

Comparable, but of differing type, are
certain phenomena observed when populations of rats are allowed to build up with
ample food but in a limited space. Apparently at a certain stage there suddenly
appear previous non-existent “‘ crimes ”’ like
rape, murder and cannibalism.

Are we ourselves to be presumed to be
immune from these phenomena which influence other mammals when crowded together?
I suggest that, truly, we neglect them at
our peril.

These phenomena—of which there seem
to be plenty of incipient examples among
ourselves—can by no means be described as
admirable by those who have any feeling for
the dignity and worth of individuals. They
are mass phenomena, inimicable alike to
wisdom and conscience. Indeed, they are
surely to be avoided by deliberate effort.
Yet, I suggest, at the present time these
factors and phenomena become progressively
more expectable, visible and horrible. There
‘is a world-wide mounting of excitement; in
the close-packed cities of the Orient a minor
stimulus will provoke a riot; the urban crimes
of rape and murder, with excessive sexual
excitement, are everywhere in evidence.

That is my hypothesis—that actual
population density (beyond some level which
will itself I suspect be related in some degree
to standards of living and opportunity for

* Walter -Heape, Emigration, Migration and

Nomadism. Cambridge, 1931.

emigration)—that population density itself
produces in ourselves results which we would
seek to avoid if we were fully conscious of
them. Surely if there be truth in what I have
suggested, we have here the strongest
possible reason for deliberately helping to
prevent human populations rising too high
—quite apart from the relationship of population with resources. We get, too, a most
important new outlook upon the reality and
the desirability of optimal populations.

These matters I feel to be well within our
purview as eugenists.

Inevitability of Limitation

However we must return from the curiosities of personal and mass behaviour to considerations of the broad canvas of world
population and its proliferation. We are not
here concerned with any assessment or prophecy about how many people the world might
theoretically support contemporaneously;
nor with the standards of diet and material
resources which may or may not be available;
nor with the rate of technological progress
which may translate potentiality into fact;
nor with the betting as to whether optimal
populations will ever be achieved. All that is
needed here is simply to stress that quite
inevitably there must be some level of human
population where increase will stop (if only in
the extreme and absurd sense that presumably individuals will always need and want to
be able to lie down as well as stand up closepacked side by side).

In fact, of course, all species of animals

are limited in their total long before this stage

is reached—normally in fact by densitydependent factors of one kind or another:
Likewise human population limitation is
quite inevitable within a smallish number of
generations. But it can take place in one or
other of two possible ways, which we may
call and contrast as acceptable deliberation
and distasteful chance. These two are long
likely to be in operation together.

Thus we may now point an interim
conclusion. Human numbers continue to
increase at an unprecedented rate; in terms
of an agreed goal for human endeavour, the
advantages in great increases are indeed
48

inne to find; while the disadvantages are
quite evident to those who are willing to
observe. Ubiquitous population limitation
is inevitable in the long run, which in fact
really means at most only a few generations
hence. The mode of that limitation may be
distasteful chance, the old-fashioned method,
and/or acceptable deliberation. And if
acceptable deliberation.is to be the mode,
matters of quality, eugenic matters, equally
inevitably arise in highest degree. The
process is at work already.

- Chance I have described as distasteful,
which is perhaps an understatement for
pestilence and personal ill, under-nourishment and struggle—and perhaps other
factors which some still call the acts of God.
Personally we all seek to avoid such factors
as the sole arbiters of human numbers.

Yet if that be so, we are in fact agreeing
that deliberation is and should be our universal aim in the inevitable limitation of
human numbers. Acceptable deliberation
means conscious contraceptive effort, by
methods and mechanisms which are not yet
perfect—though improvement is spectacular
in the perspective of fifty years, and the
optimists speak of “‘ pills’ just around the
corner.

Of greatest significance, then, becomes the
precise distribution and result of the use of
the tools which permit acceptable deliberation—and that means the extent and degree
of differential reproduction and survival—
between individuals of varying inherent
attributes, and between what we call races,
-peoples and nations, likewise of varying
inherent attributes. These are hard difficult
facts for the quite near future—indeed they
are already in operation to-day.

Differential Reproduction

The continuation of the primeval system
—which we are now terming distasteful
chance—itself of course involves differential
_success in reproduction. That has always
beens so and we have it still all over the
‘world to-day except in the most advanced
nations. Without making any subjective
judgements, it is a fact that in Fiji to-day,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in the absence of significant aid of contraceptives, the Indian immigrants are outbreeding the indigenous people, and will soon
be quite dominant in those islands. This is
happening without physical struggle, under
a benevolent Government umbrella, and is
the result, both of the environmental
circumstances of to-day and of the inherent
differences between the two groups.

As pressure of numbers mounts, so we may
expect the small good-doers—those able to
remain most active on the more humble diets
—gradually to dominate. The island Japanese, gregarious, small, good-doers, may
already demonstrate the shape of things to
come—the results of differential reproduction
under natural pressure—that is to say by
distasteful chance. They have already come
to the fore numerically in relation to the
rest of the Pacific Ocean peoples—by
differential success in reproduction.

On the other hand, if we would but take
it, we have the opportunity to approach and
face the inevitable limitation of human
numbers by our ‘“‘ power of preventing many
kinds of suffering ’’ and replacing distasteful
chance by “ other processes that are more
merciful and not less effective.” ‘‘ This ”’
to continue the quotation from Galton, “ is
precisely the aim of eugenics.”’

We have the clear opportunity to act
during the next few decades—two or three
generations at the most—which means
essentially within the lifetimes of some
already born—to act in such a way that
human numbers shall regularly be limited
by means other than the “ natural’’ ones
which we seek to avoid because they seem
cruel and arbitrary. We may say that we
have already the contraceptive tools—even
if not yet of the best—and now how shall we
use them—for we neglect them at our peril.

An example is already provided by that
same Japan, overcrowded and fast breeding
as she is. Registered abortions now run at
over a million a year and total abortions at
perhaps twice that figure. Abortion is an
uncomfortable and backward mode of limitation, and the Japanese Government is
fostering its more sensible contraceptive
alternative. What now happens is that
- PROBLEMS IN THE AGE OF CROWDING AQ

consciousness of the facts, and the improving
availability of contraceptives, is making it
already fashionable for leading and able
Japanese, so it is said, deliberately to refrain
from having children—in patriotic zeal. The
dysgenic effects may quickly become
‘immense. A possible outcome, a reaction,
to this position I will return to in a
moment.

I want now simply to focus attention on
this present dilemma in human affairs—to
help the appreciation of the facts—in the
belief that acceptable deliberation in the
inevitable limitation of human numbers, is
more probable with understanding than
without it. The only alternative is that
horrible chance—through the agency of
strife, hunger and ‘pestilence—which all
mankind seeks strenuously to avoid. These
abundant abortions serve but to stress the
fact that deliberation is insistent as an
alternative to chance.

I will make brief reference to a few further
points, though they refer to matters of
tremendous significance. If limitation is to
be by deliberation, at once, as so often in
human affairs, we enter the realms of that
everlasting, unavoidable and indeed necessary, struggle between freedom and control.
How shall the deliberate and global control
of numbers be brought about in a world
filled with such varying peoples, races and
nations, by diverse group loyalties, aspirations and sovereignties, by such differing
desires, abilities and consciences?

We are on the threshold, too, of the
supreme eugenic opportunity. If there is to
be—and indeed there must be—the widest
limitation of the total numbers of our species
born each year, then surely soon there will
be growing recognition that those who are
to be born shall be of good genetic quality.
Certainly we cannot—even if we were to be
so stupid as to try—certainly we cannot
exclude the eugenic implications and
opportunities once deliberation becomes
widely linked with population limitation.
Remember all the time that deliberation is
in itself a form of freedom—freedom from
irrational chance. But—to over-simplify—
the eugenic aspects of deliberation can tend

to be negative or positive in their incidence
as is clear to-day in that section of the world
which already breeds largely by deliberation.
In these realms of freedom and control, and
of negative and positive eugenic opportunities and possibilities, there is an immense
scope for an understanding of reality which
so far is extremely rare. The eugenic
potentialities, within the limits of a proper
but educated personal freedom, are great.
Others might feel that personal freedom in
these matters should be subjugated in some
degree to an overriding national eugenic
policy. If sovereign rivalries continue unabated, the logic for such a subjugation
would be strong, however distasteful it may
to us at present seem.

A further range of genetic opportunities,
which mankind may or may not wish to.
follow, has now been amply demonstrated
by the Milk Marketing Board. We must
consciously face the facts, the implications
and the possibilities of what is now technically
possible, and what some, somewhere, might
deem it nationally expedient to do. We
must remember that our own consciences,
in our own island setting, may indicate
prohibitions which seem curiously restrictive
to those reared in another clime.

If a totalitarian state, with conscious
purpose and central control, were to embark
upon a thorough-going policy of genetic
change for its population, making full use
of artificial insemination, there is surely
little doubt that it could soon outstrip rival
nations in, for example, the competence of
its technical manpower—with all that that
implies in national rivalries. We rapidly
approach dilemma indeed—dilemma locally
in this United Kingdom where many wish to
condemn A.I. completely, even in its parochial connection with sub-fertility—dilemma
on the world scale where the use of A.I.
(even apart from totalitarian direction)
might possibly become the patriotic, acceptable and fashionable mode of production for
one’s nation of a greater proportion of the
more able at a time when deliberate limitation of the total is unavoidable.

To those imbued with Christian doctrine
this may seem a far-fetched and most.
50 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

distasteful possibility: to others it might
seem a splendid patriotic duty.
One may ponder the question whether

settled international life, if ever it is to come,.

will require not only agreement to refrain
from the manufacture of nuclear weapons
but, also, from centralised positive eugenics
by means of A.I.? Apart from such obvious
potential national rivalries in eugenic
advance, we have here the conflict as it were
between the code of the eugenic amateur
and his professional counterpart.

Conclusion

I conclude with this brief summary. ©
In order to keep perspective in a difficult

world we require an acceptable and worthy

objective. I have tried to define such an
objective in terms which may be acceptable
to those of differing loyalties, outlooks and
religions. Only so may we have a fixed point
relative to which we may properly attempt
to judge the world to-day and to-morrow,
and the wisdom or otherwise of our present
activities.

A quite fundamental aspect of to-day is
our tremendous human breeding proliferation—a crowding which is doubling world
population in as little as fifty years. Such
crowding seems to have no admirable or
positive advantages, and many demonstrable disadvantages in terms ofour objective.
The concept of an optimal population,

integrating many factors, I hope I have
shown to be real. The local optimal population has almost certainly been exceeded
already in an extensive proportion of the
world.

I then put forward an hypothesis about
crowding effects, suggesting that there is
direct application to our own species as to
others. These crowding effects, in enhanced

‘personal excitement, do not aid the dignity

of man, and they may well be very dangerous. They cannot be regarded as encouraging
in relation to our human objective.

The inevitability of population limitation
was then stressed—either by the continued
action of factors making up distasteful
chance which we seek to avoid—or by
acceptable deliberation. Whichever, or both,
of these two modes may operate in limiting
human numbers, it is differential reproduction
which. is the prime concern—both quantitatively and qualitatively—one might almost
say politically and eugenically. These things
must be treated in great degree as inevitable,
and they present their own dilemmas. And
the perfection of the techniques of artificial
insemination do but further sharpen those
dilemmas, personally, nationally and internationally.

P.S. Approximately ten weeks have
elapsed between the delivery of this address
and its publication. During that time world
population has increased by 8 million people.
