DISCUSSION.

MATERNITY ASSISTANCE IN FRANCE.

WE are indebted to Monsieur Michel Huber, Statistician to
the Statistique Générale of France, and a member of the French
Ministry of Labour, for the following laws and regulations relating to maternity assistance, which have been enacted in France.

Law oF NOVEMBER 27TH, 1909

Guaranteeing to women in child-bed their work or employment

The only clause: Absence from work on the part of a woman
for eight weeks consecutively before and after child-birth does
not allow her employer to break his contract with her for her
services except under a penalty of damages with interest payable
to the woman.

The woman must give her employer due notice of the cause
of her absence.

Any private agreement to the contrary is void in law.

The woman may claim legal assistance in case of need in a

law court of the first degree.

Law OF MARCH 15TH, I9IO

Granting absence from duty with allowances to school teachers in
child-bed

Clause I. Absence for two months with full salary, independent of leave of absence for illness as set forth in the decree
of November gth, 1853, is to be allowed to school mistresses,
half before and half after the birth of a child.

No schoolmistress may return to work till after a medical
examination and a certificate that she may do so without injury
to her health; otherwise extended leave of absence is to be
granted her on the same terms as before, till two months have

elapsed.
320 DISCUSSION

STATE AID TO ASSOCIATIONS FOR ,MATERNITY ASSISTANCE

Budget of 1910. Munistry of the Interior

Cap. 37. Grants to associations for maternity assistance
and the protection of young infants, 500,00ofrs.= £20,000.

This grant is to provide State aid, in proportion to their
efforts and to the results shown, to such associations for
maternity assistance as afford pecuniary help to enable women
to rest before and after child-birth.

MINISTRY OF LABOUR

Statistique Générale de la France

Every workman receives at marriage a gift of too francs.

Married workmen receive a gift of 100 francs each at the
birth of a child. The mother, if she is in work or in service, has
a right to six weeks’ holiday on full pay.

Every workman who has more than three children on his
hands under the age of 16 receives the sum of Ioo francs per
annum for each child after the third.

CIRCULAR ISSUED BY THE MINISTER OF War,
APRIL 29TH, IgIo

Prizes for women who suckle their childven and who work tn the shops
of the War department

Workwomen suckling their own children will be paid at the
end of each four months after the date of birth a premium of
Io francs.

In the case of twins the premium will be raised to 10 francs
per month for each child, if both are suckled by the mother.

GRANTS TO FAMILIES

Given since January Ist, IgIO

THe City oF Paris gives to all workmen and others employed by the Municipality who are the fathers of at least four
children under the age of 13, 50 francs per annum in respect of
each living child after the fourth who is under that age, provided
that such fathers’ yearly salaries do not amount to 400 francs
(£16) inclusive of bonuses and extra pay, and that they are the
sole support of their families respectively.

THE DEPARTMENT OF THE SEINE gives 50 francs per annum
to all workmen who have at least four children on their hands.

THe MunIcIPpAL CoUNCIL OF PaRis.—It was proposed by
M. A. Rendu, with regard to reorganising the relief of the poor
(V’assistance publique) to increase to the widest extent relief to
DISCUSSION 321

women, mothers, young children, widows with children on
their hands, young workwomen and adults threatened with
tuberculosis.

Extract from his introductory statement: “ What is needed
is in the first instance to assist mothers, young children and
adults who may be rescued from disease, and especially large
families. The insane and old people, who are the caput mortuum
of Society, are a secondary consideration. A nation’s first duty
is to protect the productive element of the population.

THE CREDIT LYONNAIS
Boulevard des Ttaltens, Paris

Every woman in the employment of this concern has, in the
event of child-birth, leave of absence for thirty days with full
pay.
” Grants for family expenses made to the workmen and
widows employed in proportion to their salaries: 10 francs per
month for-the second child and 15 francs for the third and others
following, or 10 francs per month for the third and 15 francs for
the fourth and others following. The grant is withdrawn for
boys at the age of 15 and for girls at the age of 16.

The Association of the Friends of the Crédit Lyonnais grants
the following assistance to mothers whose husbands do not draw
a salary above a certain sum.

Women in child-bed receive during four weeks a sum equal
to the grant made by the Mutualité Maternelle, of Paris.

A premium is given to the mothers who suckle their infants.

GRANDS MAGAZINS DU LOUVRE

Six weeks’ absence on full pay is given to mothers in

child-bed. :

EUGENICS SECTION.

The American Breeders’ Association.

Tue Association, organised in 1903, comprises practical
breeders, investigators and teachers interested in the theory of
breeding, in the methods of improving varieties and breeds, in
the production of pedigreed plants and animals and in the
application of the laws of heredity to human improvement. It
has a Eugenics Section, which deals particularly with human
improvement by a better selection of marriage mates and the
control of the reproduction of the defective classes. The Chairman of the Section is David Starr Jordan, Stanford University,
California. With him have been associated well-known students
322 DISCUSSION

of heredity and humanists, such as Alexander Graham Bell,
Washington, D.C.; Luther Burbank, Santa Rosa, Cal.; W. E.
Castle, Harvard University; C. R. Henderson, University of
Chicago; Adolph Meyer, Johns Hopkins University; J. Arthur
Thomson, University of Aberdeen; H. J. Webber, Cornell
University; Frederick A. Woods, Harvard Medical School.

The work of the Eugenics Section is two-fold, that of the
Eugenics Record Office and that of the Committees. The
Record Office seeks to accumulate and study the records of
physical and mental characteristics of human families, and to
educate the public as to classes of fit and of unfit marriages.
Its work is done by means of (a) correspondence; (6) the acquisition of family records on special forms ; (c) the inquiries of field
workers investigating either in conjunction with institutions or
independently.

The Committees serve as centres for special inquiries or for
education. Five such are already organised, vtz., (a) On
Heredity of the Feeble-minded ; (6) on Heredity of Insanity ;
(c) on Heredity of Epilepsy; (d) on Heredity of Criminality ;
(ec) on Heredity of Deaf-mutism.

Dr. C. B. Davenport, the Secretary of the Eugenics Section,
has favoured us with the following report of a meeting of the
above Committees held at the New Jersey State Village of
Epileptics, Skillman, N.J., on October 14th, rgro. It will be
read with interest both by our English and our American readers.

‘‘ The purpose of the meeting was to give the ‘ field workers’
of the ‘ Eugenics Record Office’ and others an opportunity of
exchanging ideas with the directors of the field studies and
of comparing notes over common difficulties and methods.
Actually the meeting had a far wider scope, both because wellknown alienists, physicians, psychologists and heads of Institutions from different parts of the United States were present and
because several scientific papers of importance were read. In
the absence of Dr. David Starr Jordan, Chairman of the Section,
who had only just arrived in New York from Europe, there was
chosen as Chairman of the meeting, Mr. Bleecker van Wagenen,
a layman well known for his devotion to the work of public
institutions in New Jersey. Professor E. R. Johnstone, Superintendent of the Training School at Vineland, was chosen
Secretary of the meeting. Among others present were Dr.
George B. Wright, New Jersey Commissioner of Charities and
Correction, Trenton; Dr. Henry A. Cotton, Superintendent of
the New Jersey State Hospital at Trenton; Dr. Everett Flood,
Superintendent, Monson State Hospital for Epileptics, Palmer,
Mass. ; Dr. William T. Shanahan, Superintendent, Craig Colony
for Epileptics, Sonyea, N.Y.; Surgeon George F. Stoner, U.S.
Marine Hospital Service, in charge of the immigrant inspection
service at Ellis Island; Dr. H. H. Goddard, of Vineland, N.J.,
Secretary of the A.B.A. Committee on Feeble-minded; Dr. A. J.
DISCUSSION 323

Rosanoff, King’s Park, N.Y., Hospital for the Insane; Dr.
Madeleine A. Hollowell, Superintendent, Institution for FeebleMinded Women, at Vineland; Dr. P. F. Lange, Institution for
Feeble Minded, Glenwood, Iowa; Ada E. Sheffield, Massachusetts
State Board of Charities; F. S. Hammond, State Hospital,
Trenton; C. Cromwell, of the State Home for Girls, Trenton ;
Benjamin H. Crosby, New Jersey Reformatory, Rahway ; and
Professor H. H. Laughlin, Superintendent of the Eugenics
Record Office, Cold Spring Harbour.

‘“* After invocation and address of welcome by Dr. George B.
Wright, introduced by Dr. Weeks, the following programme was
carried out : (1) Demonstration of the Binet-Simon test for mental
grading by Dr. H. H. Goddard and assistant. The object of
this test is to determine whether, to what extent, and in what
way a person is below (or above) the normal for his age; (2) Inheritance of Insanity, abstract of a paper by Gertrude L. Cannon
and Dr. A. J. Rosanoff, given by Dr. Rosanoff. This showed
that (excluding certain types) two insane parents will have only
insane offspring, and that normal parents, both of whom belong
to insane strains, will, in the long run, have one quarter of their
offspring defective ; (3) Inheritance of Epilepsy, by Drs. David
F. Weeks and C. B. Davenport, based on studies made on the
ancestry of epileptic patients at Skillman, and showing that
epilepsy rarely, if ever, arises in families without trace of the
defect in the ancestry, even if the immediate parents are normal.
In most cases, if not all, a mental weakness may be discovered
on both sides. (4) Inheritance of Feeble-mindedness, by Prof.
E. R. Johnstone and Dr. H. H. Goddard, of the Vineland School.
This was a report on studies made at their institution into the
ancestry of the feeble-minded. These studies have been carried
on for nearly two years, and in one case a pedigree comprising
more than 600 individuals has been obtained, the parents of a
large proportion of whom, nearly one-half, are defective. There
is good reason to believe that this collection is not an exceptional
one, and it seems to show why, even on economic grounds, defectives should have at least custodial care for life and be
restrained from passing on their condition, whether mental,
moral or physical, to the next generation.

‘“‘ By the courtesy of Dr. Weeks an opportunity was offered
for studying the workings of the New Jersey Village for Epileptics,
which is considered a model institution of its kind. Special
tours of investigation were arranged and conducted personally
by Dr. Weeks, entirely covering the 800 acre plant. One of the
most enjoyable features was the concert furnished by the school
band, which is the only one in the world entirely composed of
epileptics, and which, although it has only been in existence for
seven months, rendered a programme requiring accurate
knowledge and careful training.”
324 DISCUSSION

“NATURE v. NURTURE.”

To the Editor of THE EuGEnNics REVIEW.

REFERRING to your paragraph in the current number of
the above REvIEw, Nature v Nurture, on page 165, I would like
to draw your attention to the following remarks which I take
from The Working Fatth of the Social Reformer, by Henry Jones,
page 57: “The Poor Law Inspector in Glasgow, Mr. J. R.
Motion, sends every year to Kirkcudbrightshire, in the south of
Scotland, to Ross-shire and Inverness-shire in the north, and to
the remote islands of Iona and Islay, numbers of little children
found in the streets, ‘ picked up selling newspapers between the
knees of drunkards in public-houses.’ On being asked by the
writer how far these children, born almost invariably of the
worst parents, suffered from their inheritance, his startling reply
was: ‘ Provided you get them young enough they cannot be said
to suffer at all from that cause.” He supported his conclusion
by statistics which showed that out of some 630 children sent out
by him and kept under close observation for years, only some
twenty-three turned out bad. . . . Mr. Motion would have the
child in his hands earlier (than 13): ‘ Atany age from a fortnight
to ten years: after ten, unless the child has had one, at least,
decent parent, the results are long in coming and uncertain.’ ”
The matter seems to require further examination.

Cuas. I. R. ANNANDALE.
