r DAY

4 WEEKS

II WEEKS

ADULT

NORMAL AFFECTED

 

 

 

Fic. 1.—Retinal dystrophy in Irish setters. A comparative series of histological sections at different ages in normal

and affected animals. Normal sections are shown in the left-hand column, and sections from abnormal animals of the

same age in the right-hand column. In the affected animals pathological changes began to appear only after a normal and
full post-natal development. (Personal observation.)

[Reproduced by courtesy of the publishers from ‘“‘ Genetics in Ophthalmology,” bv Arnold Sorsby. London, 1951.

Butterworths Medical Publications. |
PROSPECTS IN THE CONTROL OF GENETIC
DISEASE

By ARNOLD SORSBY

WO fallacies have determined the
prevailing attitude to genetically determined disease. It is widely believed
that genetically determined affections arise
fully developed in the afflicted patient. It is
also assumed that such affections are
uninfluenced by any other factors. Both
these dogmas lead logically to the view that
genetic anomalies are beyond treatment, and
that the most that can be done is to attempt
to eliminate them by eugenic measures.
There is no validity for either belief.
Genetic anomalies do not arise fully formed ;
they have an evolutionary course of their
own, comparable to the evolutionary course
of a disease of environmental origin—or for
that matter to every other process in nature.
The evolutionary course of a genetic anomaly
is most clearly seen in those genetic affections
that arise in post-natal life—the abiotrophies,
a classical example of which is retinitis
pigmentosa. Here the retina is normal at
birth and continues to remain normal for an
unknown period—possibly many years. This
is borne out by clinical observations on
children in families with retinitis pigmentosa.
Such children are normal, but some of them
subsequently develop the affection. Definite
experimental evidence is obtained from a
study of the affection as seen in animals.
Pure lines of Irish setters can be bred to show
the onset of an affection similar to retinitis
pigmentosa some weeks after normal develop
ment. At birth the retina of the Irish setter |

is not yet fully differentiated, and it takes
about a month before the retina assumes the
~ normal adult appearance. In both normal
and affected stock this process occurs in an
identical manner. Only after the retina has
become fully differentiated in both these
types of setters do degenerative changes
develop in the animals from the pure line
carrying the affection. This is illustrated in
Fig. 1. Similar observations are available
for the rat and the mouse.

Even the genetic anomaly present at birth
shows fundamentally the same process. The
only difference is that normal development
is interrupted at some period in intrauterine
life. This is illustrated by the condition of
anophthalmos (lack of eyes) observed in the
mouse. Here normal development persists
up to the ninth day of pregnancy—halfway
through the normal gestation period of the
mouse. The severe defect is thus the consequence of a failure in development in a
tissue that had been developing normally up
to a particular point. Furthermore, a
genetically determined congenital anomaly
has not necessarily run its full course by
birth. Figs. 2a and 2b illustrate the lethal
consequences observed in post-natal life
from a genetically determined anomaly of
cartilage present at birth.

  

Fic. 2A.—Thoracic basket of a normal rat and a lethal,
22 days old (litter mates).

The second dogma, which holds that
genetically determined processes are in fact
beyond other influences, is equally illfounded. The whole of modern genetics
emphasizes the facts that no gene has just
one effect, and that no gene acts in complete
isolation from the influences of other genes.
The total genetic constitution of an individual
plays its part in the manifestation of the
effect of any particular gene; and such

177
178

concepts as irregular dominance, expression
and penetrance are all indicative of the
influences exerted on the manifestation of a
particular gene. These influences are not
exclusively genetic, such as those due to
modifying genes, but are frequently environmental in origin. There is much experimental evidence to illustrate both these
processes. Experimentally one and the same
gene in a different total genetic environment
may be made to behave dominantly or in a

Anomaly of cartilage

|
Slight changes in

|
Narrowed lumen Abnormal sternum
of trachea Thickened ri nx, nose an
other cartilages
Fixation of thorax
in inspiration
|
Kyphosis Abnormal situs of Retardation of Spur of deltoid
thoracic viscera lung development ridge of humerus
I
| |
Compensating Slow Increased General Blocked
increase of suffocation resistance ih arrest of nostrils
red cells and pulmonary development
Hb circuration r
Coma Compensatory Blunt Inability
Exposu: hypertrophy snout to suck
Inanition of right ventricle
of hea
Decompen: Capillary Faulty Starvation
sation pulmonary occlusion
of incisors
Difficulties
in feeding
DEATH
FIG. 2B

[Figs. 2a and 2b are reproduced by courtesy of the author
and publishers from ‘‘ Animal Genetics and Medicine,”
by Hans Griineberg. London, 1947. Cassell & Co. By
courtesy also of The Royal Society in respect of Fig. 2a.]

recessive manner, environmental influences
being kept constant. Likewise environmental factors may also be brought to bear
to modify experimentally manifestations of
some genes: such classical examples as the
development of newly formed black hair in
the white Himalayan rabbit kept in the
cold, or the development of white fat in
rabbits with yellow fat fed on diets lacking
particular green stuffs, are instances of many
more. In processes approaching pathological
states, the suppression in the young rat
(genetically disposed to it) of the skeletal
anomaly known as bent nose by feeding the
mother during pregnancy on a diet rich in
vitamin D, is indicative of what may be
expected from the rational application of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

environmental influences once the necessary
knowledge is available.

Some Clinical Evidence

Clinical medicine is rich in examples which
deny the prevalent fatalism that genetic
disease is fixed and immutable. Some of the
more significant are enumerated :

(1) Spontaneous suppression of the mantfestations of a pathogenic gene.—This is
clearly seen in the group of affections which
show “ irregular dominance ”’ or “ skipping
a generation.” The fact that an apparently
normal individual in an affected family may
yet transmit the affection shows that such
an individual must carry the pathogenic
gene, though it is not manifested. In fact the
gene may be manifest, but such manifestations do not take any clearly pathological
form so that the individual is regarded as
normal. This is seen in acholuric jaundice :
the normal individual is not quite “‘ normal ”
as is shown by special tests which reveal that
his blood corpuscles are abnormally fragile.
It is only when the fragility reaches a certain
level that the individual becomes handicapped, and is recognized as suffering from
a pathological state. Here there is spontaneous suppression sufficiently marked to
take the individual out of the pathological
range. But full suppression can also occur.
This is seen in such a lethal affection as
glioma of the retina. “‘ Irregular dominance ”’
also occurs, but the retina of the individual
who is himself normal and yet passes on the
affection shows no demonstrable differences
from the normal.

(2) The inconstancy of pathological features.
—A further step in suppression, but one not
carried to the extent that pathological
manifestations are absent, is seen in the
inconstancy of manifestation of a pathogenic
gene. In the Laurence-Biedl syndrome there
is the bizarre combination of mental deficiency, obesity, hypogenitalism, polydactyly
and retinitis pigmentosa, but only exceptionally does one and the same individual
show all the components of the syndrome.
Partial manifestations are the commoner,
and the whole syndrome can generally be
reconstituted only by a study of several
PROSPECTS IN THE CONTROL OF GENETIC DISEASE

affected sibs. In each of these suppression
has been partial, and sometimes suppression
is so marked that the affected individual
shows only minimal disturbances.

(3) Pathological features brought out by
environmental factors——Such affections as
hyperthyroidism appear to be genetically
determined, but whether a genetically predisposed individual actually develops the
affection is frequently determined by such
environmental factors as stress. It is likely
that this also applies to such affections as
high blood pressure, acute glaucoma, and
many others—not excluding such apparently
exclusively environmental diseases as the
infections. There is much evidence that predisposition to tuberculosis is genetically
determined — and whether an individual
develops tuberculosis will depend on his
mode of living.

(4) Control of some of the pathological
manifestations by environmental agenctes.—
Diabetes is a widespread affection, generally
recessively inherited. Whilst insulin does not
restore the affected individual to normalcy,
it does, however, control some of the more
deleterious disturbances seen in the affection.
It is not beyond all possibility that a fuller

understanding of the nature of the affection

may give us an agent even more satisfactory
than insulin in controlling the pathogenic
manifestations. An approach to something
like a radical cure in a genetic affection is
seen in the effects of splenectomy in acholuric jaundice. Here, removal of the spleen
acts as a controlling mechanism on the
manifestation of the disease.

(5) The prevention of genetic disease.—The
recognition of Rh. blood groups, and the dire
consequences to the newborn child of incompatible blood groups in the parents, is the
latest of means available on the basis of
adequate knowledge to prevent by simple
measures ravages that would otherwise be
unavoidable.

179

The Future

Enough is already known to make an
anachronism of the current fatalism towards
genetically determined disease. Further progress depends on detailed knowledge. As a
portent of future developments, the studies
on phenylalanine metabolism are suggestive.
Normally this relatively simple amino-acid
becomes converted by a series of steps into
water and carbon dioxide. This is shown in
Fig. 3, from which it is seen that such a
severe anomaly as mental deficiency associated with phenylketonuria develops if the

PHENYLALANINE

PHENYL-PYRUVIC aC ID
PHENYLKETONURIA AND
MENTAL DEF IC IE NCY

HYDROXY-PHENYL-PYRUVIC ACID

TYROS INOS IS
DI-HYDROXY-PHENYL-PYRUVIC ACID
ALBINISM MELANIN
HOMOGENTISIC aC ID
ALKAPTONURIA

ACETO-ACETIC ACID

COp + H,0

FIG. 3

conversion process fails at an early stage.
Albinism is seen if the failure occurs at a
later stage, and alkaptonuria at a still later
stage. To what extent similar disturbances
occur in other genetic anomalies remains to
be established. What is significant of such
studies is that they open the possibility of
modifying these relatively simple chemical
disturbances at a stage before pathological
ravages have set in.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLIII, No. 4
