THE EUGENICS REVIEW

dermal ridges in relation to sex-chromosome anomalies. The clinical chapters of Part II
deal adequately with the conditions that are described, like gonadal dysgenesis and
Klinefelter’s syndrome. It is interesting that the authors class the chromosomal constitution
as an anatomic criterion of sex (p. 129) and therefore consider all sex-chromosome anomalies
to be a state of intersexuality (see Table 8.1). Is this really useful? And why do the authors
disregard the evidence concerning the presence of germ cells in the gonads of XO foetuses
(p. 146) when they discuss the streak gonads in gonadal dysgenesis ?

One could also question the usefulness of the brief introductory chapter (basic
principles) and of the description of the embryology of the urogenital system and regret
the uninformative way in which the study of meiotic chromosomes is dealt with, the failure
to discuss normal chromosome variation, age aneuploidy, etc., or the rather incomplete
way in which the X-chromosome inactivation hypothesis is discussed. Perhaps this should
have received fuller treatment because of its central importance in respect to chromosome
and gene action, and the relevant literature could have been more extensively and accurately
presented. There are a number of inaccuracies and contradictions scattered through the
book: is interphase a stage of mitosis (p. 4)? Why is the statement made (p. 58) that “an
individual possessing reciprocal translocation can give rise to four types of gametes in
respect to their chromosome constitution’? when the authors discuss this more accurately
on page 273? The statement that balanced translocation is compatible with life (p. 58)
may be taken to imply that unbalanced interchange is not. Could not the definition of
linkage (p. 9) be improved on and stated more correctly? Is the phenotype only that which
is ‘‘externally visible”? (p. 11). How does the statement about the secondary constriction
on the long arm of number 9 (p. 28 and figure 2-4) tally with the statement about the identification of C8 (p. 34) by means of the same constriction, and can a statement about the
comparative sizes of the two X’s in women (p. 34) be made dogmatically and without
amplification ?

In viewing the book as a whole, although many parts of it are good and well presented,
there are some deficiencies—fortunately generally minor—which make one hesitant
unreservedly to recommend this book to the audience for which it is primarily intended.

PAUL E. POLANI

ANTHROPOLOGY

Coon, Carleton S. with Edward E. Hunt, Jr. The Living Races of Man. London, 1966.
Cape. Pp. 344 + xx. Price 70s.

THIS WORK, the sequel to The Origin of Races*, is the second of Professor Coon’s two
volumes expounding his view of the origin and development of human diversity, which he
chooses to consider in terms of race. His material is presented in eleven chapters, each
divided into sub-chapters of two or three pages, or less. In the first two chapters he outlines
his idea of the division of the human species into races, and the kinds of evidence upon
which this is based, and goes on to recapitulate his theory of the origin of the five basic
populations in regions that were supposedly isolated by Pleistocene barrier-zones. A few
‘cautionary paragraphs on the unreliability of language and other cultural features as
‘indicators of genetical relationship between peoples are followed by five chapters which
‘reconstruct in summary the history of evolution and migrations of populations within each
of five major regions—Europe and West Asia; Africa; East Asia and America; South-east
Asia, Australasia and Madagascar; and Greater India. Chapters 8 and 9 examine the
environmental influences supposedly responsible for the pattern of distribution of inherited

* See THE EUGENICS REVIEW. 1963-64. 50, 235.
272
REVIEWS OF BOOKS

characteristics—the first deals mainly with climate and its effect on the traditional, external
characters, the second with blood factors and their relationship to disease. Chapter 10
describes migrations and conquests since 1492, while the final chapter is a glimpse of the
future of human biological development as Coon envisages it: a permissible piece of
whimsy at the end of a mammoth task.

It was perhaps predictable that the hostility aroused by Professor Coon’s previous
work, a good deal of it motivated by an ideological but scientifically irrelevant objection
to his use of the word “‘race”’, would have the effect of confirming his attitude, and obscuring
the chief scientific objection to Coon’s Origin, which applies also to the present volume; that
Homo sapiens, at least as he now exists, is not a species whose observed variation can be
usefully expressed in terms of subspecies. The five races of The Origin have now become
seven (the negritoes and African pygmies have been promoted in the text, though not in
the map, p. 25) but we still look in vain for any demonstration that the variations of man
cluster significantly into geographical regions; this is apparently held to be a self-evident
truth, and Professor Coon works from the firm conviction that “races exist’’, and compares
observed variation with the distribution of the supposed races. (This after introducing his
work with a quotation of Poincaré: ‘“‘La pensée ne doit jamais se soumettre . . . a une idée
préconcue .. .”’!). Occasionally he is defeated in his attempt to fit fact to theory; (as in
the case of colour blindness); more often the facts are contorted to fit the pattern, as with
Hb S which is continually referred to as a character of African negroes, in spite of its wide
distribution among European and Asian populations, and its absence from many African
peoples. Even the observed absence of a character in a population where, according to the
racial theory, it ought to be found, does not deter Professor Coon; the character is merely
lurking undetectable in the racial heritage, ready to be called out, when needed, by some
mechanism unknown to geneticists (p. 248). On page 17 we learn “‘African negroes . . . do
better against malaria because they have the sickle-cell gene in a polymorphic state (Ss
instead of ss or SS)” and on page 272 “‘Primatologists have attempted to use haptoglobins
in measuring the genetic distances between primate species. If this technique can be sufficiently refined, it may become a new tool in classifying the races of man... .”. Such “howlers”
as these indicate either an extraordinary looseness of thought and expression, or a very
shaky knowledge indeed of genetics and molecular biology. The term “clinal population’’,
which Coon invents, is used without distinction in at least three different senses, none of
which really agrees with the generally accepted force of the term “‘cline’’.

Professor Coon has drawn material from a great variety of sources (sometimes
uncritically from notoriously unreliable ones such as Loth). To these are added his own
anthroposcopical observations. (At times these have an almost Herodotus-like quality:
“The Tibetans .. . are more variable. Some are very tall, with long legs and large hands
and feet; their lumbar regions are nearly flat; and they walk like American Indians”
(p. 201-202)).

Writing in his usual lively and staccato style, Professor Coon is adept at throwing
together facts from a variety of disciplines, diving in and emerging with a new idea. This
seems to work best in chapters 3-7; it would perhaps be uncharitable to suggest that this
is because here the evidence is linguistic and cultural, for the most part, and the reviewer
is neither social anthropologist nor linguist. In biological contexts it is apt to result in
unorthodox and interesting ideas which remain undeveloped and largely unsupported.
This is an excellent technique in the staff or postgraduate discussion, but is it fair to thrust
half-baked theories upon the unsuspecting undergraduate or “‘general reader” as though
they were established facts? Many of his statements elicit the reaction “How could this
work in genetic terms?” or ““What genetic or selectional mechanism is he implying here?’
For example: (p. 295-6) “Thus, even as long ago as 1927, when serology was first being

273
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

used in racial studies, it confirmed Williams’ conclusion that in a long, uninterrupted history
of local racial mixture [in Yucatan], the components of the two stocks tended to retain
their genetic associations, without dominance and without unusual variability”, and again,
(p. 198) ‘‘. . . climatic influences and diseases had sorted out their descendants into a primarily
Australoid and a primarily Mongoloid population’.

Such ideas as balanced polymorphism (fleetingly and inaccurately described under the
heading of “‘balanced polymorphy’’, p. 247), particulate inheritance and genetic linkage,
all of which one would have considered vital to his arguments, are ignored or travestied.
Another serious omission is an adequate discussion of the relationship between acquired
and inherited characters—the importance of individual, phenotypic adaptation in such
matters as body-fat, blood-composition (in the context of adaptation to altitude), immunity
to disease, even the ability to sleep through a cold night undisturbed, is totally ignored or
grossly underrated.

On the other hand, some of the “explanations” of racial features are obscure, and may
be even mutually contradictory; Africans evolved a dark skin to keep them warm in the
humid equatorial forest, yet American Indians are lightest-skinned in a similar habitat.
Australian aborigine children often have blonde hair to reflect the heat of the desert sun,
yet city Arabs are often fairer than their desert-dwelling cousins because their ancestors
have “‘lived for centuries in shaded streets”! Examples of looseness of expression could be
multiplied; on p. 232 it seems to be implied that a high salt content in sweat can cause
fainting, and on p. 249 that the shape of the nose can affect the temperature of air in the
lungs. Occasionally, a fact seems to be thrown in merely to impress the reader: what
possible use is it to be told (p. 230) that “‘an angstrom is one ten-millionth of a millimeter”
in a study of skin reflectance?

Many of the Tables and Figures are also deficient in a way that suggests that they were
intended for effect rather than for examination by the reader. Table 8 (p. 256) is reproduced
without any column headings. Figure 4, “‘Fat Fold Profiles’’, shows, we are told, the numbers
of series used in each case, but are the profiles based upon means of series, or means of
individuals? From the text, we assume that males only are included, but the figure does
not tell us so. The reproduction of Boyd’s classification of (blood-group) races (Table 2),
and Coon’s commentary on it, are completely undecipherable, and mutually incompatible,
at least as far as the reviewer can see. The maps are clearly drawn, for the most part, but are
not listed in a table; nor are they numbered, which makes it the more irritating to find them
constantly referred to by number in the text. It is instructive to learn from a comparison
of maps 1 and 2 (pp. 25 and 26) that in 1492 New Zealand was inhabited by Mongoloids,
who since that date have been displaced by Caucasoids, with a colony of Australoids in
North Island! Is this a cartographical error, or simply an expression of the impossibility
of fitting the Maoris (and other Polynesians) into a simplistic racial picture? The maps
summarizing various aspects of global climatic variation are a useful source for the nonclimatologist—as long as they were not drawn from the same authority which told Professor
Coon that “During the pluvials . . . there was no Nile” (p. 30).

One suspects that a number of valid and original thoughts and observations may go
unnoticed because of the impatience generated by Professor Coon’s inaccuracies and
unsupported theorising, but as it stands, this is a work which it is impossible to take
seriously. At least, the racialists who are supposed to have acclaimed The Origin will find
little ammunition in this book although Professor Coon hints darkly at facts about racial
differences in intelligence, too terrible to be disclosed (p. 1).

What, then, has Professor Coon’s two-volume work contributed to the study of Man?
First, it represents a great fund of material from a wide variety of sources and disciplines,
and is therefore a useful work of reference, although the knowledge that all the facts pre
2/4
REVIEWS OF BOOKS

sented by Coon should be checked at source reduces somewhat the value of their compilation. At the level of ideas, Coon has done much to popularize, though he did not originate,
the notion of fossil man as a single polymorphic and probably polytypic species since the
early Pleistocene, and so has counteracted the excessive “splitting” of many earlier
anthropologists. He has also promoted the idea, a useful counterbalance to earlier theories,
that much of human evolution, in features such as brain-size, proceeded by gene-diffusion
between relatively static populations, rather than by wholesale migration and invasion.
Finally, and most importantly, he has stimulated, indeed obliged, most physical anthropologists to re-examine critically their own concepts of human taxonomy and evolution.

Cc. J. JOLLY

SOCIOLOGY

Dahlstrom, Edmund (Editor). Trs. Gunilla and Steven Anderman. Foreword by Alva Myrdal.
The Changing Roles of Men and Women. London 1967. Duckworth. Pp. 205. Price 42s.

The Changing Roles of Men and Women is an English translation, revised and brought up
to date, of a collection of essays first published in Swedish in 1962 under the title Women’s
Life and Work. The change in title, as Alva Myrdal points out in her foreword to the volume,
reflects the change in the scope of the two versions. The emphasis is no longer exclusively
on the way in which women are prepared for their role in society and the constraints upon
their behaviour as wives, mothers or workers; it is equally on the way in which child-rearing
practices in the home and the school prepare boys for the roles which society expects them
to fulfil in adult life.

The opening essay by the volume’s editor, Edmund Dahlstrém and his colleague
Rita Liljestrom summarizes the relevant data concerning trends in the relative position of
men and women in Sweden in demographic terms and in terms of their part in the occupational structure and in intra-familial functions, incidentally comparing these trends with
those in other industrialized countries. It examines and seeks to reconcile economic,
sociological and psychological theories concerning the conflict between the expressed
ideologies of equality of educational and occupational opportunity and the persistence of
marked differences in the roles allocated to the two sexes in the country’s occupational
institutions and its familial groupings. It also suggests the areas in which data which can
contribute to explanation are still lacking.

The themes which are touched upon in this first essay are developed at greater length
in succeeding ones. One of these reports on data obtained from samples of eight-year-old,
eleven-year-old and fifteen-year-old cohorts and from parents which show how, despite
professed egalitarianism, boys and girls are subjected to different socialization processes
and how these help to prepare them socially and psychologically for clearly differentiated
roles in adult life. These data, incidentally, do not lend support to Freudian theories of
female envy of the male. Boys were more conspicuous than girls among the small minority
of children who at eight years would prefer to have been the other sex, although the reverse
was true among the fifteen-year olds.

Two essays consider the factors in the employment situation, including employers’
attitudes, which still relegate women to roles carrying inferior status and rewards, despite
the virtual absence of overtly discriminatory educational and training policies. The data
although fuller and more thoroughly analyzed than those available for the UK suggest
that the patterns in the two countries with regard to employment are very comparable.

The final essay, again by Dahlstrém, categorizes and discusses the current ideologies
which determine the nature of the ever-changing, but everlasting, debate on sex roles.
Dahlstrém distinguishes several distinct ideologies. There are firstly the conservative

275
