NEUROLOGY AND EUGENICS

The Role of Experimental Genetics in their Development
By OSKAR VOGT

(From the Kaiser Wilhelm-Institut fiir Hirnforschung, Berlin-Buch)

HE neurologist, who is so often help
less to check the development of

insane or criminal tendencies, is
naturally interested in the _ theoretical
possibility of modifying the expression of
undesirable genotypes, and is therefore led
into making genetical experiments with that
object. The first part of this article deals
with such experiments.

As long as genetical research was mainly
concerned, as it was until recently, with discovering the mechanism of gene transmission, it dealt with the genes which we can call
‘strong’—those, that is, which cause the
expected ratios to appear, and which equally
affect all individuals. But there is also a
second type of gene, a ‘weak’ type, which
we find, with variable frequency, in plants
and animals, and of which no doubt there
are many in man. ‘The weakness is characterized by the fact that some individuals
carrying this type of gene go through their
whole lives without manifesting the character, a phenomenon which is described in
German as a lower Penetranz* of the gene
involved. Morgan’s analysis has shown that
abnormal abdomen of Drosophila melanogaster is a character of this type, since its
transmission is according to mendelian laws,
though it is only apparent in a certain percentage of the individuals carrying the gene.
If that gene were one for some illness or
criminal tendency, only a proportion of the
carriers would exhibit it—the rest being
healthy or normal—while all of them would
transmit it according to the appropriate
mendelian expectation. f

* There is no English equivalent for this word, but
the description should make its meaning clear.

+ The reference, of course, is not to an ordinary
recessive character.

15

Doubtless many of the diseases of the
central nervous system which appear
‘ sporadically ’ (i.e. in proportions which fit
no known mendelian ratio) in certain
families are caused by such ‘weak’ genes.
My collaborator Patzig, for instance, has published an account of monozygotic twins, now
43 years old, one of whom manifested in
youth a hereditary predisposition to dementia praecox, while the other has
remained sane.t

Recent experiments of Gabritschewsky, as
well as earlier work of my colleagues N. W.
and H. A. Timoféeff-Ressovsky, have shown
that it is possible to modify the Penetranz of
a gene by environmental factors, one of which
is nutrition. Gabritschewsky found that in a
well-nourished culture of the giant mutant
(Drosophila melanogaster) 90 per cent. were
giants, though there were only 10 per cent.
in a badly fed culture. We can see from
these studies that there may be a possibility of influencing gene manifestation by
chemical means.

EFFECT OF ONE GENE ON ANOTHER

The manifestation of a gene may also be
differentially affected by the ‘ remainder
genotype,’ by the influence, that is, of the
complex of all the other genes. In Gabritschewsky’s work the effectiveness of the
same giant mutation varied in cultures of
different ‘remainder genotypes’— 40 per
cent. giant in one culture and 70 per cent. in
another. Further, N. W. Timoféeff examined in Drosophila funebris the mutation

~ Perhaps, however, this remarkable instance is
due to the asymmetry mechanism which causes
somatic segregation in identical twins. See the
studies of Professor H. H. Newman, and especially
the notice of his recent work on page 66 of this
REVIEW.—ED.
16

venae transversae incompletae (Xvtt), a
gene which causes an interruption or failure
of the cross veins in the wings. In most
cultures this gene mutation is only manifest
in a few individuals ; but if it is crossed with
a culture of flies showing another gene
mutation radius incompletus (ri: shortening of the second longitudinal vein of the
wing) its Penetranz may rise to Ioo per cent.

In this case one gene profoundly affects
the manifestation of another. We may perhaps expect in the future to employ this
type of mechanism for eugenic purposes,
though our present knowledge of human
genotypes is inadequate, and, even if it were
not, it would still be difficult to choose the
appropriate combination of genotypes for
this or that purpose.

Another phenomenon to be observed in
‘weak’ genes is a tendency to be more
markedly manifest in some individuals than
in others.* ‘Though perhaps of less significance, this is surely not unimportant to
eugenics, N. W. Timoféeff has shown that
variations in the degree to which a gene
manifests itself are something other than
variations in Penetranz. He has proved that
lower Penetranz may be combined with an
increased degree of manifestation in both ri
and Xvti. The character, that is, may appear
in fewer than usual of its carriers, though in
some of them it will be more than ordinarily
strongly marked. The decreased Expressivitat of a disease or of an anti-social
tendency would be manifested in a milder
form of the complaint or in a weaker
tendency to anti-social actions.

According to the same worker, the degree
of manifestation may be modified both by
the ‘remainder genotype’ and by environmental factors; and the eugenic attitude
towards the phenomenon must therefore be
the same as that towards the phenomena of
Penetranz in genes.

A third type of ‘ weak ’ gene is that which
lacks specificity and which may therefore
manifest itself im more than one way. In

 

* In German this is described as a variable Expressivitat, which might perhaps be translated as a variable ‘ potency.’—Ep.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

particular, a type of ‘specificity’ which may
later be of eugenic importance, is what we
may call ‘ polar specificity.’ Genes of this
type can cause deviations from the normal
in either a positive or a negative direction,
and they may provide an explanation of the
fact—if fact it be—that highly gifted and
subnormal (or mentally unbalanced) personalities occur in the same family. The fact,
however, has not yet been substantiated,
though the subject, under some _ such
intriguing title as ‘‘ Genius and Insanity,”
is a popular one for somewhat uncritical
discussions. Our experience at this Institute seems to indicate that the ‘remainder
genotype’ can, again, affect the numbers of
positive or negative variants.

DIFFERENT EFFECTS ON VITALITY

I would call attention, too, to a further
set of experiments by N. W. Timoféeff,
who had been testing different mutations as
to their vitality. When he crossed two
such strains of low  vitality—different
mutants, that is, but each with reduced
viability—he usually found that the viability of the offspring was even lower than
that of either parent stock, the reduced
vitality of one mutation being added to that
of the other. But in some cases the contrary occurred, each mutant apparently
compensating for the defects of the other,
with the result that the vitality of the offspring was greater than that of either
parent stock. Eugenics must therefore
reckon with the possibility that the crossing
of two genotypes may in some cases balance
certain disturbances of the inner organs,
although the exterior characteristics of both
genes are manifested together in the
hybrids.

There is one further point of eugenic
importance, best illustrated by such a disease as Huntington’s chorea. If one parent
is heterozygous for this complaint, which
is due to a dominant gene, 50 per cent. of
the offspring will inherit the predisposition
and, since the Penetranz of the gene amounts
to Ioo per cent., will sooner or later succumb to the disease. Since, however, its
onset may be delayed for many years, it is
NEUROLOGY AND EUGENICS

very important for both eugenic and
therapeutic reasons, to distinguish, as
early as possible, between these children
who are inevitably doomed to the disease
and the remaining 50 per cent. of the family
who are entirely free from it. Experimental genetics has indeed shown that such a
hereditary predisposition may be associated
with certain other characters, the so-called
‘stigmata.’ Pearl observed, for instance,
that the recessive gene mutation in Drosophila vestigial (wings) is always accompanied by reduced vitality when it is
homozygous, but that the vitality of the
heterozygous carriers of it is unaffected ; and
N. W. Timoféeff found exactly the same
when studying the mutation miniature in
Drosophila funebmis.

By the aid of stigmata, therefore, it may
sometimes be possible to recognize in
advance those individuals who carry the
hereditary predisposition to a disease. C.
Vogt, indeed, has already pointed out
that the skulls of sufferers from Huntington’s chorea are very often unusually
small, while Meggendorfer found that children with the predisposition can at an early
stage be distinguished from the normal by
their psychopathic character.

It can be seen from the foregoing that
experimental genetics may throw light on
eugenic problems, as well as on those of
general heredity, and by materially assisting the study of the diseases of the central
nervous system (and, indeed, of other complaints) may sooner or later be of practical
use in eugenics.

GENETICS AND THE BRAIN

Having now indicated some of the ways
in which experimental genetics can assist
neurology, we will turn to those questions
which the eugenist would gladly see
answered by the neurologist. Above all,
what sort of brain is socially valuable?

The brain consists of an unexpectedly
large number of kinds of nerve cells which
differ morphologically and physiologically
from each other, and which together constitute the physical basis of mental activity.
Since the size of the brain does not allow

B

17

of the unlimited development of all kinds
of cells, the hypertrophy of some groups
must be accompanied by the hypo-trophy of
others; and the function of neurology is to
discover precisely how each different combination is reflected in the mental abilities
of the individual. What combinations, in
particular, of groups of cells provide the
basis of socially valuable qualities, and why
is it that those qualities, when possessed by
only one of the parents, are, as we all
know, so seldom transmitted to the children? ‘The reason is that a marked talent
of this type, being the immediate product
of a certain individual combination of nerve
cells, is fundamentally due to another and
very complex combination of genes which
is almost inevitably broken up in the reduction division at oogenesis or spermatogenesis. The very process of breeding
shatters the peculiar combination which
creates the talent.

The problem of positive eugenics is therefore how to conserve such gifts.

There may be less loss when marriages
occur between men and women with similar
talents ; and certain circus families can show
a conservation of their particular gifts over
several generations, because each husband
and wife have been similarly talented workers
at the same craft. The same phenomenon can
be seen in some families of artists. The social
trend of to-day, which eugenics should support, favours this sort of conservation of
talent, since the increase of women in in- |
dustry tends to encourage marriages between
people with kindred gifts.

EUGENICS AND BIOLOGICAL HARMONY

Finally, surely eugenics should not be
concerned only with mental qualities, but
should aim at fostering harmonies of genes,
and at the same time take into account the
highly relevant fact that some genes have
manifold effects (‘ polytopic manifestation ’).

We know, for instance, that a single gene
mutation in a wild species of Drosophila
may lower the vitality of the organism. The
probable explanation of this is that the
occurrence of the mutation automatically
18

creates a new genotype, a new combination
of genes which is less well balanced and
therefore less well adapted to the environment than was the old genotype whose
harmony of genes produced strong and
resistant individuals.

A disturbance of this harmony, leading

to an impairment of viability, may be

accompanied by external changes which are
not themselves the cause of the impairment
—like, for instance, the larger number of
head-bristles in Drosophila, a mutation
which is accompanied by a loss of vitality.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The gene fundamentally responsible for
these associated changes must have a ‘ polytopic ’ effect, not only causing the alteration
in the external character, but also disorganizing the harmonious development of
the internal organs. It is impossible to tell
beforehand whether the gene for some
valuable mental quality may not have unfavourable effects on other organs; and
eugenic wisdom must therefore regard the
general physiology and metabolism of the
human being, instead of merely concentrating upon some special mental gifts.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 1.
