THE EUGENICS REVIEW.

THE PRESENT POSITION OF
MENTAL DEFICIENCY
UNDER THE ACT.*

By E. J. LIpBETTER.

The Eugenics Education Society contributed substantially towards
those discussions which led to the appointment of the Royal Commission on the care and control of the feeble-minded in 1904, and so to the
passing of the Mental Deficiency Act, 1918. As the Act has now been
in operation ten and a half years your Council thought it desirable to
review the present position under the Act and asked me to undertake
that task.

Between the views of those who legislate and those who desire
legislation there is often a wide gap; but between Statutory enactment
and administrative achievement the gap is even wider. Mental
Deficiency is no exception to this. Of the first Mental Deficiency Bill
introduced into the Session 1912 it was said that ‘‘its career in Com‘‘mittee justifies the statement that within recent years at least, no
‘‘legislative proposals touching a social problem were ever more
‘*fiercely overhauled’? . . . ‘‘The Bill was committed to the
‘‘Grand Committee as a Bill of 68 Clauses, . . it emerged a mere
fragment of seven Clauses, which in themselves were drastic amend
‘ments of the original Clauses, and as a Bill of seven clauses it was
‘‘reported to the House. .

‘In the Session 1918 the Bill was re-introduced . . . witha
‘“‘much more friendly acceptance. Even then its passage became
‘‘rushed at the end, and the Government only managed to get it
‘enacted by a slaughter, or withdrawal, of a large number of proposed
‘famendments set down on behalf of the Government and others in the
‘‘House of Lords. This rush at the finish accounts for defects that may
‘‘be found here and there in the fitting in of one Statutory provision
‘‘with another. These defects in due time, no doubt, will be cured by
‘fan amending Act.’’f

Proposals so fiercely assailed in the House, and passed under these
circumstances, could scarcely be expected to commend themselves to
those charged with the responsibility of locally administering them.

*A lecture given to the Eugenics Education Society , on 22nd October, 1924.

t‘‘The Mental Deficiency Act, 1918,’’ By R.A. Leach, Barrister-at-Law.
Local Government Press, 27 , Furnival Street, E.C .4.
260 EUGENICS REVIEW.

The Act has proved avery difficult Act to administer, and if the course
of legislation was disappointing to its supporters the course of administration has been only less so. But this is due in large measure to the
form and terms of the statute which shut out many persons intended by
the promoters to be included under it, as well as to administrative
difficulties. The latest figures illustrate this. The Royal Commission
estimated that, in addition to certified insane, there were 149,628
mentally defectives in need of care and attention, of whom 66,509 were
urgent cases and in need of treatment in institutions. Many persons ina
position to judge considered this an under-estimate. On Ist January,
1924, there were under care 17 ,642, of whom 15,074 were under the Act
and 2,568 not under the Act. These figures shew a considerable
advance since Ist January, 1922, when there were 11,466 under the
Act and 2,344 not under the Act.

The number of defectives in certified institutions has steadily
increased from 6,389 on Ist January, 1922, to 11,044 on Ist January,
1924. It is very important to notice too that the percentage in
Institutions under the Act increased from 66% in 1918 to 81% in 1924.
These figures shew that as regards mental deficiency ‘‘within the Act’’
gratifying progress is now being made, but what has been accomplished
is only a fraction of the problem as it presented itself to the Royal
Commission.

If we turn from the statistics for the country as a whole to those for
a particular county we get some idea as to how the cases are being dealt
with. In the County of London, up to the 81st December, 1922, there
had been reported to the Local Authority since the Act came into operation, 5,501 cases. Of these on the date named there were :—

In institutions - es -. 1880
Under guardianship oe ws 138
Under supervision .. we .. 1808
In places of safety .. as ss 10... 2711

The balance of the total is disposed of as follows :—

Ascertained not defective or not within the area 1055

Dealt with by the Poor Law we . 477
Died, discharged or become lunatics .. .. 590
Still under consideration . a0 -. 8385
**No action could be taken’’ .. ee .. 838

2790

It is no doubt true that in London and in other great cities administration is better than in other areas. Thus it will be seen that only a
small proportion of those whom the Royal Commission thought to be in
need of care and attention are being dealt with under the Act.

The causes of this state of things are many and not very easy to
follow. They are partly administrative but mainly Statutory.
Among the former perhaps the most important has been the insistence
on economy in all Government departments. In May 1921 and again
in August of that year the Board of Control issued circulars to all local
THE PRESENT POSITION OF MENTAL DEFICIENCY. 261

authorities under the act advising them that expenditure on new
accommodation would not be sanctioned. As the first five
years after the coming into operation of the Act were years of
war, very little accommodation had been provided, and to refuse
new accommodation in 1921 and since, was to continue the necessarily barren period of the war. The circulars also suggested that,
having regard to the pressure on accommodation, mild cases should be
discharged to make available accommodation for more pronounced
cases. Since it is agreed that the high-grade mentally defective is
the more dangerous in regard to the ultimate consequences to the
community, it is difficult to justify this policy in the name of economy.
During the year 1921 discharges increased from 10% to12%. Tosuch
a length was this policy of economy carried that we find the Board of
Control reporting in 1921 that ‘‘notwithstanding ceaseless efforts
‘“centrally, to restrict action, it has proved impossible to avoid dealing
‘‘with 2,016 cases.’’ It is impossible to exaggerate the difficulties
that have occurred, and still occur, in administration by this failure to
provide sufficient accommodation—administration in many districts
being paralysed by this necessity.

Apart from this major consequence of the absence of accommodation, other difficulties arise in practice which care for first principles in
administration make it necessary to avoid. For imstance, under
Section 15 of the Act an officer of the Local Authority ‘‘or any constable’’ who finds neglected, abandoned, or without visible means of
support ‘‘any person whom he has reasonable cause to believe to be
defective’’ may take such person to a place of safety. (the workhouse)
and such person may be there detained until a petition can be presented.
Many persons have been taken to such a place of safety and there
detained for months without a petition being presented, which means
without any authority for such detention except such as is given by this
Section, i.e. , an officer of the Local Authority. Under the Lunacy Act
the period of detention in such circumstances is three days, but under
this Act no limit is fixed to the period of preliminary detention, so that
the alleged defective may be, and in many cases has been, detained for
months on the inadequate authority of this Section, and at the end of
the period of detention may be held by the Judicial Authority to be not
a defective under the Act. Abuses of this kind do much to bring into
disrepute the principle upon which the Act is based and so make its
administrative application increasingly difficult.

Another of the important administrative difficulties is the failure,
in certain areas, of the Education Authority to give notice to the Local
Authority of the presence of defectives in the schools. This is a very
serious impediment to the administration of the Act. Unless this
Statutory notice is given before the child is 16 years of age it is exceed ingly difficult after that time to bring the child within the provisions of
the Act. The reason for this we shall see when we come to the Statutory difficulties. In London and the larger towns the work of notification appears to be much better done than in the smaller urban and
rural areas. In London out of the 6,000 children in the Special Schools
about 860 are annually notified. The difficulties appear to be much
greater in districts where the areas of the Education and Local Authori262 EUGENICS REVIEW.

ties are not co-terminous: where organisation would need to be better
and where perhaps there is some competition locally to escape the
burden of maintenance.

On a far different level are the Statutory difficulties. We have
already seen the hostility with which this legislation was received and
the obstacles to its passing. A close examination of the Statute and its
requirements suggest that it was deliberately set and hedged about with
conditions which in effect exclude from its operation the greater part
of those who, in their own interests, and that of the community, should
have been brought within its scope. I do not think that it is fully
realised yet that the form in which the Act was passed had the effect of
excluding many defectives from its operation. For instance, Section 1
contains four nicely balanced definitions of defectiveness, within one of
‘which the defective must be brought to be included in the scope of the
Act. These are briefly, Idiot, Imbecile, Feeble-minded and Moral
imbecile. From the point of view of Eugenics the fact that the
individual comes within one of these definitions is sufficient not only to
justify dealing with him under the Act, but to require, in his own
‘interest as well as that of the community, that he should be so dealt
with. That is not the position, however, under the Act, which
requires not merely that he shall be defective within one or other of the
definitions but also if he is above the age of 16 years, that he is found
neglected, abandoned, without visible means of support or guilty of
some offence for which he is brought before a Court; or, in the case of a
female, that she is chargeable to the Poor Law at the time of being
pregnant or confined of an illegitimate child. None of these supplementary conditions are necessary where the defective is below the age of
16years and the Education Authority gives notice to the Local Authority
that he is defective. The practical difficulty of proving that a young
person is neglected or without visible means of support is so great in
many cases that if the required notice is not given whilst the child is
below the age of 16 years it is very difficult to bring him within the Act
at all, whilst in the case of a feeble-minded girl it is not only necessary
to wait for her to become pregnant, but she must also become chargeable
to the Guardians whilst in that condition. A further difficulty is that
when the child has reached the age of 16 years he is able to work and
earn. His earning capacity may be very low, but it is there, and
parents in poor circumstances will not then give the information upon
which it can be found that the defective condition has existed from
birth or early age, if they know that the result of giving that information will result in his being sent to a place of detention. It is at this.
point that I return to the question of the importance of the Education
Authority giving the necessary notice as early as possible. The service
of that notice is the only method of avoiding the complications which
miust. arise when it is necessary to find the defective neglected, abandoned cr without visible means of support. *

 

_ *Since this paper was written Dr. Shrubsal has pointed out an added difficulty
in this respect, i.e., that notwithstanding that notice had been given by the Education Authority whilst the child was of school age the Judicial Authority, before
making an Order for detention, would still require the consent of the parent.
THE PRESENT POSITION OF MENTAL DEFICIENCY. 263

* Another of the Statutory difficulties is the stringency of the four
definitions already referred to. They are:— —

1. Idiots. Persons so deeply defective in mind from birth or early
ape as to be unable to guard themselves against common physical
dangers.

2. Imbeciles. Persons in whose case there exists from birth or early
age, mental defectiveness not amounting to idiocy, yet so pronounced that they are incapable of managing their affairs, or, in
the case of children, being taught to do so.

8. Feeble-minded persons. Persons in whose case there exists from
birth or early age mental defectiveness not amounting to imbecility , yet so pronounced that they require care, supervision and
control for their own protection or for the protection of others, or,
in the case of children, that they by reason of such defectiveness
appear to be permanently incapable of receiving proper benefit
from the instruction in ordinary schools.

4. Moral Imbeciles. Persons who from an early age display some
permanent mental defect coupled with strong vicious or criminal
propensities on which punishment has had little or no deterrent
effect.

The latter provision stands out from the others. It contemplates
the case of a person who has, on more than one occasion, been found
guilty of some offence for which he has been punished without good
effect. It is to be noted that it is not mental deficiency shewn by
vicious tendencies, but coupled with such tendencies. It must be very
difficult to satisfy the requirements of the definition so as to act under
it.

The other three definitions are so finely graded that the classes
merge the one into the other. Under each definition the observed condition is to be not so bad as that in the preceding one. Taken in conjunction with the provisions of the Lunacy Acts it provides a complete
range of certifiable conditions. The definition of insanity under the
latter Acts is ‘‘An idiot or person of unsound mind.’’ By Section 80
(3) of the Mental Deficiency Act the Local Authority is to have no duty
to perform in respect of any person who ‘“‘is or might be’’ dealt with
under the Lunacy Act. The range of certifiability is therefore as
follows :—

The insane, and idiots of the worst type, may be certified under the
Lunacy Acts.

Idiots of the milder type, imbeciles and feeble-minded under the

Mental Deficiency Act, and
Harmless lunatics, senile dements, and others not in need of

Asylum treatment under Sec. 24 of the Lunacy Act 1890 for detention

in the Workhouse.

Each of these definitions require that the defect shall have existed
‘‘from birth or early age.’’ Great difficulty arises in practice from
this provision. In a great number of cases the medical man can say
after examination that the conditions observed must have existed from
birth or early age being congenital in character, but this evidence is not
264 EUGENICS REVIEW.

always accepted, the Judicial Authority requiring actual evidence ofa
direct kind from some witness in a position to give such evidence. In
other cases the medical evidence on this point is accepted, but in either
case great difficulty is experienced in satisfying this requirement of the
Statute.

It will be seen that the effect of all these provisions, and the form
in which they appear in the Statute, make the difficulties of certification greater as the age of the defective advances. The difficulties of
obtaining evidence of conditions appearing at birth or earlyageincrease
as that period becomes more remote, and are aggravated if, at the time
of examination, the defective is capable of contributing, however
slightly, to the family income. If the defective is of school age the
difficulties centre round that problem, but if he is above that age, then
to those difficulties is added that of shewing that he is neglected,
abandoned, or without visible means of support. In the result a
considerable number of those for whom the legislation was promoted
escape.

‘AS the feeble-minded mother, or expectant mother, is of necessity
well above the age of 16 years in most cases, she is the most difficult to
deal with, whilst, if she can manage to get married before she becomes
chargeable to the Poor Law in her pregnant condition, as happens in
many cases, she not only escapes from the provisions of the Act entirely ,
but the very indiscretion which it was intended should bring her under
the Act has put her into a position in which reproduction isthe normal
order of events, and probably with greater frequency than would otherwise be the case. This is admirably illustrated by the case shewn in
Diagram No. A2.

In this case a feeble-minded lad (III. 14) was living as a lodger in
ahouse where there was a feeble-minded daughter (III. 7). The
daughter became pregnant and they were married. This was in 1909,
when he was 22 years of age and the girl 20 years. I knew the couple at
that time and have since investigated the ancestry. The man’s
parents lived together from about 1878 until 1881, when they were
married. Four children were born before the marriage and five after.
The mother was one of a family of 14 children, of whom six survived to
adult age. Her father had died in prison and the children with their
mother were supported by the Poor Law; this girl with two others
being inmates of Poor Law Schools. From the time of their first
cohabitation the parents and their children were frequently chargeable
to the Poor Law, five of the surviving children being reared in Poor Law
schools. The man died in the Workhouse in 1888 where he had been
for five years, and his widow hada further child in 1897 which was born
in the workhouse and remained a charge for some years. |

The girl whom this young man married, shewn on the diagram at
ITT. 7, was one of 15 of whom 7 reached adult years. Her parents were
occasionally in the Poor Law institution, and among the surviving
children was a mentally defective epileptic girl.

Since their marriage this couple have had six children, four born
in the workhouse, but only two survive. These children are both in
the Guardians’ schools, whilst the parents are both in the workhouse.
In 1909 the woman was in the workhouse on five occasions, once again
Male. Female.
é Occasi 1
A 2. QO rn ED seniors see

Mo particulars fl Reared in Poor Lav
known Schools

00

@

®t A —
ae @

on0

&)

Small Synbols:
Imbecile CO O Died in infancy.
B. Blind. Di ‘
Chronic auper. . iscon tinuous
poup . Ppa dept ic. lines = Not married
uberculos. a ae
° or illegitimate
F. Feeble minded. child.
Born in workhouse

II.

Il.

2 0 BA CHO @ @ A Ho o8 nOoOoO;°O
IV.

 
THE PRESENT POSITION OF MENTAL DEFICIENCY. 265

in 1917-18, and again in 1819 and continuously until the present time
since April 1921. The man has been chargeable at very frequent
intervals since his birth, with two intervals, once for two years when
he was in Dr. Barnardo’s home and once during the war when he served
for two years in a Labour Battalion. There is no other considerable
interval in the period of his chargeability and he is still an inmate of
the workhouse.

This case brings me to, and illustrates, what is perhaps the most
unfortunate provision of the Mental Deficiency Act, i.e., Section
30 (2). This Section provides that the Local Authority shall have no
duty to perform in respect of any defective who may be chargeable to
the Poor Law, except as may be provided by regulations made with the
sanction of the Ministry of Health. Under this Section a most
elaborate process has been evolved which in effect is so cumbersome
that very few cases chargeable to the Poor Law are brought under the
Act. It provides certain conditions supplementary to those already
given which make the transfer of cases so difficult as to discourage
Poor Law Authorities from attempting to put it into operation. When
it is remembered that the conditions already mentioned (mental
defectiveness plus ‘‘abandoned,’’ neglected or without visible means of
support) are just such conditions as inevitably cause a gravitation of the
defective to the care of the Guardians, it will be seen that the great
majority of defectives over 16 years of age are to be found from time
to time among those provided for by Poor Law Authorities.

The class of defective coming from time to time under the care of
the Guardians is just that class which is not likely to be revealed to the
other authorities concerned. This consists mainly of the homeless,
unsettled, wandering class—often of the higher grade of deficiency—
whose case must be taken up promptly when they become chargeable, or
they disappear, to make a fresh appearance later in some other district.
It is not merely that the Guardians are reluctant to put the slow and
cumbersome machinery into operation but the very circumstances of the
case make it difficult, if not impossible, to do so. In the result the
Boards of Guardians take steps to bring under the Act few cases except
the pregnant feeble-minded girl, or such others as become attached to a
particular district, where they are well known to the Guardians and
return to chargeability after repeated trials at independent life without
success. In all these cases the co-operation between the Local Authority and the Guardians is admirable and the work attended with success.
But the machinery provided is necessarily cumbersome, having
regard to the terms of the Act, and discouraging to even the most
enthusiastic Guardians and their officers.

There is a danger of a too exclusive view being taken of Mental
Deficiency—one of the consequences of an Act which creates a special
class of ‘‘mental deficiency as recognised by law’’ asagainst the whole.
The gradations of defectiveness, the varying quality of mentality in the
family group is apt to be overlooked. It is probably true that the
average standard of mentality in a family in which a defective appears
is below the average in the normal family. From that point of view the
association of insanity and mental defectiveness in the family group is
interesting. Most biologists appear to regard mental defectiveness as a
266 — EUGENICS REVIEW.

distinct condition—a kind of unit character. But both conditions are
often found in the same family group, although not in the same generation. This is what must be expected, since the law of anticipation is,
in mental conditions, an established fact.

In the research undertaken by Miss Kelly and myself, under the
supervision of Sir Frederick Mott, the following instances were observed :—

Group. Insane Mentally deficient.

(60 each) relatives. relatives.
Insane oe .. 80 ve ve 15
Mental Deficient .. 8 a 13 22
Normal “8 se «Ch e e 3

Insanity it will be seen is much more prevalent among relntives of
insane, than among the Mentally Deficient; seldom in the family
history of the normal child. *

I think we may conclude with the following general observations :

(1) By the terms and form of the Mental Deficiency Act two
classes of defectives have been created. (a) Mentally Deficient as
recognised by statute and (b) Mentally Deficient outside the Statute.
Those in the latter class are mainly the ‘high-grade ’’ class, from the
biological point of view the worst. In operation the Act has been
selective, so that the majority of those intended by the Royal Commission to be brought under the Act are excluded.

(2) That for purposes of administration—owing to reasons mainly
of a false economy—a further selection has been made, so that the
higher grade ‘‘within the Act’’ remain uncontrolled.
| (3) There has been a great improvement in administration in the
last few years, particularly since 1921, mainly owing to the fact that the
problem of accommodation is being dealt with. We may expect this
improvement to continue. As the machinery of the Act becomes
better understood, and better known, ‘‘ascertainment’’ will be better,
and some important classes of defectives who escape in the present
generation will be brought within the scope of the Act in the next and
subsequent generations.

 

*See ‘‘Eugenics Review,’’ July, 1921.
