PROBLEMS OF PENAL REFORM

T a luncheon held on April 29th under
the chairmanship of Mr. B. S. Bramwell, Mr. George Benson, M.P., spoke

on the work of the Howard League for Penal
Reform, of which he is president.

It was doubtful, Mr. Benson said, whether
there was any direct relation between
eugenics and crime. Lombroso had put
forward his theory of a criminal type, but
thirty years ago Dr. Goring had made an
extensive anthropometrical study of criminals
in Strangeways Prison, Manchester, and had
found that their cranial measurements were
half-way between those of an Oxford fellow
and a Cambridge don! As to the well-known
Jukes heredity, he believed that this was far
more likely to be a case of the inheritance of
emotional instability and of maladjustment
than of criminal instincts ; he admitted that
a small proportion of the members of this
family were probably incapable of adjusting
themselves, suggesting that in such cases
segregation was the only satisfactory measure
to adopt. But, he maintained, most of the
individuals could have become useful members of the community under the influence of
psychiatric treatment and a good environment.

One of the main obstacles in the way of
penal reform was the muddled attitude of
public opinion towards sin, an offence against
the moral code and, in this country, against
the Christian ethic, and crime, an infringement of the criminal law. There was a deeprooted instinct which called for retribution
on the sinner, though the speaker doubted
whether this operated against the criminal ;
he could not imagine public opinion demanding the punishment of a man who failed to
obtain his dog licence. But where crime and
sin overlapped the offence was punishable
by law and thus the instinct for retaliation
on the offender was satisfied although it was
against Christian and indeed the Biblical
teaching ‘“‘ Vengeance is mine, saith the
Lord, I will repay.”’ The State maintained
the law and punished the law-breaker ;

emotionally this punishment was regarded
as retribution ; by rationalists it was upheld
as a deterrent. But were such savage
punishments as the death penalty and flogging deterrents? The belief that the severer
the punishment the greater the deterrent had
been proved to be the great illusion of
penology. At the beginning of the last
century there were no less than 180 crimes
which incurred the death penalty ; yet the
saying ‘‘ one might as well be hanged for a

. sheep as a lamb” showed how lightly this

particular penalty was regarded, and in fact
as soon as it was revoked there was a great
increase in law-abidingness. Similarly, statistics showed that crime and recidivism had
been more effectively deterred by the
reform of the prisons than by the horrible
conditions prevailing before the Gladstone
Committee was set up at the end of the
nineteenth century ; and in 1938 a Parliamentary Sub-Committee found that flogging
was not more of a deterrent than ordinary
imprisonment.

It was interesting to note that even the
small measure of prison reform which had
already taken place had originated with the
prison authorities and was against public
opinion. In this connection the speaker
instanced an allegation in the Press that
prisoners were being pampered and the
opposition to the latest reform, the payment
for work done by prisoners. |

An essential to further reform was the
classification of prisoners and the abolition
of the local prison to which all offenders
were sent. At present one might find, side
by side, a neurotic sexual offender, a clever
lawyer in for embezzlement and a low-grade
mental defective charged with vagrancy,
prison work and routine being all geared
down to the capabilities of the low-grade

‘mentality. An intelligent penal system was

15

impossible without classification ; its real
aim should be the psychological readjustment of offenders; punishment and retribution were irrelevant.
16 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Discussion

Mr. Benson’s talk was followed by a short
discussion. Replying to a question as to the
proportion of successes among Borstal boys,
he said that correct statistics were very
difficult to obtain, for the longer a boy was
out, the longer he had to get into trouble,
and as the boys grew older it was increasingly
difficult to keep in touch with them. It was
thought that 70 to 75 per cent. of the cases
were successful, but it must be remembered
that Borstal was a last resort, as only boys
with criminal associations were sent there.
As regards first offenders, Mr. Marindin
stated that there had been three Training
Ships, one for each age-group, but the one
for senior boys had been unsatisfactory ;
those for junior and intermediate boys had
been most successful.

Referring to the heredity of crime, Mr.
Gun differentiated between the intelligent
and the unintelligent criminal. In any good
stock there might be a few bad individuals,
but however bad they were usually intelligent ; the unintelligent criminals usually came
from a thoroughly bad stock and became
criminals because they had a bad heredity.

Mrs. Tyssen Gee asked to what extent
children from bad homes were sent to
approved schools. Mr. Benson replied that
such children could be committed for care
and maintenance to such schools, but where
possible local authorities tried to find private
homes for them. Replying to a question by
Mr. Bramwell, he said that there was an
enormous difference in the attitudes of local
authorities and benches, those in: big towns
being far in advance of country districts
which on the whole were reactionary.

Mr. Knaggs suggested that the problem
should be approached from the point of view
of the prisoner; many crimes were committed because of financial expediency. If
we altered the economic system of the
country these crimes would disappear. Mr.
Benson replied that he was a member of the
Howard League because he believed the
penal system should be reformed, and a
member of the Labour Party because he
wanted a change in the economic system of
the country. But as things were at present
he felt he could reply tu guoqgue—the need for
eugenic policies would disappear if social
opinion were so altered that no defective
could find a mate.

To the question whether there was not a
long time-lag in dealing with juvenile
delinquents, he replied that most juveniles
came before summary courts after a delay of
three or four days. There might be longer
delays in the case of adolescents who were
committed with an adult. Mr. Bramwell
asked if the recent increase in juvenile
delinquency was thought to be serious and
Mr. Benson said that he believed that most
of the crimes were those of small boys
getting into mischief, which could be
expected in the present times of emotional
stress. Fourteen was the age at which most
of these delinquencies occurred, after which
there was a decrease : the fact that this was
the age of puberty should be taken into
consideration.

Mr. Bramwell thanked the speaker most
warmly for his address and assured him that
his views had been of the greatest interest
to the Fellows and Members present.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXII, No. 1,
