HEREDITY AND CRIME
Blood Tests and Inheritance in Law
By W. NORWOOD EAST, M.D., M.R.C.P.

ditions may assist in determining the
connection or otherwise of an accused
person with a particular crime is well demonstrated by recent work on the blood groups.
It is now generally recognized that human
blood can be classified by the aid of serological tests into four groups, and it is suggested that these groups might be used to
test the claim of a prisoner that the blood
on his clothes came from a cut made whilst
shaving, and not from his alleged victim.
Dr. Roche Lynch, who has worked at this
subject, states that the test would act definitely on a blood stain a year or so old,
and that the examination of agglutinable property of the blood corpuscle and agglutinin
in the serum provides a double test, and
would be as valuable to prove innocence as
guilt. For if the blood of an accused person belongs to group 2, and the blood on his
clothes to group 2, and the blood of the victim
to group 4, it is certain that the blood on the
clothes of the accused did not come from the
victim. Dr. Roche Lynch found as the
result of a large number of observations that
the blood groups followed Mendelian laws,
and that, for instance, the offspring of
parents whose blood belonged to groups 2
and 4 would have blood belonging to one or
other of those groups, but not to groups 1
and 3. Dr. Roche Lynch and other workers
suggest that the tests may assist in
determining the paternity of a child.

PHYSICAL AND MENTAL STATES

The causal relation between inherited
physical and mental dispositions and crime
is more difficult to assess. To take the
causal relation between inherited physical
states and crime first. Inheritable diseases
may incapacitate the sufferer for work and
produce continuous or intermittent periods
of destitution and privations which may result in crime. Further, in some cases a dis
sk: fact that inherited physical con
abling inherited disease gives rise to a sense
of inferiority or, as it is now fashionably
described, an ‘ inferiority complex ’ which
may be itself an important factor in producing anti-social conduct.

But privations and complexes do not
necessarily cause criminal conduct. Moreover, they may act in concert with some undetected factor which is not connected with
organic inheritance; and the inquirer can
seldom be assured that he is cognizant of
all the contributing causes of any criminal
act. For it must be remembered always
that crime results from a plurality of influences, although in certain cases some outstanding feature may seem to be the
dominating factor.

Some idea of the frequency with which
mental disorder and crime are associated
may be gathered from the following figures.
During the years April rst, 1923, to March
31st, 1926, the total number of receptions
into prisons in England and Wales was
133,401. Of these 1,750 were dealt with
under the Lunacy or Mental Deficiency Acts
—gg2 were insane and 758 were mentally
defective. But since individuals who were
reconvicted more than once were counted
as a fresh reception on re-conviction, the
number of mentally affected prisoners was
larger than 1 in 76, the proportion shown
by the figures. There were also undoubtedly an additional number of unrecorded borderline cases, who should be
taken into consideration, and who would
still further increase the proportion of mentally affected prisoners. Of 14,927 male
remand and trial prisoners who came under
my observation during a period of two years
225 or I.5 per cent. were insane, 205 or 1.3
per cent. were certifiable under the Mental
Deficiency Act, and 212 or 1.4 per cent.
showed uncertifiable but abnormal mental
conditions. In round figures, of 15,000
remand and trial prisoners 3 per cent. were

169
170

certifiable under the Lunacy and Mental
Deficiency Acts and another 2 per cent.
were clearly abnormal mentally. Except as
a statement of fact these figures may appear
unimportant. But practical experience ren\ders it abundantly clear that mental disorder is an important factor in the causation of crime; although the crimes committed by insane persons are at times so
dramatic that the un-informed are liable to
exaggerate the frequency of the association.

The highest authorities recognize an inherited predisposition to mental disorder.
Maudsley in his ‘‘ Pathology of Mind ”’
says: ‘‘ First that a person does not inherit
insanity, but a predisposition or tendency,
and secondly that the tendency comes from
the stock. Nor need the unusual strain in
the stock show itself in any form of actual
insanity, it may appear in some allied nervous disorder, in hypochondriasis and suicide, in feeblemindedness, in dipsomania, in
epilepsy in its manifold forms and other
periodical nerve storms, in eccentricity, in
religious fanaticism, in the melancholic susPicious temperament, in selfish cunning,
avarice and meanness.”’

Professor Richard Berry in the Beattie
Smith Lectures on Insanity delivered in
1926 said, ‘‘ It is unnecessary here to stress
the enormous influence of heredity as a
cause of the developmental insanities, because the records of every properly conducted mental hospital contains thousands
of examples.’’ And Agnes M. Kelly and
E. J. Lidbetter, working under the direction
of the late Sir Frederick Mott, found that
with sixty normal children only four insane
or mentally defective relations were reported, whereas with 60 mentally defective
children there were 30, and with 60 insane
patients 45.

BORSTAL BOYS’ HEREDITY

The medical investigations at the Boys’
Prison at Wandsworth indicate the association of crime with familial mental disorder.
The lads are physically and psychologically
examined before they are recommended for
Borstal training. Voluntary social visitors
work in co-operation with the medical

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

officers, and visit many of the lads’ homes
and obtain information concerning their
family histories, amplifying and checking
the statements made by the prisoners. It
was found that in a series of 1,000 lads insanity and mental deficiency or epilepsy was
reported in 86 cases, and in another 26 there
was a less precise history of familial neuropathic taint. In a series of 650 insane and
mentally defective prisoners under my observation whilst awaiting trial (350 insane
and 300 mentally defective) ror were reported to have insane, mentally defective, or
epileptic relations. I think there can be
little doubt that these figures are an underestimate, for how many informants of good
intention can state accurately what diseases
their grandparents and collaterals suffered
from? And how often is a conspiracy of
silence concerning the presence of mental
disease and defect in the family adopted by
relatives, with consequent ignorance among
the descendants of the actual facts? —

A consideration of the official figures for
1925 indicates that one person in every 204
of the population is known to be insane or
mentally defective. But these figures
clearly understate the facts, for all insane
persons are not certified, and the total number of defectives among the general population is not yet ascertained. It follows that
the number of normal individuals possessing relations who are mentally affected is
very considerable, whereas the number of
persons who possess criminal relations is
probably small. But here again caution is
necessary, for although the number of individuals who are convicted of crime is
known, and also the number of offences reported to the police, there is no means of
knowing how many crimes occur that are
not reported to the authorities, how many
undetected crimes are committed, nor
how many potential criminals remain at
liberty. In fact, the estimates of the number of cases of mental disorder, and the
number of criminals in the general population, and the number of criminals with an
inherited predisposition to mental disorder
have little value for purposes of accurate
comparison and deduction.
HEREDITY AND CRIME

To recapitulate : There can be no doubt
whatever that mental disorder may be
directly a cause of crime, and most people
will agree that the hereditability of mental
disorder is axiomatic. Further, there
seems to be a relation between insane crime
and familial mental disorder, but it cannot be estimated with precision since the
amount of mental disorder and crime among
the general population is unknown.

THE LEGAL POSITION

This conclusion is of practical importance
in the criminal courts. In trials for murder
where the evidence of guilt is clear, and the
nature and circumstances of the crime offer
no prospect of the charge being reduced to
manslaughter, the defence frequently attempts to show that the accused is insane
on little evidence except a family history of
insanity. It is noteworthy that in this
event the medical witness is informed of the
number of insane relations belonging to the
prisoner, but he is usually ignorant of the
total number of relations from whom these
cases are deducted, and his data are always
incomplete for the further reason that he is
unable to determine the effect of miscarriages and contraceptives upon the proportion of insane in the stock under review.
Even if the stock is heavily loaded with the
neuropathic taint or actual insanity the
prisoner may be unaffected, and for the
medical witness the personal history of the
accused is always more important than the
family history. |

Certain dispositions tend to be associated
with crime as a causative factor, and I suppose most of us will accept the view that
temperamental conditions such as impulsiveness, violent temper, the wandering tendency, sexual peculiarities, and the like,
which are sometimes causal factors of criminal conduct, may be inherited. But this
inheritance is compatible with a useful and
law-abiding life, if balanced by other constitutional factors and satisfied by environmental conditions. As I have said already,
crime results from various influences, and
environmental factors such as poverty, overcrowding, defective parental control, vicious

171

example, and uncongenial surroundings
may be important contributors. In some
cases the organic inheritance seems to be the
chief influence, in others the environment.

The matter is still further complicated, for what is inborn is not necessarily inherited, although what is inherited is inborn. And it may be impossible to decide whether, for instance, conduct dominated by the sex instinct is the
result of inheritance, or faulty environment,
or whether inborn influences have affected
the secretion of the gonads, induced cortical
hyperplasia of the supra-renals, or produced
some other endocrine imbalance affecting
sexual conduct.

Neither is it always easy for the inquirer
to approach the subject with unbiassed judgment. The geneticist may be impressed with
the arguments for heredity, the physiologist with endocrine abnormalities, and the
sociologist with the environmental conditions in the alteration of which he sees the
only chance of reformation.

““A PREDISPOSING CAUSE ”

Cyril Burt, as the result of hig researches
into the causation of juvenile delinquency,
concludes that in rather less than half the
cases some deep constitutional failing proves
to be the primary source of misconduct.
The lawless actions of the remainder are
precipitated primarily by the difficulties of
their environment or by the events of their
own past life. He considers that the part
played by heredity or natural endowment is
im a majority of cases that of a minor or predisposing cause.

Mercier considered crime was due to
temptation or opportunity, the environmental factor or stress acting upon the predisposition of the offender, the inherent or
constitutional factor. The more potent the
one factor the less of the other was necessary
to bring about the result. A very powerful
and alluring temptation would break down
the virtue of even a very moral person who
would not succumb to an ordinary temptation. A thoroughly immoral person inured
to crime would require scarcely any temptation, no more in fact than would amount to
172

opportunity, to induce him to commit crime.

The late Sir Bryan Donkin devoted much
thought to the inheritance of mental characters, and to the influence of heredity upon
crime. He considered that the mental
make-up of all men, whether law-breakers
or law-abiders, depended upon inborn
capacities or possibilities of development, as
well as on the multiform agencies from without, which act upon the germinal material
and may influence its development. He
concluded that the various qualities of man
could not be considered for the purpose of
any investigation as simply constitutional or
inborn, without taking account of the external influences on their actual development.
He considered it was impracticable to assess
with any precision the proportionate influence Of the two factors heredity and environment in the development of men’s
minds. ‘This represents my own view, and
I would add that no one accustomed to research among criminals will gainsay that in
their case the assessment is surrounded with
peculiar difficulties.

EXAMPLE AND OPPORTUNITY

The presentation of elaborate genealogical
trees showing pedigrees of crime leave me
unimpressed, for they fail to show how
development and environment influenced the
descendants. The prostitute mother may
have prostitute daughters because their. circumstances strongly favour licentiousness
and abort the growth of moral sentiment.
The sons of a thief may be thieves, but their
thefts may be begotten of example and
opportunity. As Healy observes, ‘‘ Studying the significance of delinquent tenden
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

cies, which may arise through any of a large
number of possible biological, mental, or
social factors is altogether different from
studying the heritage of a Hapsburg lip or
the heredity of feeblemindedness.”’

Amidst so much doubt concerning the
essential nature of mental dispositions, and
so much doubt concerning the dividing line
between inheritance and acquirement the
ultimate conclusion seems to me to be this:
Heredity may condition crime in an important but variable and indirect manner, not
by begetting criminals, but by the transmission through the germ plasm of tendencies
to insanity, mental deficiency, temperamental instability, or faulty development of
some primitive instinct antagonistic to social
adjustment. If this be so eugenic endeavours to improve the physique and
mental stability of the nation may have a
part in the prevention of crime, but only a
part. The acquired influences must be
dealt with also, and as a rule the environment can be more easily, more quickly, and
more certainly altered than the personality
of the delinquent. In some cases inherited
personal failings may be socially adjusted
by precept and example; in many delinquent conduct can be checked only by
changes in both personality and environment. And it seems probable, that those
who only commit crime occasionally have
environment as the basis of their delinquency.

However this may be, organic evolution
ever lags behind social evolution, and motor
car legislation and prohibition laws suggest
that eugenically controlled matings would
fail to produce a crimeless race.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XX, No. 3.
