THE PHILOSOPHY OF WILFRED TROTTER

AND ITS BEARING ON EUGENICS
By CECIL W. USHER

great work The Instincts of the Herd in

Peace and War, drew attention to the
vast difference in time scale of history and
biology. “‘ It is scarcely to be expected,” he
said, ‘‘ that even a gross movement on the
cramped historical scale will be capable of
detection in the vast gulf of time the biological series represents.’’! Nevertheless, he
continued, “the infinitely long road still
tending upwards comes to where it branches
and meets another path, tending perhaps
downwards or even upwards at a different
slope ...a node in the infinite line...a
point ... capable of recognition by a finite
mind and of expression in terms of human
affairs.”” It was his belief that the human
race “‘ stands at such a nodal point to-day.’
Subsequent events—notably the production
of atomic weapons—have gone far to confirm
the sagacity of that belief.

Race Survival

Galton said that eugenics “‘ deals with all
influences that improve the inborn qualities
of race ’’—but unless some vigorous steps are
soon taken it may well be that there will be
no race left at all, inborn qualities improved
or not. It is therefore the purpose of these
notes to ask whether there is not some line of
research other than positive and negative
eugenics, as described in the pamphlet Azms
and Objects of the Eugenics Society, which
might yield results with greater rapidity.

Is it not possible that attention has been
too much focused on “defect ’’ and on the
elimination of defective stock? Can it be
that, in our concern to bring about improvement of the individuals of our race, we are
neglecting alternative lines of research ?

One thing is certain. It has not been the
“‘ defectives ’’ who have brought about the
major calamities to civilization and culture :
such disasters are, in fact, the work of extremely able individuals. Thus it might not

SE" years ago Wilfred Trotter, in his

be too fanciful to suggest that whilst diligent
attention is being paid to hygiene and sanitation between the decks of the Ship of State,
there is brawling and confusion on the bridge
—and the ship itself fast heading for the
rocks.

Trotter frequently speculated on this
theme ; and as so many of his speculations
have turned into such very unpleasant
realities, it would be less than prudent to.
ignore the warning.

Man’s Gregarious Inheritance

It was his view that society is not making
use of man’s gregarious inheritance to “‘ anything approaching”’ the full possibilities.
“‘ To such an extent is this the case,”’ he said,
“ that the situation of man as a species even
is probably a good deal more precarious than
has usually been supposed by those who have
come to be in charge of its destinies. The
species is irrevocably committed to a certain
evolutionary path by the inheritance of
instinct it possesses. This course brings with
it inevitable and serious disadvantages as
well as enormously greater potential advantages. As long as the spirit of the race is
content to be submissive to the former and
indifferent to the discovery and development of the latter, it can scarcely have a
bare certainty of survival and much less of
progressive enlargement of its powers.’’®

Constructive and Destructive Forces

And again : ‘‘ Throughout the enormously
long period during which modern man has
been established on the earth, human society
has been left to the uncontrolled contention
of constructive and destructive forces, and in
the long run the destructive have always
proved the stronger. Whether the general
level of consciousness will reach the height
necessary to give a decisive predominance to
constructive tendencies, and whether such a
development will occur in time to save

149
150

Western civilization from the fate of its predecessors, are open questions,’’4

We may well inquire whether the problems
of man’s inherited gregarious instinct, a
subject “which proved so fruitful in Trotter’s
hands, should not receive close study by
eugenists. If this is to be done it will be
necessary, for the moment, to leave the
questions of physical and mental defects and
the prevention of their transmission, and
concentrate attention on the fittest of our
race and on the ablest brains and endeavour
to discover where these ‘‘ enormously greater
potential advantages *’ spoken of by Trotter
are concealed.

Corollaries of Gregariousness

They are to be found amongst the corollaries that accompany man’s inherited gregarious mental qualities. These are truly
instinctive qualities which, so long as man is
man, will remain with him. Thus it seems
that the most profitable line of approach will
be first to endeavour to identify these qualities ; it might then be possible to devise some
counter influences, and in this manner
achieve results in the direction in which all
eugenists must wish to see man travel.

It is not possible to adduce in a paper of
this nature the evidence and reasons developed by Trotter, but it is necessary to
give—however summarily—some of the
headings under which the arguments belong,
even though they can do little more than
refresh the memories of those already
familiar with Trotter’s views.

Two Significant Evolutionary Advances
Taking a comprehensive survey of the
whole evolution of life it is impossible not to
recognize two advances of a quite dramatic
nature, each of which carried with it the
most tremendous potentialities for further
advancement. The first, of course, was when
the single cell had attained the maximum of
complexity and two or more fully developed
cells remained together, or developed together, and formed the foundation of multicellular organisms. The universality of this
step in each kingdom is all the evidence required to show this to be a fundamental and

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

inevitable principle if development is to
proceed further.

The next step is when multicellular animal
organisms have again reached a maximum
of complexity and a number of these organisms remain together and form a superorganism or “‘ major unit.’”’ It is only necessary to mention the words “‘ flock,’’ “‘ herd,”
“pack,” “swarm,” “ tribe,” etc., to show
that this step is also fundamental and inevitable in the animal kingdom if development is
destined to continue.

Solitary and Gregarious Species

But the inherited mental reactions of an
individual born into a species which has
become gregarious are bound to show certain
marked differences from the mental reactions
of an individual belonging to a solitary
species. The gregarious individual will have
all his “normal” or “simple” reactions
coloured and modified by the requirements
of the “‘ major organism ”’ to which he belongs
regardless of the consequences (often fatal)
to himself. He must feed when the herd
feeds, and flee because the herd is fleeing. To’
hesitate and investigate the reason would
spell swift destruction. He must develop an
inner unquestioning sensitiveness to the
feeling, or “‘ spirit,’”’ of his fellows; resistance to impulses bearing signs of herd sanction must be suppressed.

Trotter gives a homely but very telling
illustration of these qualities in describing
the differential reactions of a dog and a cat
each caught in the commission of an offence.
“... both recognize that punishment is
coming: but the dog, moreover, knows that
he has done wrong, and he will come to be
punished, unwillingly it is true, and as if,
dragged along by some power outside him,
while the cat’s sole impulse is to escape. The
rational recognition of the sequence of act
and punishment is equally clear to the
gregarious and the solitary animal, but it is
the former only who understands that he
has committed a crime, who has, in fact,
the sense of sin.” ... “‘ Conscience... and
the feelings of guilt and of duty are the
peculiar possessions of the gregarious
animal.’’5 |
THE PHILOSOPHY OF WILFRED TROTTER

Altruism:

We are here on the threshold of a better
understanding of the pleasure of service to
others, of altruism and self-sacrifice, of the
satisfaction enjoyed in performing the unwelcome duty : emotions which have hitherto appeared as anomalies in the mental
make-up of a predaceous animal such as man.
But Trotter placed upon such qualities a
biological significance as great as that of selfesteem, yet with an immensely enhanced
potentiality for the further advancement of
our species. Indeed, we are here in contact
with the foundations of our own interest in
eugenics.

It is thus clear that impressions arising in
the conscious mind of man must carry with
them a formation due to his being a gregarious species. It will be quite futile to endeavour to assess the “‘truth”’ of these
impressions subjectively, for each will be
“an a priort synthesis of the most perfect
sort ’’§ and will appear to the reasoning mind
as a perfectly self-evident, obvious proposition, needing neither justification nor
analysis. |

Mental Normality

Needless to say, the specious nature of
pure reasoning has been realized for a very
long time, and psychologists have reaped a
rich harvest of results in this field. But the
bulk of the work has been centred round
abnormality and has been content to accept
as a norm the standard set by the majority.
To amplify that definition it would be fair to
say that an acceptable norm is the beliefs
and habits of the majority of individuals of
the same nationality, brought up in the same
country, at approximately the same time, of
the same religion, of the same sex, and of
about the same age. It goes without saying
that such beliefs and habits bear very little
resemblance to an absolute norm, and are
not conducive to a really pure reasoning.

To return to the analogy of the Ship of
State, it is as though painstaking research
has resulted in a perfection of hull contour
and propeller efficiency whilst very little is
known of the internal electro-magnetic
forces which are disturbing the compass.

151

Again, in speaking of philosophy, Trotter
mentions that it has been cultivated by
perhaps most of the ablest minds the human
race has produced. “It has evolved innumerable systems of doctrine, each rationally proved by its founder to be true, and all
inconsistent with one another. No enterprise
has ever been longer or better pursued than
the effort to find a body of philosophic doctrine which should compel the universal
assent of rational minds. An experiment that
has gone on failing for two and a half
millennia may well make us wonder whether
the apparatus is adequate or the method
sound.’”

Then, in speaking of the intellect, Trotter
said: “‘ For a good deal longer than two
thousand years the ablest men of every age
have been fidgeting with the mechanism of
the intellect in the hope of helping mankind
to think and therefore behave reasonably.
The state of the world to-day (June 1939)
cannot but suggest that if practical thought
is to become strong enough to help in saving
our social systems from their increasing confusions, some more radical corrective is
necessary. ®

In this connection it is interesting to recall
that we are forced to employ identically the
same mechanism for the solution of a momentous problem as for a trivial problem.
Doubtless a momentous problem receives
longer deliberation, but the conclusion in
each case is limited by the same defects of
mechanism. Thus the longer deliberation is
similar toa prolonged microscopical examination under a low-power objective, with no
possibility of changing to high-power.

However, since the intellect is the only
instrument we possess for thinking, it is to
this instrument and its peculiarities that
attention must be devoted.

The Correction of Thought

‘The correction of instrumental errors,’
wrote Trotter, “‘is a familiar idea in practical science. The maker, having turned out
as perfect an instrument as he knows how,
studies the quality of its performance. Any
error now found is to be dealt with not by
tinkering with the machine, but by having
152

the constancy and amount of it carefully
estimated and stated in a form that can be
applied to the results. It is this method that
forces itself upon us in determining the function of the intellect, and rendering it fully
available. Psychology has told us a great
deal about the working of the mind, and in
an incidental way about its liabilities to
error: but it has not systematically undertaken just this special practical task of, as
it were, calibrating the intellect for the contemplation of ordinary experience.’’®

Calibration of the Intellect

“The calibration of the intellect ’’ is not
a new idea, albeit that it has not before been
couched in such apt phraseology. Professor
Geoffrey Jefferson has recently drawn attention to some earlier attempts in this direction. But all previous adventures have
been fatally handicapped by lack of knowledge of the corollaries of man’s gregarious
inheritance and of the manner in which these
corollaries appear in conscious thought. All
such attempts were therefore foredoomed to
failure. It might, however, eventually come
to be shown, when the underlying influences
at work on man’s gregarious nature have been
identified, that his notorious variety of
response to similar stimuli is only masking an
almost startling uniformity.

Mind and Reason

“In the first place,” Trotter reminded us,
“we must get rid of the disastrous belief
that there is any activity of the mind corresponding with the conception of pure reason.
The mind has no such function. All processes
of reasoning, however abstract, are participated in and influenced by feeling.’’™
Moreover, the only quality that lends itself
to accurate abstraction is number (“five
digits in the mind are as good as regards
number as five fingers of the hand ’’!*) and
all other abstractions are tainted at their
source and cannot lead us of themselves to
conclusions of any practical value. “It is
necessary here to guard ourselves from
thinking that the practice of the scientific
method enlarges the powers of the mind.
Nothing is more flatly contradicted by

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

experience than the belief that a man, distinguished in one or even several, departments of science, is more likely to think
sensibly about ordinary affairs than anyone else.’’18 1

However, the gregarious instinct can be
shown to be “‘ a definite fact of biology which
must have consequences as precise and a
significance as ascertainable as the secretion
of the gastric juice or the refracting apparatus
of the eye ’’!4; and when it is recalled how
accurate the speculations of Trotter have
proved to be as the years have passed, there
can be little doubt that he bequeathed to usa
line of investigation which we ignore at our
peril.

The course of events has now been greatly
accelerated by the achievement of atomic
fission: to doubt whether this knowledge
will be put to destructive purposes commits
one to the proposition that man’s nature has
changed since 1945. Unless some steps are
taken to counter that nature it may well be
that “. . . civilizations will continue to rise
and fall in a dreadful sameness of alternating
aspiration and despair until perhaps some
lucky accident of confusion finds for humanity in extinction the rest it could never
win for itself in life.’’15

These notes are therefore a plea for further
research into the gregarious instinct and its
corollaries and the consequent “ calibration
of the intellect ’’ envisaged by Trotter.
““ Unless such a work can be done,” he said,
“it seems probable that the ominous
fatuity and confusion that mark our social
and political affairs must continue to
increase.’’16

Summary

Before, therefore, we can consider ourselves free to devote attention to the
“improvement of the inborn qualities of a
race,’ it is first incumbent upon us to ensure
the continuation of the race itself. And
secondly it is becoming more and more
important that governments should have
access to reliable information regarding the
qualities and predictable reactions of the
material with which they have to deal, i.e.
human beings in a specific environment. At
THE PHILOSOPHY OF WILFRED TROTTER

present it would appear that this tremendously important field of knowledge is largely
guesswork. Commander Stephen King-Hall
recently said, “‘ The public would indeed be
astonished and even alarmed if it knew how
casually and ‘ad hockily ’ the affairs of mankind are conducted by its rulers.’”’!7 Added
to which is the fact that the minds of rulers
suffer from all the basic defects of the minds
of those who are led. To all of these ends it
would appear that research on the lines
indicated by Wilfred Trotter is fundamental.

In concluding an address to the Institute
of Pathology at St. Mary’s Hospital, Trotter
said a word about our liking to believe that
we are receptive of new ideas. “‘ Unfortunately,” he said, “this is the exact opposite
of the truth. The mind likes a strange idea
as little as the body likes a strange protein,
and resists it with a similar energy. It would
not perhaps be too fanciful to say that a new
idea is the most quickly acting antigen
known to science. If we watch ourselves

SOCIETY

\

153

honestly we shall find that we have begun to
argue against a new idea even before it has
been completely stated. I have no doubt
that that last sentence has already met with
repudiation—and shown how quickly the
defence mechanism gets to work.’

REFERENCES

1 The Instincts of the Herd in Peace and War, p. 100.
2 [bid., p. 1ot.
3 Ibid., p. 134.
‘ Ibid. p. 259.
5 Ibid., p. 40. ;
* Principles of Psychology, by William James,
quoted in The Instincts of the Herd, p. 15.
7 The Collected Papers of Wilfred Trotter, F.R.S.,
P- 177.
8 [bid., p. 183.
9 Ibid., p. 183.
10 Jefferson, oe (1948),
Brit. Med. J., 1,3
1 The Collected. Papers, p. 184.
Ibid., p. 175.
Ibid., p. 181.
The Instincts of the Herd, p. 21.
Ibid., p. 247.
The Collected Papers, p. 184.
National News-Letter, No. 627, July 29th, 1948.
The Collected Papers, p. 186.

“ Scepsis Scientifica,”’

13
18
14
15
16
17
18

OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION

‘* For the promotion of knowledge of the course of legislation in different countries, more particularly in the several
parts of His Majesty’s Dominions, and in the United States.”’
President: The Rt. Hon. Lord MACMILLAN, G.C.V.O.

Chairman of the Executive Committee: The Rt. Hon. Lord DU PARCQ

Editors: Sir ARNOLD McNAIR, K.C. Sir CECIL CARR, K.C.B., K.C.,
assisted by
Professor H. C. GUTTERIDGE, K.C., and F. H. LAWSON, Esq., D.C.L.
Honorary Secretary: C. E. A. BEDWELL, Esq.

Annual Subscription - a - ONE GUINEA

Address : THE ROYAL EMPIRE SOCIETY, NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, LONDON, W.C.2
