REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 165

instances, mostly well known, of this kind of relation, the book seems to

shed little fresh light on the problem of evolution.
L. DONCASTER.

Haldane, J. S., M.D., LL.D., F.R.S. Mechanism, Life, and Personality: An Examination of the Mechanistic Theory of Life and
Mind. London. John Murray; 1913; price 2s. 6d.; pp. 1309.
In this book of four lectures delivered last May at Guy’s Hospital, Dr.
Haldane has developed, in a remarkably attractive and assimilable form,
his views on a subject of unfailing interest. Commencing with a fair
and lucid exposition of the mechanistic hypothesis of living organisms
and the physiological observations upon which this hypothesis is founded,
he discusses more superficially the objections raised in favour of vitalism,
only to reject this alternative hypothesis as “unproved, unintelligible,
and practically useless as a scientific working hypothesis.”

On such a clear and tangible foundation it is a little disappointing to
find that the mechanistic hypothesis is rejected on no better ground than
that of the extreme complexity of the intracellular mechanisms required
for the ordinary functions of cell life, and for heredity; in view of our
ignorance of the possibilities of molecular structure, such a conclusion
would seem to be somewhat presumptuous. Moreover, when we look
further for an alternative hypothesis, we are merely frustrated by a
philosophical discussion on the reality of the phenomenal universe, and
a not very relevant presentation of idealism.

That there is nothing in the mechanistic hypothesis which is inconsistent with the purest idealism must be familiar to all students of
Huxley; and we imagine that Hume would have particularly resented the
assertion (p. 74) that he had proved the world of matter to be nonexistent. Nor does it help matters to place organic beings in a special
category; if the physicist is right in attempting to express the relations
between physical quantities in terms of mathematical symbols, although
the symbols are avowedly not physical quantities, the physiologist is
equally right in explaining physiological mechanisms, even the most
obscure and intricate, in terms of physics and chemistry.

It is, indeed, to be regretted that Dr. Haldane, in developing speculations of great philosophical interest, should have founded them, in
appearance, upon the supposed inadequacy of the mechanistic theory; for
not only does he fail to establish this inadequacy, but there remains
between the physiological and the philosophical portions of his reasoning
an unbridged gap in an argument, which in other respects he has taken
pains to make complete.

Unquestionably the best lecture of the four, both from the literary
and from the scientific point of view, is the last, entitled “ Personality.”
Here, in a purely philosophical region, the author develops the consequences of the thesis that the phenomenal world is a product of personality; and in particular of the personality of an organism, itself
adapted to its environment. The conception bristles with paradoxes,
and it is only by appealing to an ultimate unity in the universe of personality that it is possible to escape from the sophistry of “ racial
solempsism”; nevertheless, it is by powerful reasoning as well as by
brilliant creative thought that we are led to the conclusion, that “ This
world and all that lies within it is a spiritual world.” R. A. FISHER.

Dealey, JAMES QUAYLE. The Family in Its Sociological Aspects. London.
G. G. Harrap and Co.; 1913; price 1s. 6d. net; pp. 137.
THIs little book does singularly little justice to its title. The first seven
chapters comprise a somewhat poor and unconvincing historical outline,
culminating in the modern family of American democracy.
“It is possible, therefore, to get a much clearer idea of the modern
family, in its later aspects at least, from a study of the American family
166 EUGENICS REVIEW.

than from a study of the varying types prevalent throughout Western
civilisation as a whole. Modern democratic movements have affected it
profoundly, and there is evolving in consequence a type of family which
itself reacts on democracy and aids in its development. It is probable
that the American family represents, notwithstanding its transitional conditions, a movement towards a higher type of family than any now existing
and will furnish the basis on which will rest the better civilisation ot
coming centuries” (p. 76).

Primarily concerned as he is with this almost vestigial form of the
lamily, surviving in modern conditions, we can perhaps understand why
Mr. Dealey is satisfied to consider the position of marriage and divorce
in relation to Church and State, as the principal sociological aspect of the
family in the past.

The four remaining chapters, concerning subjects with which the
author is evidently better fitted to deal, contain an interesting account of
the effects of urban conditions, and a survey of the methods by which these
effects might be combated.

Mr. Dealey advocates a vigorous social policy for all the evils of city
life, including somewhat drastic restrictive eugenics; while powerful
efforts to inculcate higher ethical ideals are to complete the process of
racial regeneration.

“This is the age of the child, emphasising its rights and demanding
that every child born into the world has honourable parentage, right
training, a morally stimulating environment, and full opportunity through
education to make the most of his latent powers. A civilisation with such
aims need have no fear of racial decadence, but rather may rely on a
pure family life, a permanent monogamous tie, and a society largely free
from its present defilements ” (p. 134). R. A. FISHER.

Sehofield, Dr. A. T. and Vaughan-Jaekson, Dr. P. What a Boy Should
Know. London. Cassell; 1913; price 2s. 6d.; pp. 118.

THERE is little to be said about this book, except that of its kind it is

good; it is written simply, clearly and delicately, and it is hardly possible

to imagine the most fastidious parent taking exception to any phrase

throughout.

Nevertheless, we cannot resist the opportunity of remarking that in
our opinion the book is part of a mistaken system of giving moral instruction to young boys. We hold strongly the necessity of such instruction,
but the grand question is not the what? but the how? and this question
is not answered by any book, whether addressed to boys or to parents.
That is to say, anyone with any insight into moral problems and boy
life must be aware that even a book like this one is sure to be suited to a
few youngsters and unsuited to a good many more. It is probable that
to those for whom it is unsuited it would do no harm. Some, if left to
themselves, would find it dull; some would feel their curiosity stirred and
would wish to know more than the book tells them; to a small minority
it would be exactly what is wanted; but those who would find it sufficient
in itself would be only a handful.

The facts of human nature must be faced, and the first is the
immeasurable difference between temperaments and minds. Among boys
exposed to the same influences, one at 14 will be found to be wholly
ignorant of natural processes, while another will have become morbidly
interested in them at 10. If the problem is considered which arises out
of this diversity, we think there should be agreement on the method of
imparting the teaching; and we believe the soundest to be as follows :—
First, there should be a determination to make this instruction part of
the general training in self-control on its moral side, and on its intellectual side part of the general intellectual training given first by the mother,
then by the father. Broadly speaking, it is hardly possible to avoid the
