FUTURE TRENDS IN POPULATION"
By R. R. KUCZYNSKI

F I had had the privilege of talking on

future trends in population to an audience

like this on May 25th, 1837, I might well
have begun by saying: “It is practically
impossible to discuss future population
trends in England because England, unlike
the Scandinavian countries (Denmark, Finland, Sweden and Norway), unlike France,
Belgium, and Austria, has not yet comprehensive records of births and deaths. But on
July 1st, the Act for Registering Burths,
Deaths, and Marriages in England, which has
been opposed so strongly by the clergy, will
come into operation, and I feel confident that
in a few years from now we shall have all
those basic data on reproduction which
Sweden has had for over sixty years.”” Toa
modern demographer who knows that in
England even to-day some of these data, and
in fact the most important, are not available,
the optimism which I would have displayed
in 1837 may seem rather foolish. But I think
there are some extenuating circumstances :
England had produced John Graunt, the
founder of vital statistics ; she had produced
Edmund Halley who discovered the basic
principles which we still apply to-day in
measuring mortality; she had produced
Malthus who did more to arouse interest in
the problems of reproduction than any man
before or since.

Registration Statistics instead of Vital Statistics

How, then, is it to be explained that the
hopes which demographers, a hundred years
ago, may have cherished for the future of
English vital statistics were fulfilled only to a
limited extent, and that people who, like ourselves, are interested in the future population
trends of England will, five weeks from now,
commemorate with mixed feelings the centenary of the beginning of civil birth and
death registration in England? The principal

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on May
25th, 1937.

99

reason, I think, is that these records were
started by men who were interested mainly
in the legal aspects of registration and that
this viewpoint is predominant even now.
One consequence thereof is that all statistics
published by the Registrar-General are
registration statistics and not vital statistics.
From the beginning of registration, the date
of birth or death was ascertained, of course,
but in preparing the statistics no account was
ever taken of the dates on which the registered events occurred, and all official reports
show births and deaths according to the date
of registration.*

This defect may at first sight seem a trivial
matter, but it is not so. The time-lag between the occurrence of the event and its
registration is, to be sure, rather irrelevant if
you compare the number of deaths in various

* A few days after I had delivered this address, my
attention was called to the fact that of the twenty-three
tables on mortality embodied in the Registrar-General’s
annual report, one shows the deaths by months of
occurrence. The above statement, therefore, is not
correct so far as deaths are concerned. The table in
question is introduced in the report for 1935 by two
notes: ‘‘ (a) The figures for the last three months of
1935 are not available at the time of going to press ; (6)
Totals for any period made up from this table will differ
from the corresponding figures shown in other tables
which are tabulated according to date of registration.”
A comparison leads to the following results :

Registered Occurred Difference

Last Quarter 1934 114,331 113,493 + 838
First Quarter 1935 132,657 134,194 —1,537
Second Quarter 1935 121,935 121,253 + 682
Third Quarter 1935 100,066 98,913 +1,153

Total 468,989 467,853 +1,136

The differences are greater than I expected them to
be because I assumed that deaths, apart from exceptional cases, are reported within five days. If this
assumption were correct, Note (a) would not be understandable. Had I been aware of this table, I would have
emphasized more strongly the necessity of making
available all the death data by date of occurrence. As
matters stand, the value of the data contained in all the
other twenty-two tables is impaired by the lag of time
between the death and its registration. This is, for
example, also true of the official life-tables. There is no
point, it seems to me, in applying most refined methods
in computing life-tables as long as the basic data are
not the deaths occurring in a definite period of time.
I0o

years since deaths must be registered within
five days, and usually are so. But when it
comes to studying closely the trend of mortality during a short period, the official
statistics lack the necessary precision. The
deaths from influenza recorded in the Great
Towns for each of the five weeks between
January 3rd and February 6th, 1937, numbered 768, 1,100, I,137, 1,155, and 976
respectively. But it would be rash to conclude therefrom that the peak of mortality
was reached in the last week of January, as
the figures appear to suggest. The deaths
registered in that week, which ended January
30th, comprised firstly almost all the deaths
occurring on January 24th, 25th and 26th,
secondly, a more or less considerable portion
of the deaths occurring on January 2oth,
21st, 22nd, 23rd, 27th, 28th, 29th and 30th,
and thirdly, some deaths occurring before
January 20th which had not been registered
in due time. It seems then more likely that
the maximum number of deaths actually
occurred either in the second or the third
week of January. But is it not rather awkward that after a hundred years of death
registration and in spite of all the pains
physicians take in preparing accurate medical certificates of the cause of death, the
answer to the question, ““ When was the peak
of mortality reached in the last influenza
epidemic? ”’ is, so to speak, anybody’s guess?

Results of Lag between Births and their
Registration

On the whole, however, the consequences
of the fact that we have in England merely
registration statistics are much more serious
in connection with births, since the time
which is allowed to expire, between the birth
and the registry, is six weeks and since a
registration fee is charged only when a birth
is not registered within three months. So far
as births are concerned, the weekly reports
of the Registrar-General reflect indeed merely
the changes in the amount of work performed
by the local registrars. How little these
changes correspond to actual changes in the
frequency of births may be illustrated by one
example. In the Great Towns, 5,750 births
were registered in the week ended December

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

21st, 1935, the number dropped to 3,677 in
the week ended December 28th, and jumped
to 6,786 in the following week. Although the
oscillations are not in every year as great as
this, the number of registered births is always
particularly low in Christmas week and
always particularly high in the week
following.

The long delay allowed in registering
births has the consequence that the quarterly
returns of registered births likewise throw
only a very dim light on the actual fluctuations in the number of births. It should be
noted in particular that the section “‘ Natural
Increase or Decrease ”’ which appears in each
quarterly report is utterly misleading. In the
last report, the one for the quarter ended
December 31st, 1936, this section read:
“The natural increase of population by
excess of births over deaths was 21,360 as
against natural increases of 7,729, 28,178 and
18,260 in the corresponding quarters of 1933,
1934 and 1935.” But since the births registered during a quarter comprise probably
something like 30 or 35 per cent. of the births
occurring in the preceding quarter and something like 65 or 70 per cent. of the births
occurring in the quarter of registration while
the deaths comprise about 2 or 3 per cent. of
the deaths occurring in the preceding quarter
and 97 or 98 per cent. of the deaths occurring
in the quarter of registration, the figures
officially stated to represent the natural increase in a given quarter are altogether untrustworthy. Since moreover the percentages
just mentioned naturally vary all the time a
comparison of the excess of registered births
over registered deaths in various quarters is
perfectly futile. All this is obvious, but unfortunately, is little known. Very few authors
writing on seasonal fluctuations of births in
England seem to be aware that what they
discuss are in fact seasonal fluctuations in the
numbers of registrations, and that, for
example, the usual increase in the number of
births from the last quarter of one year to the
first quarter of the next is, in part at any rate,
fictitious.

Even the yearly birth figures do not necessarily convey a true picture of the actual
changes in the numbers of births. The
FUTURE TRENDS IN POPULATION

number of registered births decreased from
613,972 in 1932 to 580,413 in 1933, and rose
again to 597,642 in 1934. It is evident that
the actual number of births in 1933 must
have been smaller than in 1932 and 1934.
But it is doubtful whether the difference was
as large as indicated by the statistics of
registration, and my doubts are enhanced by
the fact that the number of registrations in
the last quarter of 1933 was over 10,000
lower than in any other quarter from 1850 to
this day. If we then compare the births
registered in 1934, 1935 and 1936, we find
that they numbered 597,642, 598,756 and
605,659 respectively. In view of the discrepancy between the dates of occurrence
and the dates of registration these differences
are so small—especially if one takes into consideration the extraordinarily large drop in
birth registrations in the Christmas week of
1935, and the additional opportunity of
registering births in 1936, it being a leap year
—that it is impossible to tell whether births
actually increased between 1934 and 1936.
But there remains the fact that the average
number of births registered in these three
years exceeded that of 1933 by about 20,000,
and you know the far-reaching conclusions
which have been drawn from this fact. It
may also seem at first sight that it really does
not matter so much how large the increase in
births actually was, whether it amounted to,
say, 15,000 or 25,000. But if you consider
that the average number of marriages in the
years 1933 to 1935 was by about 30,000
higher than in 1932, you will easily understand that registration statistics which leave
it open whether births have increased by
15,000 or by 25,000 are no adequate substitute for vital statistics.

Omission of Maternal Age, Birth Order, and

Duration of Marriage

Another deplorable consequence of the fact
that birth and death records in England were
started by men who were interested mainly in
the legal aspects of registration was that the
needs of the demographer were sorely
neglected in preparing the registration forms.
Such a simple question as the age of the
mother which has been asked in Sweden

Ior

since 1774 was not included in the English
birth schedule. The order of birth was likewise omitted. William Farr, who in 1839
was appointed Compiler of Abstracts in the
General Register Office, repeatedly deplored
the lack of such information. In a letter to
the Registrar-General, published as an Appendix to the Annual Report for 1867, he
stated : |

Two grave defects in the registers of the United

Kingdom deprive them of much of their utility as
pedigrees, and as records of facts for the solution
of the great problems of population. Neither the
age of mothers at the births of each of their
children, nor the order of birth, is recorded ; so
that the number of children borne by women at
different ages, and in the course of their lives,
cannot be ascertained.

In 1869, at The Hague, he “ fully indorsed’’ the resolution accepted by the
International Statistical Institute, ‘‘ That in
each birth-registration certificate the age of
the mother, and for the legitimate children
also that of the father be stated, and that
those data be compiled in tables by age, distinguishing the married woman from the unmarried.” Fifty years later ‘‘ the First Conference of Government Officers engaged in
dealing with Statistics in the British Empire”’
accepted a resolution, ‘‘ That all birth registers should contain a record of the age of each
parent and the number of children previously
born to the same marriage, distinguishing
between those living and those dead.” But
England remained adamant. On July ist,
therefore, we can celebrate two anniversaries :
the centenary of the introduction of the birth
and death registration, and the centenary of
the birth and death registration forms of
1837, which have survived without an alteration up to the present day.

We are thus confronted with the following
situation: while nearly all other countries
predominantly inhabited by Whites, including Canada, Australia, and New Zealand,
publish the number of births according to the
age of parents, and while many of them publish in addition the order of birth and the
duration of marriage at birth, yet all these
data are lacking for the United Kingdom. As
a consequence thereof our ignorance of some
of the most elementary facts of human life is
102

simply appalling. Let me illustrate this by
one example. I am speaking here to an
audience which has an exceptionally good
judgment on conditions surrounding marriage. But if I were to ask you to write ona
slip of paper the percentage of first-born
legitimate children who, you think, are born
in this country in the first seven or eight
months of marriage, I feel sure your answers
would vary enormously, they would vary
perhaps between 5 and 50 per cent. My own
guess, by the way, would be nearer to 50 than
to 5 per cent., because I happen to remember that at the census of 1911 something like
20 per cent. of the couples married for less
than a year overstated the duration of their
marriage in order to conceal the fact that
their children had been conceived before the
wedding. Since couples with no child had no
reason to pretend that they had been married
for over a year, and since probably many
couples who had a child of over three months,
inadvertently (or because they did not mind)
stated that they had been married for less
than a year, the proportion of first-born
legitimate children conceived before marriage
must have been very large indeed. The lack
of adequate information concerning the duration of marriage at the time of each birth
renders the task of the students of future
population trends and in particular of those
who will be called to frame a population
policy unnecessarily difficult because they
are not in a position to analyze, for example,
the trend in the total number of children conceived out of wedlock, who constitute perhaps 15 or 20 per cent. of all children, while
the proportion of children ilegitimately born
is only 4 per cent.

The defect in the birth registration form,
however, which rightly has been complained
of more than any other is the absence of a
question bearing on the age of the mother. In
order to measure population trends we must,
first of all, know the fertility of women at
various ages, and this presupposes the knowledge of the age of mothers at the birth of
their children. Now let us suppose we knew
as little of the ages of mothers for all other
countries as we know for England. In computing the reproduction of the women in

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

England we might then start by assuming an
equal fertility of women at all ages between
fifteen and fifty years, and would thus find
for 1933 a gross reproduction rate of 0-89.
It would, however, occur to us that this is
most likely an overstatement since fertility
is higher at the younger ages which at the
same time comprise a larger number of
women. We might then make a second computation, assuming that all children were
borne by women in the age group of twentyfive to twenty-nine years, which was the
largest of all age groups for this year, and
would thereby obtain a gross reproduction
rate of 0-80. But I do not see what more we
could do, and our conclusion would be that
the gross reproduction rate must be somewhere between 0:80 and 0:89. Since, however, we know the ages of mothers at each
birth for many other countries, we may go a
step further and compute what would have
been the gross reproduction rate of England
if the fertility rates for the various age groups,
which we actually do not know, had been
proportionally the same as in some other
country where fertility on the whole was
about as low as in England. If we took as
standard a country such as Germany where
fertility rates were particularly low at higher
ages the gross reproduction rate of England
would appear to be 0°84, while if we took as
standard a country such as Norway where
fertility rates were particularly low at lower
ages the gross reproduction rate of England
would appear to be 0-86. But it is possible,
of course, that the 580,000 births registered
in 1933 were distributed among the women
of different ages in such a manner that the
gross reproduction rate was lower than 0-84
or higher than 0-86, and, as stated before,
we cannot even tell how much the actual
number of births differed from the number of
registered births.

Fallacies in Estimations of Population Trends

You know that in recent years computations have been made for many countries
showing what would be the future trend of
population if fertility and mortality were to
remain year in year out what they are now.
Since we do not know fertility in this country,
FUTURE TRENDS IN POPULATION

similar computations for England could
merely show what would be the future trend
of population if mortality should remain
year in year out what it is now and if fertility should remain year in year out what it
would have been, say in 1933, if the number
of births occurring in 1933 had been exactly
the same as the number of births registered
in 1933, and if the fertility rates for each year
of age had been proportionally the same as
in Sweden, or in Norway, or in Germany, or
in some other country which the computer
may have chosen as standard.

In so far as such computations are made in
order to elucidate the present balance of
births and deaths, the results for England, of
course, are less conclusive than for other
countries, and this is most regrettable because there is, I think, no better method of
showing what is happening now. In so far
as such computations are used for forecasting
the future trend of population, a forecast for
England would not necessarily be more trustworthy if exact fertility rates were available
because the unknown factors are anyway too
many. The forecast which, it seems to me, is
the safest to make is that the actual population of England in the year 2037 will be
determined more by other factors than by
the fertility of to-day. A computation which
shows us that, if fertility in England declines
for another fifty years in the same proportion
as it has in the past, the descendants of the
present population of England, a hundred
years from now, would number only
4,000,000, even if mortality were reduced
considerably and even if there were no
emigration, is very instructive because it
indicates that the bulk of the stock which
now inhabits this country is doomed to die
out within a comparatively short period if
present fertility trends are not checked in due
time. But thereupon to forecast that the
population in England a hundred years from
now will be 4,000,000 would be perfectly
foolish. It would be just as foolish as to forecast that a few hundred years from now there
will be no offices in New York because if the
height of office buildings continues to increase
at the same rate as it has in the past, the lifts

103

needed for carrying up and down the personnel will take up all the space so that there
will be none left for offices. Should the
descendants of the present population of
England in a hundred years time number not
more than 4,000,000, they would then constitute only a small minority of the total
population of this country, because immigration of one kind or another would inevitably
prevent the depopulation of such an attractive area.

Future Numbers of Present English Stocks

If, however, we forgo any attempt at
estimating the number of people who in a
more or less distant future will live in this
country and confine ourselves to speculating
about the fate of the stock which now inhabits England, we are on much safer
ground. If fertility and mortality remain
what they are now this population is bound
to decrease steadily. Its numbers, by definition, could not be affected by immigration.
Emigration would only accelerate the process
of decline, and so would wars and epidemics.
A reduction of mortality, on the other hand,
could have no decisive effect because the
gross reproduction rate is much below unity.
If fewer girls remained unmarried fertility
would increase somewhat, but by no means
sufficiently to ensure replacement.

How would earlier marriages affect reproduction? If the future couples have more
children because they marry earlier, fertility
of course would increase. But if fertility per
marriage should remain the same, earlier
marriages would accelerate population decrease. This statement sounds paradoxical
as it may seem that, if the average age of
mothers at birth decreases and the average
length of the generation is thus shortened,
this ought to affect favourably the population
trend. And as a matter of fact, the Journal
of the Institute of Actuaries published only a
few months ago a note in which the author,
after having quoted seven net reproduction
rates, five of which were below unity and two
above, stated: “ Of two different countries
which have the same net reproductionrate, the
one with the shorter average generation length
is in the stronger position.” But the learned
104

author is mistaken. Of two different countries which have the same net reproduction
rate the one with the shorter average generation length is in the stronger position if their
net reproduction rate is above unity, but is
in the weaker position if their net reproduction rate is below unity. Let us take as an
example a group of a thousand elephants and
a group of a thousand fleas, both with a net
reproduction rate of 2, that is to say both
doubling within a generation. It is evident
that by the time the elephants have doubled
themselves, the fleas will have reached an
astronomical figure. If on the other hand
both the elephants and the fleas had a net
reproduction rate of 0-5, that is to say, if they
were reduced to one-half within each generation, the fleas would have died out long
before the elephants would have been
reduced to 500.

We thus reach the conclusion: Neither a
reduction of mortality, nor an increase in
the number of marriages, nor a change in
the age of marriage can prevent the bulk of
the present population from dying out unless
fertility per marriage increases.

Differential Fertility and Population Growth

You may have noticed that I have used
repeatedly the term ‘ the bulk of the population,’’ and I am now coming to an aspect of
the future population trend in which this
Society has always been particularly interested, the effect of differential fertility
upon population growth. Let us suppose
there was a country inhabited by two
absolutely different types of people, type A
comprising 10,000,000 females with a constant net reproduction rate of 0-5, and type
B comprising 1,000,000 females with a
constant net reproduction rate of 1:5. After
six generations type A would have dwindled
from 10,000,000 to 156,000 females, while
type B would have increased from 1,000,000
to 11,391,000. At the same time the net
reproduction rate of the whole country would
have risen from about 0-6 to about 1°5
because the bulk of the population which
now has a net reproduction rate of only 0:5
would have practically died out. If in England 10 per cent. of all women had the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

same fertility as the average woman had
fifty or sixty years ago and if all the descendants of these women kept on displaying the
same fertility, the low fertility of the rest of
the community need not to worry us much
from a numerical standpoint ; it might cause
a temporary decline of population but the
gaps would soon be filled.

Unfortunately we know practically nothing about differential fertility in England. By
using the fertility rates of other countries we
are able to ascertain approximately the
average number of children born to a woman
in England, we are also in a position to estimate roughly the average fertility in various
sections of the country, but all statements
about differences in the fertility of various
economic or social classes are guesswork.
The investigations of differential fertility
made in other countries are little known here.
If they were better known, people here would
probably be more cautious in talking about
the present fertility of the well-to-do as
compared with the poor, of the wives of
professional men as compared with the wives
of workers, of the industrial as compared
with the agricultural population. I shall confine myself to quoting a passage from a recent
report of the Director of the Statistical Office
of Norway based on the census taken in that
country in 1930.

The old rule which was stated in 1920: the
highest number of children in the agricultural
classes, the second highest in the industrial
working classes, and then decreasing number of
children for the other classes, indicating that the
number of children was a function of the
economic standard, does not seem to exist any
more. If we take Oslo as an example of an
advanced position we find that the average
number of children for the marriages which had
lasted ten years in 1930 was lower for the working classes than for the factory owners, wholesale
dealers and professional occupations as for
instance physicians, barristers, etc... .

Statistics of occupation do not however give a
true picture of the economic position of the different classes. I therefore tried at the Census of
1930 to classify marriages in greater Oslo (Oslo
and Aker) by duration of marriage, number of
children, occupation and income. This classification was carried through for marriages having
lasted ten years or less in 1930. . .

The result of these inquiries for all ‘classes and
for all years of marriage is that the average
FUTURE TRENDS IN POPULATION

number of children has a tendency to decrease
with increasing income, up till an income of
5-7,000 kr. For the higher income-groups there
is a tendency of increasing number of children
with increasing income.

The figures for the three social groups do not
however show the same tendency. The figures
for the workers show a tendency of decreasing
number of children with increasing income. The
figures for the employees seem to show a tendency
of decreasing number of children with increasing
income, up till 3-4,000 kr. and later on a tendency
of increasing number of children with increasing
income. The figures for those working on own
account are small and very irregular, but there is
a very slight tendency of decreasing number of
children in the lower income-groups with increasing income, and afterwards a slight increase
of number of children with increasing income.

There are doubtless in Oslo keen observers
of the life of the people who are in close touch
with all classes of the population. But do
you think any of them could possibly realise
the fundamental changes in differential
fertility which had occurred between 1920
and 1930 before having seen the results of
this census ?

In matters of differential fertility it is
wrong to take anything for granted. Nevertheless a study of differential fertility may be
considered as a luxury which one can dispense with as long as the population is
replacing itself. But although our statistics
do not reveal more than the number of
registered births by sex and legitimacy, we
know that this number is so low that the bulk
of the population is doomed to die out even if
fertility should not decrease any further.
This knowledge is spreading with an amazing
rapidity all over the country and is rightly
arousing a great deal of concern. In a few
years from now the Government very likely
will be compelled to embark on a population
policy which may become as costly as its
present rearmament policy. I certainly would
not be the least ashamed of urging a thorough
and continuous investigation of fertility for
the sake of satisfying my scientific curiosity.
But, as matters stand, it is my firm conviction that dozens of millions of pounds which
might be wasted through a haphazard population policy could be saved if such a population policy were based from the outset on a
thorough knowledge of the facts.

B

105

Proposed Changes in Fertility Statistics

This is not the place to develop a detailed
programme for the badly needed reform of
the official fertility statistics. I shall confine
myself to sketching briefly what I consider
as the minimum demands :

1. The yearly reports of the RegistrarGeneral should show from now on the births
by months of occurrence. Similar tables
should be published as soon as possible for
the last ten or twenty years.

2. Beginning with January Ist, 1938, there
should be recorded for each birth the age of
the mother, and in addition for each legitimate birth the date of marriage, the order of
birth within the present marriage, and
whether the mother has been married more
than once.

3. A thorough census of fertility should be
taken not later than December 1938.

Demand No. 1, I trust, will not meet with
much resistance, and it is even conceivable
that before long the Registration Act may be
so amended that births will have to be registered, as in other countries, within a few
days. If this is done it would be possible to
report the births according to the date of
occurrence also in the Quarterly Returns
without delaying their publication unduly.

Demand No. 2, it will be said, is asking too
much at a time; the Registrar-General has
agreed anyway to include in the birth
registration form a question about the age of
the mother, and the public would resent particularly a question about the date of marriage. Such objections, however, should not
deter us. I mentioned before that seventy
years ago William Farr considered the omission of questions about the age of the mother
and about the order of birth as the two grave
defects in the registers of the United Kingdom. We cannot accept to-day a compromise
by which the first of these grave defects
would be removed in the near future, and the
second perhaps after another seventy years.
Nor do I see any ground for the belief that
the public would resent a question about the
date of marriage. When thirty years ago I
took charge of the Statistical Office of BerlinSchéneberg, I had this question entered on
106

the local birth registration forms, and all
through the fifteen years during which I
directed this office there was not a single
complaint about that question. It is now
asked in many countries on the Continent,
and also, for example, in Australia and New
Zealand.

The recording of the age of the mother will
mean a great step forward. It will enable us
to compute reproduction rates, and these
rates will tell us the exact deficit in the
national balance of births and deaths. They
may show that something must be done to
stop the decline of fertility but they cannot
show what should be done. The other day I
discussed with a friend what allowances
might have a decisive effect upon fertility. I
told him that in my opinion allowances ought
to start with the second child because the
many couples who nowadays do not want
more than one child would hardly be influenced by the prospect of obtaining an
allowance for a third or fourth child; that
the allowance for the second and subsequent
children should be something like ten shillings per week, but that I did not much like
the idea of having this allowance granted for
any number of children. He said that he
agreed with me, but that in his opinion it was
after all of paramount importance to induce
parents to have at least three children. He
proposed a grant of Ios. a week for the second
child, {x for the third, 15s. for the fourth,
tos. for the fifth, and nothing for any further
child. Now let us suppose we knew the age of
the mothers at birth and had ascertained that
with present nuptiality, fertility, and mortality, married couples, on an average, have
only 1-8 children. This would show us how
serious the situation is. But unless we know
the order of birth, we cannot tell the proportion of childless marriages, the proportion of
marriages with one child, with two children,
etc. Unless we know the order of birth we
cannot tell whether the plan suggested by
my friend is likely to be more effective than
other schemes, and we cannot tell, of course,
what would be the cost.

But even if we knew the age of the mothers
and the order of birth, the situation would
still be rather obscure as long as we do not

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

know the duration of marriage. We would
know, for example, how many fourth children
are born now, but we would not know how
many of these fourth children are the issue of
marriages which were concluded, say, in the
last ten years. It may be that the number of
fourth and later children born to-day is still
very considerable, but that at the same time
the children born to marriages concluded in
the last ten years are nearly all first or second
children. William Farr did not demand that
the duration of marriage be ascertained.
He lived in a period of stable fertility, and in
such periods interest focuses rather on the
total number of children born to women
who have passed the child-bearing age. We,
however, live in a period of changing fertility
and we must therefore ascertain first of all
the fertility of the more recently married
couples because it is their behaviour which is
indicative of what we may expect from the
couples who are going to marry in the coming
years. Demand No. 2, therefore, is really a
minimum demand. I have forgone proposing
many questions which are asked in other
countries, such as the age of the father, I
have brushed aside the recommendation of
the 1920 Conference of British Commonwealth Statisticians to record the sexes and
ages of previous children, both living and
dead, and have confined myself to what I
consider as absolutely necessary.

Demand No. 3, which asks for a fertility
census to be taken not later than December
1938, will encounter, I am afraid, unsurmountable opposition. It will be argued that
a fertility census will be taken anyway in
connection with the general census of April
1941 and that it would involve too heavy an
expense and too much trouble for the public
if two censuses were taken at so short an
interval. But these objections are not valid.
A fertility census taken in connection with
the general census of 1941 could not adequately cover the ground because it would be
impossible to include all the necessary questions in the form appropriate for the regular
censuses. Since, moreover, it would not be
possible and not even in the general interest
to delay the compilation of other important
census tables by granting precedence to the
FUTURE TRENDS IN POPULATION

tables on fertility, we could not expect to get
the report on fertility before 1945. If, on the
other hand, a special fertility census were
taken in December 1938, the form to be used
for this census could be such as to comply
fully and exclusively with the needs of a
fertility census. The report on this census
could be published in 1940. The form for the
general census of 1941 would not be encumbered by questions on fertility, and its results
could then also be published earlier than
otherwise would be the case. Nor would the
cost of the fertility census of 1938 be altogether an additional expense, since the census
of 1941 would cost considerably less if it did
not embody a fertility census.

When in Ig19 a petition prepared by a
committee of the Royal Statistical Society
and signed by 163 distinguished persons,
thirty-six learned bodies and other societies,
thirty-nine county and municipal authorities,
ten medical officers of health and public
health committees, etc., represented to His
Majesty’s Government “ the urgent need of
a reorganization of the present system of
official statistics,’ the Cabinet appointed a
committee which, in 1921, reported “ that
the allegations put forward against the system of national statistics as it stands to-day
are, broadly speaking, not established.”
This committee, which included the Registrar-General, stated in particular, “‘ that the
whole body of official statistics is the product
ofevolution.”” Evolution? The Government,

107

for a hundred years, have not changed one
question in the birth or death registration
form. They included three questions on
fertility in the census schedule of I911I, one
question in 1921, and none at all in 1931.
If they now add a question about the age of
the mother on the birth registration form and
include a few questions on fertility in the
form of the next general census our ignorance
of all essential aspects of fertility will be, for
about eight years more, nearly as appalling
as it is now, and our knowledge even after
that will be quite inadequate. If, on the
other hand, the minimum demands which I
have mentioned previously should be fulfilled, we would, within three years, have a
fair knowledge of present fertility trends, and
the Government would be able to embark on
a population policy with some chance of
success.

But in view of past experiences and remembering what Mr. Keynes has said—‘“ There
is nothing a government hates more than to
be well-informed ; for it makes the process of
arriving at decisions much more complicated
and difficult ’—I am less optimistic about
the near future of English fertility statistics
than I would have been a hundred years ago.
In fact, considering the mean expectation of
life at my age, I am afraid that if, before I am
dead, you ask me again to talk to you on
Future Trends in Population, I would disappoint you pretty much the same as I had
to to-day. 7

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIX, No. 2.
