DISCUSSION.

THE MEASUREMENT OF MENTAL ‘‘ NATURE’? AND THE STUDY OF
ADOPTED CHILDREN.

Different estimates of the amount of intrinsic worth latent
among the poor lead to such opposite political aims as those of
the Labour Party on the one hand and Mr. G. P. Mudge’ on
the other. At the First International Eugenics Congress, Professor Loria told us that germinal worth and economic position
were independent. A widespread belief to the contrary is,
perhaps, a part cause of the general disapproval turned upon
anyone who marries into a lower social class.

As it is strength of mind rather than of muscle which earns
large incomes, I will confine the following statements to mental
and moral qualities.

I venture to think that the whole question will be greatly
clarified if we adopt a definition of Nature which is directly
applicable to sociological investigations. The customary
definition of Nature as ‘‘ that which is contained in the fertilized
ovum,’’ or “‘ that which is inborn,’’ has no immediate application. No one proposes to measure the mental qualities of newborn babies as a step in eugenic research. A definition more
satisfactory than ‘‘that which is inborn’’ would be ‘‘ the
growth attained under standard conditions of nurture and
personal effort.’” We may apply this definition to biometric
methods as follows :—

Let Q be a mental quality in the parent.

Let W be the parents’ effort to develope this quality in

himself.

Let E, E, . . . E, be diverse environmental conditions
affecting this quality in the parent.

Let q,w,e, . . . @, have like meanings for the child.

Then Professor Pearson? speaks of the total correlation between
Q and q as if it were a measure of the strength of inheritance.
I submit that the proper measure is the partial correlation
between Q and q for constant values of W, E, . . .E, and
W, @; . . .@,. To calculate this partial correlation we require
to know, among other total coefficients, that between the

1 “°A plea for a more virile sentiment,’? Mendel Journal.
2 Prof. Pearson. Nature and Nurture, Dulau & Co., 1910.
392 EUGENICS REVIEW

environments of the parent and of the child; also that between
the environment of the child and the development of the parent;
and neither of these, as far as I am aware, has been published.
Some, however, of the total correlations involved in the partial
coefficient have been determined,? namely, rg, and a large
number of the type rg, between the teacher's opinion of the
child and the state of its home. Belonging to the same type
f4- are a further set of correlations which it would be very
interesting to know, namely, those between teachers’ opinion
on the one hand, and home traditions, conversation, interests,
and discipline on the other. It is not unlikely that these coefficients will be larger than the very low values found? for
correlations between mental capacity and such things as state
of teeth, cleanliness, clothing or nutrition. For mind may be
expected to feed primarily on mental food. In view of the
above I submit that the size of the correlation which measures
mental inheritance is still quite uncertain, although the valuable
labours of Professor Pearson and his school have led us partway towards its determination. Comparisons by the correlation method such as Professor Pearson has made* between the
strength of Nature and Nurture for mental qualities are not
yet justified.

Moreover, in addition to mathematical complications, it is
very difficult to find out exactly what mental influences a person
has been subject to; still more difficult to compare them with
any standard education. And the same applies with even
greater force to the personal efforts made by the individual
considered. On this account the foregoing definition of Nature,
as the limit of growth under standard conditions, is likely to
lead to uncertain measurements which will disturb any application whether Galtonian or, preferably, Mendelian.

A more hopeful line of advance appears to me to be that
taken by Mr. Cyril Burt in his novel argument with reference
to his instrumental tests.‘

There is, however, another way. By going into training
a boy may add an inch to his chest measurement, but not twelve
inches. By caring for sweet peas a gardener can increase their
growth, but only up to a certain point. In a graphic passage
in ‘* Hereditary Genius ’’ Francis Galton describes the way in
which competition gradually forces a young man to realize that
there is a limit to his general ability, beyond which no effort,
learning, or enthusiasm will carry him. Correspondingly the
measure of Nature which I wish to propose is ‘‘ the growth
attained when conditions of environment and personal effort
have been so favourable, throughout the whole time of growth,

12 Prof. Pearson. Nature and Nurture, Dulau & Co., 1910.
3 loc. cit. p. 27.
4 Eugenics Review, July, 1912, p. 181.
DISCUSSION 393

that a limit ts reached.’’ Such conditions may be spoken of
briefly as “‘ saturating conditions,’”” and we may accordingly
say that ‘‘ Nature is saturated growth.’’ The advantage of this
definition is that it does not require any measurement of the
environmental and personal conditions provided they are
sufficiently favourable. In this sense it is an absolute definition.
When it can be applied much trouble and uncertainty are
avoided.

One or two books would suffice to give an imbecile such
elementary literary knowledge as he could grasp, whereas the
style of a Lord Macaulay might lack some element had he been
deprived of a single one of a hundred of his favourite authors;
so in general the greater the innate power, the more favourable
the conditions, which will be necessary if growth is to reach its
limit.

A saturated growth of any one faculty or combined group
of faculties is moreover often inconsistent with a saturated
growth in other directions.

So much for the definition. Next as to two applications of
it. Let us seek for cases of saturating conditions.

1. The sons of a man who is eminent in any line usually
have the benefit of his experience, and in addition a good deal
of stimulus to emulate him; so that if they show no capacity
for their father’s work it is a pretty clear proof that their nature
differs from his. Thus difference between brothers is a surer
indication of the strength of heredity than is resemblance. It
would be useful to collect cases in which a lady’s father and
husband are both eminent in the same profession; her brothers
and sons have then grown up in saturating conditions as
regards this profession and we can trace the inheritance of any
lack of capacity for it through her. The studies in Galton’s
“* Hereditary Genius ’’ are somewhat inconclusive because there
is not sufficient evidence as to the amount of latent ability in the
population outside the specially successful families which he
considered.

2. When mental defect occurs in one member of an otherwise normal and well-brought up family, and when the defect
cannot be attributed to accident or ill-health, we may be pretty
certain that this defect is a true measure of the individual’s
nature in this particular direction. For it is supposed that we
are dealing with cases in which some training has been provided with the intention of overcoming the defect, and that the
encouragement by parents and the teasing by schoolfellows
have stimulated the will of the defective one tiil this has been
saturating also. On this account, I think that the researches
which have been published on the inheritance of mental defect
deserve a degree of confidence which cannot at present be
placed in those on the inheritance of ability.
394 EUGENICS REVIEW

Now we may apply the foregoing considerations to compare the nature of different classes of society. For if offspring
of poor parents, adopted when newly born into well-to-do and
well-educated families, turn out markedly different from the
birthright members of those families then the presumption is
that the dullness, of whichever is the duller, is a saturated
growth. If on the other hand they all turn out much alike there
is no proof that growth is saturated for any of them. There
remains the presumption that the conditions have been much
alike for all the members of one family and we get a more
uncertain but still useful comparison of native worth, as pointed
out above. A thorough study of a hundred such cases of
adopted children would do more to reveal the nature of the
poorer classes than statistics of 100,000 poor persons brought
up in poverty. The author hopes that a co-operative study of
this kind can be arranged among the adherents of the Eugenics
Education Society. .

L. F. RICHARDSON.

EUGENICS, NIETZSCHE AND CHRISTIANITY.

The charge is often brought against Eugenists that their
principles are in opposition to the teachings of Christianity. And I
think it must be admitted that consistent Eugenists must find themselves out of sympathy with much of the work that is to-day
carried on in the name of the Christian religion. They must quarrel
with many of those whose lives are devoted to carrying into practice
what is dictated to them by their conception of Christian duty. Much
of modern religious and social work is unconsciously increasing the
gravity of the problems with which future generations will have to
deal. Short-sighted charity, state and private, is doing great harm
in so far as it encourages the reproduction of the unfit, and there
are many who helieve that the exhortation ‘‘ Be fruitful and multiply”
must in a Christian country be held to apply to all sorts and conditions of men, regardless of economic or Eugenic stability. It is
scarcely surprising, therefore, to find many Eugenists dissociating
themselves from this code of public morals which they believe to be
inspired by the Christian religion. Consciously or unconsciously they
are forced to the position of Nietzsche, to whom Christianity seemed
as a glorification and encouragement of the unfit among the human kind.
Nietzsche divided the moralities of the world into two broad classes,
the Master Morality and the Slave Morality. The former was the
gospel of the barbaric age of Natural Selection, where the weak must
die lest they hinder the rightful development of the strong. The
Slave Morality was to Nietzsche typified in the teaching of
Christianity, in which mankind is urged to care for the weak, whose
estate is held out to be the highest. The ideal set by Nietzsche was
beyond doubt a Eugenic ideal. To him the greatest of all questions
was: What type of man are we tending to produce? He believed
DISCUSSION . 395

that the only way of uplifting a nation is to improve the type of
its individual citizens. And Nietzsche saw around him the many
influences that are working to-day to burden the fit of to-morrow.
And he rushed to the conclusion that the Christian religion was fully
revealed in the work of the short-sighted philanthropists of. to-day, and
he consequently cast aside its teaching as the very root of the Slave
Morality. The aim of Nietzsche was to evolve great men in all the
walks of life and to remove all restraint which would impede their
evolution. And in modern life he saw that the strong and healthy
are hampered by the care of the unfit and the weak. So Nietzsche
blamed the Christian religion.

There are many who, with Nietzsche, believe that the greatest task
of the present generation is to build up a better generation for the
future ; must all these, too, set themselves in opposition to Christianity ?
It is necessary for a Christian nation to care for the poor, to feed the
hungry and to tend the sick; but does this necessarily mean that we
must follow and adopt the Slave Morality? Under present
conditions I submit that we are doing so, and the result, if we
continue on our present path, must be what Nietzsche predicted, the
ultimate triumph of degeneracy, which, of course, means national
and racial decay and the victory of a more virile civilisation. But
does not the science of Eugenics teach us how we can retain what
is noble and valuable in the Slave Morality and at the same
time retain the ideals of the Master Morality? As Christians
we cannot return to the practice of killing off the weak and allowing
the poor and the diseased to die; we cannot return to the barbarous age
of Natural Selection. ‘But surely, as Christians, we can insist that
the pauper degenerate, for whom we care to-day, shall not be at
liberty to increase our burdens of to-morrow. Under the Christian
code of morals, as under any other, we are perfectly entitled to look
forward and to see that the next generation shall not be burdened
by our charity of to-day. As Christians we must be charitable to the
living, but we must also have thought for the future.

I submit that there is nothing anti-Christian in the doctrines of
Eugenics. Their application will shock many present-day conventions
and beliefs, and they will possibly be denounced as opposed to
Christian morality ; but those who believe in Eugenic reforms can be
inspired by the Christian ideal just as much as those who preach and
practise modern charity. Eugenics loyally follows what is fundamental and true in the Christian code, though it shakes off many of
the mistaken conceptions of Christian duty which are so widespread
to-day. At the same time Eugenists incorporate with their practical
Christianity much of what is healthy and stimulating in the warnings
of Nietzsche.

CLraup W. MULLINS.
390 EUGENICS REVIEW
RACE MIXTURE.
To the Editor of the EuUGENIcs REVIEW.

In view of the increasing importance of marriages between
Europeans and Asiatics perhaps the following case may not be
without interest to the readers of the REVIEW.

A European woman of the nordic type married the son of
a Chinese mother and a Dutchman, all of very good families.
Of their four children, three sons and one daughter, the eldest
are twin boys. One of the latter is dark, vivacious, and like
his father shows certain Mongolian characters, whereas the
other is fair, blue-eyed and relatively phlegmatic like his
mother. The other two children resemble their mother. It
may be remarked that no twins occur in the families of the
European or of the Chinese grandmother; several cases of
twins, however, are recorded in the family of the maternal
grandfather.

I shall be greatly indebted for information from any reader
acquainted with the family histories of children of mixed
European and Chinese or Japanese parentage.

J. H. Koeppern.

University Union,
Edinburgh.
