CONSTITUTION—MENTAL DISEASE AND
PSYCHOANALYSIS

By EMANUEL MILLER, M.A., F.R.C.P., D.P.M.

opening the controversy of inheritance

and environment, nature versus
nurture. This issue is no longer currency
in the biological sciences to-day. It is simply
my duty to restate the issue in a new form
to make a few not very startling statements
or arguments in favour of integrating what
we know of genetics in regard to mental illness and what we know of the effects of
nurture and environment with a view to
coming to some sober conclusions as to the
range of our powers of altering neurotic
reactions and even modifying unfavourable
character traits.

This is but a circuitous way of asking,
“ does genetic research invalidate the claims
of psychoanalysis, or mutatis mutandis,
do the discoveries of psychoanalysis put
limits on the effects both good and bad of
inherited factors ? ”’

Furthermore there is, to be sure, no finality
regarding present-day genetic theory on the
one hand or psychoanalytic theory on the
other. Geneticists, for example, are not
decided upon the issue of uni- or multifactorial causes of mental illness as constitutional substrates, nor can psychoanalysts
say with finality what parts of the psychic
institutions are concerned with the maintenance of healthy homeostasis or most responsible for psychic distortions. ‘“‘ The problems
of genetic theory” is not our subject
to-night ; but we must examine some aspects
of psychoanalysis, because it is in a way the
actively attacking party with theories of
character and neurosis from which the
problems of predisposition cannot be dissociated.

For although Freud himself, particularly
in his early papers, admitted quite clearly the
constitutional soil upon which his neurotics
grew, there are aspects of psychoanalytical
theory which sometimes suggest the presence

[renin is no intention in this paper of

202

of a constitutional substrate, and sometimes
make character as a whole a product of those
environmental forces which impinge upon
the human organism from birth itself to
maturity, and even those intra-uterine forces
which are in a sense environmental however
biologically primitive these may be. However, Freud has never concerned himself
with the distribution of constitutional factors
amongst the various types of neurosis and
psychosis nor with the measure in which they
operate in these groups. Neither has he permitted himself to consider what prognostic
qualifications are to be made, nor whether
cases for psychoanalytic treatment should
be selected where constitution or inheritance
is clearly displayed in family history. Nevertheless, both he and his followers have from
time to time stressed differences in psychological development which militate against a
successful treatment. Such considerations
are unfortunately not made much of, but if
we examine psychoanalytic theory it is a
matter of some moment to ask why the
mental institutions he speaks of have these
overwhelming effects in some, yet do not
effectively limit normal development in the
vast majority of persons.

Before entering into a detailed discussion
of psychoanalysis as a technique, as well as
a theory of mental development, we ought to
clarify certain genetic basic terms and consider, however briefly, those predispositional
forces which are likely to alter the mental
development other than genetic ones—
namely germinal factors in the life history of
the ovum and spermatozoa of the parents,
then embryonic factors which operate after
fertilization has been accomplished, and even
later foetal factors operating after the eighth
week of gestation to the time of labour.

True genetic factors are pregerminal and
operate as for example in Huntington’s
Chorea, Amaurotic Idiocy and some forms of
CONSTITUTION—MENTAL DISEASE AND PSYCHOANALYSIS

imbecility. Substantiation of these factors is
obtainable from family histories, and particularly from twin studies. With this subject I do not intend to deal beyond stating
that there is increasing evidence for supporting the view that not only psychosis but
neurosis is preconditioned as to form if not
to content by such factors. But what I
should like to stress here, and it may appear
a hypothesis worthy of careful research for
confirmation, is that genetic endowments do
not necessarily exert their influence at birth
as a complete datum for the mental life
which is to follow, but they exert their
influence in the process of maturation, nay,
more, they may not become operative until
certain life situations are to be met. Some of
these life situations are obligatory and not
facultative, such as the period of weaning,
walking, talking, puberty, and the recessional
phase of the climacteric. If I may be allowed
to use a musical analogy. The orchestra
assembled to play a symphony does not
necessarily operate as a whole. Many
instruments are potential, awaiting the call
of the mestro when a particular theme is
developed and needs, say, brass and drums
which stand expectantly for the mestro’s
call. In some the total score does not need
either brass or percussion. These absences
may, to revert to genetics, represent deficiencies. The calling up of instruments
represents the rendering of kinetic what has
hitherto been only potential. A given phase
of life therefore needs certain genetic qualities, their absence will occasion failure at
those points. Further, failure may come
about because the genetic anomalies are such
as to make breakdown possible under
minimal cultural stimuli or biochemical and
bacterial assaults. But we can add that the
assault may come about by what can bestyled
massive or minimal assaults coming suddenly
oracting over long periods of time by attrition.

Nevertheless, it would appear that genetic
potentialities do tend to come about at
ordered moments in maturation or during
the periods of greatest cultural pressure. I
sha]l deal with the point of the relation of
maturation to psychoanalytic theory later
in the paper. ,

203

I should like to pursue the argument in
several stages, starting with genetic data first,
then considering constitution as a general
concept, and then dealing with those efforts
to see endowment in terms of personality
patterns upon which environmental stresses
are alleged to work.

While we have no means of proving how
the genes operate in transmitting qualities
which make for endowment or inadequacies
in Man we have ample evidence of twin
studies made by Lange, Hardy, and Rosanoff,
Kallman and Slater, that in monozygotes
there is a strong tendency to concordance of
characteristics and of proneness to mental
disorder when these are noted in the blood
relatives. |

For example, Kallman’s figures show that
amongst the relatives of patients with
schizophrenia the incidence of schizophrenia
for brother and sisters is 14.3 per cent, for
fraternal twins with the same constitutional
similarity as any brother or sister 14.7 per
cent, for identical twins 85.8 per cent.
However much we stress the alleged effects of
subtle environmental differences in upbringing, these figures are striking confirmation of
genetic causation.

Nevertheless there is still the 15 per cent
left unaccounted for, and there are cases
quoted by Hobbs in 1941 in which pronounced differences in monozygotic twins
was noted in the course of their life studies.
We do not know what special event led to the
divergent development. And even, as animal
experiments show, a susceptible animal needs
a very special experience to suffer an
emotional breakdown.

The greatest difficulty arises when we deal
not with psychotic cases and family histories
but with neurosis. Here the problem of
assessing concordance arises. Difficult
though it may be at times to place a patient
in psychotic category without prolonged
follow-up, as in examples where early
depressive and obsessional states pass over
into clear schizophrenia, it is still more
difficult to categorize the neuroses and
deviations of character. The claim to have
defined the so-called dimensions of personality is qualified by the fine shades of

E
204

difference which separate say one hysteric
from another, and anxiety hysteria from
anxiety simplex. With character differences
the difficulties of defining concordance and
discordance is greater still. In the absence
of psychopathological data I do not see how
we can do it.

Nevertheless observers such as Klages
claim to define the massive qualities or
undertones or Anlagen which are the basic
fabric on which experimental patterns are
woven. Slater as well as Eysenck have,
however, shown fairly regular personality
patterns which require the stresses of life to
convert into the neuroses.

I formed the same conclusion in observation of children in which the temperamental
peculiarities of a group of children were
statistically related to type of neurotic
behaviour disorder. This inquiry was checked
up by obtaining rulings as to the intensity of
temperamental traits from the psychological
tester, the social workers’ enquiries from
parents and my own observations of the

children during play activities (1933). Asa.

result of therapy, both individual and social,
the overt neurotic symptoms were in many
cases cured or modified, but the basic temperament traits remained unchanged on
retesting and reassessment. It is not unreasonable to conclude that some fundamental pattern of behaviour equivalent to
teinperament was unaltered. Isit unnatural to
suppose that, were further stresses to occur resulting in behaviour disorders or neurosis, the
early type of reaction would reappear with perhaps the supervention of modifications based
upon the nature of the new stress, and for the
activation of unresolved emotional conflict ?

Constitution in the sense that we can use
the term for medicine, and particularly for
psychiatry, represents the idiosyncratic
aspects of inborn qualities. For, as an early
French clinician, Rostan, wrote in 1822, ‘‘ It
is rare for a perfect balance to exist in all
systems of the animal economy. This complete harmony has never existed outside the
imagination of the ancients. One system
seems always to predominate over another
or the rest. Thus are imprints made upon
our physical and moral constitution.”

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

In modern terms we can accept Nicola
Pende’s definition of constitution as the
“morphological, physiological and psychological resultant of the properties of all the
cellular and humoral elements of the body,
and of the combination of these in a special
cellular state having a balancing and functional output of its own, a given capacity for
adaptation and a mode of reaction to its
environmental stimuli.”

It will be generally agreed that this state
is determined by heredity, with the possible
addition of nocuous effect upon the germ
cells of parents of certain poisons, in nutritional
impoverishment and later upon the fertilized
ovum, causing malformation in gestation.

Following this, temperament may be
defined as the humoral aspect of constitution.

Where a constitution is said to be anomalous we mean variation from a normal type
which is determined by the statistical
method of serial frequency curves. Variations in stature, for example, were found by
Quetelet to conform with the law of Gauss—
the binomial law—that the distribution of
the individual variations in an ethnic group,
for example, is determined by conditions
which lead to a uniform deviation of the
individuals on the two sides of the average
central value of the curves.

Anomaly in constitution has no clinical
value if it is a single feature, there may be
extreme localised variants which in no way
imperil life or health. And this is as true in the
mental field as in the field of morphology.
What matters is the constellation of anomalies. These anomalies in the psychological
field would be represented by those dispositional traits which under stress produce
neurotic symptoms which become in some
way incapacitating. They tend to recur
together. To bring this concept into line
with normal behaviour we should test for
traits which have a wide distribution in a
population but which shew a tendency to
constellate when viewed in the light of such
selected members of the population as have
neurotic or psychotic symptoms. Such a
correlation has proved of value in the hands
of Eysenck and his co-workers and was also
disclosed by Dr. Slater.
CONSTITUTION—MENTAL DISEASE AND PSYCHOANALYSIS

If we regard these traits whether
advantageous or disadvantageous as endowments, it is within the frame of such endowments that many things are possible. We
shall return to this point as to what can
happen with an endowment when considering
the contribution that psychoanalysis has
made to trace the variability which can take
place within a field of endowment. For
endowment defines limits, but it cannot stop
variability within the boundary. Theexternal
world determines in what way within the
limits development takes its course, or
whether an inadequacy ab znittio makes the
pursuit of a course impossible with the
regressive results which psychoanalysis has
made clear to us.

At this point we might fruitfully step back
and consider what we know of the dynamics
of temperament as seen in the light of
hormone studies and their relation to
varieties of behaviour and its biological
maturation.

From classical times the hormones of the
body—now loosely equated with endocrine
function—have been regarded as causally
related to the differences of temperament
seen in man. These hormones are to be
regarded not as stimuli to behaviour, nor as
organisers of the overt response, but merely
as facilitating agents which increase the
reactivity of specific neuro-muscular systems
to stimulation.

This process has even been shewn by the
work of Coghill and Sawyer on successive
behavioural stages in amblystoma. Proper
enzyme concentrations have been shewn
to be necessary to the attainment of a
functional condition, and in the ontogeny of
behaviour increasingly morphologic differentiation and rising enzyme level go
hand in hand, neither being effective in the
absence of the other. We can argue, therefore,
that even in very early development stages
patterns of behaviour are internally determined although they may be called uplaterto
perform special adaptations as a result of
environmental stimuli. Nevertheless the
behaviour takes place under environmental
stresses within a predetermined biological
tramework.

205

It is still more important that these powers
of reaction are subject to developmental
necessities—the response to a hormone being
different at succeeding stages of an organism’s
development. The attainment of puberty
is not a sudden transformation but a slow
process of maturation in which as Professor
Beach states ‘‘ various endocrine somatic
and behavioural features of sexuality make
their internal appearance at widely separated
stages in the developmental scheme.” It is,
therefore, quite possible that despite the
inevitable march of developmental events
stresses can delay or even present this
approach to mature integration with behavioural results. Indeed the whole field of
this subject is covered and documented in
Beach’s volume ‘“ Hormones and _ Behaviour.”

It is my contention that genetic endowment or inadequacy is not a datum at birth
but a dynamic process of unfolding in the
process of maturation and even during the
period of mental decline.

The various functions appear serially
throughout life but naturally make their
most dramatic appearance during the early
years of life. The passage from breast feeding
to weaning follows the maturation from
sucking to biting. Then the capacity to sit
up and then to walk are both genetic and
behavioural; and as _ behavioural these
capacities make more varied contacts with
external stimuli which not only evoke them
but condition them in a variety of ways
which we'call experience. Speech is perhaps
not solely a maturation of cortical prepotencies but a still more complex process of
integration of various cortical zones. Thence
we step to puberty, which stretches over
years, and which perhaps involves many
more growth gradients than do the earlier
stages cited. It is not surprising that the
possibility of breakdown is greater at this
stage because of this wide call on integration
processes of the body as a whole. Inherited
inadequacies assert themselves and become
visible in the varieties of morphological
deviations that appear at this time.

Nevertheless, despite this predestined
framework which howbeit betrays degrees of
206

flexibility called forth by environmental
needs, the maturation points are not determined solely by the constitution at each of
these phases ; the culture closes in upon the
human organism not only in incubating
capacities but in restricting them. The
suckling process is hall-marked as it were by
the nurtural techniques laid down by the
mother who is but a vehicle of passing modes
of nurture in our culture, but by the social
inheritance in more primitive social groups.
So with the control of the sphincters which,
as animal life shows, undergoes maturation
in ways which are biologically necessary or
life preserving. But in man these controls
have great cultural significance and press
hard upon a recalcitrant infant loath to
yield up such pleasures as these functions
afford. All object relations are part of a
learning process which is given a bias by the
parental care imposing upon a preordained
pattern which has only a limited plasticity.
Psychoanalysis has been particularly concerned with the innate forces and their

education, with the lagging behind of the

child of nature subject to the schooling
which would mould it into a child of nurture.
Walking is a natural part of maturation but
it brings with it environmental opportunities to explore wider horizons and at the
same to suffer the insults of the environment, the interpersonal ones. The emergence
of speech while as already stated the result of
prepotencies, is largely a cultural product.
It makes not only for the expressing of needs
in culture symbols and responding to
cultural demands, but it makes for conceptualisation so that experience is handled
in a new way. The particular, which is of
the essence of instinctual life of adjustment,
gives way to generalisation. This transition
makes possible the postponement of gratification, the development of foresight until
the highest levels of the intellectual life of
contemplation is reached. The delaying
action of intelligence, which helps with
memory to look back as well as to look
forward, is to my mind the very nucleus of
that ego development which psychoanalysis
rightly regards as the process which makes
for control over both the inner life of internal

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

relations and the outer life of environmental
adjustment. Between infancy and puberty
lies a vast learning period—the social maturation by contact with others and the final
settlement if possible of the moral nature of
the child.

The permutations and combinations of
object relations are made possible by endowment, and experiences can be regarded as the
woof and weft within the frame of endowment. With a smooth unfolding of the
maturation processes the human organism
is adequately endowed with powers to meet
varying environmental demands, if one were
to view such demands as those which nature
herself would impose. But the demands
made upon the human subject are those of
socia] inheritance which embodies the culture
and the particular demands of parents who
represent more than the culture which they
convey. They also convey their own genetic
qualities which may be at variance with the
genetic qualities of their children. There is
not only the culture clash of the generations,
but the clash of temperament. Psychoanalysts have admitted that there are
quantitative differences of endowment. They
hold, and Anna Freud has stated, that the

capacity to accept frustration and to post
pone is not the nuclear problem of child life
but the battle between life furthering or
erotic needs and destructive impulses. This
surely is admission of a datum line from
which further development takes place by
fusion and defusion. The handling of the
child by mother and by father will aid and
abet these fusion and defusion processes by
education imparted with the bonus of
limited gratifications, love and security.
But where there are temperamental clashes,
hardships, too eager demands for social
maturation on the part of the parents, there
are rejections, ejections, projection which tax
the endowed as well as the under-endowed to
the breaking point. Psychoanalysis and
indeed common experience itself shows how
flexible the subject is, or what inflexible
demands can do to limit even this flexibiity.
It may well be that abnormal experiences
can be as great a tax as lack of endowment,
so that actual experience itself can produce
CONSTITUTION—MENTAL DISEASE AND PSYCHOANALYSIS

the defects which are seen in the unendowed
enjoying favourable experience. Thus
psychosis like states as well as neurosis
may appear in the absence of genetic predisposition. Experience in short might well
imitate the conditions which a genetic
pattern imposes by itself.

Psychoanalysis claims to be able by its
technique to modify the tensions set up
between the various psychical institutions
and there is evidence that it has done so in
many instances. Nevetherless, the results
are extremely variable. In simple uncomplicated cases of anxiety cures are not
always achieved; even where significant
processes lay revealed the condition either
remains unchanged or the appearance of
alternative symptoms appear not only in the
analytical situation which can be explained,
but after treatment has lapsed.

Indeed spontaneous remissions occur even
in the absence of significant changes in the
ambient life of the subject. Oscillations of
mood occur for no known reason although
well rounded explanations of a psychopathological nature are put forward. Like
causes are unearthed to explain psychosomatic disorders which have a_ familial
incidence.

Yet like causes are found to operate in say
an obsessional who develops an ulcer and
another who presents a florid and intolerable
obsession. One patient waxes fat with
anxiety and another will waste away. I
contend that we must frankly face the fact
that while variability is widely possible
within an endowment, the endowment will
determine the persistence of an inadequate
adjustment to life needs within a given
cultural setting.

Psychoanalysis is au fond a process of
deconditioning of very complex cultural
inclusions so that the patient is able to
dislodge himself from falsely emphasised
training processes, identifications and projections, freeing himself from phantasy
gratifications for more sober yet more
adequate requirements. But wherein lies
this capacity to liberate oneself or not to do
so? This flexibility lies in the way in which
the essential maturation processes have been

207

freed from unnecessary cultural loads applied
with too great an emphasis by nurture. But
the vast majority carry this load patiently
enough evoking from their internal relations
a balance of personality which we call
character which is not only serviceable
enough, but acceptable to group life. But
some cannot evolve such patterns alone but,
while retaining a relative fixative of personality traits, overflow into neurosis. We
should be able during say the early period
of analysis to decide whether the mental
economics are such as to allow for redistribution of forces or whether they are so
depleted as to bring them near bankruptcy,
unless we give them a loan of moral support.
I think that a proper history of the subject
and of his blood relations will help us to
decide whether we can embark upon the
adventure of redistributing energies by
analytic procedures or whether we must
rest satified with more sober methods of
support and social readjustment. It is not
the place here to deal with the economics of
long treatment or the worthwhileness of the
person in question as a social asset or liability.
We must ask ourselves—‘‘is this in the
nature of a research project designed to
disclose the pattern of a life and its vicissitudes, or can we hold out real hope of cure
by what must be conceded is the most
fundamental way of altering the variability
or indeed of taking advantage of the possible
variability of the person under our care?”

‘ There is no advance which has been so

revealing of human nature on the experiental
level as is psychoanalysis, but while we have
evidence of genetic processes and the handicaps they entail in psychosis and neurosis we
would be doing psychotherapy an injustice
if we did not realise its area of maximum
utility and its frontiers.

In the final reduction it is very doubtful
whether we will be able to adjudicate between
all that nature gives and all that nurture
achieves, but well planned researches may
bring us nearer to a solution if by carefully
statistically checked observation we note the
frequency with which certain arrests of
maturation stages are associated with poor
endowment, what cases show relentless
208

persistence of abnormalities, and what
statistically normal children and adolescents
develop the personality disorders which
psychoanalysis suggests they might well do
when subject to the types of stresses which
psychoanalysis regards as necessary for
deviation from the norm.

Psychoanalysis is tending to throw the
area of conflict farther and farther back into
the early weeks and months of life when
genetic aspects of the instinctual life appear
to be dominant. If, as it is claimed, the
experiential factors of psychosis are established at so early and homogeneous a phase,
what hope can there be of modification ?
But if the child outlives this phase and
reaches some later period of maturation, it
still has to meet the world with further
emerging genetic peculiarities and_ shortcomings.

Until psychoanalysis can give us a truly
psychobiological picture of the structure of
the Ego in terms say, of the field vectors in
Kurt Lewin’s sense, we shall not I think
be able to decide how much psychotherapy
has really achieved and how it achieves it.

In his book on Responsibility and Mental
Disease, Henry Maudsley quotes Sir Thomas
Brown, who says :

“Bless not thyself only that thou
weren't born in Athens; but amongst thy
multiplied acknowledgements, lift up one
hand to heaven that thou wert born of
honest parents, that modesty, humility and

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

veracity lay in the same egg and came into
the world with thee. From such foundations
then mayst be happy in a vertuous precocity, and make an early and long walk in
goodness; so mayst thou more naturally ,
feel the contrariety of vice unto nature and
resist some by the antidote of thy temper.”

Maudsley adds “ when will man learn by
the study of the operation of natural laws
of which he is the head, that by studying
these laws and by deliberate conformity to
them he may become the conscious framer
of his own destiny ? ” |

But I venture to add that these laws of
man’s nature are contained not only in the
relentless process of heredity, but in those of
his own experience which he can in some
measure modify in as much as they are made
by him and by a social inheritance which
must always be subject to change.

REFERENCES

Beach. F. A. Hormones and Behaviour, 1948.
Eysenck, H. J. Dimensions of Personality, 1944.
Freud, S. Collected Papers, Vol. 1.

Kaliman, F. J. Congres Internat. de Psychiatry, Vol. 6.

1950.

Klages, F. The Science of Character, 1929.

Kreischmer, E. Physique and Character, 1936.

Lange, J. Crime as Destiny, 1931.

Miller, E. Temperamental Differences in Behaviour
Disorders of Children. Brit. Jour. of Education,

1934.
Pende, N. Le Debolezza dela Constituzione.
Shelden, W. H. Varieties of Temperament. 1942.
Slater and Slater. J. Neur and Neuro surgical Psychiatry
7» 49, 1944.
de Waal. Psychoanalysis and Heredity. Int.
Journal of Psy. Anal. 1949.

Van

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY

Edited by Warder C. Allee, the University of Florida.

In the January 1951 number:

ONTOGENETIC CHANGE IN THE ANTIGENIC SPECIFICITY OF THE CHICK SPLEEN. By James D. Expert.
CRITICAL STAGES OF HAIR DEVELOPMENT AND PIGMENTATION IN THE MOUSE.

By Herman B.

Ase, H:roitp Raucna, and Viromia W. SmirH.

STUDIES ON THE INORGANIC REQUIREMENTS OF TETRAHYMENA. By G. W. Kipper, Virawia C. Dewey and R. E

Parks, Jr.

THE CONCENTRATION OF RIBOFLAVIN IN THE TISSUES OF THE EMBRYOS, LARVAE, JUVENILES AND ADULTS
OF THE FROG, RANA PIPIENS PIPIENS. By Max Burton Fercuson.

NITIATION OF CELL DIVISION IN THE ARBACIA EGG BY INJURY SUBSTANCES. By Drusitta Harpina.

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY is published quarterly in January, April, July and October
Subscription $10 per volume Single copies $g Canadian postage 20c. Foreign postage 50c.

THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS, 5750 Ellis Avenue, CHICAGO

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLII, No. 4
