DEPOPULATION AND EUGENICS.

By LucrtEN Marcu
(Directeur de la Statistique Générale de la France ).

(Translated from the French in ‘‘ Eugénique,’’ January-April,
1913, by the Hon. H. Onslow.)

From the fact that France is ready to make considerable outlay
it may be concluded that she is at last paying attention to all the
impending dangers of depopulation. It is true that her chief
cause for anxiety is the weakening of her military power; there,
indeed, lies the immediate danger, but not, perhaps, the only
one; because this evil, of which the general causes are so closely
connected with the progress which we value so highly, acts
injuriously not only on the political and economic power of
the nation, but also on the value and vitality of the generations
to come. Therefore, our society may render true service to the
country and to humanity by helping, in its proper sphere, to
measure this action, and, putting aside all preconceived notions,
by endeavouring through methodical study to discover the best
means of preventing it.

The surest way of accomplishing this object is to make an
attentive and impartial examination of the facts, which in this
case are particularly complex. It appears to me that one of the
first things needful is to organise this examination. Such are
the general views which, with the assistance of concrete
examples, I shall try to elaborate, endeavouring to give the
exact value to each example.?

I.—France and Europe; the reproductive powers of the race.

Let us first observe, from Fig. I., the reduction of our
population, since the beginning of the nineteenth century,
compared with the populations of the other countries of Europe.
In 1811 the population of France alone constituted more than
16 per cent. of the total population of Europe; to-day it does

not represent 9 fer cent. Further, this relative reduction would

1The plates illustrating this article have kindly been lent by the Revue
@’ Anthropologie and by its editors, Messieurs Alcan and Lisbonne.
DEPOPULATION AND EUGENICS. 235
PRANCGAIS
EN BUROPE, 40 CANADA, EN ALGERIE

CANADA
Population totale par nationalité
Ss 1971 Accroissement de 187] a 1901

Provinces Anglais
Ontario ee, Anglais. Ecossais

Irlandais

Frangais

en 1763 ES

Divers B&

Population oe de 1l’Algérie
RSs 1856 SJ Accroissement de 1856 & 1911

 tevagtzeen i: RS SSN WN
Espagnols
Italiens

 

Fic. I.

Fig I.—At the top of the figure, the area of each circle represents the population of Europe. The area of each sector is proportional to the size of the
population of each European country. Below, in the diagram referring to
Canada and Algeria, each nationality is represented by a rectangle, part of
which is light and part dark. The dark part represents the number of inhabitants at the earlier date, the light part the increase in this number. The width
of this portion represents the relative growth ser 1,000 inhabitants at the earlier
date.
236 EUGENICS REVIEW.

be greatly increased if the countries of North America and of
the Far East, which have so rapidly come to the fore-front of
civilisation, were taken into consideration as well as those of
Europe. I will not recall the situation with respect to the distribution of power, languages or intellectual centres, in the time
of Louis XIV., for the allusion has grown stale; and it is of
little use to regret the vicissitudes of history. If, as Renan
suggested, the soul of a nation is the synthesis of its common
memories, these memories should not be an incentive to
melancholy, but a stimulus to action. As a matter of fact, our
vitality seems intact, our sway extends over wide territories
peopled by a hundred million human beings. But of these, the
French do not compose the larger part, and the question arises,
whether, being deficient in numbers, we shall remain strong
enough in relation to the subject races or to possible rivals?

On the other hand, France is by no means the only
country whose birth-rate is falling; yet, as this fall is partly due
to the lowering of the death-rate, in ‘these other countries the
number of inhabitants continues to increase, in some cases
even faster than before, as may be seen from Fig. II.
If this is not so with us, it is because our birth-rate is by
far the lowest. For what reasons it is so, it is our present
object to account. Let us dismiss at once the idea that the
reproductive power of the people is waning. In Canada, the
population of French origin is increasing far more rapidly than
the population of English origin, though the latter is in the
majority. And it is calculated that, excluding the two million
people of French origin who live upon Canadian soil, those
who have crossed over into America number more than a
million. The case is the same in Algeria, where, it is true, the
French are politically the most powerful.

If then the physiological faculty of reproduction has not
weakened, the number of births can only have been diminished
by reason of voluntary restriction, and the question arises—
What are the causes of this restriction? As a matter of fact,
‘ever since man has recognised the necessity of regulating his
sexual instincts—for example by the institution of marriage—
the restriction of his progeny, or their systematic destruction,
237

DEPOPULATION AND EUGENICS.

pays

NATALITE,
divers

MORTALITS, EXCEDENT DB NAISSANCES

en

:
a

S14 OL6T-LO6T
SH OO6I-T68T

068T~T88T

G O88T-TL8T
ey OL8I-T98T

A OT6T~TO6T
Z\ OO6T~TE8T

Autriche

Yq O68T~T88T

aeun

A 068T-T88T
A O88T~TL8T
4 OLST-T9I8T
A O98T~TS8T

OS8T-THBT

 

Fia. II.
Fig. II.—For each country, the height of the corresponding rectangle repre
sents the number of births per 1

The height of the lighter part

;00o0 inhabitants.

of each rectangle represents the excess of births over deaths er 1,000 inhabitants.

(Taken

The dark part represents the number of deaths ger 1,000 inhabitants.
from Ja Statistique Internationale du Mouvement de la Population.)
238 EUGENICS REVIEW.

has been considered in all ages the most convenient way of
avoiding some of the consequences of having too many
children.*

The number of births and the mortality among children are
the two terms of which the balance gives the number of new
existences, for the time being at the charge of the family or the
community.

I1.—The Death-rate as a factor in the Birth-rate.

Infant mortality, therefore, is one of the most important
factors in the limitation of births. Each one of us knows
instances where the loss of one child has been replaced by the
birth of another. Speaking generally, the curves of the birthrate and of the death-rate are often approximately parallel. The
objection has been made, it is true, that this parallelism is due,
not to the fact that the death-rate regulates the birth-rate, but to
the fact that the birth-rate regulates the death-rate, on account
of the enormous number of infants that die at an early age.

We are in a position, however, to show that for France, the
first factor has a far greater influence than the second. From
1872 to 1911, that is for forty years, when comparing the births
of one year with the deaths of the next, the variations in the
death-rate are as often equal as they are unequal to the variations in the birth-rate. If, on the other hand, the number of
deaths in one year be compared with the number of births in
the following year, then the variations between the birth-rate
and the death-rate are in the same direction for three-quarters
of the total number of years, and in the contrary direction for
one-quarter only.

Thus, the death-rate governs the birth-rate far more than
the birth-rate governs the death-rate: this is an essential fact
that must on no account be lost sight of.

III.—The Burden of a Family.

The death-rate has this marked influence on the birth-rate
because parents weigh seriously the material and moral cost of

1It is unnecessary to recall the names of Lycurgus, Plato, and Aristotle.
Concerning the present customs of the South American Indians, see the account
of Nordenskjold, in Za Géographie (1912).
DEPOPULATION AND EUGENICS. 239

their children. So it has always been, and it will never be
otherwise.

We have evidence to show that in France, since the seventeenth, and even the sixteenth century, the limiting of families
was already looked upon as a wise course among certain classes
of society; and Madame de Sévigné’s letters to her daughter
advising her to avoid having another child are often quoted.

Even before that time, Montaigne, a careful and shrewd
observer, explained in a few words why in certain families it is
wise to marry late and have few children, whereas in others it
iS wise to marry early and have many. ‘‘ Therefore, should
not we marry so young .. . This I speak,’’ he adds, ‘“‘ chiefly
unto the nobility which is of an idle disposition, and which, as
we say, liveth only by her lands or her rents: for else, where
life standeth upon gaine,’ plurality and company of children is
an easeful furtherance of husbandry. They are as many
implements to thrive and instruments to grow rich.’”?

These few words give, rather crudely, the key to the average
attitude in all ages towards marriage and the family. It
expresses a care of an economic kind, natural enough in the
opinion of Montaigne. Motives of another sort do, of
course, intervene to differentiate between families of the same
class. But since a constant cause (namely the cost), apparent in
all ages, overshadows the variable causes which depend on
political conditions, on moral and sentimental influences, and
on customs and beliefs, that cause should be kept constantly in
mind, in order to understand the facts properly.

Together with the aristocracy, the upper middle classes
have practised this restriction from an early date, and even in
the eighteenth century, various authors, Moheau for example,
as well as many priests and other clergy, tell us that the practice
of restricting the number of children was extraordinarily
common.

After the Revolution, the contagion spread. On the one
hand it spread to the lower middle classes, since, as their
position improved, the same cares beset them. For them,

tWhere the living has to be earned.
2¥ssays, Book II., chap. 8.
240 EUGENICS REVIEW.

é¢ 39

the child was no longer an ‘“‘instrument,’’ it had become an
expense, and an expense which was especially heavy in the
towns. On the other hand it spread to the country, especially
among landed proprietors and business men of a certain
standing, because in their case the too numerous children of a
family could not all find positions equal to their father’s in the
same profession. Moreover, the abolition, whether voluntary
or legal, of the right of primogeniture and the splitting up of
legacies, due in many cases to the action of the Code civil,
but generalised by the doctrine of equality, have made the
responsibility of fathers particularly heavy, at least wherever
there exists a sense of duty attached to this responsibility.

Since France, of all modern countries, has the oldest civilisation, the bad effects which accompany progress in power and
progress in thought are there earliest manifested. ‘‘ There
everything takes place a hundred years sooner than anywhere
else.’”?

Unfortunately we are not in a position to present any
general statistics for the preceding centuries. It has been
shown, however, that in Paris, in spite of the growing adult
population, there has been a decline in the birth-rate since the
eighteenth century.

The classes of the population with which we have been
dealing up till now, comprise capitalists and those who have at
their command certain assets either material or intellectual.
They are not by any means the most numerous; consequently
if the contagion had been limited to those classes, the fertility
of the nation would not have perceptibly decreased. For if that
were the case, it would mean that the advantages of civilisation,
characterised for our purpose by the improvement in the
standard of life, by life in towns, by education, by improvement
in hygiene, by the care of children and by the emancipation of
women, would have been restricted to those classes alone. But,
by degrees, the movement which has raised more and more
families to the level of the rich and intellectual classes has been
extended to the lowest of those classes, where, as Montaigne

IJules Lemaitre. es Rois.
DEPOPULATION AND EUGENICS. 241

says, ‘‘ life standeth upon gaine.’’ In those classes children
were looked upon as a good investment; as soon as they could
work they began to yield profit. As, moreover, a comparatively large number died, the birth-rate was considerable. In
these classes may be placed artisans and labourers both in town
and country, agriculturalists on a small scale, and farmers, etc.,
who, taken together, form four-fifths of the population of
France.

Among twenty millions of employed persons it has been
calculated that sixteen millions might claim benefits under the
law concerning labourers’ or peasants’ pensions, and the proportion of taxpayers whose annual income is below 2,500 francs
can thus be estimated at three-fourths.

In the case of all these families the child has gradually
ceased to be a means of future profit, becoming instead, up toa
more or less advanced age, a burden, just as is the case in the
families of the middle classes or of the nobility. M. Cauvin
has lately brought this fact to the notice of the Senate.

The laws regulating labour and the laws of compulsory
education have taken away from the father the power of turning
the work of his child to profit before it has reached a certain
age, and the laws connected with old-age pensions have made
it unnecessary that people should take the precaution of having
children, in order to insure their being provided for in their
old age.

The most important laws with regard to the employment of
children were passed in England in 1867, 1876, and 1891; and
in France in 1874, 1892, and 1900. Education was made compulsory in England in 1870, and in France in 1882.* Referring
to Fig II. it will be seen from the two curves for the birth-rate,
plotted for periods of 10 years (they are, it should be noted,
practically parallel with the curves which can be traced to
represent the legitimate birth-rate), that the birth-rate in
England, after having risen until the period of 1871-1880, has

1In France education is compulsory up to the age of 12 or 13 years; in

England up to the age of 14. Since 1899, children of 12 to 14 (of 11 to 14 in
the country) were exempt under certain conditions.
242 | EUGENICS REVIEW.

fallen rapidly ever since. In Germany there is the same fall,
but it is less marked; and in France the birth-rate ceased to
diminish during the periods 1851-1860 and 1761-1870, but
since then, the decline has never ceased. It is also noteworthy
that, in France, those departments which contain the greatest
number of large families are also those in which there is the
greatest number of young illiterates. Thus the limitation of
births may be seen to have become generalised to an alarming
extent, and to have grown indeed in proportion as the burden
of the surviving children of each family became more heavy.
It has taken place either, as in the case of the minority, by a
restriction that is entirely voluntary; or, as in the case of the
majority, as an effect of either social or legal constraint.

IV .—Other Factors participating in the Fall of the Birth-rate.

Of the other factors we will say a few words only concerning the most important, namely, town-life and feminism.

Everyone is aware of the difficulties which surround
families living in towns, such as expenses connected with
housing, clothing, travelling and amusements. Quite apart
from the question of wages, it is easier for a family of twelve
children to live in the country than it is for a family of six in
Paris, because in the country, life is simpler and less luxurious.
In Paris expenses are by far the heavier.

Feminism has also an economic point of view, because the
employment of married women is a considerable obstacle to
their having children. But this factor assumes another aspect
which is becoming more and more emphasised. ‘‘ We want to
keep our wives young’ say the workmen of Berlin, if they are
asked why they have fewer children than formerly. And
again, ‘‘ We will not be like cats,’’ say the modern young
American women; and finally, Dr. Emil Reymond has made
this melancholy assertion in the Senate, ‘‘ We are living in an
age when women have passed on themselves a judgment which
is dangerous in the highest degree to the development of
the population... We have the right not to conceive,
say some . . . We have the right to do what we will with the
DEPOPULATION AND EUGENICS. 243

CONSOMMATION DE L'ALCOOL
en litres d'slcool pur, par habitant et par ap

Litres 0

Danemark

Allemagne

Pays-Bas

Autriche % By

ZR QW... WOO

Belgique Recs a
ai SN

‘Russie

Etats-Unis

Royaume -Uni
Suisse

Norvége

BK. CQ

Litres 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18

oe Alcool contenu Alcool contenu
Aleool per (spiritueux) dans la vitre dens le vin

1871-80 Me 1901-10 MMB 1901-10 1901-10 BSS

 

Fig. ITT.

Fig. I1I.—From Annuaire statistigue for 1911.
244 EUGENICS REVIEW.

ALIENES DANS LES ASILES
pour 100.000 habitants

Fig. IV.
Fig. IV.—From l’Annuaire Statistique for 1911.

p. 100, 000

 
DEPOPULATION AND EUGENICS. 245

life that is in us, say others.’’* In fact, women look upon
the burden of motherhood with that same individualism which
actuates parents when they regard the economic cost of their
children. Yet, is it not exertion and the effort to exert oneself
that gives to human life its value? It may be said, therefore,
that the question of population is above all a moral question;
indeed, many religions have had for their object the preservation
of the race, by means that are in harmony with the laws of nature.
But morality has changed. Without going back very far,
indeed, only as far as last century, serious authors, economists
of repute, have advocated the limitation of births.?

To sum up, the decline of the birth-rate keeps step for step
with regard for life and the progress of hygiene, with the
improvement of the standard of living and the increase of
wealth, with the tendency to live in towns, and the progress
of education, with the protection of the weak, and the advance
of individualism, especially of the individualism of women.
There is no doubt that social co-operation is advancing
also, but in co-operation which is restricted to special objects,
the individual runs the risk of losing sight of its highest aim.

These progressive movements can be described by the one
word, Civilisation. But civilisation has its excesses and its
evils. In order to become acquainted with them, it will be
sufficient to observe the other movements which accompany
those we have already mentioned.

V.—Some Signs of Degeneracy.

We are enabled to observe these disquieting changes by
statistics of the following facts: the respective amounts of
alcohol drunk in France and in the United States, the number
of lunatics in asylums, the number of suicides, the number
of criminals, etc. (Figs. III., IV., and V.)

1These are also the opinions which prevail among the Indian populations (see
the note on page 238).

2In his Principles of Political Economy, Stuart Mill has gone as far as to say
*©One can hardly hope that morality will make progress, so long as one does
not look upon too numerous families with the same contempt as upon drunkenness or any other physical excess.” Quoted by Sicard de Plauzelles in /a
Fonction Sexuelle.
246 EUGENICS REVIEW.

SUICIDES, CRIMINALITE

Ssicides per million d’bebitent on divers peys

Grimes et Gdélite eignalée en France

CPO is"
CoC EE
UNA
SH NYE

 

Fic. V.

Fig. V.—The numbers of suicides have been printed from a table published
by Professor von Mayr, in the third volume of his work, Statistik und
Geselischaftslehre, p. 279. With regard to the amount of crime in France, the
curve represents the total number of persons indicted at the Assizes, those
appearing before police magistrates, and the number of crimes reported, the
perpetrators of which have remained undiscovered. The rapid rise from 184145 to 1851-55 has partly been attributed to an increase in the number of police;
the marked fall in 1851-55 to the abolition of prosecution for the infringement of
many of the game laws.
DEPOPULATION AND EUGENICS. 247

The figures in the following illustration should, of course, not
be accepted without reserve. The means of observation have
varied and the criteria have broadened. It is not possible here
to enter into further details, but when every reservation has
been made, it seems beyond doubt that the change in the figures
corresponds, in some degree at least, to a change in the facts.

It is true that this increase, which has kept pace with the
development of riches and the means of communication, with
concentration in towns, etc., does not appear to be more
rapid in those countries where the birth-rate is low, than in
those where the birth-rate is high. On the other hand, there is
no evidence to show that the morality or the energy of the
individual or of the society, necessary to resist effectively these
evil tendencies, reaches a higher level in the former than in the
latter.

In order to explain this invasion of defects and the reduction of families, a sort of senescence or decadence of the nation,
analogous to the senile decay of living beings has been invoked.
In fact, it has been asserted that the extermination will be comparatively rapid among those families who belong to the social
classes which have reached a sufficient degree of culture. For
example, Sundbarg’ has adduced significant figures from the
history of the ruling families of Europe; and Fahlbeck? has
studied the aristocracy of Sweden. Extinction has always
been preceded by some such circumstances as the following:
a diminishing marriage-rate and _ birth-rate, a smaller
proportion of male births, sterile marriages, and increased
mortality among children. This may be seen from Fig. VI.

It is generally admitted, notably by Dr. Jacoby who has
published a large volume of observations on this subject,? and
also by Professor Fahibeck, that this reduction does not depend
upon a voluntary restriction of births, but upon certain
mysterious physiological causes. But there is nothing to show,
in the greater number of cases at least, that these families have
not suffered directly or indirectly through a reaction from the mis
'G, Sundbirg, Maisons Souveraines de Europe (Ekonomisk Tidskrift).
2P, Fahlbeck, Die Adel Schwedens (Jéna, 1903).
3Dr. Jacoby. Ziudes sur la sélection chez Phomme. (Paris, Alcan, 1904.)
248 EUGENICS REVIEW.
PAWILLES NOBLBS SUEDOISES ( P, Fahlbeck )
( Générations I, II, II], IV V, VI, du 17° au 19® sidcle )

Survie
des familles nobles

Mariés p. 100 hommes majeurs

Nombre de familles

     
  

80 100
———

40 60

Garcons nés p. 100 filles

'
' , i ' ! i
dah cect tana omenitjuans pone prceneionnieanndbasseiessaheeastinae fiat
! i ‘ i ;
0) |

fi |
|
| Re

3081

   

familles
Peas observées
| 4& Mannheim

7

Garcons morts de 0 A 20 ans sur 1000 nés | 3000 ion

i 225 2000
+ | 1000 [
|

V InmiVvvvi I TuUrivy

Fic. VI.

Fig. VI.—The illustration has been drawn from a communication of Professor
Fahlbeck to the /mstitut International de Statistique in 1901. From left to right
are represented the families who have become extinct after 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6
generations. On the right hand side of the figure, the principal curve represents the number of families still extant out of a hundred observed in the seventeenth century, after 25, so... . 250 years. After 7o years the number is
reduced by about one-half. In the right-hand bottom corner is shown the
result of a research made in Mannheim by Dr. Schott (Alte Mannheimer Familien).
The curve represents the number of families extant after 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 generations, out of the 3,000 families observed at the beginning of the nineteenth
century.
DEPOPULATION AND EUGENICS. 249

direction of their own voluntary acts Thus, Sundbirg,
comparing, age for age, the fecundity of married women of the
reigning families with the fecundity of French married women,
found that the former was less than the latter, especially over
the age of 35 years. This is essentially the same as is found
in France, when a comparison is made between the fecundity
of married women at two different periods. It always diminishes
by reason of voluntary limitation as the age increases.

It requires a very mild form of limitation to cause a family
to become extinct at the end of a very few generations, simply
through deaths, through sterility, physiological or acquired,
and through an excess of female births. In short, no matter
what the explanation, extinction is the established fact.

To show that the qualities of the father are in a large measure
inherited is not sufficient to justify the opinion that an increased
birth-rate should be encouraged more particularly among the
richer classes or even among those who are intellectually superior.
There is nothing to show that from such people are produced
strains whose superiority is generally of a lasting kind. It is,
however, probable that the restriction of births which is habitual
among such people is in itself one of the causes of degeneracy.
The children of restricted families seem in fact to be more
liable to have ancestral taints transmitted to them than those
of other families, among which originality is more likely to
spring up. Various authors, in observing different groups of
families in England and Germany, have proved that certain
defects such as myopia, tuberculosis, feeble-mindedness and
criminality, attack the earlier born members of a family rather
than those born later. This is illustrated by Fig. VII. In
France Dr. Belbéze*? has noted the alarming progress of
neurasthenia in the country surrounding the Garonne, where
the restriction of families has been for some time general; Dr.
Labarte® has published similar observations.

1Herbert Spencer’s argument is also familiar. Physical and mental hygiene

of people in the same social class has rather improved. To be overdriven is
the fate of a small minority.

Dr. Belbéze. La Neurasthénie Rurale. (Paris, Vigot, 1911.)
*Dr. Labarte. Ln Gascogne. (Revue des deux Mondes, 1910.)
250 EUGENICS REVIEW.

FREQUENCE DES DIVERSES DEFECTUOSITES
suivant l'ordre de la neissance

    

   

---e- Ensemble des enfants des familles dont un membre ea été observe.
—— Individus atteints de défectuosités

      
 

        
   
  

  
  

     
       

LELEEELE EEL EL a

10 rr Truett THT TTF
, | | | i it bbe td yy e118

; i | Tudercalose | ” —*
2 ’ | (Pearson, 381 familles) . (Heron, T

\ 1 | . 468 femilles) |

      
 

0 Se ey ee eer

ORDRE ra se hoe eS LP IP ese YS
OF WalSSAICR

    

        

   
 

 

    
     

  
      
   

 

 
  

       

Sos RII
<2 x, siisteeselateeeecteoresoees
0 S05 O50:

Femilles
hongroisss
(Kérdsy)

    

‘| (Coring, étude. 385 femilles} | .
Myopie
50 a tebe phe 50 vrZ1iiitzer,
f tj i | | 220 familles}
5 Pare td da ee
‘s | | iy | “7 1 | |
25 these 25 4+}
Ss | | | ;
0 ttt to rt 0 po tat
, ~~ 3 Y @}. 1 i i 3 4e y .
on CaDae ee ¥ RF WLMLICIMIPIV IRL IRIS re 4 SF Gt Te Ke
Premiers et derniers nés
Femilles d'nommes remarquables (M°++© Robdinovitch)
Familles dont le chef est décédé A Budapest de 1897 & 1900 (KBrds7)
0 69 100
QS SORRY
ven YQAAQAA \ =
_ Nas or MQ? Ne
Pamilles . ROA
frxa RA
d' hommes _ Lote Oe
Wi Y, Yip
remarquables 6£ Y i
fam Yi
{ Mp UME
i

Premiers nés

Fic. VII.

Fig VII.—Tuberculosis: from Karl Pearson. A First Study of Pulmonary
Tuberculosis. Three hundred and eighty-one inmates of a sanatorium have
been classified according to the position of their birth in each family (thick line),
and all the children from the same parents have been classified in a like manner.
Among the tubercular there is a larger proportion who are first-born than among
the total number of children, among whom are included the tubercular.

The same proceeding is adopted for insanity. (A First Study of the Statistics
of Insanity, by David Heron) and for crime (a diagram given by K. Pearson
DEPOPULATION AND EUGENICS. 251

These first indications* are interesting since they confirm
what might easily be suspected: namely the relative weakness
of children of restricted families, who are brought up with care,
often reared with great difficulty, and who are protected from
natural selection or social competition which appears, indeed,
to be the only means of separating the strong from the weak.

It is, moreover, natural that in a large family the degrees of
ability should be more varied than in a restricted family, and
the individual who is exceptionally gifted is more often met with
in the former than in the latter. This is borne out by the
experience of every class of breeder.

Further, it has been observed that distinguished men
belong more often among the last-born members of the
family than one might expect. At least, that is what the
publication of Mlle. Robinovitch? seems to show. Thus it will
be seen that the first-born children are more susceptible to
hereditary taints, and that the last-born more frequently find
a place amongst the distinguished members of society. In
fact, it is easy to mention numerous examples of illustrious men
who have been the last-born of large families in several generations.

1We say indications, because of the small number of observations, and also
because these observations have not been published with sufficient details for
the reader to be able to appreciate the influence of the age of the individuals
included in the statistics. It is most important to consider (1) whether this
influence is entirely eliminated, (2) whether these defects are more frequent in
restricted families than in large families; or whether, in the same family, they
attack the older members more frequently than the younger.

2J7ournal of Mental Pathology. 1907, Vol. 7, p. 228.

(Zo be continued.)

 

from the work of Goring in The Scope and Importance of National Eugenics).
The work published by Goring does not include the figures on this diagram.
These works are published by Dulau, London.

For myopia, a curve has been used which was shown at the first International
Eugenics Congress (London, 1912, by Dr. Crzillitzer). In the lower portion of
the illustration is represented the proportional distribution of the members of
Hungarian families, the head of which died at Budapest in the years 1897-1900
(from a communication of Dr. Kérésy before the /mstitut Nationale de Statistigue), according as to whether they are first-born, last-born, or other children.
Above, this, the proportional distribution of noteworthy men collected by Mlle.
Robinovitch from various biographies. It will be seen that the proportion of
first-born among the latter is less than among the total population of the Hungarian town which is used for the sake of comparison.
