RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN INTELLIGENCE
AND SIZE OF FAMILY

By F. W. WARBURTON

N the course of a research carried out in
the University of Manchester on capacity
and opportunity for university education,
Leybourne-White® found the following
median scores for students, grouped according to size of family, in the untimed version of the 1938 Matrices non-verbal and in
the Moray House Adult 2 tests of intelligence.

  
   
  
  

 

 

TABLE I
No. of siblings 3 4
Matrices Test
Median Score... 55°3 | 56°0

 

 

Matrices Test
Equivalent
edian I.Q

    

124°9 | 124°0 | 124°3 | 124°8 | 127°0

 
  

 

 

  

Moray House
Adult 2 Test
Median Score... 68-8 | 75:8

No. of students= 862 for Matrices Test.

No. of students= 700 for Moray House Adult 2 Test.

The socio-economic level of the fathers of
the students (derived from the classification
of Carr-Saunders and Wilson! in The
Professions) was: |

TABLE IT

 

N= 1427.

The number of siblings in each economic

36

 

class is not known. Table III gives the
figures which are available :

TABLE III

PERCENTAGE DISTRIBUTION

Professional
Fathers

Large
Entrepreneur

(N=407)
2I°9
42°3
22:0

ra
5°4

 

The poorer students tend to come from
the smaller families. A similar tendency was
noted by Himmelweit,? although the socioeconomic levels in the two researches are
not strictly comparable, as the systems of
classification are not the same.

Product-moment correlations between
students’ intelligence test scores and the size
of family are :

Matrices Test (N= 862) r=-025*+:035 S.E.
Moray House Adult 2 Test (N= 700) r=-073* +-°039 S.E.

This gives no indication, of course, of the
relationship between the size of the family
and its average intelligence, since only the
brighter children in each family are likely to
attend the university.

In this sample, there is no definite tendency for the more intelligent students to
come from small or from large families.

* Non-significant.
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN INTELLIGENCE AND SIZE OF FAMILY 37

Correlations between the intelligence of the
students and the number of siblings are
positive and insignificant, i.e. they are
effectively zero. At the London School of
Economics,? low negative correlations were
found.

REFERENCES

1 Carr-Saunders, A. M., and Wilson, P. S. (1933),
The Professions. Oxford University Press.

*? Himmelweit, H. T. (1948), Intelligence and Size of
Family. EuGrnics REvIEw. 40, 2, Pp. 77-84.

* Leybourne-White, G. (1947), Opportunity and
Capacity for University Education. Plot Papers, il, i,
March, 1947.

GALTON’S HEREDITARY GENIUS
REPRINT OF THE SECOND EDITION

Hereditary Genius stands to-day as one
of the great books of the nineteenth century.
This is not due to its influence on popular
thought, but to its inherent qualities. It was
first published in 1869, ten years after the
Origin of Species, and only separated by two
years from the appearance of the first volume
of Das Kapital by Karl Marx. The latter
book is its natural antithesis. Its central aim
is the political control of wealth, whereas
Galton has his eyes fixed on biological wellbeing; it dogmatically asserts human
equality, while Galton is concerned to
measure the important inequalities; it
appeals to hatred and vindictive destruction,
while Galton, not irrationally in his period,
looks forward with confidence to the progressive improvement of existing institutions ;
above all Das Kapital appealed to passion,
but Hereditary Genius to an almost stoically
detached reason. Ideological war had broken
out, right in Bloomsbury. It is small wonder
that the leftist tradition has never ceased to
assail Galton’s work, with an animus that
Galton could never begin to understand.
Sooner or later, however, the world will have
to choose between them.

Marx’s book has supplied a large part of
mankind with a new religion; evil and
ignorant, but still a religion. Galton’s has
had no such sensational effects, it has acted
slowly as the leaven leavens the lump, but
it has never ceased to act. From this point
of view, perhaps Galton put into it far too
much for one book. His overflowing ability
is, at one and the same time, offering his
readers an entirely new point of vantage from

. which to view human affairs, developing a

new technique for the study of human
problems, and presenting a condensed mass
of biographical detail as the objective basis
of his conclusions. Cautiously as he discusses
both sides of each question, there is never a
doubt as to which side the facts favour. Yet
the twenty-three years that elapsed before
the second edition shows by how much his
ideas were too new for his own generation.
No man could be more studiously impartial,
yet his detachment affronts many prejudices, and those who write “for the
million ’’ find in the accusation of partiality
their best excuse for ignoring the solid body
of fact he established.
R. A. FISHER.
