EUGENICS’
By LORD HORDER, EK.c.v.O., MD., F.R.C.P.

Y first duty, and a very pleasant one,

is to express my thanks to those of

my colleagues who invited me to
deliver this lecture. I had no hesitation in
accepting the compliment, which I esteem
to be a very high one. Nor did I hesitate in
suggesting my subject, confident that the
choice of a matter which demands a bold and
an intelligent outlook for the appreciation of
its importance would meet with the approval
of the Australian Members of our Association, which in fact it did.

I will confess at once that those of us who,
at home, urge the claims of Eugenics even
upon thinking people, find ourselves for the
most part crying in the wilderness. We
plough a lonely furrow. But we believe that,
just as John the Baptist preached a gospel
which was followed by an epoch of momentous consequences in the world’s religious
life, so will the gospel which we preach usher
in an epoch in the physical and intellectual
progress of the human race which will have
comparably good results. Let me hasten to
add that I do not come here as a missionary
in this matter. You in Australia have
already ploughed your first furrow and it
would not be like you if it were not a straight
one. If, by anything I say this evening, I
can stimulate you towards cultivating this
promising field, I shall be intensely gratified.

TRIBUTE TO HENRY TWITCHIN

There is a circumstance which makes my
choice of this subject for an address in
Australia all the more fitting. It is that the
chief benefactor of the Eugenics Society, of
which I have the honour to be president, has
been for some years past a man of great
enterprise and vision, who, though born and

* The Popular Lecture, delivered at the Annual
Meeting of the British Medical Association in Melbourne,
September 1935.

educated in England, spent most of his life
in Western Australia. Here his affairs prospered to a degree which enabled him to give
£1,000 a year towards the work of the
Society for several years before his death in:
1930, and to bequeath for the same purpose
the residue of his estate, which was large
enough to increase that subscription threefold. I refer to Henry Twitchin. It is
appropriate that I should offer a tribute to
the memory of this pioneer in the field of
Eugenics.

Henry Twitchin’s interest in Eugenics
began, as he himself says in a letter which
he wrote to Major Leonard Darwin, a former
president of the Society, about the year 1900,
when, to quote his own words, “ the idea of
applying the principle we had for a long
time made use of in improving our farm
stock, to the improvement of the human
family, occurred to me just as originally as
it did to the founder of our Society . . . and
no doubt to many others. This is not to be
wondered at when it is known that I am
descended from a long line of countrymen at
home, some of whom helped to make our
domestic animals what they are to-day’ and
“that I have . . . devoted my whole life to
the breeding of live stock in which...
under the best practice, the principle of
Eugenics is the controlling factor... .
Although my occupation alone would naturally have led me to this conclusion, it was
the fact that I was born of unsound parents,
and inherited their weaknesses, and consequently have suffered thereby, that first
forced this question upon me.”

Twitchin was prepared to advocate much
more drastic measures than most enthusiastic supporters of eugenic reform considered practicable. ‘‘ Applying the great
principle,”” he continues, “as I was constantly doing in my work, it was natural for
me perhaps to see no difficulty in doing the

277
278

same thing with men and women. And I was
then advocating the immediate introduction
of legislation in all civilized countries, prohibiting the propagation of the unfit from
any cause.”’ ‘‘ But later,” he “ realized that
the great majority of the people were not
ready for so revolutionary a change, and that
the best course to bring about the desired
improvement was to educate them, if possible, to see the inestimable advantage of
adopting the principle and gradually enforce
control.”

“Believing in practice as well as in
principle ’’ Twitchin never married, although
of course this abstention was not the only
means at his disposal by which his hereditary
tendencies to unsound health might be prevented from tainting future generations.
He was the last of his family, and as there
were no relatives having any claim on his
property, he made his will almost entirely
in favour of the Eugenics Society—to use his
own words—“ for the carrying on of the
propaganda which I believe to be by far the
most urgent and important work possible
in human endeavour.” Now had there been
in this country any institution dealing with
work of a eugenic kind there is no doubt that
Henry Twitchin would have bequeathed his
money to it. He makes this clear. ‘‘ There
is no institution throughout the world,” he
says, ‘‘which is carrying on an active
eugenic propaganda such as we should
desire to initiate had we the means; and
for any society to set a proper example in
this respect might produce beneficial results
to posterity of incalculable magnitude.”
And so it was the Eugenics Society which
benefited from the generosity of this great
Australian.

But it was not in the older countries
so much as in the new that Twitchin
placed his hopes. To quote his words once
more: ‘‘ Progress is slow, but the only way
is to keep pegging away like a patient
fisherman, hoping for a bite sooner or later.”
‘‘T think we must look for the greatest
developments in the newer countries, where
deep-rooted prejudice is not so strong as it
is in [the old countries] ; and yet it is there
that eugenic reform is most needed.”

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

EUGENICS AND SOCIAL REFORM

The definition of Eugenics handed down
to us by Francis Galton, who himself coined
the word fifty years ago, is: ‘‘ the study of
agencies under social control that may
improve or impair the racial qualities of
future generations either physically or mentally.’”’ Galton’s aim was ambitious, so
ambitious, indeed, that his outlook has been
regarded by most people as that of a visionary. Change the race? Why, that is surely
a fantastic idea, savouring of the Utopias of
old. “‘ It is too high, I cannot attain unto it.”’
And quite apart from that sympathy which
most of us have with the Irishman who
asked ‘‘What has posterity done for me?”
we are in the main confirmed opportunists.
Surely our own mental and physical salvation
is a sufficient objective, without considering
future generations? To say nothing of the
shocks and long pauses introduced into a
single generation by wars and economic
hold-ups.

And yet there are societies and organizations galore whose activities are concerned with human betterment in our
day, and whose existence bears witness
to that urge that is inherent in so many
of us to do something to help our fellows.
Whether, and to what degree, this altruism
springs from biological incentives, and is
really an expression of the ego in sublimated
form, as the psychologists tell us, need not
concern us in this connection. It is sufficient
to note that there is a large body of good
intention, backed by tradition and culture,
and supported by wealth, whether of the
individual or of the state, available for social
reforms. The question that does concern us
at the moment is this—is all this expenditure
of good endeavour directed into the channels
which are calculated to produce the most
fundamental, and the most enduring, benefits? Long observation and reflection have
convinced me that they are not. This does
not mean that schemes for social reform are
intrinsically unhelpful, still less does it mean
that they should not be encouraged. All it
means is that, in the view of the eugenist—a
view which I share with utter conviction—
the economic advantages, using the term in
EUGENICS

its widest sense, lie with efforts made
towards racial betterment rather than with
social service in a particular generation.
Since the outlook between attempts at
improving the environment of the people,
and attempts at improving the stock, are
entirely different, there can really be no
conflict between social reform and eugenics.
Our attitude towards those critics who
suggest such a conflict is to say: ‘‘ These
things ye ought to do, but not to have left
the others undone.”’ The psychology of the
position must be faced, and those of us who
feel impelled thereto must combat it. What
cramps our style again and again is the lure
of immediate results. It is a weak strain in
human nature. With the communist it takes
the form of a lust for direct action, ‘‘ and
damn the consequences.”” With the politician
it is “‘ ninepence for sixpence—and I hope
no one will notice the slight economic
fallacy involved.”” With the sick man it is
the bottle of medicine or an operation.
What are all these but expedients of the
moment ? Temporary devices that can only
secure transitory and impermanent results.
Too often, alas! tricks of the charlatan,
whose sole motive is to be the chief actor
upon the stage. But though the eugenist has
no sort of quarrel with the principle underlying social and environmental reforms when
these are wisely conceived and efficiently
carried out, he is bound to notice that a
number of efforts in these directions seem to
be of the nature of tinkering. And since all
such efforts mean expenditure of energy and
money, he naturally regards these as wasted
in relation to the furthering of his own aims.
Time does not allow me the digression
which would be entailed by pursuing this
point of view. Suffice it to say that the
eugenist is more humanist than humanitarian in his outlook and in his work. He
does not believe that permanent results will
accrue from pampering the individual or in
trying to lead his life for him. He believes
rather that it is a divine prerogative for
every individual that he should live his own
life, and that for others to abrogate this
privilege is to do him a great disservice. On
the other hand, to do our utmost to start

279

every new life on as sound and sturdy a
basis as possible is the greatest service that
one human being can render to another.

A CONTRIBUTION TO PREVENTIVE
MEDICINE

If I may for a moment deal with the
national stocktaking of life to-day—I speak
of conditions at home—I find these somewhat disturbing facts. For years every child
has been educated, the clever, the strong,
the blind, the dull, and the feeble-minded.
For twenty years we have had National
Health Insurance, and the number of Maternity and Child Welfare Centres has greatly
increased. Much money has been spent on
the needy, on housing and on a number of
other things. Our bill for social services in
England and Wales (only) during 1930
amounted to £407,545,000. In spite of this,
it has been estimated that to-day one person
out of ten is too dull or unhealthy to be
absorbed into industry; one in 120 is
mentally defective ; one in 300 is certified
as insane, and large numbers in addition to
this are uncertified.

What is wrong? We have forgotten
heredity, and that if heredity does not work
for us it works against us. We have concentrated upon nurture and we have neglected
nature. In Medicine we have tended to get
back farther and farther in our outlook and
in our practice. From the cure of the individual patient we have turned to the control of the disease and the increase of the
patient’s resistance to infection. We call this
preventive medicine, and we are all of us
convinced of the wisdom of this orientation
in medical science. We have attended more
to the child and from the child we have
passed to the infant and even to prenatal
life. But we must go back farther still, for
by the time the new individual is conceived
heredity has already stamped upon it, either
the power to live healthily or handicaps from
which, lavish our care upon it as we may,
it may never be able to shake itself free.
Eugenics, in actual fact, is the soundest and
by far the most profitable form of preventive
medicine.
280

CONTROL OF BIOLOGICAL FORCES

To some here this evening all this may
seem like beating a willing horse. They
must forgive me my emphasis, because they
must remember the lag that exists in the
minds of many others on this matter. There
is the attitude of the determinists amongst
us—those who say, ‘‘ Why interfere with
nature? She will see us through all right.
And, anyway, does not evolution arrange
these things over our heads? ’’ Granted the
vital forces of nature and of evolutionary
tendencies, these forces can still, we have
reasons for believing, be brought under
control. But though we all agree in striving
to get control of things and forces which are
physical and chemical, we boggle at the idea
of getting control over things and forces
which are biological. Why? This is a deepseated prejudice, and no doubt it has its
roots in the dim and distant past, when a
new individual was thought to be a direct
gift, or burden—as the case may be—from
the god of the race or of the tribe. That it
is the product of two individuals, that it
inherits physical, mental and even temperamental characteristics from those two individuals, and that these can be modified at
will, is knowledge of comparatively recent
origin.

I suggest that civilization has advanced
far enough to encourage us to achieve
biological control just as actively as we seek
to achieve physical control. I go farther,
and suggest that efforts at achieving biological control are overdue. Biological control in the human sphere, I mean, since no
one seems to question either the wisdom or
the morality of achieving biological control
in the animal and in the plant worlds. We
accept the principle in relation to our horses,
our cattle, our dogs, our corn and our
cabbages. But we gasp at the idea of accepting the principle in respect of men and
women. The principle offends the religious
emotions and ideas of some of us. I do not
propose to enter this particular arena. The
degree to which a man’s religion determines
his views on questions of the kind I am
discussing to-night must be settled in the
sanctity of his own secret heart. Nor shall I

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

do more than remind myself of the golden
rule, and how specially applicable it seems
to me in the eugenic field.

Then there are some critics who say that
we have not as yet enough knowledge upon
which to put eugenic principles into action.
My answer to this is to admit in the first
place that our present knowledge of genetics,
that is, of the laws governing human
heredity, is certainly meagre. But I advance
in the second place that until more observation and research are undertaken in respect
of these laws we shall remain ignorant. We
cannot employ the same methods in the
study of genetics in the human race as we
can with domestic animals and with plants.
And the characteristics to be observed are
vastly more complex. But we know enough
to feel sure that there is a mass of unascertained facts that would prove of enormous
value if we had them, and we have definite
reasons for believing that the basic laws
which we know to operate in plants and in
animals operate also in human beings. In
other words, it is highly probable that, if we
chose to do so, we could go a long way
towards encouraging dominant characteristics that make for physical and mental
health, and discouraging characteristics that
spell physical and mental ill-health.

A EUGENICS PROGRAMME

But supposing the main principle of
Eugenics to be accepted, and we wish to act
upon it, what is it suggested that we should
do?

1. In the first place the study of genetics
should be encouraged in the universities and
schools and by the institution of scholarshjps
and research studentships. Both the material,
and the questions needing answers, abound.

2. Genetics should be taught to medical
students. We are told, and we know by our
own experience, that the medical curriculum
is already too full. But room should be made,
and could easily be made, in the pre-clinical
subjects (e.g. physiology) by the omission of
something far less important.

3. Then the compilation of family pedigrees should also be encouraged. These have
a value for the individuals who compile
EUGENICS

them over and above their value to the
seeker after genetic information. The
Eugenics Soctety has prepared a schedule
which is very useful in this connection, and
which makes the filling in of the particulars
comparatively simple.

4. Pre-marital schedules have also been
prepared by the Society. Men and women
intending to marry should be encouraged
to fill these up by mutual agreement. A
healthy sign of the times is the increasing
number of people who consult their doctors
prior to marriage. A man and a woman
should be proud of being found fit for
parenthood.

5. But anyone should be proud of being
fit and of keeping fit. The maxim ‘‘ know
thyself ’’ is very ancient-but few of us put it
into practice. It takes a war to stimulate
most governments to carry out a national
stocktaking in regard to the physique and
mental health of its citizens. And I am
ashamed to say that some of them regard
even the omission of the census as a form of
economy in times that are stringent. Surely
the more stringent the times the more need
for careful stocktaking. What should we
think of a shopkeeper who adopted methods
like these ? It should be possible for men
and women, especially those of marriageable
age, to produce, if not a pedigree, then at
least a statement, kept up to date, of their
physical and mental fitness. Here, again,
would be engendered a legitimate pride in
the fact of being a healthy citizen.

6. The positive application of the eugenics
principle, however, takes us farther than
this. We must do our utmost, by cultivating
a family conscience, to counteract the
selfishness of the childless marriage when
both parents are healthy, and by combating
that ‘‘ tendermindedness ’’ which is so common in these days in women who refuse to
brace themselves to fulfil their main function
in life.

4. And if the monetary status of the
parents is a real, and not merely a selfish,
bar against a family, we must help them by a
proper scheme of family allowances, whether
by the remission of taxes or by even more
direct assistance. In most civilized countries

281

the birth-rate is falling. Quite soon the
figures may be such as to cause alarm in the
minds of those who have the interest of their
nation at heart. The guiding tenet of
Galton is based upon qualitative lines, not
on quantitative lines. And we dare not
sacrifice quality to quantity. But there is no
reason why both of these desiderata should
not be attained if the principles of positive
eugenics are strictly followed.

NEGATIVE EUGENICS

8. But eugenic principles, if they are
thorough, involve a negative as well as a
positive, aspect. Negative eugenics have
attracted a disproportionate degree of attention. This is because they are more easy, and
more immediate, in their attainment, and
also, it must be confessed, because they
involve much less self-sacrifice.

At the present time there are two practical
examples of negative eugenics. The first of
these is sterilization of the unfit. The
Eugenics Soctety is a strong advocate for the
provision of facilities for voluntary sterilization, under appropriate safeguards, for
persons suffering from, or carrying, transmissible defects seriously impairing physical
or mental efficiency. It considers that,
without introducing compulsion, valuable
results can be achieved by awakening
throughout the community an enlightened
eugenic conscience. A strong and representative committee is at present working at home
to try and get the necessary support for a
Bill in Parliament, which shall implement the
recommendations of the Brock Committee, a
carefully chosen body of men and women
who reported recently to the Ministry of
Health on this subject.

No doubt the legal position in regard to
sterilization is the same here as it is at home
—a doctor who advises, or himself performs,
an operation for sterilization has no legal
cover. He may be the subject of an action
at law, and may, should a jury take an
adverse view of his action, be mulcted in
heavy damages. This is scarcely an encouragement to the doctor. Moreover, the
present state of the law throws a stigma also
upon the patient. There are those who
282

consider that the safeguards proposed
hitherto in regard to the proposed Bill are
unnecessarily severe and restrictive; there
are others who desire to see compulsory
sterilization introduced. But the official
view of the Eugenics Soctety is that the
greater hope of inculcating a eugenic conscience lies along the path of voluntary,
rather than enforced, sterilization.

A great deal of propaganda is still necessary to popularize this measure. Many
people do not know that the risk to life of a
sterilizing operation is very small indeed in
the female and negligible in the male; that
in the latter it can be performed under a
local anesthetic and that in neither sex does
it in the least degree impair health or change
the sex function, except in the matter of
conception.

g. The second form of practical negative
eugenics is what is termed Birth-Control ;
though the more correct term should be
conception or pregnancy control, the words
Birth-Control have become too popular to
be ousted in favour of the more accurate
expression.

Time does not allow me to deal fully with
the history of this measure of negative
eugenics. It is, of course, as old as Bradlaugh
and Annie Besant. It has had a chequered
career. It has been blessed and it has been
cursed. That it has come to stay seems
certain, but that there is no method yet
known which is free from some disadvantage
is equally certain. The disadvantage may be
physiological or it may be esthetic or it may
be no more nor less than that the method
is unreliable ; the fact remains that so far we
have not found a method that is anything
like perfect. Research is necessary, therefore, and such research is being actively
undertaken by the Eugenics Soctety.

We hold that the practice of Birth-Control
has, unfortunately, acted dysgenically rather
than eugenically during the past fifty years,
because it has been largely confined to
persons of superior biological endowment,
and has not been practised by those who have
needed most some means whereby the births
of their children might be spaced. And, I
ought to add, this spacing of births is the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

only proper use to which we consider the
practice of contraception should be put. To
correct this misfortune of contraceptive
methods not reaching the class for which
they are most helpful, we advocate very
strongly that instruction in these methods
should be provided by local authorities under
medical supervision, in properly organized
clinics. We also advocate that such instruction should not be confined to women whose
lives are in danger from subsequent confinements nor to those who are suffering from
gynecological diseases.

Need I, in this place, and in the year of
our Lord 1935, deal ‘with those critics who
advance as an objection to Birth-Control
that its practice tends to the increase of sex
promiscuity ? Are we never to grow up?
Does anyone still seriously hold that men
and women can be made moral agents
through fear of contracting disease or of
producing illegitimate offspring? Did prohibition make America a sober nation?
And, anyway, shall we penalize women who
have dire need of help in the legitimate
spacing of their childbirths because other
folk exist who would find it easier to break
through the conventions that society and
the sanctity of family life impose upon them,
as the result of this knowledge that they
steal for their own ends? Surely there can
only be one answer to this question.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

I have now put the case for Eugenics
before you as well as I am able in the time
at my disposal. If I have brought coals to
Newcastle I must crave your pardon. If I
have not, I am glad of the opportunity of
offering some fuel for your mental combustion. I propose to end my remarks by
summarizing the aim of Eugenics as I see it.

The aim of Eugenics is to study the laws of
heredity as they apply to human beings, with
the practical purpose of using this knowledge
for improving the physical and mental
quality of the race. Eugenists believe that
no child should be born into the world who is
unlikely to have a fair chance. They affirm,
therefore, that anyone, man or woman, who
undertakes the serious responsibility of
EUGENICS

parenthood, must be free from any disease,
mental defect, or other disability that is
likely to be passed on by heredity and so
impair the quality of future generations.
Most intelligent people now share this view ;
indeed, many have too few children, because
they wish to give the best care and attention
to each child. But the nation is endangered
when fit people refuse to have children for
selfish reasons. Our empire needs the best
citizens it can produce.

But if it is agreed that people who are
sound in body and mind should have as

many children as they can afford to bring up, |

it follows that people who are ill-endowed in
body or mind, and whose offspring are liable
to be unhealthy or subnormal, should avoid
having children. The next generation should
be recruited from good stocks rather than

283

from bad. But exactly the opposite is now
happening, for it is among the fittest stocks
that the birth-rate is lowest and among the
unfit that it is highest. We should not be
content to allow this to continue. We should
encourage the fertility of persons likely to
produce healthy children, and at the same
time prevent the waste and misery caused
by the birth of children who are healthy
neither in mind nor in body. These policies
deserve the serious consideration of every
citizen and especially of young people who
are entering on adult life and beginning to
realize its responsibilities.*

* In the preparation of this lecture I have made free
use of literature published under the direction of the
Eugenics Society, to which, therefore, and especially to
the able pen of its General Secretary, Dr. C. P. Blacker,
I make due acknowledgment.—H.

———— > —— ey

MARRIAGE HYGIENE

An International Quarterly

Vol. II, No. 2

November 1935

CONTENTS

Magnus Hirschfeld

Marriage in Christendom
Dangerous Slogans from Eugenics
Inhibitions in Marriage
Household Contraceptives
Abortion in China

Birth Control in Soviet Russia
Conditions of Rapid Population Growth
World News

 

Yearly Subscription 18/-, post free.

Book Reviews

Norman Haire and Max Hodann
George Pitt-Rivers

Julius Bauer

Owen Berkeley-Hill

R. L. Dickinson

Amos Wong

F. P. de Caux

Frank Lorimer

Abstracts

Single Copies 4/6

KODAK HOUSE, HORNBY ROAD, BOMBAY, INDIA

London Agents: H. K. Lewis & Co. Ltd., 136 Gower Street, London

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVII, No. 4.
