MARRIAGE LAWS AND STATUTORY EXPERIMENTS IN EUGENICS IN THE UNITED
STATES

By R. NEWTON CRANE, M.A.

THERE is no epoch in American History of greater interest or of
greater importance to the student and thesociologist than that which
followed the landing of the Pilgrims upon the continent of North
America. In England and in the Netherlands and in Switzerland,
they had lived in protest against the constituted authority of
their native land in matters of faith and dogma. They claimed the
fullest freedom of action where religious and social observances.
were concerned, and at the same time they denied to their
opponents a like liberty. Controversies which at first centred
about forms and ceremonies and vestments, were modified by
disputes over the personal character of the sovereign and became
identified with the political parties in the state. Laws were
good or were bad according to the interpretation they put upon
them. But, however intolerant we, in this age, may be of their
intolerance, we cannot fail to recognise that they evinced a
purity and consistency of conduct in morals which exalted their
lives and exercised a wholesome influence upon their domestic
relations.

These pilgrims, all Englishmen, self-exiled for their form of
religion, disciplined by misfortune and by their sufferings for
conscience sake, cultivated by extensive observation of the laws
of at least three countries, equal in rank as in rights, and bound
by no code but that of religion and their idea of the public will,
must have rejoiced, when they sailed from Plymouth, at the
prospect of an opportunity to put into practice their exalted
ideals with respect to liberty and their theories of what laws a
state should have and how its government should be constituted
62 R. N. Crane:

and administered. In the cabin of the ‘ Mayflower,’ before
they disembarked to establish their colony in the new country,
they formed themselves into a self-governing political community by a solemn voluntary compact, to which each of the
male adventurers subscribed his name. There were but one
hundred souls in all, men, women and children, and infants
born during the voyage. In this compact they professed to
combine themselves together “ into a civil body-politic for their
better ordering and preservation,” and in order ‘‘to frame such
just and equal laws, ordinances, acts, constitutions and offices,
from time to time, as shall be thought most convenient for the
general good of the colony.” They began with a clean slate.
They were not bound by any local laws or traditions, for none
such existed in the wilderness in which they sought refuge.
They had only themselves to govern, and they had the widest
possible field for experiment in legislation. Nearly a generation
‘was passed in a struggle with adversity, with the deep snows and
the cold of protracted winters, with the heat and droughts of
summer, with famine and pestilence and with contests with
savage Indians. The instinct of legislation, nevertheless, was
inherent in them. They justified their compact, and they
passed laws for their ‘‘ better ordering and preservation,” according to their promise in the “ Mayflower’s”” cabin. Some of the
laws were repressive enough to warrant the thought that they
were intended to wreak upon the less fortunate of their fellow
colonists the vengeance they had prayed Heaven to mete out
to their oppressors in the land from which they had escaped.
Liberty of worship was practically restricted to those, and those
only, who subscribed to the Westminster catechism, and any
garb save that of the covenant-pattern, and any conduct which
was not a mild variation of austerity, were rigorously suppressed.

There is more truth than cynicism in the trite observation
that virtue is the absence of temptation. The paucity of numbers
in the infant settlements, where attendance upon religious meetings
was strictly inforced by local civil ordinances, as well as by
public sentiment, enabled every individual to be a censor of his
neighbour’s morals. Infractions of virtue were practically
impossible, and consequently any lapse from the established law
MARRIAGE LAWS 63

was quickly discovered and vigorously dealt with. Adultery
was a capital offence, and if the extreme penalty was mitigated,
the reprieve assumed the less merciful form of the public badge
and the cruel social ostracism of which the pathetic story of
Hester Prynne, in Hawthorne’s Scarlet Letter is an_ illustration. But, however contemptuous modern criticism may be
of the narrowness of these legislators, it must be admitted that
their influence has been of a salutary character upon the
American people. The laws which the Puritans passed, the
customs they established and the observances they instituted,
still survive, after three centuries, in more or less modified form,
and well-marked traces of them may be found impressed not
only upon the ideas of the populace but imprinted in the statutes
of nearly all of the states which now, forty-six in number, constitute the great area of the United States of America, with its
population of approximately ninety millions of people, a people
sprung from English stock but admixed with the flux of every
diverse kind of continental emigration.

Generally speaking, the traces of the most salutary of the
old Puritan laws which are observable in the legislation of
the various states, relate to the regulation of marriage, its
restraint and its encouragement, the measures for preventing
procreation by undesirable spouses, the restriction of employment of women of child-bearing age, the prevention of contagious
diseases, the prohibition of the use of alcohol and drugs by adults
and tobacco by infants, and the regulation of what is commonly
and euphemistically known as the “ social evil.”

From the outset, long before the word ‘‘ eugenics ’”’ had been
coined, or what it is supposed to mean had been formulated into
a science, American legislatures were moved to make laws and
to enforce regulations with respect to marriages, not merely to
thereby execute the ordinances of the Church or to promote
ecclesiastical authority, which was held in scant respect, but
solely to insure a healthy product of the marriage. As Puritans
and the descendants of Puritans they undoubtedly recognised the
Levitical law, provided always that they could give it their own
dogmatic interpretation, but they were very loth to acknowledge
any canons of ecclesiastical law, and certainly attached no
64 R. N. Crane:

sanctity to them. Such portions of the various statutes of
Henry VIII. on the subject, and particularly that of the thirtysecond year of his reign, which declared lawful the marriage of
all persons ‘‘ not prohibited by God’s law ” to marry, became, it
is true, a part of the common law of the American states, but the
table of affinities was never at any time a part of that law.

For this reason consanguinity, as a bar to inter-marriage
between those of the same blood, appears to have had more importance in public opinion, and consequent legislation, than
affinity. Thus it happens that at the present time, where affinity
is a legal impediment, such impediment continues only with the
marriage which created it, and terminates, except in five of the
states, upon the death of one of the parties, leaving the survivor
free to marry the relative of the deceased. Thus, and for this
reason, the marriage of a deceased wife’s sister is now, and
always has been, permissible in all the American states. In
Blodgett v. Brinsmead (9 Vermont, 27) the Supreme Court of
Vermont said, by way of dictum: “The relationship by consanguinity is, in its nature, incapable of dissolution, but the
relationship by affinity ceases with the dissolution of the marriage
which produced it. Therefore, though a man is, by affinity,
brother to his wife’s sister, yet upon the death of his wife he may
lawfully marry her sister. Such is the law of this state, whatever may be the statute of Henry VIII.’’ This reasoning has
been followed in all the discussions upon the subject in America,
and underlying them all is the idea that the inter-marriage of
affinities is more likely to result in purer blood and greater virility
than where those inter-marry who have any blood in common.

Each state of the United States is sovereign so far as its
domestic laws are concerned. There are, therefore, forty-six
different codes in the United States, in each of which there are
regulations with respect to marriage. Each of the forty-six
states defines marriage, regulates the age at which minors are
capable of marrying, indicates below what age parental consent
is required and the nature of the consent, establishes prohibited
degrees, imposes rules respecting licenses to marry, explains who
may solemnise the marriage, and provides what, if any, form of
solemnisation is necessary.
MARRIAGE LAWS 65

The age at which minors were capable of marrying, known
as the age of consent, was fixed by the common law at fourteen
years for males and twelve years for females, and this was the rule
in the earlier history of legislation in the United States. But
there has been a steady advance in the age, until at the present
time there is but one state, Virginia, which adheres to the old
common law rule. With but very few exceptions the limit is
now eighteen years for males and sixteen years for females. But
while a valid marriage may be contracted by a male of eighteen
years of age and a female of fourteen or sixteen years of age, as
the case may be, the consent of the parents is necessary to such
aunion. All of the states now have statutes which require that
males under twenty-one years of age and females under the age
of eighteen may not marry without parental consent, and licenses
may not be issued for such marriages. In some instances it is
necessary that both parents attend before the licensing authority
and signify such assent, but more generally it is sufficient if the
written consent of the parents be produced at the time the
license is applied for, or when the marriage ceremony is performed. In some states, in addition to the consent of the parents
or guardians, the Probate Judge, or other official having jurisdiction in marital matters, must require a bond ‘to be executed in
a penal sum, generally of $200, payable to the state, with the
condition to be void if there is no legal cause why the marriage
should not be celebrated.

Recent legislation in California has resulted in an Act which
provides that no license shall be issued when either party is an
imbecile or insane, or who at the time of making the application
for the license is under the influence of any intoxicating liquor
or narcotic drug. In Indiana a similar Act provides that “no
license to marry shall be issued where either of the contracting
parties is an imbecile, epileptic, of unsound mind or under
guardianship as a person of unsound mind, nor to any male
person who is or has been within five years an inmate of any
county asylum or home for indigent persons, unless it satisfactorily appears that the cause of such condition has been removed
and that the male applicant for the license is able to support a

family and likely to so continue, nor shall any license issue when
5
66 R. N. Crane:

either of the contracting parties is affected with a transmissible
disease, or at the time of making application is under the influence of an intoxicating liquor or narcotic drug.” The New
Jersey law is practically to the same extent, the language being
that ‘‘any person who has been confined in any public asylum or
institution as an epileptic, insane, or feeble-minded patient”’
shall not inter-marry in that state, ‘“ without a certificate from
two regularly licensed physicians of the state, that he has been
completely cured of such insanity, epilepsy, or feeble-mind, and
that there is no probability that such person will transmit any
such defects or disabilities to the issue of such marriage.” The
tendency of modern legislation is on these lines. The scope of
such Acts as have been passed or such legislation as is proposed,
is based upon the requirement that all who enter into the
marriage state shall be sound in mind and body, and unlikely to
bring offspring into the world who may be tainted by the ailments, disorders and mental weaknesses of their progenitors. It
is for this reason that in a majority of the states marriages
between first cousins are forbidden, and that in some of them
such marriages are declared incestuous and void.

The view upon which this legislation is based is expressed
by Governor Durban of Indiana, in his message in 1905 to
the legislature of that state. Init he uses the following language :
‘“‘ The state should exercise the right of preventing the contract
of marriage between persons manifestly unfit to assume its
obligations, and particularly of such marriage as insures the
propagation of defectives who are certain to become a charge
upon the state. . . . . We may reasonably consider the
advisability of requiring, on the part of those applying for licenses
to marry, medical evidence that the contraction of marriage will
not threaten society by the perpetuation of mental or physical
deficiency.” In certain of the states laws have been introduced
making the passing of a medical examination a pre-requisite to
the obtaining of a license to marry, and for this purpose empowering the licensing officer to call the parties before him and
to examine them upon oath touching their physical condition.
The Michigan Act provides that ‘‘no person who has been
afflicted with syphilis or gonorrhoea and has not been cured of the
MARRIAGE LAWS 67

same shall be capable of contracting a marriage,” and those
offending against this law incur a penalty of from $500 to $1,000
fine, and imprisonment for five years, or both, and in case of
prosecution the husband and the wife may be examined against
each other, and the attending physician may be compelled to
testify and may not be permitted to shelter himself under the
plea of professional privilege. In other states it is made a misdemeanour for any clergyman or magistrate to perform a marriage
ceremony between persons one or other of whom was defective
in body or mind, and for any person to abet such a marriage.

The tendency to “race suicide’? in the United States has
been emphasised by President Roosevelt, and a number of
societies have been organised to counteract its effect upon the
community, by encouraging marriage and by promoting all
influences which tend toincrease the birthrate. In the language
of Mr. Roosevelt, ‘“‘the institution of marriage is at the very
foundation of our social ‘organisation, and all influences that
affect that institution are of vital concern to the people of the
whole country.” Marriage is rendered easier by a law common
to a majority of the states which, in effect, provides that where
any husband abandons his wife, or a wife her husband, and
resides beyond the limits of the state for five successive years,
without being known to such person to be living during that
time, death is presumed, and any subsequent marriage entered
into after the end of the five years, is as valid as if such husband
or wife were dead. Furthermore, to encourage matrimony it is
now an almost invariable rule that the subsequent marriage of
parents legitimatises children born out of wedlock, provided the
father recognises the child so born. In other instances this
salutary regulation has been advocated in the interests of children
who would otherwise have had to bear throughout their lives a
stigma which they would have no power to remove. But the rule
has been enacted in certain of the states as a direct encouragement to matrimony.

There is also an encouragement to marriage in the facility
afforded for its celebration. Marriage is defined by statute in
most of the states as a civil contract. It is not a sacrament,
and it is not, in any state, necessarily attended or evidenced by
68 R. N. Crane:

any religious rite. It may be performed at any time of the day
or the night, and anywhere. Until very recently no form whatever was necessary. A mere agreement of the parties to be man
and wife, provided the mutual consent is per verba de praesenti,
followed by marital relations, sufficed, and at the present time
Scotch, or common law, marriages are legal in a majority of the
states, even where licenses to marry are required, The various
statutes on marriage indicate who may perform the ceremony,
and a wide range, extending from ordained ministers to civil
magistrates, justices of the peace, aldermen and even coroners,
is afforded to the intending celebrants. These officials usually
charge a nominal fee and expense is therefore not a necessary
consideration. It is a well-established fact that the marriage
rate is quickly responsive to changes in economic conditions,
increasing in periods of prosperity and declining after a commercial crisis or panic and during hard times. It is therefore
fair to assume that those contemplating marriage, count the
cost, at least so far as the expense is concerned.

Paradoxical as it may seem, the facility for divorce in the
United States may be considered as an encouragement to
marriage. Statistics which have been carefully collected by the
United States Government show that during a period of twenty
years past the ratio between the number of marriages dissolved
by divorce and the number of marriages celebrated, would seem
to be between one to thirteen and one to fifteen. In other words,
out of every fifteen marriages contracted in the United States
one at least is dissolved by divorce. The inference is incontestable, however the fact may be regretted, that the young of both
sexes enter into the contract of marriage with the knowledge
that if it proves unsatisfactory it may be revoked without disgrace
to either party and without impediment to a subsequent fresh
contract. The grounds for divorce are of such, and so diverse,
a nature that some pretext may be found, or even be agreed upon,
for dissolution of the marital tie. From the point of view of
both morals and religion such an aspect of marriage is most
detrimental to domestic life, but so far as race development is
concerned the result is probably beneficial. The union of illassorted couples tends to produce either no offspring or offspring
MARRIAGE LAWS 69

of a degenerate type, and the dissolution of the contract may
enable one or other of the spouses to join with a more congenial
mate for a more numerous and better reproduction of the species.

Reference has been made to the intent of the legislators to
prevent the union of degenerates by the enactment of laws which
prohibit the issuance of marriage licenses to epileptics, lunatics,
victims of the drug habit, and confirmed inebriates. And it is
not only with reference to marriage that such laws have been
passed. Sexual intercourse between such persons has been made
a misdemeanour, punishable with heavy fine and imprisonment
in several states. But the most advanced legislation tending to
the improvement of offspring is that which has recently been
enacted in two or three of the Western states, where a novel
treatment has been devised to prevent the possibility of physically
unfit persons and depraved characters producing offspring. In
California, in 1909, the legislature passed a statute which
provides that whenever in the opinion of the medical superintendent of any state hospital, or the superintendent of the
California Home for the Care and Training of Feeble-minded
Children, or of the resident physician in any state prison, it
would be conducive to the benefit of the physical, mental or
moral condition of any inmate of such home, hospital or state
prison, to be asexualised, then such superintendent or resident
physician shall call into consultation the General Superintendent
of State Hospitals and the Secretary of the State Board of
Health, and they shall jointly examine into all the particulars of
the case, and if, in their opinion, or in the opinion of any two of
them, asexualisation will be beneficial to such inmate, patient, or
convict, they may perform the same. This Act is on the lines of
a similar statutory provision, passed two years before, by the
State of Indiana, under which a staff of skilled surgeons is
appointed to examine the mental and physical condition of the
inmates of certain State institutions, including prisons, having
the care and custody of confirmed criminals (and all persons who
have been three times convicted of felony are deemed to be
“confirmed criminals”), idiots, rapists, and imbeciles, and,
where the board of managers and the surgeons unite in deeming
a case unimprovable, the surgeons may perform an operation for
70 R. N. Crane:

the prevention of procreation. It is, perhaps, upon this theory
that in Maine, Michigan, Wisconsin and Arizona all marriages
become void without a decree of divorce, and therefore without
the necessity of the other spouse to resort to the courts, where
either party is sentenced to imprisonment for life, and no pardon
granted shall restore the convict to his conjugal rights. In the
former of these Acts the operation is expressed to be for the
benefit of the person operated upon, and this may be the intent
of the other statutes of like nature, but the law is claimed to be
for the advantage, as well, of the community at large, by preventing the possibility of such degenerates and defectives having
offspring.

The regulation of the ‘social evil,’ and its efficacy in
preventing the spread of contagious disease, has had at least one
illustration in the United States, but unfortunately the law was
repealed, and a search of the statutes of the various states discloses no recent attempts in this direction. In 1870 a law was
enforced in the City of St. Louis which provided that every
woman who followed the vocation of a prostitute should be
compelled to register her name and her address, and to make
application for a license. The license was granted to her upon
the condition that she should be subject to medical examination
at stated intervals, and that she should ply her vocation in a
certain area of the City. Failure to comply with these provisions, and any act in the nature of solicitation, either by word
or manner, or even in the character of her dress, caused an
immediate revocation of the license. By universal consent most
beneficial results followed upon the enforcement of the law.
Prior thereto the thoroughfares of the city were infested by lewd
characters who paraded through the principal streets in open
vehicles and thronged the pavements, not only during the nigh
but in the afternoon. After the Act was put in force the streets
were absolutely cleared of such passengers, and were secure to
the use of all classes of citizens. The records of the police
showed an almost instantaneous and marked decrease in all
kinds of vice and intemperance. The cases of infectious diseases
in the dispensaries and hospitals and under private treatment
were likewise and correspondingly diminished. Unfortunately
MARRIAGE LAWS 71

certain individuals, and those least likely to be affected by the
enforcement of the law, raised the outcry that the licensing of
prostitutes was in principle the legalising of crime, and they
demanded a repeal of the municipal ordinance. Although small
in numbers these individuals were supported by the ministers of
various influential denominations of religion, and as the promoters of the ordinance were without organisation, a municipal
assembly was elected pledged to undo the work which had been
accomplished, and the ordinance was repealed. Fortunately,
however, it had been long enough in force to establish, and
insure the continuance of, some degree of order and propriety.
The women themselves had learned that their condition was
much better when their lives and their practices were properly
regulated, and as a result they chose to continue, at least toa
great extent, voluntarily, that which the law had forced upon
them. It is significant that while so beneficent a law was
repealed, an Act was passed last year in an adjacent state making
it unlawful for any person to follow the occupation of a barber
unless he should first obtain a certificate of registration. The
Act provides for a board of examiners of three persons, to be
appointed by the governor, and to consist of practical barbers,
and that they shall hold examinations and inspect barbers’ shops,
and issue certificates of registration which shall be granted to
those having the requisite skill and sufficient knowledge of
common diseases of the face and skin to avoid the aggravation
or spreading thereof.

Regulations for the restriction of the sale of intoxicants
in America are common to most of the states, but differ widely
in their nature and purpose. In America there are no “ tiedhouses,”’ and the license for the sale of drink being issued to the
individual and not to the public house, no interest in it becomes
vested. Legislation in America on the subject of drink is therefore more simple, and is less likely to be opposed than in England.
The extremist form of restraint is total prohibition, which has been
adopted in a number of the Western states, and is more or less
strictly enforced. Local option has its advocates in many communities, and it is contended that it is more consistent with
the expression of the will of the people in small localities than
72 R. N. Crane:

prohibition could possibly be, as in every instance the latter must
beindiscriminately enforced, in large and small communities alike,
throughout the entire area of a given state. Still a third form
which legislation for the restraint of the sale of intoxicants has
taken, that is, what is called ‘‘ high license,” has many advocates,
who base their arguments in its favour upon the ground that it permits the people to be served, while at the same time it yields a
large revenue for the state and improves the condition of the houses
in which the drinkis sold. In the prohibition states special laws
have been passed forbidding the manufacture of all kinds of intoxicantsas well as their sale, andin some instancesauthorising a search
in private as well as public placesforthem. In Texas it isa misdemeanour todrink intoxicating liquors on a railway train exceptin
a restaurant car, and in many states there are Acts providing
that liquor shall not be sold within a certain distance, in some
cases as far as four miles, of schools or educational institutions
of any kind or of railway construction camps or barracks. In
nearly all of the states it is an offence to serve women as well as
minors in a public house. The Missouri legislature passed an
Act making it a misdemeanour to give away intoxicants in districts
where the supply of drink had been prohibited. This, however,
the Supreme Court held to be an infringement of the liberty of
the subject so far as it was an act of hospitality, but otherwise,
if it was connected with a business transaction. Apparently a
general idea prevails in many of the states that the greater inconvenience there may be in the consumption of drink, or in the
opportunity for obtaining it, the less there will be consumed.
In New Hampshire, for example, innkeepers are prohibited from
serving drink at any table in a room where drink is usually sold,
while in Vermont booths, stalls or obstructions in a bar room, and
furniture of any description whatever, is forbidden. In other communities it is provided that the windows of a room where intoxicants are sold shall have no blinds or screens, and that there
shall be no obstruction between the bar and the view of a passerby. Where licenses are imposed, as much as $1,000 is levied
upon railway companies for each restaurant car in which drink
is served. |
Akin to the restrictions upon the sale of intoxicants are
MARRIAGE LAWS 73

those which seek to prevent the use of tobacco. In Arkansas,
Washington and South Dakota it 1s a misdemeanour to sell or
even give away Cigarettes or cigarette papers, to adults as well
as to minors. In Florida, also, it is unlawful to sell cigarettes to minors, and in Illinois persons under eighteen, and,
oddly enough, “ over seven years of age,”’ are forbidden to smoke
cigarettes in public places. These sumptuary laws, which area
type of those prevailing inanumber of states, would have delighted
the hearts of the old Puritans, but it can hardly be conceived that
even they would have impliedly given permission to children
under seven years of age to smoke cigarettes in public places.

The appalling increase of pulmonary diseases in all sections
of the United States has led to a well-organised campaign for their
abatement and extinction, if possible. In nearly every state
sanatoriums are now provided at public expense in which patients
in any stage of the disease may be isolated and carefully attended
by expert physicians. In many cases provision is made for the
instruction of children in the public schools in matters relating
to the detection of the malady and the use of its prophylactics.
Last year the New York legislature passed a law declaring
tuberculosis to be an infectious and communicable disease, and
requiring reports, as in the case of scarlet fever, from physicians and others of all those known to have had the malady.
It also provides for examination of patients and the keeping
of a register as to their condition, and for disinfection of
premises, which may not be subsequently occupied until they
have been disinfected. It declares that any person having
tuberculosis who shall not exercise proper care to prevent disseminating it, shall be guilty of a nuisance, and upon failure
to comply with prescribed regulations, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanour.

It is not possible, as yet, to collate statistics which will
demonstrate what, if anything, has been accomplished by these
or other of the various measures which have been enacted for
‘the better ordering and preservation’ of the American community, but it is certain that the mere agitation which has
resulted in this legislation, however tentative it may be, has had
a salutary effect upon the body-politic.
