CORRESPONDENCE

“is only incidentally concerned with human genetics’’. In making this sweeping judgement,
he particularly ignores the following statement in my Preface (p. xvi):

So human genetics, as I have viewed it and am seeking to present it, is far more
than a limited scientific specialty dealing with the mechanism of human heredity—to
be spoken of in terms of recessives, dominants and other genes, and of such and such
inherited traits. Rather, I have regarded human genetics as an introspective, allembracing science which can reveal people in the round and help us to see why we as
individuals and groups are what we are, and what our inborn capacities might enable
us to be for the better.

It was in the light of this concept of human genetics, and of the objectives I had set
forth in writing about it—and not of the meanings and aims improperly imputed to my
work—that my book should have been appraised. AMRAM SCHEINFELD
41 Fifth Avenue
New York, N.Y. 10003

__

. Carter, Cees O. In Congenital Malformations. (Proc. 2nd Intl. Congr.) Intl. Medical Congress (N.Y.),
1964. P. 308.

. Cox, Rody P., and MacLeod, Colin. 1962. In Methodology in Human Genetics. (Ed. Burdette, W. J.
Holden-Day.

. Garn, Stanley M. 1961. Human Races. Chas. C. Thomas. P. 129.

. Penrose, L. S. 1959. Outline of Human Genetics. Wiley. P. 27.

. Roberts, J. A. F. 1960. An Introduction to Medical Genetics. 2nd edition. Oxford University Press.

. Stanbury, J. F. 1960. Familial Goiter. In The Metabolic Basis of Inherited Disease. (Ed. Stanbury,
Wyngaarden, Frederickson). McGraw-Hill.

. Stern, Curt. 1960. Principles of Human Genetics. 2nd edition. Freeman. P. 721.

. Stern, Curt. Ibid. P. 116,

on AnNRW bO

POPULATION POLICY

To the Editor, The Eugenics Review

Sir,—In your Notes of the Quarter (December 1966, 58, 178) you quote the two questions
asked by the Minister of Health and Population in France, and you seem to find it somewhat
incompatible that one should inquire into legislative measures which would raise births,
and at the same time consider the possible liberalization of birth control facilities.

If one could achieve by the latter a reduction in the births of unwanted children, and
could offset this by the former which might increase wanted children, one would certainly
achieve a great deal.

In a report published in New Society of 9th February, Professor Hans Forssman and
Inga Thuwe of Gdteborg, Sweden, have studied the lives of 120 children born to mothers
whose applications for an abortion had been turned down. The controls were children of
the same sex registered next in the same hospital or parish.

Sixty per cent of these unwanted children had an insecure childhood, going to foster
homes or hostels, as against 28 per cent of the controls. Rates of psychiatric referral,
delinquency, receipt of public assistance were all more frequent among unwanted children.
More of them needed special schools, and only seventeen compared to forty-four of the
controls, went on to higher education. More of the unwanted children married early,
twenty as against fourteen. Twice as many were rejected by the army. Only 48 per cent of
the unwanted children attracted no unfavourable notice compared to 68 per cent of the
controls. H. E. LOBSTEIN

41 Copthall Gardens
Twickenham,
Middlesex

147
