VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION BILL

{This Bill, embodying exactly and in detail the recommendations of the Departmental Committee on Sterilization (the ‘‘ Brock Committee ’’) which was appointed in June 1932, was drawn up by the Joint Committee on
Voluntary Sterilisation in collaboration with the County Councils Association, the Association of Municipal
Corporations, and the Mental Hospitals Association, and presented by a deputation of these organizations to the
Minister of Health on May 23rd, 1935. Before being introduced into Parliament it would be submitted to an
expert eae draughtsman for any necessary modification of form. The substance however would remain

unchanged

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
Clause
1. Classes of persons who may be sterilized.
2. Conditions to be satisfied before sterilization is performed.
3. Duties and powers of the Minister of Health.
4. Appointment of the Advisory Committee.
5. Persons by whom and places where sterilization is not to be performed.
6. Notice of performance of sterilization.
7. Confidential nature of documents.
8. Provision as to expenses.
g. Protection of medical practitioners.
1o. Penalties for offences.
11. Definitions.
12. Short title and extent.

SCHEDULE.

An Act to enable sexual sterilization to be performed upon certain persons
at their request, or, in certain cases, at the request of their parents or guardians
or the authorities responsible for their maintenance.

st peo =, Subject to the provisions of this Act, sterilization may be performed
Sterilized. upon the following classes of persons :

(a) Persons in whose case there exists mental defectiveness.

(6b) Persons who have suffered from mental disorder.

(c) Persons who suffer from a grave physical disability deemed to be
inheritable.

(d@) Persons who are deemed to be likely to transmit mental defectiveness
or mental disorder or a grave physical disability to a subsequent
generation.

‘Goariitioas Trefone be 2. Except where in the opinion of a registered medical practitioner the
sterilization is per- performance of sterilization is necessary in the interests of the person’s health,
the following conditions shall be satisfied before any sterilization is performed,
for the purpose of preventing procreation or child-bearing, upon any of the
persons defined in Section 1 of this Act.
(x) Such persons shall transmit, or cause to be transmitted, to the Minister of
Health the following documents :
(a) An application in the form prescribed by Part I of the Schedule to this
Act, signed by the applicant, stating :
(i) His age.
(ii) That he desires to be sterilized, and the grounds upon which
the application is made.

136 _
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION BILL

(iii) That he understands the nature and consequences of
sterilization.

(iv) That if married, he has informed his spouse of the application
where it is possible to do so, and produces evidence to this effect.

(6) Two separate medical certificates in the form prescribed by Part III of
the Schedule to this Act, each of which shall state :

(i) That the medical certifier has personally seen the applicant and
inquired into the reason for his application.

(u) The class of persons, as defined in Section 1 of this Act, to
which the applicant belongs.

(111) The facts, ascertained by himself and/or communicated to
him by others, upon which the medical certifier has founded this

- opinion.

(iv) That the applicant has attained sexual maturity.

(v) That where the applicant is suffering from mental defectiveness he is, in the opinion of the medical certifier, a fit and proper
person to live in the general community under suitable conditions
after sterilization.

(vi) That in the opinion of the medical certifier the applicant
understands the nature and consequences of sterilization.

One of these two medical certificates shall, if possible, ‘be furnished by
the person’s usual medical attendant. The second shall be furnished
by a medical practitioner approved for the purpose by the Minister of
Health.

Where application is made on the ground that the person is a mental
defective or has suffered from mental disorder, one of the certificates
shall be signed by a registered medical practitioner experienced in
psychological medicine and approved for this purpose by the (Minister
of Health) (Board of Control), stating that the certifier has examined
the person and inquired into his history and is of the opinion that no
injurious results to the person’s mental condition are likely to follow
sterilization.

(c

~~

(2) Permission for the performance of sterilization shall not be granted in the
case of any person who has not attained sexual maturity.

(3) Permission for the performance of sterilization shall not be granted in the
case of any person who is under the age of twenty-one years without the
written consent, to be given in the form prescribed by Part II (a) of the Schedule
to this Act, of the parent or guardian of such person.

(4) Where the person is, by reason of mental defectiveness, deemed to be
incapable of giving a reasonable consent to be sterilized, the parent or guardian
of such person shall be empowered to make application on his behalf, and such
application shall be made in the form prescribed by Part II of the Schedule to
this Act.

(5) When such parent or guardian cannot be found, or is outside Great
Britain, or is being dealt with as a person of unsound mind, or as a mental
defective, under the Lunacy, Mental Treatment or Mental Deficiency Acts, the
Minister of Health shall have power to act upon the application of the person or
local authority who is in fact responsible for the applicant’s maintenance.

137
138

Duties and powers
of the Minister of
Health.

Appointment of

the Advisory Committee.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(6) Permission for the sterilization of a person suffering from mental defectiveness shall not be granted unless the Minister of Health is satisfied by medical
certificates or such other evidence as he considers satisfactory that an inquiry
has been made into the personal characteristics and circumstances of the
defective, and that after sterilization he would be a fit and proper person to live
in the general community under suitable conditions.

3. The Minister of Health shall have the following duties and powers in
regard to applications for sterilization transmitted to him in accordance with
the provisions of this Act :

(a) If satisfied that the applicant is a fit and proper person to be sterilized
in accordance with the provisions of this Act, the Minister of Health
shall issue to him in the form prescribed by Part IV of the Schedule to
this Act an authorization for sterilization, and such authorization shall
permit a registered medical practitioner to sterilize the person at any
time within six months after the date of the authorization. If sterilization has not been performed within a period of six months, the sanction
shall lapse, but may be renewed by the Minister of Health on receipt
of a satisfactory explanation of the delay.

(6) If not satisfied that the applicant is a fit and proper person to be
sterilized, the Minister of Health shall refuse his consent unless and
until he has been satisfied by the production of further evidence.

(c) For the purpose of obtaining further evidence the Minister of Health
may :

(i) Require additional particulars from the applicant or from one
or both of the medical certifiers, or from the appropriate local
authority.

(ii) Direct that a special examination of the applicant and/or
inquiry into the circumstances of the application be made.

(iii) Refer the application with the documents pertaining thereto
to the advisory committee referred to in Section 4 of this Act, for
its consideration and report.

(d) Provided that where the applicant for sterilization is suffering from
mental defectiveness or is a person who has suffered from mental
disorder, the Minister of Health, before coming to a decision, shall
consult with the Board of Control.

4. Upon the coming into operation of this Act, the Minister of Health shall
appoint a special advisory committee, to be known as the Advisory Committee
on Sterilization, which shall consist of specialists in psychological medicine,
medical practitioners and geneticists. Such Committee shall have the duty of
advising the Minister upon, and may initiate the investigation of, such psychological, medical and genetic questions as may arise in connection with any
application or with the operation of this Act.

5. (a) Sterilization under this Act shall not be performed except by a registered medical practitioner.

(6) Sterilization under this Act shall not be performed in any institution

or place in which persons suffering from mental defectiveness or mental
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION BILL 139

disorder are detained under the provisions of the Lunacy, Mental
Treatment or Mental Deficiency Acts.

Provided that this prohibition shall not apply to the case of mental
defectives under guardianship or in private houses.

_ 6. (a) Where sterilization has been performed in a hospital it shall be the duty Notice of performof the superintendent or secretary of the hospital to forward to the tion.
Minister of Health within seven days a notice in the form prescribed by
Part V of the schedule to this Act, stating that sterilization has been
performed.

(6) Where sterilization has been performed elsewhere than in a hospital, it
shall be the duty of the medical practitioner performing it to forward
such notice.

7. All applications, certificates and documents furnished in accordance with Confidential nature

the provisions of this Act shall be confidential and their contents shall not be
divulged to or by any person except those acting in an official capacity for the
purposes of this Act.

8. (a) The local authority on being satisfied that having regard to his financial] Provision as to
circumstances an applicant for sterilization cannot reasonably afford
the expenses of and incidental to sterilization and the application
therefor, shall have power to pay either the whole or part of such
expenses, provided that it shall be the duty of the local authority to
recover from the applicant, or from any person legally liable to maintain him, such part, if any, of the said expenses as the authority consider the applicant or such person is, having regard to his financial
circumstances, reasonably able to pay.

(b) Any expenses recoverable under this section shall, without prejudice to
any other remedy, be recoverable summarily as a civil debt.

9. (a) A medical practitioner who signs a certificate or does anything under Protection af medithe provisions of this Act shall have protection against civil or criminal “ "too
proceedings similar to that accorded by the Mental Treatment Act,

1930, Section 16.

(0) Nothing in this Act shall render unlawful any surgical operation or
medical treatment which before the passing of this Act could lawfully
be performed or applied.

10.* (2) Any person who makes a wilful misstatement of any material fact in Penalties for
any application, statement or certificate under this Act or who divulges “*""**
the contents of any document except as laid down by this Act shall be
guilty of a misdemeanour.

(b) Any person who makes default in sending to the Minister of Health the
notice of the performance of sterilization as required by this Act shall
for each day or part of a day during which the default continues be
liable to a penalty not exceeding ten pounds.

* It will probably be necessary to add clauses dealing with the procedure for prosecution and the
recovery of fines for offences.
140 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
Deiat, 11. In this Act, if not inconsistent with the context :

(a) The expression “ sterilization ’’ shall mean :

(i) The operations of vasectomy, salpingectomy, or any other
surgical operation whereby the patient is rendered incapable of
procreation or child-bearing without any other impairment of the
capacity to exercise sexual functions.

(ii) Any medical treatment which attains the same results as a
surgical operation with the same limitation in its effects as regards
the sexual functions.

(b) The expression “‘ mental defectiveness ’’ shall have the same meaning
as in the Mental Deficiency Act, 1927, Section I, subsection (2).

(c) The expression ‘‘ mental disorder ’’ shall mean any chronic or recurrent
disorder of the mind in consequence of which the person has received
medical treatment.

(d) The expression “‘ local authority ” for the purposes of this Act shall
mean :

(i) In reference to a person of unsound mind, the local authority
for the purposes of the Lunacy and Mental Treatment Acts, 1890 to

1930 ;

(ii) In reference to a person who is mentally defective, the council
of a county or county borough ;

(iii) In all other cases the council of a county, county borough or
non-county borough as the case may be.

Providing that, without prejudice to their powers under the Local
Government Act, 1933 :—

(i) A local authority for the purposes of the Lunacy and Mental
Treatment Acts, 1890 to 1930, may delegate or refer with or without
restrictions or conditions their functions under this Act in reference
to persons of unsound mind to a visiting committee or to a subcommittee thereof ;

(ii) The council of a county or county borough may delegate or
refer with or without restrictions or conditions their functions under
this Act in reference to persons who are mentally defective to their
committee for the care of the mentally defective or to any subcommittee thereof.

Ghost file and 12. (a) This Act may be cited as The Voluntary Sterilization Act, 193

ex °

(6) This Act shall not apply to Scotland or Northern Ireland.
(c) This Act shall come into force .. .
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION BILL 141
SCHEDULE

Part I

FORM OF APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION TO BE STERILIZED
I, ("J tdone and surname
oc rsa
os Pama
hereby make application for permission to be sterilized in accordance with the ‘
provisions of the Voluntary Sterilization Act, 193
I hereby declare as follows:

1. (a) I suffer from mental defectiveness.

(0) I have suffered from mental disorder, namely :
‘ (*] State nature of
(c) I suffer from a grave physical disability which I believe to be inherit- 324, pisces and
able, namely : of same,

5

[*] State nature of
disability.
(2) I believe myself to be likely to transmit to a subsequent generation ”
(mental defectiveness) (mental disorder) (the grave physical disability
of ), on the following grounds:
[*] of this belle
2. My age is years, months.
3. I understand that sterilization will render me incapable of producing
children.
4. I am married to [7] ["] Give name and

address of spouse.

of

(I have informed my spouse of my intention to make this application and attach
documents in evidence thereof) (I have been unable to inform my spouse of my
intention to make this application, for the following reason :

5. I am not married.
6. The name and address of my usual medical attendant is as follows :
7. I enclose with this application two medical certificates from the following :
(a) YC) tive same nd
(0) the medical certifiers,

8. The reason why one of the medical certificates in support of this application is not signed by my usual medical attendant is as follows :

Signed : [*] £1) Applicant’

Dated: This (day) of (month) (year).
142 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

10
pay Give name, I, [8]

cription of witness f
to the applicant’s 0.
signature.

hereby declare that the above signature was made in my presence, this
(day) of (month) (year).

[™] Signature of Signed: [7]

To the Minister of Health

N.B.—Marginal notes must be strictly followed, and inappropriate words or clauses struck out. Two
medical certificates on Form III are required in support of an application. One of these certificates
should, whenever possible, be signed by the usual medical attendant of the applicant. The second
certificate must be signed by a medical practitioner approved for the purpose by the Minister of Health.
Where the applicant is a mental defective or has suffered from mental disorder, the second certificate
must be signed by a practitioner experienced in psychological medicine approved by the Minister of
Health.

ParT II

FORM OF APPLICATION FOR STERILIZATION, MADE ON BEHALF OF A PERSON

Wuo BY REASON OF MENTAL DEFECTIVENESS IS INCAPABLE OF GIVING A

REASONABLE CONSENT, BY His PARENT OR GUARDIAN OR THE AUTHORITY
RESPONSIBLE FOR His MAINTENANCE .

f}] Give name ss In the matter of [*]
$s

fle oteie! OF [7

cis rome ot 1, [4]

Ulises of mes OF [*]

[*]Givedescription [5]
Patien or ica) of
same. hereby request that permission be granted for the above-named ["]

to be sterilized in accordance with the provisions of the

Voluntary Sterilization Act, 193

I declare as follows :
(a) I am the (father) (mother) (guardian) (official representative of the
authority responsible for the maintenance) of the above-named [*]
(b) I make this request for the following reasons :

1. That the sterilization of the said [*]

(*] State reasons is advisable on the following grounds: [¢]
Say soutlization i 2. That the said [2]

is incapable of giving a reasonable consent im consequence of
suffering from mental defectiveness.
3. That the parent or guardian of the said [*]
["] Give reasons. is unable to make the request for the following reasons: [7]
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION BILL 143

(c) The said [*] | is
aged (years) (months).
(d) The said [*] is
_ [unmarried] [married to [*] UT] Give name of
of [°] , and (his/her spouse has ) Give adress of

been informed of this application, in evidence of which I attach docu
ments) (it has been impracticable to inform the spouse for the following

reasons: [1°] )]. ["*] Give reasons.
(ec) The name and address of the usual medical attendant of the said

[2] is as follows: [#2] it Sostal neko
(f) The reason why one of the medical certificates in support of the of, usual medical

application is not signed by the usual medical attendant of the said

is as follows: [1] [4] Give reason.
(g) After sterilization the said [*]
be living under the following conditions: [1°] Fp eee erat
I enclose with this request two medical certificates from the following :
@) YT oy a
(() addresses the
medical certifiers.
Signed: [15] Gu} Slenature and
Dated: This (day) of (month) (year), Suen ing the
I, P codat addres’ and
description of withereby declare that the above signature was made in my presence, this a
(day) of (month) (year).
Signed: [17] 7] (Signature of
above signature.

To the Minister of Health

N.B.—Marginal notes must be strictly followed, and inappropriate words or clauses struck out. Two
medical certificates on Form III are required in support of an application. Ome of these certificates
should, whenever possible, be signed by the usual medical attendant of the applicant. The second
certificate must be signed by a medical practitioner approved for the purpose by the Minister of Health.
Where the applicant is a mental defective or has suffered from mental disorder, the second certificate
must be signed by a practitioner experienced in psychological medicine approved by the Minister of
Health.

Part IIA

FORM OF DECLARATION TO BE SIGNED BY THE PARENT OR GUARDIAN OR
AUTHORITY RESPONSIBLE FOR THE MAINTENANCE OF AN APPLICANT FOR
STERILIZATION WHO IS UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY-ONE YEARS
(To be appended to Part I or Part IT)
I, [?] [] Full Christian

name and surname.
mn fal po
["] scompation °F
hereby declare :

(a) That I am the (father) (mother) (guardian) (official representative of {*) Give name and
the authority responsible for the maintenance) of the above-named [*] cant” “7?”
144 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(6) That I have read (his/her application) (the application on his/her behalf)
and that to the best of my knowledge and belief the statements
therein are true.

spolcant mauie: ot (c) That I consent to the said [*]
being sterilized.

(d) That the reason why this declaration is not signed by the parent or
guardian of the above-named [°]

[*] Give reason. is as follows: [°]
7] Signature and Signed : [7]

escription of permaking the

—_— Dated: This (day) of (month) (year).
iddress “and des. L [*]

cription of witness f
to Phe above sig- O
nature.

hereby declare that the above signature was made in my presence, this
(day) of (month) (year).

° Si f ’ . 9
D) oenature 0 Signed: [°]

To the Minister of Health
N.B.—Marginal notes must be strictly followed, and inappropriate words or clauses struck out.

Part III

FORM OF CERTIFICATE OF MEDICAL PRACTITIONER IN SUPPORT OF AN
APPLICATION FOR STERILIZATION

Pd Give name of In the matter of [*]

person propoce
: 2
Uy ive fall postal OF [*]

fomsane [4

ation) of same.

° an applicant (on his/her own behalf) (through his/her parent or guardian)
(through the authority responsible for his/her maintenance) for permission to

be sterilized.
ocrae 1 04

5] Give full tal 5
Chee of medics OF [5]
certifier.

hereby declare as follows :

1. I am a person registered under the Medical Acts (and the usual medical
attendant (if any) to the above-named [7]
(and approved by the Minister of Health as a practitioner experienced in
psychological medicine) for the purpose of giving medical certificates under the
Voluntary Sterilization Act, 193.
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION BILL

2. On the [*] of
at [7] in the county (borough)
of , I personally examined the said
1] and am of opinion
that he/she is a fit and proper person to be sterilized on the ground that
he/she [*]

(a) Is a mentally defective person within the meaning of Section 1 of the
Mental Deficiency Act, 1927, being [°]

(0) has suffered from mental disorder, namely: [1°

(c) is suffermg from a grave physical disability which I consider to be
inheritable, namely: [1%]

(2) is likely to transmit to a subsequent generation (mental defectiveness)
(mental disorder) (the grave physical disability of [7] ).

3. I base my opinion on the following grounds :
(2) Facts observed by myself, at the time of the examination :
13

(6) Facts communicated to me by others:

[**]

4. I have ascertained that the said [7]
has attained sexual maturity.

5. [24] I have inquired into the personal characteristics and circumstances of
the said [7] and am of the opinion
that he/she is a fit and proper person to live in the general community under
suitable conditions after sterilization, and that to the best of my knowledge and
belief such conditions are available.

. [25] I have inquired into the nature and circumstances of the mental
(defect) (disorder) from which the said [7]
(suffers) (has suffered), and as a result I am of the opinion that the performance cine
of sterilization upon the said [*]
is not likely to be followed by any injurious results to his/her mental condition.

7. I further declare that I have questioned (the said [7]

(the parent or guardian of the said [*] ) and am
satisfied that he/she understands that the effect of sterilization will be to
prevent the said [*] from producing

offspring.
Signed: [7°]
Dated: This (day) of (month) (year). toner

To the Minister of Health

145

[*} Give date of
examination.

{("] Give place of
examination.

(*] ae out He
which
BO not ie.

State here

m or

ficiency Act, 1927.

[?°} State nature of
mental disorder.

Wes Give name of
isability.

(1°) Give details,

*] Give full
ticular of the de
fec or
disability, with
mames and dresses of informants.
Oda Only to
led in where the
applicant is suffering from mental

defectiveness.

ae To be filled in
a practitioner

ical

the case of
an an xpplicant who
is a mental defective or has suffered
from mental disorder.

z
chol

C*) piafire and
medical tons acti

N.B.—Marginal notes must be strictly followed, and inappropriate words or clauses struck out. Two

medical certificates on Form III are required in support of an application. One of these certificates
should, whenever possible, be signed by the usual medical attendant of the applicant. The second
certificate must be signed by a medical practitioner approved for the purpose by the Minister of Health.
Where the applicant is a mental defective or has suffered from mental disorder, the second certificate
must be signed by a practitioner experienced in psychological medicine approved by the Minister of
Health.
146 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Part IV

FORM OF AUTHORIZATION BY THE MINISTER OF HEALTH FOR A PERSON TO BE
STERILIZED

I, Minister of Health, in virtue of the powers conferred upon me by the
Voluntary Sterilization Act, 193 , having received (on his/her own behalf)
(through his/her parent or guardian) (through the authority responsible for
his/her maintenance) an application that "(name
of applicant for sterilization), of (address
of applicant) should undergo sterilization, and being satisfied that the said

(applicant) is a fit and proper person to
be sterilized, DO HEREBY GRANT THIS AUTHORIZATION for the said
(applicant) to be sterilized by a registered medical practitioner at any time
within six months of this date.

Signed :
Dated :

N.B.—This authorization is only valid within the time stated. If sterilization is not performed within
such time, it may be returned to the Minister, with a statement of the reason for the delay, and a request
for its renewal.

ParRT V
ForM OF NOTICE OF THE PERFORMANCE OF STERILIZATION

I hereby give notice that in accordance with the authorization of the Minister
of Health, dated , sterilization was

U1 Give name of performed upon [+]

[] Give address of Of [*]
same.
[?] Give place. at [?]

(*) Give date. on [4]

veal address, and Signed ° [*]
qualifications.

Dated: This (day of) (month) year).

To the Minister of Health

N.B.—This notice shall be forwarded within seven days of the performance of sterilization to the
Minister of Health, failing which the person responsible is liable to a penalty of ten pounds for each day or
portion of a day during which the default continues.

Where sterilization is performed in a hospital, it shall be signed and forwarded by the secretary or
superintendent: if elsewhere, it shall be signed and forwarded by the medical practitioner performing
sterilization.
