EUGENICS AND HUMAN ECOLOGY"
By G. C. L. BERTRAM, W.A., Ph.D.

Introduction

OR thirty-five years this Galton Lecture
r= been given annually in memory of

that great man who both coined the
term Eugenics and was this Soczety’s first
President. To be included in the long list of
Galton lecturers, many of them persons of
great distinction, makes me feel honoured
above my deserts. I hope I may not fail in
an effort to stimulate thoughts which will
further the aims of Galton’s society, our
Eugenics Society, whose newly reissued
““ Statement of Objects ”’ must surely spread
far our eugenic ideals.

My paper is divided into two main parts.
In the first part Eugenics and Human Ecology
are defined and related, and then the
peculiarities of our own species are described,
followed by an insight into the complexity of
our inter-relationship with our environment.
The second part of the paper then deals with
the actual numbers of mankind, with the
concept of optimal populations, the problem
of race and the differences between individuals. Finally, something is said of the
difficulty of the task of Eugenists.

Eugenics and Human Ecology

I attempt this afternoon to co-ordinate and
relate the two sciences, concepts or call them
what you will, of Eugenics and Ecology, both
of them directly concerning our own species.
Further, I want to orientate Eugenics within
a still wider setting, and to do that with a
particular perspective. For those who have
perhaps kept themselves too rigidly confined
in their interests, first I will provide brief
definitions of the two terms, which cover
ourselves and our surroundings in the broadest terms. “‘ Eugenics”’ Galton defined in
1904 as the “science which deals with all
those influences that improve the inborn
qualities of a race; also with those that

* The Galton Lecture delivered before the Eugenics
Soctety on February 16th, 1951.

II

develop them to the utmost advantage.”
Thought quickly shows how wide then is the
scope of the Eugenist.

For Ecology I may quote Ernst Haeckel’s
definition in 1870. “‘ By ecology we mean the
body of knowledge concerning the economy
of nature—the investigation of the total
relations of the animal both to its inorganic
and to its organic environment ; including,
above all, its friendly and inimical relations
with those animals and plants with which it
comes directly or indirectly into contact—in
a word, ecology is the study of all those
complex inter-relations referred to by Darwin ”’ (Galton’s first cousin) “as the conditions of the struggle for existence.’?’ Human
Ecology is, of course, the study of Ecology as
thus defined but in relationship to a single
Species.

From these definitions alone the linkage
between Eugenics and the Ecology of our
own species must be obvious: but in
addition it must be clear that Eugenics
encompasses not only knowledge but a
purpose as well—to improve the inborn
qualities of people—while Human Ecology
consists of knowledge alone. This eugenic
objective can only be achieved in a favourable ecological surround whose study includes
what are now commonly termed the social
sciences. Of course, a large part of the
personal environment is filled with other
members of one’s own species, and the kicks
and kindnesses of social life are comparable
with the wind of climate and the wine of
bodily satisfaction.

The width of both Eugenics and Ecology,
like geography too, causes them inevitably
to suffer Some scorn from those of narrower
disciplines. To such, Eugenics is a bastard
brother to genetics and Ecology the unwanted child of zoology. But such emotions
are of no real import and spring up in minds
which are wedded to clear-cut categories and
advance in narrow ‘fields.

Let me remind you of the analogy of the
photograph, which is each one of us. The
12 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Eugenist is primarily concerned with the
exposure, while the Ecologist keeps the shop
where the film goes for development. Care
in development may produce a fair result
from a bad exposure, and even faulty
development may yet permit a fine first
image to appear of worth. But best results
can come only from a superior first image
allowed to grow under the most skilled
development. Image or genes, development
or environment, are similar pairs, the first
attracting the Eugenist in greater degree,
the second the Social Scientist or Human
Ecologist. Regrettably, however, while the
Eugenist is actively aware and interested, at
least in some measure, in both sides of the
field, it seems rare for the Human Ecologist
or Social Scientist to display any real
enthusiasm for the genes, and commonly too
little interest even in the nourishment of the
image.

Peculiarities of our Species

Now, apart from a natural self-regard, we
are indeed a most interesting species to study
—we are so peculiar.

Though it has not always been so, we are
now, in fact, by far the most abundant of the
larger mammals, indeed of animals of any
kind above a quite small size. What species,
next in size to man, can show 2,000 million
individuals living at the same time ? Can the
rats do so? Perhaps the cod can. But both
are far smaller than ourselves. Again, what
other large species is still increasing in
numbers following quadruplication over the
last 300 years?

Take another aspect of our peculiarity. It
is evident that the appearance and evolution
of human-kind is a phenomenon of the recent
past : we are a sprouting twig at the top of
the phylogenetic tree. Man to-day is
markedly different from his ancestors of
times not distant by geological reckoning.
Yet evolution within a species or group, so
we believe, takes place by little steps or
changes which can occur only in that
ephemeral period of maturation and fusion of
the gametes. With us, since we are such slow
breeders by common comparison, there are

but four generations to a century, so that
the steps of evolution would seem not to be
capable of falling faster than once every 25
years. Thus the evolution of our species,
compared with most, is fast measured
directly in time ; it is racing if measured in
generations, between which the evolutionary
steps must, in fact, be unusually large. Does
this encourage, or stimulate despair ?

Compared with all other species our fewness of off-spring is so marked, our parental
care so great, our personal development so
slow. On a variety of grounds, anatomical
and otherwise, some have likened us to
foetal apes, with so slow a development that
we become sexually mature while still
possessing various foetal or at least juvenile
attributes compared with other mammals.
Our heads and brains are remarkably spherical and youthfully large in proportion, and
our cranial axis remains at right angles to our
long axis. There is connection here with our
upright posture, the freeing of our forelimbs
from the needs of locomotion, and the
presence of binocular vision. We even
parasitize cattle so that we can enjoy milk
long past infancy.

We are generalized mammals, and we are
large. That is of great importance. Our large
size and relatively unspecialized form, simple
pentadactyl limbs and upright carriage,
allow us physically, as well as mentally, to
outstrip our fellow mammals. Puny our
bodies are not. True we cannot swim like
seals or run like deer, but in a general
integration we surpass all other mammals in
our ability to traverse at reasonable speeds
a great variety of different terrains—we
swim, we run, we climb—water, ice, rocks,
earth, trees, all can be surmounted. The
next most skilful large mammal I believe to
be the polar bear, a swimmer, runner and
climber of real ability.

Man’s body is tough and adaptable, and
that, linked to a superior brain, brings him
to a position of dominance which is remarkable. It is salutary to remember, however,
that in shaping the topography of the earth
it is the most humble of animals, the
Foraminifera and the corals, which have the
greatest and most lasting influence.
EUGENICS AND HUMAN ECOLOGY 13

But in many other ways we follow the
normal animal pattern, in our bodily appetites and in the guiding and controlling
factors of our lives. Our individual growth
and population growth follow the normal
curves: till very recently our populations
were controlled in the usual way by densitydependent factors: the factors of mortality,
readjusted as they may be by medical
philanthropy and war, are throughout most
of the world of standard type.

Interaction with Environment

Of course, the interaction between ourselves
and our environment has very many facets,
depending on factors which are multitudinous. Some of these factors are under our
own control or could be under our own control
if we so willed, while others are quite beyond
human, interference though sometimes predictable. What is controllable or controlled
in, respect of one group or section of humankind is not necessarily so in respect of
another: the incidence of smallpox in
Britain and in Arabia is an example ; so is the
differing availability of breadgrain to a rich
and to a poor importing country. Mortality
by thunderbolts is never likely either to be
predictable or controllable, while certain
aspects of the weather are already to some
degree predictable and may one day be
controllable. The factors in this interaction
between ourselves and our environment are,
in fact, astonishing in their abundance,
variety and degree of controllability. For
example, the further melting of polar ice,
probably inevitable and _ uncontrollable,
could raise world sea levels by another
1oo feet or more, overwhelming a large
proportion of the population of the earth.
The changing sources and control of energy
have repercussions which may seem overwhelming. The social results of the spread of
the potato and of television are alike remarkable. In this general connection, further, we
should note our influence, which could
largely be controlled and rationalized, on the
world’s flora and fauna; we should note
both the spoliation and the conservation and
production, with all their aspects, material,

biological and esthetic too. We cultivate,
we modify by breeding our domestic animals
and plants, we exert various degrees of
control upon some of our crop pests and
diseases and upon some of those which
afflict directly our own persons.

All of us peculiar beings, each with his own
personal gene content, personality and
aspirations, are set in this vast ecological
frame to some of whose facets I have drawn
fleeting attention.

Total and Optimal Populations

I have now outlined, as it were, some
features of the back-cloth. In the foreground
leaps ever upwards the advancing figure of
world population. The reasons for this
leaping are well known to you and fortunately
are becoming daily more widely appreciated.
That, of course, is the state of the total of our
human species—a net annual increase which
is estimated to surpass 20 million each year.
The differing position of the many subdivisions of human-kind in their individual
population cycles just magnifies the complexity, increases the dangers of partial
understanding and multiplies the difficulty
of solution.

We live to-day in a strange medley of fastincreasing numbers on the world scale and of
diminishing replacement rates in advanced
nations. Excess numbers, backwardness,
hunger and disease glare across the gulf at
technological advance, plenty and medical
philanthropy which are, in large measure,
both their cause and their cure. Ignorance,
and lack of a vision wide enough to encompass
the whole, leads to emotional conflict between groups, to optimistic reliance on this
or that single panacea and to special pleading. Advanced nations with recent low
replacement rates seek selected migrants
from other nations equally forward in
diminished reproduction, and do so for
perfectly good reasons of compatibility and
tradition, while spurning the excess hordes
from spawning India. Kindly people from
advanced nations diminish, with the weapons
of modern prophylactic medicine, the mortality of the backward at speeds excessive in
14 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

comparison with the slow increase of food
production. Philanthropy and economics,
with opposed systems of distribution of
resources, vie with one another for the
control of the stomachs of the masses.

Here, indeed, is a medley of forces and
factors quite capable of confusing all but
those whose vision is wider than the average.
This is the pudding from which the plum
must be extracted ; this is the brew from
which the essence must be distilled. The
trouble is that our peculiarity, or more
honestly called our stupidity, so far has never
allowed most people to realize for our own
species what is so abundantly obvious for
both wild animals and domestic animals. So
far few recognize the validity of an optimal
population for living within any particular
environmental framework. Even when the
concept of an optimum has been achieved,
rarely indeed does that concept extend
beyond the single criterion of food or
standard economics. Yet within any particular environmental framework there must
be in fact an optimal population relative to
whatever criterion is held supreme, be it
economic, nutritional, educational or spiritual. Further, the optimum may perhaps
vary, even within the same environmental
framework and with the same priority list of
desirable criteria, according to the gene
content of the particular population in
question. For example, there may well be
fundamental genetic differences concerned
with gregariousness: there may be real
differences here between, shall we say,
Norwegian farmers and Levantine labourers.
The complexity of such concepts does not
detract from their reality.

An Aim Essential

The theoretical discussion of optimal
populations is, however, somewhat barren. It
can become pregnant with understanding so
soon as we attempt to integrate the desirable
criteria and express them as an agreed aim.
As a precursor to actual agreement I have
suggested an aim which should surely achieve
some wide acceptance. Surely our goal
should be a state of affairs in which every

individual shall have the opportunity to
develop to the full, in the service of his
fellows, all the talents with which he is
endowed, physical, mental and _ spiritual.
When that is our aim we shall soon realize
that the optimal population which will
allow approach towards it by no means
necessarily will involve immensely high
standards of material well-being, and one
may guess that population density will be
moderate. Remember the benefit which so
many achieve through periods of solitude in
the waste places of the earth.

Even when the validity of this line of
reasoning is accepted, that is not the end of
the story ; very far from it, for, as I have
said, the gene content of populations, even
populations of equal size, varies very greatly.
But if only a general aim could be consciously
appreciated, a general aim which will allow
within it some difference of more closely
conceived or doctrinal aim based on differing
religion, then some progress could be made.
Yet any progress will be beset by immense
problems and I propose to deal, in a moment,
briefly with three of them.

Another Human Peculiarity

First of all, however, it is necessary to
remind you that there are still further
important peculiarities of our species which
so far I have deliberately left aside. Alone
we have speech and are capable of passing
experience from one to another in writing ;
alone we have a highly developed consciousness of self, a moral sense, even a sense of
destiny, a free will and an aim, though that
often is blurred by circumstances. Finally,
we can deliberately control our reproduction.
That is of immense and saving importance.
In contraceptive practice we have a means
of directing the future for good or ill.

The Control of Numbers

I said I would deal with three particular
problems: these must be solved if we are
ever to approach the aim I have suggested
as likely to be acceptable to most. The first
of these problems concerns the control of
EUGENICS AND HUMAN ECOLOGY 15

total population and eventual limitation to
optimal ranges. |

I do not understand its origin but there
does seem to afflict so many people, even the
most educated, a distaste amounting to a
wilful blindness even for the recognition of
population dynamics and the inevitability
of change. Yet if one seeks a worthy goal,
even if one seeks a less worthy goal such as a
maximum of material well-being alone, then
almost at once, if the mind is not peculiarly
blinkered, surely must come the appreciation
of the reality of an optimal population for a
culture group, an economic conglomeration,
a nation or the world. It should be equally
evident, if the mind is allowed to roam and
possess and appreciate the evidence, that
optimal populations do not appear by magic,
by waiting, or by unchecked reproduction
but can only emerge by taking thought and
finally appropriate action. At once, as so
often in man’s affairs, comes then the
problem of personal freedom and the free
expression of personal conscience. Man
reaches his greatest stature by the right use
of his individual free will. Self-imposed
restraint is the highest expression of freedom—the use of free will to seek a consciously appreciated goal in the general
interest. This is true in all things, including
the multiplication of our species. It concerns
intimately any approach to those optimal
numbers in the several parts of the world, or
the world as a whole, which shall eventually
allow the full development of all the attributes of all men. It is a far cry, and crisis in
numbers is upon us now.

How much, it may properly be asked, do
the crises in political and public affairs,
within nations and between nations, derive
from the unconscious but perhaps inevitable
repercussions of unsuitable population densities within the present frame of life. High
population density in itself brings great and
seemingly inevitable changes in the behaviour
of lemmings, and even in the anatomy of
locusts : it may be so in ourselves too,
and those changes cannot be considered
desirable. That remains a fascinating if
future field for research. Meanwhile, to the
west we have the seeming leaders of mankind,

far advanced in their own population cycles
and turning a blind eye to the reality of the
concept of optimal population, and to the
east the reproductive torrent in mighty spate.
Gerald Heard has described it thus :

Few sights so quickly staunch humanitarianism, and stun humanism as the mere sight of too
many human beings—just seeing how many
human beings there actually are. The spate of
life proliferating along the Ganges: the fecund
density which spreads in China like a fungous
growth mantling even the broad rivers themselves; there the actual triumph of the life
force, the actual biological achievement of Homo
sapiens, stir neither loyalty nor hope....
There is an awkward disregarded balance
between quantity and quality. Not only does
gold’s value depend on its rarity : it is the same,
at base, with bread. Beyond sufficiency, plenty
simply collapses into glut. And life, too, the
most precious of possessions, it also can be
debased by the cheapening caused by unrestrained, unbalanced quantity.

The Problem of Race

Having dealt with numbers, the next.
immediate problem is that of race which
recently has so teased the conscience of
U.N.E.S.C.O. that there has been an abortive
attempt to propound new doctrine. It seems
perhaps unfair, but it is a fact, that we are
born, equal perhaps in ultimate spiritual
worth, equal in the right to freedom and
opportunity, but so unequal in our genetic
make up, so unequal in our personal attributes. In this connection reference must be
made to Galton’s Hereditary Genius, written
in 1869 and recently re-published at the
instigation of this Society, where for the first
time the genetic aspects of eminence in many
fields was clearly demonstrated.

Let us boldly face this matter of race, if
that term may still be used despite its
imprecision and its attendant emotional,
anthropological and other glosses. Of course,
there are different races in the world, as any
travelled and observant child of five will
explain to you. They have different appearances, features, colour and so on, and go per
cent of the people of the world can by a child
be put into one or other of four categories,
usually denoted by their skin colour. The
analysis of figures for a single measurable
16 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

physical attribute may not conveniently
determine the same major or minor categories as does the, perhaps subjective but
none the less real, integration of many
features.

Attempts to classify living people, and
peoples, by mental attributes or educable
potentialities lead to still less significant or
happy results. It is not for me to enter into
discussion of the worth or otherwise of the
recent pronouncements by the U.N.E.S.C.O.
panel and the more recent denunciation of
certain of those pronouncements by anthropologists and others. My main point here is
to stress that genetic differences, physical,
mental, physiological and otherwise, are
expectable between different geographical
groups of our own species as they are
between particular groups of other species of
animal covering a wide geographical range.
Geographical groups in any species may be
well- or ill-defined, and there will almost
inevitably be overlap and intergrade, most
breeding within the group and some interbreeding with neighbouring groups. Remember both that modern taxonomy is based on
phylogenetic assumptions and that the
general ease of so-called natural classification
is considered as evidence of evolution. Our
own species, man, within which all individuals
appear to be fertile one with another, clearly
would be abnormal if there were not obvious
genetic groupings. In insects we break down
populations so far as to say that there are,
for example, so-called biological races, similar
in anatomy but differing in some aspect of
habit, commonly a food habit. The result is
an obvious tendency normally to mate
within the particular biological race, though
abnormal matings outside it remain fertile.
Whatever the interplay of genes and environment the existence of biological races in
insects is real.

So is it, I suggest, with our own species.
There ave groupings of a genetic nature,
which are commonly further differentiated by
habit, upbringing, culture or call it what you
will. To each one of us usually our own
precise little ways of speech, feeding habits,
social graces and so on seem so much the
normal that we feel an oddness and a dis
taste for the ways of others. Thus it comes
about that, in general, like breeds with like.
But because of that ingrained feeling that
each one of us is the normal and that the
other fellow who is different is the abnormal,
we are only too prone to relate our own
estimate of normality with propriety, with
quality and with superiority. Thus we can
interpret the presence of emotional barriers
between our groupings. They are entirely
expectable, and respectable, in any swiftly
evolving species: the members of a particular group in general have an innate
distaste for matings between that group and
another. What is so reprehensible in ourselves is that we have failed to understand
the situation and in consequence too frequently are filled with an evil emotion, not
simply a recognition of a difference and an
appreciation of sameness, but an _ evil
emotion involving ideas of relative superiority and worth as between races. We have
been sufficiently dull-witted to make these
subjective integrations of worth even in the
absence of equality of educational, social and
dietary opportunity. We have inflamed
emotions which, I suggest, will far more
quickly be suppressed by an honest appreciation of actual differences and of natural
breeding barriers than by any attempts to
evade the issues, or any pretence that man
is not divided into sub-sections separated by
perfectly normal barriers of considerable
variety and strength.

Personal Differences—the Core of Eugenics

So, thirdly, in our consideration of the vast
besetting problems, we come to the central
core of Eugenics, the recognition of differences
in quality between individuals, and the hope
that by one means or another future general
tions may come to consist of higher proportions of those possessed of the more desirable
attributes. Many may feel that in a world of
obviously and continuously increasing complexity no effort must be spared to increase
the proportion of the wise, and thereby, in all
probability, gradually to increase the capacity for individual wisdom. Sadly, evidence
has recently been adduced suggesting, if now
EUGENICS AND HUMAN ECOLOGY 17

proving, something of the reverse trend in
our schoolchildren. Wisdom must be
increased and that cannot be done by
education and experience alone—they can
do no more than allow potentialities to
develop.

These differences in innate qualities between. ourselves in one sense seem so unfair,
yet at the same time they provide the means
to a worthy humility in realization of the
talents of the other fellow, some of which we
have in minor degree, some of which we seem
to lack completely. There have been, and
there still arc, many who, in their first youth,
feel that they personally are the equal, at
least mentally. of all men, if they would but
exert themselves. But, of course, it is not so
mentally, just as so clearly it is not so
physically. But with all the various types of
attribute, the transmission of quality from
one generation to another is surely demonstrable, if not always as simply as some would
like. The process of biological transmission is
largely obscured by environmental influences, nutritional, social, educational and so
on. And, though we improve, by no means
yet is there equal opportunity for all in these
environmental or ecological factors. But, in
this connection, let us always spurn the false
dectrine of equal shares for all men in all
things: that is nonsense. The aim, [ repeat,
is equality of opportunity in an environment
capable of atowing each to develop to the
full his every attribute,

It is the awareness of aim at this stage
Which is paramount in importance and. yet
so sadly Jacking. Further, the aim must. be
haly worthy, not just a sccking after
personal contentinent, though that perhaps
Isa true reflection of fitting into the environMent in the parely animal sense.

Conclusion

Thos Thave atvempted to detine and te
relate Eneenies and Himan heolosy to one
another Thess tried to show that we belong
oa spectes which is peculiar im many of its
attributes. TP hove drawn attention to some
of the the interaction
betweei our ehvironment,
Further complesaties become overwhelm
CORI EN Ties af
our elves

:
betty

ingly evident when we considered the total
numbers of our species and the significance
of optimal populations. Then came the
realization that there must be a widely
acceptable aim, and that such an aim involves
provision for the full development of all the :
attributes of a free individual. I then stressed
another great peculiarity of man, the ability
to control reproduction. So we passed to the
consideration of three particular problems ;
numbers, race and personal differences.

Finally, we must realize that most of these
problems are easily soluble by dictators, but
soluble in a way which is damnable. The
task of liberal Eugenists is inevitably a
difficult one, difficult for the very reason that
they are so fully embued with the liberal
spint, convinced both of the sanctity of
human life and the worth of the individual
free will. Therefore it is that they must rely
on education (which has been defined as
“that kind of culture which survives the
forgetting of facts '’). They must rely on the
education of those who are born, so leading
to the birth only of those with a sufficiency
of worthy attributes, and then only in
numbers which will allow the population to
he within an optimal range.

The aim of Eugenists, and their striving
towards that aim with the aid of moral
qualities, makes, to my mind, very apt for
remembrance that quotation from Thucydides taken by General Smuts for his
rectorial address at St. Andrews.

‘In freedom lies happiness,
courage lies freedom.”

That should be the motto of all leaders
to-day, and Eugenists must indeed be leaders.

and in

Mr. Cecil Binney, in moving a vote of
thanks to the lecturer, said that he had never
listened to a lecture at any of the Society's
meetings with greater interest as the lecturer
had referred to such a large number of
matters in which he himself was particularly
interested > it was unfortunate that he had
not had tune to develop all these. — For
example, Dr. Bertram ’s resiarks on the polar
bear reminded him that he had recently,
though with no zoological knowledge, been
considering the question, which of the

Cc
18 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

animals would have been most likely to
obtain the mastery of the world in the
absence of human beings or creatures of a
similar type. He thought the lecturer overestimated the value of being able to swim :
it was more important to be able to hold
things. The horse was a noble animal and
formed for speed, but, as any young child

who rode a pony could see, was confined to .

level ground, whereas the cat could go anywhere. Kittens could play with a ball of
wool, while a horse could not, and the paws
of such animals could conceivably be
developed into hands. The elephant, though
having the advantage of a trunk, was too
large and cumbersome. On the other hand
the rodents were too small. Passing from the
animal to the vegetable kingdom, Mr.
Kinney regretted that the lecturer had not
had time to develop the theme of the
influence of the potato on the human race.
The influence of plants on human history

Still persisted.

was a subject of great interest. Professor
Myres had pointed out that the position
of the Greek colonies was governed by the
possibility of growing the olive tree. If it
had been possible to grow this in England
this country might have become part of the
Greco-Roman civilization, which it did not.
It was arguable whether the results of this
It was frequently said that
the Tartar invasions were stopped by the lack
of grass in Bavaria to feed the horses of the
invaders. If this were so it had undoubtedly
saved European civilization. Mr. Binney
referred to the lecturer’s mention of the
lemming, a creature which had always
interested him and was peculiarly appropriate nowadays as an emblem of human
progress. After making some observations
on the position in the Far East, and the
relations between different races, Mr. Binney
concluded by saying how much the Society
were indebted to Dr. Bertram for his lecture.

THE PLAIN VIEW

fa INVERNESS PLACE,

LONDON, W.2

A Quarterly journal converned
with human relations and wtt/)
the quality of Aving

Edited by H. J. BracKinam

Editorial Advisory Panel
Gilbert Murray. o.m., Bertrand Russell.
O.M., F.R.S., Lord Chorley, Sir Richard
Gregory, BY., F.RS., Barbara Wootton

48.64. per annum, post free

WRITE FOR SPECIMEN COPY

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLII, No 1.
