Fertility in Economically Emergent

Countries

SOME FACTS

HERE ARE OVER 150 countries in the

world as a whole, and of these only about

sixty can provide worth-while complete
data of birth registrations. In another sixty it is
possible to make some assessment of fertility
from census or sample survey statistics, but in the
remainder (including much of Asia and some of
Africa) there is no satisfactory information at all
on this subject. The particulars given below are
subject to the limitation that the state of affairs
in emergent countries, and a fortiori in countries
that it is hoped will soon start emerging, is only
rather dimly known.

It is estimated by the demographic staff of the
United Nations that in the more developed
regions of the world the average crude birth rate
is 22 per thousand (ranging from 18 in Western
Europe to 25 in U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R.) and
the gross reproduction rate 1-4. The corresponding figures for the other regions are very
nearly double in both cases, and show little
variation from place to place: nearly 90 per cent
of less-developed countries have a birth rate of
35 per thousand or more and a gross reproduction rate of 2-4 or more.

The following data quoted (subject to possible
errors) by Professor Freedman at the recent
Royal Society Symposium include some exceptionally high gross reproduction rates:

British Guiana 2-9 Honduras 2°8
Cocos Islands 4:2 India 2°6
Ceylon 3-7 Trinidad 2:5
Costa Rica 3°4 United Arab
Republic 3:1

The numbers of children that respondents to
sample surveys say they consider ideal vary a
good deal from region to region; for example, an
average of three or less in parts of the Caribbean

area, four in an Indian city and in Formosa, five
in an Indian village. Not many couples say two
children; even the image of a small family is
hardly present as yet. This will do much to
explain why current population projections show
an expected increase between the years 1975 and
2000 of over 2,000 million people in Asia, and
over 3,000 million in the world as a whole.

Where fertility data are scanty, the reality must
be faced that evidence on the trend of the birth
rate will be rare and unreliable. But some recent
indications are available for ten countries in Asia
and four countries in Africa and they show little
change of level. Fertility has not yet responded
to political, social and economic developments;
or perhaps conflicting forces have been at work,
improved health conditions tending to raise the
birth rate and economic progress to lower it—
though this seems unlikely to have occurred on
any large scale. In the Caribbean area, at least,
the upward-pressing forces have prevailed and
fertility has risen. In general, however, fertility
levels in the developing countries are determined
to a large extent by cultural traits that have not
so far been appreciably influenced by their
economic modernization. Japan, with the striking reduction in its birth rate, is an isolated
exception. There is immense scope for research
and much-needed reform: research which has
been conducted in only a handful of the underdeveloped areas, and reform that has been put
into practice almost nowhere. As Dr. Hauser
said at the Conference on Research in Family
Planning, held in New York in 1960, the existence of large programmes of modernization in
these areas provides a valuable opportunity for
studies of the effect a changing culture does and
could have upon fertility.

53
