fF FRIEDRICH WILHELM SCHALLMEYER:
2 1857-1919

A Pioneer in Eupenics

HEN transmitting to the library
of our Society a copy of the 1920
: edition of Schallmeyer’ s work
" ed ‘‘ Vererbung und Auslese’”’, I should
B to be permitted to say a few words about
&. He died in r9r9, and neither that event
} the publication of the above-mentioned
k was, I believe, noticed at the time in
*® EuGENIcs REVIEW. This omission was
Bbtless due to the poverty of our Soctety
mehat time and to the post-war conditions
i preva: As I was President at that
wish in some measure to make good
$ omission.
gnallmeyer was born at Mindeheim in 1857,
ing g one of a large family, and his father
@ in business. He achieved distinction in
abjects at the Gymnasium at Augsburg
{hen ‘began to study law. Soon afters he turned his attention to philosophy
then finally to medicine. In 1887 he
gme a general practitioner in a small
brian town, but before long came to feel
Eto help individuals at the expense of the
Fwas incompatible with his conception of
pties, which moreover deprived him of
F anities for research. After further
s of study he became a specialist in
hl diseases at Dusseldorf. He retired
_ seven years’ work and spent the
mder of his life in research work near
ih. Early in life he had visited Brazil,
when freed from duties he travelled in
r East. He died in 1919.
‘ Miimeyer’s short first work * ‘Uber die
de k6rperliche Entartung der Kultur
a Bheit und die Verstaatlichung des
fen Standes’’ was published in 1891,
ve years spent in trying to find a
pr. His main theme was that medical
. by preserving those of weak constitupatributes to the deterioration of the
ge urged that attention should rather

   
  
 

 
  
  
  
 
  
  
    
 
   
   
  
   
  
 
   
 
   
   
   
   
 
 

33

By MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN, s-. p.

be devoted to the control of the selective
processes, this being based on researches in
regard to heredity. He advocated the medical
registration of all citizens and the state
control of the medical profession. He was
greatly influenced in his writings by the
“* Origin of Species,’’ and he was at this time,
like the author of that work, a believer in the
inheritance of acquired characters, a belief
he subsequently abandoned. His ideas were
formed in the first instance before he had
studied Galton’s writings. Indeed it was his
desire to study that author’s works which led
him to learn English, a task perhaps facilitated by his wide knowledge of other
languages. He started his eugenic campaign
in Germany uninfluenced by Galton.

Schallmeyer’s second and more important
work, ‘‘ Vererbung und Auslese,”’ was first
published in 1903, it being written as an
entry for a competition organized and
financed by the famous Krupp. The subject
of the competition was “ Was lernen wir aus
den Prinzipien der Deszendenztheorie in
Beziehung auf die innerpolitische Entwickking und Gesetzgebung der Staaten?”’ A
prize of high value was offered and three
scientists appointed as Judges. They awarded
it to Schallmeyer’s work in preference to
those sent in by sixty other entrants. Several
subsequent editions were issued, all carefully
brought up to date, that of 1910 being already
in the Soctety’s library. The edition of 1920,
forwarded herewith and published after his
death, contains so many alterations as almost
to amount to a new book, and is valuable as
indicating the progress of eugenic thought
in Germany. Schallmeyer’s last years were,
in fact, mainly occupied in an endeavour to
popularize eugenics.

Schallmeyer’s aim was, in fact, to prove
that the qualities of human groups are
prone to change as the result of an incessant
34 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

though imperceptible selective process. This
arises because individuals are endowed with
different hereditary dispositions and because
they contribute unequally to the formation
of subsequent generations. Favourable social
conditions do not, he held, usually tend to
promote racial progress ; in fact they tend
to endanger it by limiting the action of
natural selection. Governments must influence racial processes both quantitatively
and qualitatively and this can be done most
effectively by propaganda. It is to be noted
that Schallmeyer called the science he dealt
with Rassehygiene not Rassenhygiene, and
by it he meant the hygiene of the genotype.

Lest it should appear from the above that
Schallmeyer’s work was only known in
Germany it may be mentioned that in
Holmes’s ‘‘ Bibliography of Eugenics,’”’ published in 1924, there are twenty-three entries
against his name, dating from 1891 to IgI9.
Again at the Eugenic Congress held in
London in 1912, the most important eugenic
meeting held in England up to that date, a

Publishers: DAVID NUTT, London - G. E. STECHERT & Co., New York - NICOLA ZANICHELLI, Bologna - FELIX ALCAN, Pas
- F. KILIAN’S NACHFOLGER, Budapest - F. ROUGE & CIE,
THE MARUZEN COMPANY, Tokyo. <

AKADEMISCHE VERLAGSGESELLSCHAFT m. b. H., Leipzig

“SCIENTIA ”

IS THE ONLY REVIEW the contributors to which are really international.

IS THE ONLY REVIEW that bas a really world-wide circulation.

IS THE ONLY REVIEW of synthesis and unification of science, that deals in its articles with thenewest and most fundamental problems of all ba
of knowledge : scientific philosophy, history of science, scientific teaching and advancement, mathematics, astronomy. geology, physics, chg
, bistory of religions, anthropology, linguistics : articles sometimes constituting real and proper e
v the different nations to the advancement of science ; on determinism ; on the most fun _
cal and chemical questions, and particularly on relativity, on the physics of the atom and of radiations; on vitalism. Scientia thus st

biological sciences, physiology, psychology
such as those on the contribution given

the main problems interesting the intelectual circles of the whole world.

18 THE ONLY REVIEW that among its contributors can boast of the most illustrious men of science in the whole world. 4
The articles are published in the language of their authors, and every number has a supplement containing the French translation of all the 4
The review is thus completely accessible to those who know only French. (Write for a free copy to the General Sect
Scientsa, Milan, sending sixpence in one stamp of your country, merely to cover packing and postage.) “J
SUBSCRIPTION: 46 Shillings 4
Substantial reductions are granted to those who take up more than one year’s subscription.
For information apply to “ SCIENTIA ” Via A. De Togni, 12 - Milano (Italy)

that are not French.

 
  
   
  
  
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
  
   
  
  
    
 
  
  
  
 
  

paper was read by Dr. Agnes Bluhm in wi
Schallmeyer was spoke of as “one of 4
leading spirits of the German euge
movement ’”’ (See “‘ Problems in Eugeni¢
p. 388). The main theme of his works ¥
illustrated by indicating that ‘‘ when throw
the skill of the obstetrician a mother with
much contracted pelvis brings a living ck
into the world’’ he thus “ contribd
towards the spread of ’’ this trouble ing
coming generations (ibid. p. 390). I sh
like to see this paper reconsidered ing
light of modern additions both to me¢
knowledge and to eugenics. It may
added here that Dr. Alfred Ploetz, who
now, I believe, been for a longer tin
fighter in the eugenic field than any q
living German, was welcomed in Eng
on that occasion as a representative of
country. Which of these two pionee
had greater influence in changing Gerg
thought in the right direction it is not &
non-German to attempt to decide. Sclj
meyer was anyhow first in the field.

INTERNATIONAL REVIEW OF SCIENTIFIC SYNTHESIS Published every month (each number contasning 100 to 120 pages) =%

Editors : @. B. BONINO - F. BOTTAZZI - G. BRUMI - A. PAld
G. SCORZA. General Secretary: Paolo Bonetti
