THE EUGENICS REVIEW.

THE PRESENT TENDENCIES OF

POPULATION IN GREAT BRITAIN

WITH RESPECT TO QUANTITY AND
QUALITY.

By JoHN Brown EE, M.D., D.Sc.,

(National Institute for Medical Research.)

The problem of the birth-rate is one which has received a great deal
of consideration in recent years. There are two chief factors concerned
in the matter, the first biological and the second economic. That the
economic factor plays a part, I have never had any doubt, but I feel
satisfied that it plays second fiddle to the biological factor and as it has
received an immense amount of attention, it will not be further discussed. To document the matter fully would require a book, a short
synopsis of the main points (as they seem to me), is discussed alone.

The problem presents two aspects, first the actual numbers of
births in proportion to the fertile women and secondly the quality of
the race brought into being. Man is an animal and therefore must be
subject to the same or analogous causes which give rise to changes in
the numbers of animals. Among many of the smaller mammals, there
are well marked variations in the numbers associated with food supply
and epidemic disease, but apart from these, great variations in numbers
occur at certain times without any apparent cause. Such an occurrence was the plague of mice in the south of Scotland at the end of
last century and these instances are very numerous elsewhere. In
many of these cases even after the most careful enquiry, no reason
could be assigned for the variation. Parasitic micro-organisms also
assume infective and lethal properties at times with very disastrous
results; (such was the epidemic of influenza in the autumn of 1918,)
and then, for long periods, seem to loose much of their power of affecting man. I think man must be subject to the same laws. Take for
instance the emigrations of the Norse during the 8th to the 10th centuries. Here ship after ship of emigrants colonised and established
Kingdoms in England and in the west of Europe. These emigrations
suddenly ceased. It is very difficult to believe that the emigrant
74 EUGENICS REVIEW.

period was not a period of high birth-rate, Norway is a country with
no great abundance of food supply, and if the birth-rate had continued
at the same level as that during the time of the emigrations, selfpreservation would have driven the inhabitants to seek more fertile
areas. Of these migrations of population, there are many examples
in history. For instance in historical times, or immediately prehistoric, there were three great eruptions of population from the
Arabian peninsula. In other words, such rapid increases in the
population may be compared to a ‘plague’ of men.

The rate of increase of the population varies in most nations from
time to time. In England this is not the first time that a great increase
in the population has taken place, though it is the period at which much
the largest increase of population has occurred. A considerable part
of this however, is due to the fall of the death-rate. Had the deathrate remained as high as in the 18th century, 30 to 35 per thousand,
though the population would have undoubtedly increased very
markedly and in an unique manner, the existing phenomena would not
have occurred. There isample evidence that there were very considerable increases of the population in England during the reigns of the
early Edwards in spite of the Great Plague, and later in the times
of Henry VIII. and Elizabeth the population doubled itself.

The quality of the population now demands a few remarks. Everywhere in history the quality of the population has varied in a very
remarkable way. The great days of Athens were due to an outburst
of genius within fifty years which is not known to have been equalled
in the history of the world. The twin galaxies of eminent men in
modern Italy were both the birth product of but 50 years. The first
contained Dante, Boccaccio, Giotto, etc., the second, Ariosto, Da
Vinci, Machael Angelo and many others. In like manner, the great
names in English literature occur. In the 14th century Wyclyffe,
Chaucer, Langland and Gower were all born within a few years of one
another. In the Shakespearean age, the group of great men containing
Spenser, Bacon, Shakespeare, Marlowe, Milton, etc., and lastly the
group containing Wordsworth, Shelley, Byron, Keats, etc., were all
born likewise within fifty consecutive years. I do not say that great
men do not occur at other times but they occur distributed much more
sparsely. Take any book such as Nicol’s Tables of European
History and consider the distribution of the names he marks as distinguished, it is at once obvious that they group themselves around
narrow periods in a remarkable manner.

I feel inclined to associate quantity with quality and I think it
well marked in the history of England. In support of this view that
a high birth-rate is associated with the birth of eminent men, I may
point out that in the 18th century between 1710 and 1728, there were
born in Scotland David Hume, Tobias Smollet. Adam Smith, William
Collins, Thomas Reid, William Robertson, James Hutton, William
and John Hunter and Joseph Black, while at the same time Immanuel
Kant whose grandparents were Scottish was born in Germany. This
was a period of higher birth-rate in Scotland than the years preceding
or following. The births in the selected parishes of Scotland given
in the 1801 Census for Great Britain are as follows- :—
THE PRESENT TENDENCIES OF POPULATION. 75

Baptisms
Years. Males and Females.
1700 8,125
1710 oo 3 ,661
1720 4,146
1730 3,902
1740 3,643

We now come to the discussion of the fall of the birth-rate which
has taken place in the last fifty years. The figures given have been
calculated by a method which seems tome to be the most satisfactory
at the present moment. Many years ago Professor Tait using the
Edinburgh and Glasgow figures for 1856 found that the fertility of
married women lessened with age in a very regular manner. The
chance of a child being born in any year to a married woman between
the ages of 15 and 20 years was 0.5 and with each successive five years
this was reduced by a definite amount. The figures published for
Abedeen 1911 show that the fertility between 15 and 20 years is still
0.5 but the falling off in the fertility is much more rapid and still
sensibly constant from five years to five years. The constant of the
decline in fertility with age has been calculated for many instances of
which a selection is given in the accompanying table. As the constant increases, the birth-rate falls. It will be observed that the fall
began over the country at practically the same time. If anywhere
it began first in rural Wales but the figures are not sufficiently large to
make the fact absolutely certain. InShetland and Orkney the fall
is continuous from 1860. In Shetland the constant describing the
fall in fertility, has increased by 55 per cent., whereas in the county
of Lanark which includes Glasgow, the constant has only increased
28 per cent. It is to be noted in rural England since 1870, the constant has increased 45 per cent., whereas in the Hampstead and
Lewisham districts, in which if anywhere limitation of families is
practised, the constant has only increased 38 per cent.

We are thus faced with a problem that I am certain cannot be
explained simply by measures of birth control: there is some other
factor. It might be thought that as a much larger proportion of the
inhabitants of the town are now natives of the town they might have a
lower fertility, but the fall is just as great in rural England, so that
explanation certainly does not satisfy. The matter at present must
remain more or less a mystery but I feel in favour of the view that
there is a race physiology behind the matter and that the fall of the
birth-rate just now is not essentially different from what must have
taken place in England in former times.
EUGENICS REVIEW.

‘ganid uaye} sey UOT}BIIeA 244 yoryafut
JOUNBUI 9} UT APIV[IUIIS 9IQvIEpIsUOD AIDA SI 9I9GJ, ‘UPATS St poxe[No[vo JULYsUOD 4sIY OY} 0} UUM]OD 7eY} UT yUB}SUOD
ay} JO O1}7BI JY} ‘SUUIN[OD ZUTPI900Ns 9Y} UI PUB ONT SB UIYV} UIEq SBY JIIsSIP YORo}ioJ{UIAIS,}UBISUOD JSIY OY, *WIIY} JO
@peUl 9q UBd JY VSN A[UO 9Y} SI SOpwoop FZuIpss0ons Ul 19qG}OUT UO YTA UOSTIVdUIOD 9y} pus o}yeuTTxXOIdde A[UO parspIsuoCD
aq JSNUI SOn[VA JU, *‘UMOYS II ‘GH JO 998 JY} 0} OS PUB aIIT Jo sIBIA G ZULPI90ONS JY} UL UIUIOM PoTIIVUI Jo AP[IZIIJ OY
UIB}GO 0} G-O WIJ pszoVIAQns oq JsNUI YOIyM “Jue sUOD 9Y} ABS 07 SI VEYA ‘JUBISUOD AZI[1}.19J DY} JO SAN[VA 9Y} 9[ QB} SIY? U[—: TLON

 

    

8ZI 96L0- 6ZL 080- OIL FZL0- 76 F890- OOL 8290: | °° "° yreuey
OFT 9L80- LST 6180: SOL $90: POL $290- OOL sé6so- | °° _ AdUyxIO
SSI 1680- LYL = %8L0- 901 9950: SOL T9sg0- OOL ssso- | °° ™ pue[zyaus
SSL POL: PSL POL: L6 = 98L0- OOL 9920- °° ureysIMaor'y

pue peoysdurexy
O9L S860: 9FL 1980: OIL $90: OOL 68g0- "° [eany “
6FL 9F60- SEL FPSO: FOL 1990: OOL 2890- "*  uBqiQ, = ‘SATB AA
SPI $960- OFT Sg60- ZOT 4290: OOT 9990- ™° [einy .*
9FL 0860: OFT 6860: FOL 2690- OOL 0290: "'  ueqiy ‘puelsug
S—0Z6I S—OT6L Z—O68T 3—O88T S—OLST S—098T

 

76

 

“AIVTICUAA TO SSOT
GHL SHATYOSHd HOTHM LINVISNOO ALITILAGT AHL tO SHOTIVA AHL ONIMOHS WIEViL
