THE EUGENICS REVIEW

 

The Field for Eugenic Reform. *

By Major LEonarD Darwin, Sc.D.

The section of which this is the opening meeting deals with
eugenics in relation to the state, to society and to education; it may be
described as the section for applied genetics. I have been tempted to
describe it as the section for practical eugenics, but that. description
‘would hardly be appropriate. The details of experimentation and
research fall outside our sphere; but to make experiments is the most
practical thing one can do. Your practical manufacturer knows full
well that if he trusted to running forever on the old lines he would soon
come to grief. We are, therefore, here dealing with the practical
application of knowledge acquired by practical research.

Differences of opinion no doubt exist amongst those who have
‘conducted the researches on which we have to build our practical
superstructure; differences both as to methods and as to results.
Even more marked differences are, however, sure to be felt in this
section, where we have to apply to human conduct the knowledge
acquired by others. Ought thistoalarm us? Ithink not. Iremember long ago seeing a picture in our English Punch in which a tailor
is depicted when making excuses for some misfit by saying ‘‘you must
remember, sir, that tailoring has not yet been reduced to the level of
one of the exact sciences.’’ My views about eugenics are somewhat
similar, though that is not the way I should express them. But we
must remember, that, as evolutionary science teaches us, uniformity
always means stagnation. If we all felt alike, no one of us could ever
pick up from a neighbour any wiser thoughts than his own; and we
should therefore neither regret a certain amount of divergence of
opinion nor attempt to hide it. If the beasts of the field had never
fought together in the struggle for existence, mankind would never
have been developed out of our ape-like ancestors. But do not mistake
me. Iam not advocating war, which is the most damnable thing on
earth both as to its immediate and its racial consequences. We must
obtain the benefits which did result from savage warfare in some other
way; but competition we must have in everything, our opinions included. If any other eugenist should disagree entirely with some of my
assertions, I shall feel in no way hurt!

But what is the foundation on which we, in this section, have to
build? As I have already stated in this room, I hold that our aim as

 

*This address was delivered by Major Darwin at the Second International
Eugenics Congress, New York, September, 1921, and was published in the
Scientific Monthly for November 21.
500 EUGENICS REVIEW.

eugenists should be to increase the rate of multiplication of stocks
above the average in hereditary qualities and to decrease it amongst
the less fit. Others may wish to make our efforts cover a wider field,
holding, for example, that the immediate benefits likely to arise from
the teaching of sex hygiene should be included. With such as these I
shall not quarrel for I am in full sympathy with their aims. But I do
think that as a matter of convenience it would be as well to restrict
the meaning of ‘‘eugenics’’ so as to make it cover no more than was
intended by Sir Francis Galton who coined the word, that is, that it
should apply only to measures affecting the inborn qualities of future
generations.

| Now as to the differences of opinion amongst us, I am glad to
think that we are not divided into definitely antagonistic camps; for
all are, as it were, linked together by the existence of every intermediate shade of opinion. No doubt at one end of the scale there are
eugenists who regard racial progress as an assured law of nature, a progress merely to be hastened by the elimination of certain extremely
undesirable types, such as the insane, the feeble-in-mind, and those
endowed with grossly defective inborn constitutions. At the other
end of the scale are those who regard the signs of the times as pointing
without doubt to a slow and progressive deterioration in the innate
qualities of all civilized peoples; that is, to national degradation,
which it will only be possible to arrest by national efforts covering a
wide field of endeavour. In short, though all eugenists aim at improving the inborn qualities of posterity, yet some would attack on a wider
front than others. In this connection it may be convenient also to
divide inborn qualities into two groups; groups which also cannot be
separated from each other by any very definite line of demarcation.
At one end of the series we have qualities dependent on a single
something which the child received before its birth from its parents,
whilst qualities at the other end of the series depend on a large number
of such somethings ; just as we may divide tables into those which have
one leg and those which have many supports. In technical language,
the distinction here suggested for consideration is that between qualities dependent on a single Mendelian factor—or let us say on one or but
few such factors—and qualities dependent on large numbers of factors.
‘The qualities belonging to these two groups demand somewhat different
treatment, and some eugenists attach more importance to the one
group and some to the other.

Let us first consider the single factor qualities—the one legged
tables—in cases where such qualities are harmful; and let us take as a
single example a deformity called brachydactyly, the symptoms of
which are the fingers being excessively short. Now a child before its
birth either has or has not been endowed with the factor resulting in
this ailment. If it has not, it will not show these symptoms, and there
is anend of the matter. If it has been so endowed, it is certain to have
its hands crippled in this way, and it is, moreover, certain to pass
on this deformity to many of its offspring. How the factor first arose
in the ancestry of the brachydactylous child is unknown; but its
apparently spontaneous appearance is at all events such a rare event
that for practical purposes it may be neglected. This is the very
‘HE FJELD FOR KUGENIC REFORM. 501

simplest eugenic problem with which we have to deal; for if we could
“prevent parenthood in the case of all brachydactylous persons, we
might thus stamp out this ailment forever. The matter is not often
quite as simple as this; for, in regard to many defects, the child must
receive the harmful endowment from both parents in order to be harmed
thereby. If the endowment be recieved from one parent only, its
recipient is apparently normal; but all the same he is the carrier of this
hidden evil, very likely to be passed on to future generations, and to
show its harmful effects when it chances to be combined in one individual with a similar endowment from another line of descent. Here also
all that can be done is to prohibit parenthood in the case of all those
who, by exhibiting the symptoms in question, show that they have the
double dose of defective heredity ; though here the beneficial effects will
be more slowly obtained. In both cases all that has to be decided
is whether the defect in the present and in all future generations constitutes an injury sufficiently grave to justify, in this one generation
only, the actual prevention of parenthood or the self-sacrifice needed
for its voluntary abandonment. The world could be freed from all
such ailments more or less quickly, and it is only a question in each
case whether it is worth the cost of thus freeing it. But please note—
and this is the point to which I especially wish to call your attention—
if we were to rid the world of any one of these single-factor hereditary
effects we should probably thus benefit mankind in no other respect.
Here I cannot refrain from saying a few words about the feeble-inmind ; though to do so is in a measure to depart from the thread of my
argument. Whatever may be the final verdict of science as to the
nature of the factors on which this grave evil depends, all experts now
agree that it should be treated in the way in which single factor qualities should be dealt with; that is to say, each case should be studied
separately and dealt with on its individual merits. Here in the
United States you have at least three hundred thousand or four
hundred thousand of these unfortunates, and the numbers would probably be far greater if high grade cases were to be included. A very
large proportion of the mental defectives who become parents will pass
on this ailment to many of their children; whilst many of their offspring, though apparently normal! themselves, will be endowed with
the power of transmitting this defect to their descendants; and, if the
interests of posterity are not to be grossly neglected, no feeble-minded
person should be allowed to become a parent. Moreover, those who have
‘studied the problem, all of them, I believe, agree that the right method
to adopt is, as a rule, segregation; by which is meant confinement in
comfort, the sexes being kept apart. We all hate interfering with
liberty; but let it always be remembered that liberty necessitates
equality, and that as equality is impossible with the feeble-in-mind,
they can under no circumstances ever have true liberty. Segregation
is unquestionably the kindest course to adopt in most cases, especially
when all the natural protectors of the afflicted have disappeared. The
creation of the necessary accommodation would present. ditticulties,
but it would be a national economy in the long run.
There is, however one difficulty to be faced which some eugenists
have passed over too lightly. The feeble-in-mind often attract to
502 EUGENICS REVIEW.

themselves far more affection than would be expected by the inexperienced, and in nearly all cases the mother has strong instinctive sentiments in regard to her children. The removal of the mentally defective
infant from its home is in consequence often keenly resented ; a resentment which may no doubt frequently be overcome by argument,
except when it is backed up by less reputable desires dependent on the
possible economic advantages to the family. Here is a difficulty which
must by no means be neglected; though in my country at all events,
what is now greatly needed is to make the segregation of the mentally
defective more easy, not more difficult, than it is at present. Now
these conflicting considerations have forced me to consider what part
sterilization could be made to play in the eugenic program. It is not
for me to discuss what has been done in this respect in the United
States; for there are many present who can deal with this topic better
than Ican. Iam aware that the American Breeders Association has.
investigated this subject with care, and I wish to urge as strongly as I
possibly can that a continuation of these scientific researches is the
most practical thing that can now be done. We want to know what is
the best method of sterilization, and what are all the objections to it.
Is the X-ray method to be relied on? What effect would it have on the
offspring if insufficiently applied to produce sterility? Is there any
danger of cancer as a result? I strongly press this inquiry with regard
to X-rays because I think that the adoption of surgical methods does
increase the prejudice against sterilization, especially in regard to the
operation needed for women. The prejudice itself is very likely to be
instinctive; for natural selection is almost certain to have eliminated
all mental traits which are opposed to procreation. If this be so, this.
is a prejudice certain to be met with, and only to be overcome by reason..

If a sufficiently safe method of sterilization is available for both
sexes, aS some experts now hold to be actually the case, would it not be
a useful auxiliary to segregation? Mentally defective persons ought
to be allowed to live at home, or boarded out where they can be useful,
provided that ample precautions are taken to make it certain that they
can thus be maintained in equal contentment to when living in an
institution, that all other conditions are suitable, and that procreation
will be very improbable. Might not voluntary sterilization be regarded as a strong plea in favour of permission being given by the
authorities for the mentally defective persons not to be taken to an
institution? Many parents would, I believe, gladly welcome this
alternative, if carefully explained, in order to retain their child under
their own care; though here again it should be ascertained that the
home conditions are all suitable. No doubt sterilization may in some
cases facilitate immorality ; but if the authorities were given power to
enforce segregation in the case of all sterilized persons found to be living
an immoral life, the harmful consequences might he largely diminished.
I am myself inclined to favour the introduction of sterilization as a
voluntary and experimental measure; for if it proved to be successful,
its use would certainly be extended, its racial advantages being
obvious.

To revert to my main theme, we have seen that as regards such
bad qualities as are dependent on one or but few mendelian factors, the.
THE FIELD YOR EUGENIC REFORM. 503

right course to adopt is to consider and to deal with each case separately
and this is no doubt the way in which many eugenists wish to treat all
such human qualities as need be considered. Probably we shall all
agree that the grossly unfit , whether they be habitual criminals, utterly
incorrigible wastrels, or those endowed with excessively bad natural
constitutions , ought not to be allowed to become parents, each individual being separately weighed in the balance. But most of the bad
qualities leading to gross unfitness are dependent on many factors, and
what I now wish to suggest for your consideration is that the recognition
of this fact ought to make us modify in certain respects the policy
which we recommend for adoption. To make the point clear it will be
better to turn to the consideration of good qualities and to study the
methods of increasing the rate of multiplication of those well endowed
by nature. No single good, qualities known to me can be certainly
attributed to the presence of a single factor; and if we consider the
make-up of a man of genius, including reasoning power, concentration
of mind, energy, perseverance, faculty of observation, et cetera, et
cetera, we may feel sure that many factors are invalved. Almost
every student of eugenics has at some time or other during his career
attempted to sketch out schemes for the individual selection of a number of highly endowed persons, for inducing them to marry superior
mates, and for the encouragement of the production of large families
by these selected couples. Ought we not, therefore, to inquire to what
extent reliance is to be placed on such methods when the qualities
involved are dependent on many factors? The matter is complicated ;
but as it is one to which I am very anxious that the attention of eugenists should be directed, I beg for your patience whilst I try to illustrate
the point in question.

If a few millionaires were to be selected, and all their wealth were
to be distributed broadcast amongst the people, we may be certain
that the result would be a feeling of keen disappointment amongst the
originators of the plot, for each recipient would receive such a minute
share of the booty. Again, if it were possible to create a few millionaires, wealth and all, and if generation after generation, their decendents were to dissipate this newly created wealth until it was widely
scattered throughout the whole land, in this case also the ultimate
benefits to the mass of the people would be very small. Now the
eugenist who wishes to see a number of eminent persons picked out and
induced to produce large families is no doubt aiming at what would be
equivalent to the creation of a number of distinguished persons in the
coming generations; and I do not doubt that at all events as regards the
next generation only, a marked success in this respect could thus be
reaped. But we have seen that the good qualities of the selected
parents would be due to many factors ; and these factors, like the money
of the spendthrift descendants of our millionaires would tend to
become more and more widely scattered amongst the people in accordance with an inevitable law of nature; the final result being, we may be
equally certain, very disappointing to the eugenist, as far as ultimate
racial results are concerned. If we want more millionaires—I am not
saying whether we do or do not—one way to secure their presence in
greater numbers in the future would be to raise the level of the wealth
§04 EUGENICS REVIEW.

of the whole people; for the more we were to enrich the soil of any
country, as it were, by increasing its total wealth, the greater would be
the number of its inhabitants who would in the ordinary course of
trade grow so rich as to become millionaires. In nearly the same way,
if we want more persons eminent in morals, intellect, or physical
strength to spring into existence in all the generations to come, the
most certain method of achieving this result would be to raise the level
of the whole people in regard to their inborn qualities. For if this
could be done, the factors needed for the production of a man of genius
would exist in greater numbers; their union by chance in any one
individual, or the actual appearance of a genius, would occur more
often; whilst all the while the mass of the people would be receiving
the benefits due to their improved natural endowments. Surely this
then is a policy not to be neglected .*

The effects of the wide distribution of a millionaire’s wealth, even
though disappointing to those concerned, yet if accepted as an illustration of the racial consequences of increasing the progeny of a number
of selected persons, certainly give a greatly exaggerated idca of the
benefits thus to be obtained; and we must seek for some more accurate
method of attempting to estimate the probable results. Sir Francis
Galton stated that one man in 4,000 might be fairly described as being
‘‘eminent’’ in intellect; and we may perhaps in like manner describe
the tallest of a group of 4,000 men as being eminent in stature. Now
Frederick, father of Frederick the Great, is said to have picked out the
biggest men he could lay hands on, and then to have mated them to
very tall women,f with the object of securing a number of huge recruits
in the coming generation. To what extent the royal aspirations were
fulfilled in this respect I do not know. But let us follow Frederick’s
example in imagination and consider what would be the effect of such
a scheme on the average height of the people in future generations.
In a town of 8,000 inhabitants there would probably be one man and
one woman eminent in stature and let us imagine that we bring these

*The analogv of the inheritance of money is, of course, faulty in many respects.
With natural inheritance the chances of a person receiving a good endowment from
his parents are the same whether he has few brothers and sisters or many. Again,
many have no money to leave to their descendants, and often money is only received
from one parent. With natural inheritance every one is certain to receive an endowment, good or bad, from each parent, and one endowment is as important as
the other. Lastly, whilst we can aim at a more even distribution of wealth, it
would be impossible, even if we would, to prevent the fortuitous coming together
of the necessary factors so as to produce a man of genius.

{Frederick would have produced nearly the same ultimate results on the race
if he had allowed his male and female giants to marry whom tuey liked provided
their progeny were increased. It has not been sufficiently recognized that , putting
aside the effects of assortive mating, the only racial advantages of mating the
selected individuals are (1) the immediate production of giants, for example, and
{b) that greater results can perhaps thus be obtained for the same money, as one
stimulus then affects two selected individuals. It should also be noted that if in
consequence of their selection the selected persons were moved out of a more fertile
into a lesa fertile stratum of society, and if their descendants remained in that less
fertile stratum, then the ultimate results would b2 dysgenic, whatever might be
the more immediate consequences. In these circumstances thus to create an
improved type in perpetuity would necessitate the establishment of a rigid caste
system.
THE FiELD FOR EUGENIC REFORM. 505

two together, with the result that two more children are brought into
the world than would be the case if we had not interfered. Looking
to the male part of the population—only for simplicity and not out of
disrespect to the female half—we should find that our tall man was
rather under nine inches in height above the average; and, as a rough
approximation to the truth, we may imagine that after many generations a certain proportion of these nine inches, about two-thirds in
fact, would become evenly distributed amongst the whole male
population of the town; or, in other words, that we should
thus have raised the average stature of that town by a little more than
one six-hundredth part of an inch.* If this be a true conclusion, as
I believe it to be, you may judge that if you were to pick out the
12,500 tallest men and 12,500 tallest women in each generation in
the United States, if you were to mate them together and if somehow
or other you were to induce each couple to have two additional children,
you would thus in about 18,000 years raise the average height of your
citizens by one inch! In passing I cannot help expressing my pity
for any official in charge of a department of state dealing with any
such duties! But what I really wish you here to note is that mental
qualities though not as easily measured as physical characteristics,
are distributed in accordance with the same laws and are no more
easily improved by dealing with selected groups. Does not this way
of regarding the matter throw serious doubts on the ultimate advantages
of eugenic reform of this kind; that is, of picking out a comparatively
small number of selected persons on account of qualities dependent on
many factors. Our main endeavour ought to be to raise the level of
the whole people in regard to their inborn qualities, for which purpose
large numbers must be affected; and I am inclined to believe that the
success of our efforts to promote racial progress will depend largely on
this fact being fully recognized by eugenic reformers.

Since we are getting on well enough as we are, why not let things
alone? Before adopting the hopeful attitude indicated by this enquiry
we ought carefully to consider whether at the present time civilized
nations are advancing or deteriorating in regard to their inborn
qualities; a most difficult question to answer decisively. Here we
enter the region where keen feelings are likely to be aroused; and, to
avoid the distorting effect of prejudice, let us look to the future rather
than to the present. Now those young men of to-day who are endowed
with good natura] abilities and constitutions will be nearly all certain
in time to earn for themselves a fairly good livelihood, whilst the
reverse will be the case with those ill-endowed by nature. Then
again, those who are members of small families will receive greater
advantages in education and in many other respects than will the members of big families and they will in consequence more easily win their
way tothe front. These two selective processes will become more effective as civilization advances; and as a result we may expect to find in the
future in the ranks of the well-to-do a most harmful combination of

*The increase in stature would in truth be materially less than .002 of an inch;
for regression due to dominance and other circumstances has to be taken into account.
See ‘‘Correlation between Relatives,’? R.A. Fisher, Trans. Royal Soc. Edin.
Vol. III, Part 2. (No. 15.)
506 EUGENICS REVIEW.

qualities more and more often appearing; that is to say, superior
inborn qualities more and more often combined with all those natural
tendencies which tend to favour the production of small families; these
latter including natural infertility and an innate desire to consider
the welfare of children as yet unborn. The result to be anticipated is
that, in comparision with the ill-endowed, the naturally well-endowed
will! as time goes on take a smaller and smaller part in the production
of the coming generations, with a tendency to progressive racial deterioration as an inevitable consequence.* And it we ask whether existing
facts confirm or refute this dismal forecast, what do we find? Statistical inquiries at all events prove conclusively that, where good incomes
are being won, there the families are on the average very small. Moreover, history teaches us that in the remote past ancient civilizations,
after rising to a climax, often began to sink and sink until they disappeared off the face of the earth. These problems are too complex
now to be discussed at length; and I can only assert that I can find no
facts which refute the theoretical conclusion that the inborn qualities
of civilized communities are deteriorating, a process which must
inevitably lead in time to an all round downward movement. I am,
of course, regarding this question broadly and generally, but I cannot
refrain from adding that the United States has a mighty future before
it, on which the civilization of the whole world may in a large measure
depend. It is, therefore, doubly incumbent on its citizens to consider
whether their best or their worst stocks are now multiplying most
rapidly. If it is the worst stocks, and if no steps are taken to remedy
the evil, then this country may in consequence miss an opportunity of
filling a most glorious page in future history.

If in all civilised countries the forces the existence of which I
have briefly indicated, are producing deteriorating influences by acting
on the masses of the people, then the only way to counteract this
tendency is to set in operation other forces which will affect large
numbers in the opposite direction. But how is this to be accomplished ?
As to good qualities, what I hold to be the main remedy can be expressed in so few words that its great importance is likely to be overlooked. What is necessary is to make it widely and deeply felt that
it is both immoral and unpatriotic for couples sound in mind and body
to undu!y limit the size of their families. No doubt difficulties will
be experienced in deciding to what extent the duty of parenthood is
imposed in individual cases; difficulties which I have no time to discuss. . The main difficulty will, however, be to get this duty strongly

 

*The theoretical side of all these questions is here quite inadequately discussed. Many authorities have pointed out the efiect of wealth in reducing fertility,
a subject not here dealt with, though I have bee: convinced it is a most important
factor. As to the possible influences of Fhysiological infertility, see ‘‘Human
Fertility’? by J. A. Cobb, Eugenics F:i:iew, January 1918. As to the effect of
mental traits on fertility and racial prog:<ss, see ‘‘Some Hopes of a Eugenist’’ by
R.A. Fisher, Eugenics Review, January 1914. These topics have been discussed
by me at greater length in ‘‘The Need for Widespread Eugenic Reform.’’ Eugenics
Review, October 1918; ‘‘Eugenics in Relation to Economics and Statistics,’’
Journal of Royal Statistical Society, January 1919; ‘‘Some Birth Rate Problems,’’
Eugenics Review, October 1920 and January 1921. See also ‘‘The Habitual
Criminal,’’ Eugenics Review, October 1914.
THE FIELD FOR EUGENIC REFORM. ‘507

felt by the mass of the people; for success in this endeavour would, I
am convinced, have a much greater effect on the size of families than
common sense alone would indicate. Failure, is however, certain if
the problem is not attacked with religious zeal. There ought to be a
great moral campaign against the selfish regard for personal comfort
and social advancement, for these aims must in a measure be sacrificed
on the altar of family life if racial progress is to be insured. We must
all learn that if envy and jealousy could be banished, the happiness of
our children would depend greatly on their inborn gualities and but
little on their place in society. We should recognize that we shall best
serve our country by bringing healthy and intelligent children into the
world, provided that we can give them a sound education and a fair
chance of winning a good livelihood; and all of us should be ready to
make some sacrifice of social position in order to obey our country’s
call in this respect. The nation that wins in this moral campaign
will have gone half way towards gaining an all round racial victory.
There are no doubt many economic methods of increasing the rate
of multiplication of the people, methods which would be beneficial if
applied to good stocks and harmful in the case of inferior types. The
main reason why persons of high character limit the size of their
families is in order to insure that all the children they do bring into
the world shall have a good start in life. Obviously the simplest way
to remove this check on fertility is for the state to step in and ease
the financial strain on parents due to the upbringing of their children.
This method must, however, never be applied indiscriminately or without consideration ,for the qualities of the types affected must ever be held
in view; and this is especially to be noted in connection with all schemes
for motherhood endowment. Then again an increase of taxation
is equivalent to an increase in the poverty or a decrease in the
wealth of the persons taxed; and such a change in their prospects will
tend to make all couples still further limit the size of their families;
unless indeed they are naturally incapable of taking thought for the
morrow.* It follows that to increase the taxation on the more fit in
order to ease the strain of family life amongst the less fit would do a
double dose of harm ; that is by decreasing the output of children where
it should be increased and by increasing it where it should be diminished. There are no doubt evils which cannot altogether be avoided ;
for we are bound to pay attention to the needs of all who suffer, whatever may be their natural qualities. If only looking to the types whose
multiplication we want to promote, what we can safely do is to increase
the taxation on the unmarried and the childless and, out of the proceeds, to give advantages to the parent of growing families in the same
social stratum. In regard to all proposals such as that recently made
in Australia, for directly or indirectly taking from all workmen a portion of their earnings and for distributing the money thus obtained
amongst the parents in proportion to the number of their young children, here again the racial effects will be good if,and only if,the benefits
received by each couple are proportionate to the contributions made
*It should be noted that I am speaking of an increase of taxation and not of

high taxation. ‘The ultimate racial effects of high taxation are difficult to foretell.
508 EUGENICS REVIEW.

by members of the same group to which they belong, a condition almost
certain to be neglected. The economic principles, which I have all
too hastily alluded to, involve many puzzling questions in regard to
their application; but to neglect them altogether is to court a great
racial danger.

Turning to the consideration of influences which would tend to
diminish the rate of multiplication of inferior types, we see that the
grossly unfit can be separated from the normal population with but
little doubt, and that they are often a serious nuisance to society.
As regards most of these types it is probable that several mendelian
factors are involved; but even if that be so it is not improbable that
some one of the resulting bad qualities may be due to a single factor.
For all these reasons it seems right that the grossly unfit should be
selected individually from the rest of the population, and that in their
case parenthood should be prevented by segregation, with voluntary
sterilization as an experimental auxiliary. But here also some attention should be paid to the principle which I am advocating, namely,
that with qualities dependent on many factors it is as a rule best to
aim at dealing with large numbers rather than with the extreme cases.
Taking the criminal population as a single example, it is found that
those who have been frequently in prison are practically certain to
revert to crime when liberated. These habitual criminals form the
bulk of the prison population; they have no good qualities to recommend them ; they are too stupid to avoid detection, and the only courage
which they show is that needed to face disgrace and imprisonment.
Merely to reduce the fertility of large numbers of this class would be
more beneficial from the racial point of view than to absolutely prohihit parenthood in the case of a small number of persons convicted
of grave crimes; persons who at all events arc often intelligent and courageous. With the habitual criminal the length of detention should be
increased and its severity diminished after each conviction; periods
of liberty should be given until it is quite certain that no cure can be
effected; and in the end the malefactor should be regarded as a
person to be permanently detained because he is incapable of selfmanagement, all idea of punishment being abandoned. The benefits
thus to be derived are indicated by the statistically proved facts that
lengthy imprisonment does lessen the number of progeny of the criminal, and that his children are at least ten times more likely to be
sent to prison than are the children of honest parents. Even those who
do not believe in heredity may, therefore, be inclined to hold that
permanent segregation is justifiable after many convictions. We
should endeavour to deal in the same way with the wastrel, the drunkard, and the work shy ; that is as members of large classes the size of
which ought to be diminished rather than as individuals requiring
separate consideration.

If it be true, as I hold, that there are hidden forces continually
at work tending to relatively increase the rate of multiplication of
large numbers of.those who are below the average in the various qualities held to be desirable, then efforts to deal with the obviously unfit
would not alone stem this tendency towards racial deterioration. To
prevent our civilization from slowly sinking in the future, some far’
THE FIELD FOR EUGENIC REFORM. 509

more widespread action is needed. But how are we, it may be well to
ask, to pick out large numbers of the population whose hereditary
influence on posterity will tend to drag down the average?* Now we
shall all probably agree that the fewer young men there are in any
country who prove themselves to be incapable of winning sufficient
wages to maintain a family in decency, the better it wil) be for the
community as a whole. This is true even if we only look to the comfort and well being of the children destined to be born in these illfound homes. Here we are of course tempted to urge that the state
should step in and see to it that no disadvantages are felt by the little
unfortunates likely to be brought up in bad surroundings for which they
would be in no way responsible. Any such action would, however,
increase the birth rate of the class affected. Now bad surroundings
doubtless tend to increase the number of social failures; a cause of
failure which, we may believe will become less and less operative with
every advance in civilization. But a very large proportion of those
incapable of supporting a family in decency in normally prosperous
times are characterized by certain inborn defects; such as weak constitutions, inferior mental powers, unstable moral qualities, etc.,
all of which are in a measure certain to be passed on to posterity. State
action of the kind just suggested must therefore be harmful in its racial
effects; for we ought to check rather than to increase the size of families
born in squalid surroundings. How can this be done? This is a problem
to which I must earnestly hope that eugenists will turn their attention ;
for I confess I have found myself no very satisfactory solution. I can
only suggest that state and charitable aid should never be given in
such profusion as to prevent the appearance of each child from causing
any additional financial strain on the household, for fertility is decreased by financial pressure. But IThardly know what to suggest in
the case of those who in spite of this pressure persist in procreation in
evil surroundings; and perhaps for the present we should concentrate
our attention on the attempt to secure a general approval of the desire
to lessen the output of children in such circumstances. The
problems involved must, however, be solved sooner or later, and in attempting to solve them we must remember that every reform does harm
as well as good, and that all we can do is to make reasonably certain
that the good results will preponderate over the evil. In order to prevent the civilized nations of the world from slowly losing what has been
won by long ages of suffering, no doubt sacrifices must be made and
some suffering yet endured. But if we have courage to face this problem without flinching; if we fearlessly advocate what we hold to be
right, in spite of the unpopularity of the safeguards and remedies we
suggest; and if we can in the end secure wide approval of our aims;
then I am myself certain that we shall be able to introduce reforms
which will secure untold benefits for mankind in all the long, long
ages to come.

In conclusion may I once again indicate the contrast which, I
suggest, ought always to be held in view in framing plans for eugenic
reform ; a contrast which I have painted with such a broad brush that

*It must be remembered that this must be true of half the population.
510 EUGENICS REVIEW.

many qualifications have of necessity been omitted and many pointe
but ilJ-explained. I have endeavoured to show that, for the purpose
of our discussions, human qualities may be divided into two illdefined groups, with intermediate types between them. At the one
extreme there are the single factor qualities; and in the case of persons
possessing bad qualities near this end of the series, they should be
individuaily selected and examined and then each treated accordingly.
Here we should be dealing for the most part with pathological cases or
with persons who are likely to become a nuisance to society ; and the
aim of the eugenic reformer weuld usually be to rid the world of some
definite defect. These are the cases which are least in dispute, and
where racial benefits can be most rapidly obtained; and for these
reasons it is perhaps to these qualities that our attention should first
of all be directed. At the other extreme are those characteristics which
separate whole classes of a community from each other, and which
obviously depend on a great many factors. Here we generally have to
look to the class as a whole, and to apply such remedies as do not
necessitate the selection of individuals, the aim being to raise the
level of the whole people. It is on such qualities as these that the
slow improvement or deterioration of our civilization will in the main
ultimately depend; and if they be neglected in our schemes of eugenic
reform, we shall before very long begin to lapse back again towards
barbarism, thus following in the footsteps of many highly cultivated
nations in the past. On the other hand, if our biologists face these
problems more earnestly in the future than they have in the past, if
our politicians pay more attention to the advice of scientific experts
than has hitherto been customary, and if the general public are
guided by common sense in regard to heredity, than I hold that we shall
have more right to look with confidence to the future than ever has
been the case since the dawn of civilization.
