RECENT INVESTIGATIONS OF
INTELLIGENCE AND ITS MEASUREMENT"
By PHILIP E. VERNON, M.A., Ph.D.

qualities were based, for the most part,

on the investigators’ own assessments
of intellectual eminence or special talent,
social worth or depravity, and the like.
Obviously the subjectivity of these judgments was open to criticism, however fairminded the investigator. Hence the invention of objective tests of intelligence was
received with enthusiasm. They appeared to
offer scope for far more scientific studies of
inheritance. Thus the Eugenics Society has
sponsored, or has undertaken the publication of, numerous and outstanding researches
by psychologists such as Burt, Thomson,
R. B. Cattell, Fraser Roberts and Terman,
which were based on intelligence tests. It
was of course realized that tests either of the
Binet type or the group verbal type (e.g.
Otis) were not pure measures of innate
ability. Early studies like those of Gordon
with canal-boat children and Freeman with
American foster-children revealed a distinct
influence of education and cultural background. This was confirmed by Newman,
Freeman and Holzinger’s work on identical
twins brought up apart. However, analyses
of foster-children and twin data by Burks
and others indicated that environmental
effects were unlikely to alter an Intelligence
Quotient by more than ten points up or
down ; or, more precisely, that the contribution of heredity is three or four times as
great as that of environment in determining
individual differences in intelligence. Thus
most psychologists, in this country at least,
who were interested in eugenic problems
were Satisfied that ordinary intelligence tests
were adequate tools for genetic investigations.
Moreover, when Cattell (7) employed nonverbal group tests, based on pictorial or
diagrammatic material, which would presumably be less susceptible to educational

ARLY eugenic investigations of mental

 

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on May
29th, 1951.

influence, he obtained much the same negative correlation with family size as did
workers with verbal tests.

Nevertheless, recent investigations by
myself and others have forced me to the
conclusion that, while intelligence tests are
admirable instruments for practical purposes
such as educational and occupational selection and guidance within any one cultural
group, they cannot be regarded as sufficiently
pure measures of innate ability to be
employed in comparisons between different
groups such as races or nations, nor for
genetic studies. And this discouraging conclusion applies to non-verbal, performance,
or other tests as much as to verbal Binet or
group tests. My views have altered since
1949 (27), largely because two crucial
eugenic studies—those of the Scottish Mental
Survey (21) and of Cattell (8)—have given
negative results. If the tests that they
employed were adequate measures of inborn
intelligence, then I do not see how they could
fail to disclose some decline over the past
fifteen years. Thomson (24) and Cattell are
commendably cautious in their discussions of
possible reasons for the rises in their group
test means, and the lack of any drop on
individual tests. But their explorations of
possible genetic factors seem to lead only to
blind alleys, and even Penrose’s (19) ingenious picture of heterosis could hardly compensate for the relatively large fall that was
anticipated. Thus they appear to incline to
the view that practice or sophistication
effects may have distorted the results of the
group tests, particularly among girls, and
that improvements in health and education
may have played some part ; while Thomson
admits the possibility that the negative
relation between intelligence scores and
family size may be partly environmental.
Most of my paper to-day, therefore, will be
devoted to relevant studies of practice and
environmental effects, and their implications.

B 135
126

First, however, I would like to give
you the preliminary results of a large-scale
survey of the abilities of some 9,000 Army
recruits. When the Scottish results were
published I suggested that part of the difficulty of interpretation arose from using such
factorially complex tests as Moray House
and Stanford-Binet, and that further data
should be obtained with the aid of factor
analysis to supply relatively pure measures
of Spearman’s g.

A Survey of Army Recruits

The scores of about 10,000 male National
Service recruits, mostly aged 18, were
obtained on six mental tests. Their height
and their physical and eyesight gradings on
the Pulheems system were available, together
with records of the county in which they
lived. During an interview with a personnel
selection officer they were classified by the
place they had chiefly lived as rural versus
urban and as native or migrant ; finally the
numbers of living siblings were ascertained.
Such recruits provide a fairly representative
sample of the population, but unfortunately
few agricultural workers were being called up
at the time (the end of 1947). Also there was
a wastage of 6 per cent of men who failed to
supply the interview data, and these were
somewhat inferior in intelligence.* The
material was collected by the personnel
selection staff of the War Office’s Directorate
of Manpower Planning, and all the essential
tabulations and calculations were done from
Hollerith cards by the Statistics Branch of
the Admiralty. I am most grateful to those
concerned and to my colleague in the Senior
Psychologist’s Department of the Admiralty
—Mr. E. Elliott—for their assistance. A
fuller account than I can give to-night will
be published in due course.

Table I shows the best solution I have been
able to reach so far to the analysis of the
inter-correlations ; it gives the loadings or
saturations of the tests with four main
factors or underlying types of ability: g—

* There were 603 such cases, whose mean intelligence
*‘ quotient,”” on the scale used below, was 96°5. A

number of others had failed to take one or more tests,
leaving a total of 9,183.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

general, verbal-educational, spatial-mechanical and physical. The results are fairly
logical, but one should note the overlapping
between the g and the education factors. Not
only does an arithmetic test show the highest
g-loading but also a non-verbal test and a
mechanical one have considerable educational content. Natives, you will see, are
slightly (but significantly) inferior to

TABLE I

LOADINGS OF TESTS AND OTHER MEASURES ON Four
Factors EXTRACTED AND ROTATED BY THE CENTROID
METHOD

g v:ed mech. phys.

Arithmetic-maths.... . .... *73 39°57
Verbal ability am we. = GI 65
Clerical 28 wee 91 56 +07
Education standard .- 60 °7I 06
Non-verbal intelligence ... +72 ‘40 *20
Mechanical problems -- 6°54 85084702
Mechanical assembly see 31 45 “16
P (physical) ot .-. 08 °37
EE (eyesight) jus ws (OL +23 *32
Height TT sea -- ‘9 °*33 #°‘'I3 *20
Variance, per cent . 26:8 21-4 4:3 3:2
Native . —04 —‘IO —*07 —-04
Urban . —04 “OF —03 —'II
Siblings . —°34 —*I7 —°0g —-04

migrants on all factors. Urban dwellers seem
to be slightly inferior in all respects, except
education, and particularly in physical
qualities. But I am afraid that the lack of
agricultural workers may have affected these
figures ; we shall see later that the relationship is not linear. As regards family size, it
is quite clear that the negative correlation
exists not so much with education as with
our general factor. But as the general factor
itself is somewhat mixed up with education
this result does not carry us much further.
It is interesting that the correlation of
— +34 1s higher than is usually found among
children ; presumably this is due to more
families being complete when a cross-section
is taken at 18 than at II years.

I had hoped to calculate independent
factor scores, but the labour proved too great,
and instead I merely combined the results of
certain tests which were most highly loaded
with each factor. For ease of comprehension
I converted these combined scores into
standard scores with a mean of 100 and a
RECENT INVESTIGATIONS OF INTELLIGENCE AND ITS MEASUREMENT 127

standard deviation of 16, so that they should
all be comparable to I.Q.s.* Table II shows
the mean standard scores for g, education,
mechanical and physical tests for each family
size. Note, however, that because of the
method of derivation the education and
mechanical scores are considerably impregnated with g. You will see that the decline

TABLE II

MEAN STANDARD SCORES OF RECRUITS WITH GIVEN
NUMBERS OF SIBLINGS ON TESTS OF DIFFERENT TYPES

No.of Freq. Mean Scores Scottish
Siblings % g ed. mec. phys. Mental
Survey

oO 13°3 106°6 107:2 104°6 102°3 105*3
I 22°0 105'8 105°8 104°3 I0I‘6 105-1
2 18-8 101-8 Io0I-7 101-7 100°8 101-6
3 138 = 988-985 99°5 99°86
4 10-4 94°99 94°77 967, 98:7, 958
5 78 93'2 92°99 95'2  97'7, 942
6 52 924 926 935 96:4 92:8
7-8 555 889 91:6 92:9 965 91:8
g-II 2:8 87-9 88:2 90:6 96:2 go'l
12-17 04 87-2, 86:2 916 95°8 86°5

is almost identical on the more g-loaded and
the more educational tests, and that both
closely parallel the results of the Scottish
Mental Survey. On more mechanical tests
the decline is less marked, and it is quite
small on physical measures ; indeed there is
scarcely any drop beyond six siblings.
Turning to geographical differences: the
counties were grouped into twelve major
regions, which were so chosen that no region
contained less than 5 per cent of the total,
and each would be fairly homogeneous in
respect of industrialization. Table III shows
that variations in g scores in different
regions are remarkably large, ranging from
an average of 104 in the Home Counties to
ninety-four in South-West Scotland. Wales,
Lancashire, Stafford and Warwickshire are
distinctly below average—ninety-seven. to
ninety-eight ; but the whole of the rest of
England and Scotland, including London, is
around 100-to 102. There were, of course,
variations between counties within regions ;
but numbers were too small for these to be
highly significant. Surprisingly the regional
differences on educational tests are smaller
* Such units are not normally employed by Service
psychologists, who are well aware of the misinterpreta
tions to which I.Q.s, particularly among adults, are
liable.

than on g tests, while mechanical differences
are largest of all. The South-West Scots and
Welsh are relatively well educated, the East
Anglians are significantly poorer than would
be expected from their intelligence. On_
mechanical tests it is the less industrialized
and more healthy regions that do best,
though Warwick-Stafford does pull up
slightly. The physical results run almost
parallel to the mechanical and are incidentally very similar to those discovered by W. J.
Martin (16) (in so far as our differently

- grouped regions can be compared.)

 

 

 

TABLE III
MEAN STANDARD SCORES OF RECRUITS FROM DIFFERENT
REGIONS
Region of

Great Britain Nos. g ed. mec. phys.
Home Counties 1,663 104°0 103°0 I04:3 103°0
East Anglia, Beds,

Cambs, Northants 474 I01-7 100°0 103°0 100°6
S.W. and Hants . 563 IOI°5 IOI‘O 103°7 1025
Berks, Bucks, Oxon,

Glos, Here, Worcs 540 I0I*4 100:9 103°2 1027
Leics, Notts, Derby,

Yorks W., Ches 1,128 101-4 IOI-0 100°3 99°7
London ees ..» 695 100°6 99:9 I100°8 99°8
Yorks E. & N.,

Northumb, Dur,

Cumb... 502 99°6 I00°0 g9°I gQ-2
Scotland E. ‘and N.

Counties . . 486 99°6 99°4 97:0 98-9
Wales 466 97:9 I00°0 97:0 97:2
Lancashire ... --- I,125 972 97°38 96°5 97°6
Warwick, Staffs,

Salop. - 1,046 97°I 96:9 98:4 99°5
Glasgow and S.W.

Scotland .. se 495 93°7 97°09 914 95°0

%
Natives 74°8 99°09 99:0 99:2 99°5
Migrants 25°2 102°8 1029 I02:4 101°6
Distance
from
open
country
miles %
Rural .. 0 4°9 1004 99°8 102°5 102°8
Village or

small town <1 22°4 99°8 I00°0 180-4 IOI‘O
Middle of

mod.town 1-2: 186 100:9 100°7 100:2 100:2
Edge of large

town .. %I-2 T5°O 103°0 103°I I02:4 1007.
Middle of

largetown 3+ 39° 98:4 98-5 98:5 98-7

Migrants are uniformly superior to natives.
Note that they constitute only a quarter of
the population in spite of all the war-time

migrations. Martin found 20 per cent in
128

1939. My rural-urban classification refers to
the place in which the recruit has chiefly
lived (not necessarily where he was born nor
where living at present), and was based on
the distance of that place from open country.
Thus the first group represents those who say
they live surrounded by open country,
the second those living in small towns or
villages where open country can be seen from
close by their homes. You will see that the
size of the town is not crucial. Those living
on the outskirts of large towns are highest
and those in the centre lowest on almost all
psychological tests. The true country
dwellers do not appear to be inferior in
abilities; they are actually highest on
mechanical as well as physical measures.
While I have admitted a possible lack of
agricultural workers in my sample, the fact
that 5 per cent of the total fall in the most
rural group and 22 per cent in the villagesmall town group suggests that the loss is
slight. Mrs. Bosanquet’s (2) careful survey
showed, like mine*the physical superiority of
rural populations. Her evidence for intellectual inferiority was by no means unanimous, and she wondered whether such inferiority as was found might not be ascribed to
the content of the tests favouring urban
children. I would add to this the suggestion
that urban children are more likely than
rural to be practised, or sophisticated, in
taking tests ; and we shall see below that
such practice effects may be very considerable. To conclude then: there is too much
doubt about the representativeness of my
sample for me to contradict the common
belief in the lower intelligence of the rural
population. But at least it would appear
that any inferiority lies more in educational
level than in general or practical ability.
The more important finding of my survey,
from the eugenic standpoint, is that the best
measure of intelligence that I have been able
to extract from six mental tests behaves in
just the same way as tests with obvious
educational content in predicting a decline in
national intelligence—a, decline which has so
far not been borne out by direct evidence.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Practice and Coaching Effects on
Intelligence Tests

Turning then to environmental effects on
test scores: these may be classified under
five headings—

1. Coaching or teaching the right answers
on the actual test used.

. Practice in taking the test itself.

. Practice on other similar tests.

. Coaching on other similar tests.

. More generalized educational training
or cultural influences which are incidentally reflected in test scores.

The first—coaching on the test itself—is
obviously possible, but is unimportant because care is normally taken nowadays to
prevent leakages. Secondly—practice effects
from repeating the same test; these were
shown to be so large in the Army during the
war that additional norms had to be provided when men were retested. The improvements ranged from 2-I per cent to 8-6 per
cent on different tests, in terms of I.Q. units
with a standard deviation of fifteen. They
were highest among tests with unfamiliar
content or with elaborate instructions and
restricted time limits, such as Progressive
Matrices and a clerical test ; least marked
among straightforward tests such as arithmetic, where also the timing was generous.
More recently Dr. Heim (6) and her collaborators have shown that repeated practice
at a timed group test (having adequate
ceiling) produces almost indefinite rises,
though these tend to tail off after about the
fifth retest. Obviously this is a quite artificial situation ; practice or coaching on other
similar tests is of far greater importance. It
is particularly serious now that intelligence
tests are used by almost all education
authorities for competitive entry to grammar
schools at eleven years. In many primary
schools, much of the final year is spent in
coaching children to pass intelligence and
objective English and arithmetic tests, in
spite of the efforts of the authorities to
prevent it. Not only is this unfair to the
schools which do refrain from coaching but
also it naturally renders the original test
norms valueless and it distorts the results of

in -B OG) N
RECENT INVESTIGATIONS OF INTELLIGENCE AND ITS MEASUREMENT 129

any comparative investigation, such as the
Scottish Mental Surveys. Thus there was
virtually no rise in scores between 1932 and
1947 in Scottish districts where children are
unused to tests, but a rise of 3-2 points in
districts where children are _ relatively
sophisticated.

I have surveyed some of the literature on
practice and coaching effects in my book,
with Dr. Parry, on personnel selection (29).
Important additional results have been
obtained by McIntyre (14) in Australia,
Johri (11) at Leeds, Dr. Watts (30) in London and Professor Peel (18) at Birmingham ;
and a series of experiments is being carried
out by one of my students, Mr. D. T. Navathe.
He is taking the precaution, which few
previous investigators have done, of mixing
two parallel versions of each test so that
those pupils who are initially given version A
take version B as their final test, and those
who are initially given version B take A
finally. Only in this way can slight differences
in the difficulties of the versions be controlled.

The increase in score resulting merely from
the practice effect of taking one previous
test ranges from about 3 per cent to 8 per
cent. Peel compared 1,593 pupils who took
Moray House Test 41 and Test 42 a few
weeks later, also 1,367 pupils who took them
in the reverse direction, and obtained an
average rise of 3-14 I.Q. points. Mr. Navathe
got a rise of 4 per cent after two weeks using
similar tests. But both these sets of pupils
may have had some previous familiarity with
tests, and in another experiment at a private
school where the boys were virginal the rise
was 7-4 per cent. These, however, were boys
of initial I.Q. around 120 and therefore perhaps more able than most to learn from
practice. Dearborn and Rothney (9), Rodger
(20) and others have claimed that trainability is greater at higher I.Q. levels ; but
one would naturally expect greater increases
below the average than above as a consequence of regression. Peel has attempted to
allow for this regression effect and has
applied his as yet unpublished technique to
Moray House retest results of 7,000 pupils.
Table IV derives from a smoothed graph

which I drew from his results. It shows that
trainability does indeed increase with intelligence up to a certain point, say I.Q. 120,
but thereafter there is a dropping off, not
because of ceiling effect but because the very
bright children understand the initial test so
well that they have little to learn.

Navathe compared the improvement on
timed tests with that when ample time was
allowed ; the latter amounts to 2-8 per cent,
that is roughly three-quarters as great as
with the timed test. Hence the practice effect
is not merely a matter of learning to make
efficient use of time or to read and follow the
instructions quickly.

TABLE IV

SMOOTHED RESULTS (FROM PEEL) oF RetTeEsT RISES
Initial I.Q. Mean Rise

Level on Retest
140 2°9
130 3°9
120 4°1
IIo 3°5
I0o 3:2

90 2:6

80 I°9

7O (1-2)
Overall 3°14

With further practice between the initial
and final test the improvement may be considerably greater. Thus Johri obtained an
additional increase averaging about 12 per
cent as a result of ten periods of practice at
parallel tests on successive days. All investigators, however, show that this tails off ;
in other words, that increased practice produces diminishing returns.

TABLE V

SUMMARY OF RECENT INVESTIGATIONS, IN STANDARD
SCORE (I.Q.) UNiTsS

Practice Coaching

Effect Effect

McIntyre 15-18
Johri 12°4 14'8
Watts 5°4 9°5
» wnt 3°2 8-2
Navathe ... 4:0 8-11
7°4 16°2

Under my fourth category, coaching or
instruction in how to answer group test items
produces very large rises. Watts obtained
an increase of 8 to 9 points from quite intensive coaching over ten weeks, but his testees
were secondary modern pupils who already
had some acquaintance with tests. Navathe
found 8 to 11 points in similar groups. But
130

in a private school two small groups who
received only one or three periods of coaching
rose by 16 points. McIntyre’s pupils had
four and Johri’s ten periods. It is, of course,
difficult to compare these experiments since
the tests and the age and previous sophistication of the children varied. But it certainly
appears that an hour or two of coaching can
be as effective as much more prolonged
training. Notice, too, that coaching is only
about twice as effective as the practice
resulting from a single retest. In Johri’s
study ten coaching periods were slightly
more effective than ten practice periods, but
to a statistically insignificant extent. Thus,
from the standpoint of educational selection,
the solution is obvious. If all primary schools
were made to give a few hours’ coaching
shortly before the I1-year examination,
previously unsophisticated children would be
brought up to the same level as those who
had already been coached; and schools
which coached for months beforehand would,
in all probability, have been wasting their
time. But the mere application of a short
practice sheet or (as happens in some areas)
of one preliminary test is clearly not sufficient to raise children to their effective limit.

Many other points require investigation.
Different types of test differ in their susceptibility to coaching, but there is no clear
evidence as to which are the most prone.
Navathe found that a battery of separately
timed subtests yields much the same improvement as an omnibus test of the Moray House
type ; also that allowing ample time reduces
the coaching effects only by some 10-20 per
cent. He is trying now to find how lasting
are the effects, also whether coached or
uncoached test scores are the more valid. On
the one hand we might expect many uncoached children to fail to manifest their true
ability because they often do not understand
what the test requires of them. On the other
hand, fully coached children may have
acquired what is mainly a familiarity with
the tricks of the tester and their scores may
be less valid indices of the intelligence they
show at school or in daily life. How far
training on one type of test transfers to other
types is a matter on which the evidence is

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

conflicting. In one experiment in the
Navy (29), practice obtained by taking one
battery of tests produced a 3-6 per cent
improvement on another quite different
battery. In another recent investigation by
Mr. Elliott, five groups, totalling 1,719 men,
took the same set of five tests in five different
orders ; and quite large variations, ranging
up to 5-2 I.Q. points, were found when the
same test occurred in different positions.
For example, the I.Q. score on an abstraction
test was 97-7 if taken first or second, but
to1-5 if it came later in the series.* On the
other hand a straightforward mathematical
test requiring creative responses appeared to
be upset if it followed other, selectiveresponse, tests. Thus when taken first the
score was 102, but after other tests 99-5.
These tests all differed considerably from one
another in form, and it seems likely that the
set of responding to one type of item interfered with the sets required for other types.
Thus most of the tests showed a negative
practice effect, i.e. more declines than rises
with lateness in the series.

Johri trained or practised his boys on
analogies, similarities, directions, reasoning
and mixed sentences. He also applied, but
did not train them on, opposites, best answer,
always has and absurdities. He claims that,
of the latter, only absurdities showed any
improvement ; neither the practice nor coaching transferred to the other three. Navathe
gave four tests—verbal classification, verbal

TABLE VI
SUMMARY OF NAVATHE’S RESULTS
Points

Practice effect alone, on all four tests ... | 4:0

Practice effect on tests dissimilar to those
coached .... 5:0
Practice effect on tests similar to those ‘coached 4°
Coaching effect on tests specifically coached... 8-4

Coaching effect when whole battery is coached II‘o
analogies, non-verbal classification and nonverbal analogies—and he trained four of his
groups, one on each of these tests; other
groups were practised or coached on all tests.
His results show that transfer effects were no
greater than those arising from simple practice. Actually there was more transfer to

* The five groups were nearly, but not quite, identical

in initial ability. However, analysis of covariance
showed the variations to be statistically significant.
RECENT INVESTIGATIONS OF INTELLIGENCE AND ITS MEASUREMENT 131

dissimilar than to similar tests, though the
difference is insignificant. For example,
those coached on verbal classification showed
more improvement at non-verbal analogies
than they did either at verbal analogies or at
non-verbal classification. Furthermore, those
trained for two periods on one test showed
less improvement at this test, on the average,
than those trained for the same total time on
all four tests.

I would suggest the following conclusions,
though I would like much more evidence.
First, either practice or coaching has a rather
general effect in familiarizing testees with
intelligence tests, inducing the set of working
quickly, of taking careful account of the
instructions, not wasting time on difficult
questions, being alert to tricky items and in
improving confidence and reducing anxiety.
One might call this the sophisticated attitude
or even the morale of the testees. Dr. Watts
suggests that this attitude may not only
improve but also decline if testees are overcoached so that they get bored. Second,
there is a highly specific coaching effect
which helps only at the particular type or
types of item coached or practised, and which
may hinder facility in tackling other types.

The more general sophistication may well
be stimulated to some extent by recent
schooling or by the taking of any kind of
examination. Adult recruits tend to show
rather large practice effects, possibly because
their schooldays are so remote that they do
not readily settle down to writing answers to
silly questions as quickly as possible. But
this brings us to the fifth of my headings—
the improvement in intelligence test performance attributable to environmental influences and education. I shall not attempt

to resummarize the earlier literature which |

tended to show a definite, though quite small,
environmental effect. Nor will I describe the
notorious Iowa studies, which claim to show
very large effects but which have been
devastatingly criticized by McNemar (15).
I would, however, like to discuss the startling
results published in 1946 by Bernardine
Schmidt (22).

B. G. Schmidt’s Study of Environmental
Effects

Miss Schmidt states that, during 1935-42,
she took 320 Chicago children aged 12-14,
who had been diagnosed as feeble minded,
all with I.Q.s below 70. Three groups, totalling 252 adolescents, were educated for three
years at special experimental schools where
the curriculum was designed to increase
emotional and social adjustment, as well as
to provide appropriate training of academic
and manipulative skills and study habits.
Another, control, group of sixty-eight cases
went to more conventional schools. The
follow-up of subsequent careers continued
for one and a half to four and a half years
after the end of schooling. Stanford-Binet
tests and certain educational tests and tests
of personality adjustment were applied at
eighteen-month intervals throughout. The
main findings regarding intelligence are
shown in Fig. 1. The controls show the com
Fig. 1
B.G SCHMIDT'S RESULTS

 

monly observed drop over the four and a
half years from an average I.Q. of 60 to 56.
But the three experimental groups, starting
at an average of about 52, rise to 73 in the
132

three years’ schooling and continue to increase thereafter, Group I reaching 89 in
seven and a half years. The Vineland Social
Maturity scale showed even greater improvements, and the personality test results were
concordant. Apart from tests, half the
experimental children went on to ordinary
high school courses and 27 per cent graduated
from high school. When last surveyed, 83 per
cent were in regular employment and nearly
two-thirds of these were in clerical or skilled
work. By contrast, the controls showed a
very poor educational and employment
record.

Naturally these results have aroused
doubts and criticisms, but it has been very
difficult to find flaws, apart from some minor
arithmetical slips. At least one reviewer (12)
seems to suspect gerrymandering, but this is
unlikely since the study is backed by several
highly reputable psychologists. (I myself
feel grave doubts as to how children in the
imbecile grade could have taken such personality questionnaires as Bernreuter’s.)
The initial intelligence testing was all done
by trained psychologists of the Chicago
schools Child Study Bureau ; thus we cannot
object that some of the children were diagnosed as feeble minded because of bad testing, as occasionally occurs in Britain. Retestings were, apparently, carried out by
Miss Schmidt using 1916 Stanford-Binet
throughout with Groups I, II and IV, and
Terman-Merrill Form L throughout with
Group III. Moreover, an independent tester
is said to have given a further test to some of
Group I, getting virtually identical I.Q.s.

Nevertheless, certain weaknesses deserve
mention. First, there are always considerable
fluctuations in I.Q.s during the teens. The
correlation between tests applied to a representative group four and a half to seven and
a half years apart would hardly exceed -60,
and might be lower. Hence, due to regression
effects alone, we would expect an apparent
rise in average I.Q. of 19 points, that is from
52 to 71. The statistically untrained person
finds this very difficult to grasp, but it is
really quite simple. Ifa representative group
was tested (with accurately standardized
tests) at 12 years and at 16 years there would

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

be as many children with I.Q.s below 70 on
the second as on the first occasion. But they
would not all be the same children. Owing to
imperfect correlation, some of those scoring
above 70 at 12 fall below 70 at 16, and vice
versa. If, therefore, we pick out only those
below 70 at 12 years (as Miss Schmidt has
done) they inevitably show an average rise
by 16; this rise has no psychological significance at all since we are neglecting the
above 70s who show a fall in the same
period.

A second point is that the experimental
children were tested from five to eight times,
the controls only twice. Schmidt denies that
there is any practice effect when retests are
as far apart as 18 months. I doubt this, particularly with children near to their limit of
intellectual growth, and suspect that at least
5 points of the average rise might be attributed to practice.

Thirdly, you will note that much the
biggest rise occurs in Group III, which was
tested with Terman-Merrill. It amounts to
35 I.Q. points in four and a half years
compared with 26 points in Groups I and II
who were tested with Stanford-Binet. Now
in spite of all Terman’s care in standardization the new revision undoubtedly exaggerates adolescent I.Q.s. Every psychologist
who has used Form L on children of 12 years
upwards has been surprised by the number
of very high I.Q.s that turn up. In 1940 I
pointed out that the vocabulary test alone
was considerably easier at the upper end
than the Stanford-Binet vocabulary, and I
carried out a rough restandardization reported
in my book The Measurement of A bilities (26).
The first two columns of Table VII show that
children with a ten-year Terman-Merrill
vocabulary score would score nine years
only on the Stanford-Binet or according to
my norms, while a twenty-year TermanMerrill score corresponds to sixteen and a
half years only. Next, over several years, my
students at Glasgow University applied
Terman-Merrill to small groups of children
along with several other intelligence, educational and performance tests believed to be
relatively accurately standardized. In this
way I collected records for several hundred
RECENT INVESTIGATIONS OF INTELLIGENCE AND ITS MEASUREMENT 133

children of various ages and, on graphing
Terman-Merrill mental ages against other
mental ages, found that Terman-Merrill was
probably quite accurate around six to eight
years, but then gave more and more exaggerated results. I combined these into a
rather conservative restandardization summarized in the third column of Table VII.
Then in 1949 the second Scottish Mental
Survey appeared, showing a tremendous
positive skew in the Terman-Merrill distribution of eleven-year I.Q.s. Whereas 3 per cent
of the representative sample obtained I.Q.s
below 70, not three but 10 per cent obtained
I.Q.s above 130. It is quite simple to work
out from the Scottish figures revised norms
which turn this skewed distribution into a
symmetrical one, and an extract from these
norms appears in the last column. My three
attempts at restandardization do not agree
very closely, but they all show the same
trend.* I do not know whether this inaccuracy in the Terman-Merrill scale arises

TABLE VII
RESTANDARDIZATIONS OF TERMAN-MERRILL MENTAL
AGES

Revised M.A.s, Based on
Obtained Vocab. Glasgow Scottish
M.A. Test Tests Survey
8 7:6 8:0 8:0
Io 9:0 9:7 9:10
I2 10:4 Ii1:t Ir:6
14 Il.7 12:7 13:1
16 14:1 14:3 14:35
18 15:3 15:11 15:8
20 16:6 17:7 16:10
22 17:8 19:3 17:9

from Terman’s failing to secure representative older groups, but I suspect that it is due
more to the fact that mental growth is not
even approximately linear after about ten
years. Several investigations suggest that it
is logarithmic, i.e. that there is a gradual
deceleration. Terman makes some allowance
for this, but not enough. Hence, if successive
mental age years above ten represent smaller
and smaller increments of mental growth the
exaggeration of I.Q.s that we have found
would naturally follow. Psychologists are
coming more and more to the view that the

* Quite a close approximation to the average of these
figures is obtained by counting each year above 7:0
as 10 months. E.g.: Obtained M.A. 13:10 = 7:0+

82 months; Corrected M.A. = 7:0+ 10/12 X 82 =
7:0 + 68 months = 12: 8.

Cc

M.A. and I.Q. system of scoring tests is
quite inadequate above ten years or so and
are resorting to standard scores or percentiles
(cf. Vernon (28)).

This long digression was necessary to bring
out my third criticism of Miss Schmidt.
Clearly a child of average intelligence at
12 years will obtain an I.Q. greater than I00
if retested with Terman-Merrill four or five
years later, merely because of this defect of
scaling. I calculate the increase as about
14 points. A bright child might easily show
a much larger rise of 30 points. Miss
Schmidt’s dull children -would not be expected to increase as much, because they
would still be below the level where TermanMerrill exaggerates most, but some 5 points
of the rise in her Group III may well be due to
this. Whether similar exaggeration occurs
with the old Stanford-Binet (as used in
Groups I and II) we do not know. There is
actually more evidence that it gives unduly
low I.Q.s among older adolescents and
adults. But everything depends on what
divisor is used for calculating I.Q.s, and this
Miss Schmidt fails to tell us. If it was sixteen
years for those aged 16 or over, then the
reported rise in average I.Q. is indeed surprising ; if fourteen, then it is much less so.
But in any case Schmidt’s results are open
to the criticism that the I.Q. standardization
of all the Binet scales is most unsatisfactory
for older children and adults.* When we also
take into account the natural effect of regression and the probable practice effect, we
must admit that the claims for large increases
in I.Q. are very dubious. Personally I am
more impressed by the sociological data. One
cannot dismiss the finding that, when steps
are taken to improve the emotional adjustment and to provide a suitably stimulating
educational environment, a large proportion
of children once diagnosed as feeble minded
are converted into reasonably capable adults.
I am sure, however, that the investigation
needs to be repeated with better controls and
more adequately scaled tests.

* Yet another likely reason for a spurious rise on
Terman-Merrill is that the standard deviation of I.Q.s
at 16-17 years is only three-quarters what it is at 12.

I know of no information as to whether the same is
true of Stanford-Binet.
134

Other Evidence of Effects of Education

Further evidence of environmental effects
is forthcoming from studies of the intelligence of adults. Ever since large-scale
testing began in the American army in 1917,
two apparently conflicting results have been
obtained. On the one hand the average M.A.
of representative adult groups has been
remarkably low; for example, the mean
Army Alpha test score corresponded to a
M.A. of 13%. On the other hand, when
pupils or students in high schools or colleges
are given intelligence tests of appropriate
difficulty they usually continue to show
rising scores from I5 up to over 20 years.
Hence it seems absurd to say that the average individual reaches the limits of his
intellectual growth at 13 to 14 years. But
these two findings can be reconciled if we
allow that growth continues as long as
education or other intellectual stimulus continues and that thereafter a decline sets in.
The majority of the population, including
almost all the average and dull adolescents,
finish their education around 14 to 16, hence
their intellectual growth and decline might
be represented by lines A and B in Fig. 2,

Fig. 2

CURVES OF MENTAL GROWTH
AND DECUNE

AVERAGE

A
DULL

     

o 10 20 30 40
AGE
which reach their maximum height at about
15 years. But a minority receive secondary or

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

college education to 18, 22 or later, and when
this finishes they usually enter jobs where
their intelligence continues to be fully exercised. They may be represented by line C,
which shows an increase till 25 or 30 before a
gradual decline sets in. Since, however, they
are relatively few in number, the mean M.A.
of all adults around 20 years is even lower
than the maximum that the average pupil
reached at 15.

Now what is the evidence for this hypothesis ? Lorge (13) retested a number of
adults at the age of 34 whose test results at
I4 years were known. There was a clear
effect of education beyond 14. For example,
adults who had received a university education were two years superior in mental age
to others who had had no further schooling
but whose intelligence level had been the
same at 14. Similarly Terman and Oden (23)
followed up their gifted California group
after 20 years and gave them an individual
synonyms and analogies test. It may be
deduced from their results that those who
had had the best education and had entered
professional careers scored best, relative to
their I.Q.s as children. Might these results
not be due, however, to the use of verbal
tests with high educational content ? Actually the same seems to hold for other types
of test. Thus the mean score for 18 year
recruits on an abstraction test, which has
only a small verbal component, is equivalent
to that of 13 year children ; but brighter
recruits score distinctly higher than bright
14-15 year olds and dull recruits distinctly
lower than dull school-leavers. Again
Raven (10) has published age norms from
5 to 65 years for his vocabulary and for his
non-verbal matrices tests, both of which
show the tendencies pictured in my Fig. 2,
namely the fanning out of ability during
adulthood and the earlier decline among
lower-grade adults.

Elsewhere (29) I have given the mean
scores on the twenty minutes’ progressive
matrices for nearly 90,000 naval recruits,
ranging in age from 17 to over 40. These
indicate that an average decline has begun
as early as 18 years, though it is difficult to
be certain of the comparability of the various
RECENT INVESTIGATIONS OF INTELLIGENCE AND ITS MEASUREMENT 135

age-group samples. When the recruits are
classified by civilian occupation there is a
definite tendency (shown in Fig. 3) for such

Fig. 3

MATRICES
QO-mat.)
RAW SCoRE

FRRPNES YUP REEKREY Ese set

 

 

fAYEARS
SUDOWED GRAPHS SHOWING DECLINE OF INTELLIGENCE,
WITH AGE Il VARIOUS OCCUPATIONAL CKOUPS

2ST YEARS  SSyERS 4S YEARS

groups as mates and labourers, whose work
demands least intelligence, to drop more
rapidly than clerks, electrical and woodworkers, who are likely to make more use of
their brains in their jobs and leisure pursuits.

A corollary of my hypothesis is that we
would expect the relation between intelligence and education to be closer in an unselected adult population than the relation
between intelligence and educational attainment among children still at school. So long
as the educational stimulus is much the same
for all individuals, innate factors will be the
main determiners of individual differences in
abilities ; but after 15 years the amount of
educational stimulation varies widely, and
this, I would claim, affects the measured
intelligence. This is borne out by our factor
analysis, where the arithmetic test had as
high a g loading as the non-verbal intellig
ence test, and the latter had a substantial
educational loading. Hence, also, family-size
differences in our measure of g were practically identical with differences in education.

Conclusions

Now to sum up the inferences that appear
to follow from these investigations : I accept
the view of Burks (3, 4), of Professor Burt (5)
and others, that, within a culturally fairly
homogeneous group such as the primary
school population of the U.S.A. or of Great
Britain, something like 75 per cent of the
variance in intelligence is attributable to
hereditary factors, provided that care is
taken to ensure a uniform degree of familiarity with the tests employed. When the
amount of practice or coaching varies
between different sections of such a population, no worthwhile conclusions at all can be
drawn. But I would say that this large’
hereditary influence is manifested only
because the environmental stimulation is
fairly uniform for all children. They all hear
much the same language and learn to use
much the same concepts; they receive a
more or less standardized education ; they
live in a country where the same pictorial or
other concrete symbols are current ; they are
all trained to attend to printed questions and
to write down answers quickly, and so on.
All these factors do of course vary between
social classes, between families within classes
or between children within families, though
not enough to raise the environmental component of the I.Q. to more than 20-30 per
cent. They begin to vary more widely when
children are segregated into different types of
secondary schools and after school-leaving
age. Probably also they vary more widely
among emotionally maladjusted children
who have difficulties in absorbing adult concepts, or among Gordon’s canal-boat and
gipsy children, or among such cases as Miss
Schmidt investigated who, through emotional
handicap or intellectual weakness, had fallen
by the wayside so that the education which
stimulates the growth of the ordinary child
became too advanced for them. Certainly
the variations in concepts, habits of thought,
and in attitudes to intellectual tasks, between
136

members of different nations or races
are so large that experts like Nadel (17) and
Biesheuvel (1) believe that a culturally
neutral intelligence test is an impossibility
and that psychologists who try to make racial
comparisons are wasting their time. This
applies just as much to performance or pictorial or other non-verbal tests as to verbal
ones. But I am afraid that this conclusion
holds also, though in lesser degree, for many
of the comparisons within relatively homogeneous cultures in which eugenists are
interested. The stimulus value of the environment in which the numerous children of
social-problem families on the one hand, and
the only children of university graduates on
the other hand, are reared, may account for
no more than 25 per cent of the differences in
their observed intelligence ; but surely this
25 per cent is too large a component for the
test scores to be accepted as reliable measures
of genetic differences.

I do not think that I am saying anything
revolutionary about intelligence tests. It is,
after all, a commonplace of genetics that
qualities as such are not inherited, only the
capacity to develop these qualities under
favourable environmental conditions. Thus
I would regard intelligence as the outcome of
the interplay of innate potentiality and of
such conditions as good emotional adjustment and appropriate educational stimulation. I am not sympathetic to the argument
that intelligence itself is an innate quality,
and that our tests are inefficient at measuring
it because they are subject to environmental
influences. Rather, I regard intelligence
operationally as the general all-round ability
that an individual manifests in his daily life
adjustments, at school, in his job, or in test
performances, and all these manifestations
are environmentally as well as hereditarily
determined. That brings me to my last
point : my criticisms of tests apply only to
their use in genetic studies and do not affect
their application to practical problems such
as educational and vocational prediction.
Success at school, or in a skilled job, is
helped by a superior environment or education and hindered by a poor one. Thus it is
better predicted by a test which is culturally

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

biased than it would be by that hypothetical
and unattainable instrument—a pure test of
inborn ability.

REFERENCES

1. Biesheuvel, S. Psychological tests and their application to non-European peoples. r949 Yearbook of
Education. London: Evans Bros.

2. Bosanquet, B. S. The quality of the rural population. EUGEN. REv., 1950, 42, 75-92.

3. Burks, B. S. Nature and nurture : Their influence
upon achievement. 27th Yearbook, National
Soctety for the Study of Education. Bloomington,
Ill. : Public School Publishing Company. 1928.

4. Burks, B.S. On the relative contributions of nature
and nurture to average group differences in
intelligence. Pyroc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 1938, 24,
276-82.

5. Burt, C. L. Intelligence and Fertility. London:
Eugenics Society and Hamish Hamilton. 1946.

6. Cane, V. R., and Heim, A. W. The effects of
repeated retesting : III. Further experiments and
general conclusions. Quart. J. Exper. Psychol.,
1950, 2, 182-97.

7. Cattell, R. B. Is national intelligence declining ?
EuGEN. REv., 1936, 28, 181-203. ,

8. Cattell, R. B. The fate of national intelligence :
Test of a thirteen-year prediction. EuGEN. REv.,
1950, 42, 136-48.

9. Dearborn, W. F., and Rothney, J. W.M. Predicting
the Child’s Development. Cambridge, Mass. :
Sci.-Art. 1941.

to. Foulds, G. A., and Raven, J. C. Normal changes in
the mental abilities of adults as age advances.
J. Ment. Sci., 1948, 94, 133-42.

1r. Johri, S. R. The Effect of Coaching and Practice
on Intelligence Tests. M. Ed. Thesis, University of
Leeds. 1939.

12. Kirk,S. A. Anevaluation of the study of Bernardine
G. Schmidt. Psychol. Bull., 1948, 45, 321-33.

13. Lorge, I. Schooling makes a difference. Teach.
Coll. Rec., 1945, 46, 483-92.

14. McIntyre, G. A. The Standardisation of Intelligence
Tests in Australia. Australian Council for Educational Research, Educ. Res. Ser., No. 54. Melbourne University Press. 1938.

15. McNemar, Q. A critical examination of the
University of Iowa studies of environmental
influences upon the I.Q. Psychol. Bull., 1940, 37,
63-92.

16, Martin, W. J. The Physique of Young Adult Males.
Medical Research Council Memorandum No. 20.
London : H.M. Stationery Office. 1949.

17. Nadel, S. F. The application of intelligence tests in
the anthropological field. The Study of Society
(edit. F. C. Bartlett and E. J. Lindgren). London:
Kegan Paul. 1939.

18. Peel, E. A. A Note on Practice Effects in Intelligence Tests. Brit. J. Educ. Psychol., 1951, 11.

1g. Penrose, L. S. The Galton Laboratory : Its work
and aims. EuGEn. REv., 1949, 41, 17-27.

20. Rodger, A. G. The application of six group intelligence tests to the same children, and the effects
of practice. Brit. J. Educ. Psychol., 1936, 6,
291-305.

21. Scottish Council for Research in Education and the
Population Investigation Committee. The Trend
of Scottish Intelligence. London: Uftiversity of
London Press. 1949.
22.

23.

24,
25.
26.

RECENT INVESTIGATIONS OF INTELLIGENCE AND ITS MEASUREMENT 137

Schmidt, B. G. Changes in personal, social and
intellectual behaviour of children originally classified as feebleminded. Psychol. Monogr., 1946,
60, No. 5.

Terman, L. M., and Oden, M. H. The Gifted Child
Grows Up. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University
Press. 1947.

Thomson, G. H. Intelligence and fertility. EuGEN.
REv., 1950, 41, 163-70.

Vernon, P. E. Intelligence test sophistication.
Brit. J. Educ. Psychol., 1938, 8, 237-44.

Vernon, P. E. The Measurement of Abilities. London : University of London Press. 1940.

27.

28.

29.

30.

Vernon, P. E. Psychological studies of the mental
quality of the population. Brit. J. Educ. Psychol.,
1950, 20, 35-42.

Vernon, P. E. The interpretation of intelligence
test results. To be published in Le Travail Human,
195I.

Vernon, P. E., and Parry, J. B. Personnel Selection
in the British Forces. London: University of
London Press. 1949.

Watts, A. F. Coaching for the Grammar School
Entrance Examination. Paper given at the Education Section, British Psychological Society, Dec.
29th, 1950.

 

The American Journal of Human Genetics

A quarterly record of research, review, and bibliographic material relating to heredity
in man, and to the applications of genetic principles in medicine, anthropology,

psychology, and the social sciences.

Edited for the American Society or Human Genetics by C. W. Correrman, University of Michigan, in
collaboration with C. N. Hernpon, M. T. Mackuin, H. W. Norton, Bronson Price, N. F. WALKER
and A. S. WIENER.

Volume 3

SNYDER, L

BERNDON, Cc. N., and JENNINGS, R.

histories of senescent twin pairs.
FINNEY, D. J. Review of :
MOURANT, A. E. Review of : W. C.
WALKER,
McCULLOCH
STEINBERG, A. G., and MULDER, D. W.

Aspects.
NEEL, J. V. Review of: A. B.

Review of :

CONTENTS

. H. Old and new pathways in human genetics.

G. A twin-family study of susceptibility to poliomyelitis.

H. A genetic study of Mediterranean anaemia in Cyp:
FEINGOLD, L., and BONDY, E. Comparative adaptational, social and psychometric data on the life

Grobman’s Our Atomic Heritage.
BI BLIOGRAPHY OF HUMAN GENETICS, 1950, Part 3.

Number 1

rus.

I. M. Lerner’s Population Genetics and Animal Improvement.
Boyd’s Genetics and the Races of Man.
N. F. Review of : A. Lundstrém’s Tooth Stze and Occlusion in Turns.
» CG. Review of : A. Sorsby’s Genetics in Ophthalmology.
C. H. Alstrém’s A Study of Epilepsy in its Clinical, Social and Genetic

ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION, $8.00—SINGLE NUMBERS, $2.50

Subscriptions and inquiries regarding membership in the Society should be addressed to H. H. Strandskov,
Department of Zoology, University of Chicago, Chicago 37, Ill.

PB S50 F505 FF FSF FFF 5 FFF OOF OOO OOO Ot

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLII, No. 3
