EUGENICS REVIEW

 

Editorial Offices:
69 Eccleston Square, London,
(Telephone— Victoria 2091/2.)

Editor for the Society—Maurice Newfield.

The Eugenics Society,
S.W.1.

 

  

“Eugenics is the study of agencies under
social control that may improve or impair
the racial qualities of future generations.

 

either physically or mentally.”

 

  

THE GALTON LUNCHEON 1940

President's Address on Eugenic Policy

fifty at the Galton Luncheon, which
was held at St. Ermin’s Hotel, Westminster, on Saturday, February 17th, 1940,
with The Rt. Hon. Lord Horder, G.C.V.O.,
M.D., President of the Society, in the chair.

ix was an attendance of about

Lord Horder’s Address

Lord Horder said: Before I embark upon
the few remarks which, against my own
inclination and, as I now think, against my
better judgment, I promised to make, I
think we all have a duty as eugenists, and
that is to rise for a few seconds in honour
of the memory of a man who, British to the
core, was recognized all over the world as
having made not only a large but perhaps
the greatest contribution that any individual
has made to the eugenic idea—Havelock
Ellis.

(The company stood in silence.)

Lord Horder continued: I am in somewhat of a difficulty. My remarks were
primarily intended to be of a domestic kind.
I was to say what was happening to our
Society during war time and what our
policy was ; but we have some of our friends
of the Press here, and they, of course, are
not very much interested in our domestic
affairs, nor should we like them perhaps to

blaze abroad any doubts that there may be
in the minds of the Council and of the
members of this Society as to exactly what
eugenics stands for at this point in human
history. We would like to put it to them that
our activities were very well defined and
extremely authentic. I have no doubt about
their authenticity, I have a little doubt about
their definition.

But first of all as to these domestic matters.
Most of you know that after the initial
concussion which the announcement of war
brought to every group such as ours, when
we had stabilized after the shock, we
decided—and I hope everybody agrees—to
carry on. We did this despite the absence of
our General Secretary, Dr. C. P. Blacker,
upon whom we lean so heavily and so
justifiably, and despite the loss of others by
reason of war work—witness the absence of
Professor Crew, who should have given the
Galton Lecture to-day—also despite the
diminished income of the Society, the effect
of the black-out and difficulties of transport,
which of course affect our meetings and
lectures. Despite all these things we decided
to carry on, if only because we felt that in
war, dysgenic though it is, and perhaps
because war is so dysgenic, there are a
number of ways in which the Eugenics
Society might be helpful to the community.
4 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

We thought that there were opportunities
as well as handicaps in the situation.

My colleague, the Chairman of the Council,
reminds me of some of the good points to
set against the bad ones. We had just completed Dr. Baker’s researches, leading to the
production and placing on the market of
“Volpar.”” It remains to see whether clinically—you know what I mean by that term—
Volpar comes up to the expectations of the
laboratory worker. Well, that piece of work
has been completed. The Darwin Fellows
had just rounded off their respective pieces
of research, and, thanks to our rather
generous subsidy of the Population Investigation Committee and the Population
Policies Committee, the work of those two
committees was quite far advanced before
this shock came upon us. So things might
have been worse.

With regard to the programme that the
Council proposes during war time, in the
first place the REVIEW will be continued,
the format remaining the same, though
some diminution in size has become necessary. I am glad to tell you that the health
of the Editor, Dr. Newfield (for whose
gifts in this direction all of us have great
admiration), which was rather precarious
three months ago, is not nearly so precarious
now. Then the members’ meetings will continue; the approach of “ Summer time ”’
will make their continuance more practicable and we hope they will be popular.
Propaganda is rather severely restricted by
force majeure, the pressure coming mainly
from our valued Treasurer; but it is not
shut down, it will continue.

We have just appointed a Committee for
the study of the eugenic aspects of family
allowances. That Committee will, of course,
make contacts with other bodies, such as
the Family Endowment Society, pursuing
the question actively. All sorts of movements bear upon this important question of
family allowances. There is no system yet,
no large rounded policy on the part of the
Government in this respect, and therefore
the Council thought that, especially now
when this question is so pertinent, it would
be good that we should have an ad hoc

committee to inquire into the whole position
from the eugenic angle.

Then, of course, family allowances are
linked up very closely with the question of
War marriages and pensions. We have also
to watch certain matters which might easily, if they were not watched—or even perhaps
if they were—lapse and be _ neglected,
matters which we believe to be very important from our angle. One is the question of the
census. Is it really in the public interest, even
in war time, that the census should be
waived? We want to consider that. We
have to watch the Chancellor of the Exchequer in view of his quite reasonable
desire to get the money to pay £6 or {7
millions a day for this gigantic effort which
the Allies are making. We have to watch
him when he does such extraordinary things
as to lower the income tax allowances for
married people and children—an _ extraordinary piece of legislation. I have a letter
from Sir John Simon in answer to an inquiry
from myself in which I took the liberty of
saying that the Council of the Eugenics Society
was amazed at this particular clause in the
Finance Bill. I am not going to burden you
with that letter but it seems to amount to
this, that in scaling down a number of
benefits this particular benefit was included.
We think it should have been excluded. We
think that at a time when the Government
should be concerning itself with the downward trend in population, income tax
allowances for married people and for
children should at least have been excepted,
even if only on principle. The amount which
the Chancellor hopes to get by this extraordinary piece of legislation is negligible,
but the principle is not negligible.

I return to the question of propaganda.
What are we going to do about propaganda ?
The original title of our Society, as Mrs. Grant
Duff reminds me, was the “‘ Eugenics Education Society.”” Thename was changed because
it was thought that research was as important
as education, if not for a time more important. It is chiefly our financial position which
compels us to reduce propaganda activity for
a time, but I am going to suggest that there is
another reason why propaganda activity
THE GALTON LUNCHEON 1940 5

should be, if not reduced, controlled rather
severely.

Are we sufficiently clear upon what it is
that we should just now educate the people
eugenically ? It is easy to propagandize—
God knows how easy it is! You can propagandize to such an extent that the word
becomes very ill-odorous. It is so simple
to try to educate people, so difficult to be
certain of the truth and permanence of the
things on which you educate them. Of
course, some of us who have had scientific
training are quite sure of our biological
principles, but it is difficult to get biological
principles over to people who have not had
scientific training, because as soon as you
depart from your biological nomenclature
you run the risk of not telling them the
truth. When we get down to the human
problem—biologically it is not difficult with
horses and dogs and chickens and pigs—the
elusiveness of it comes home to us. Supposed
as I am to be quite confident about my outlook on eugenics, the elusiveness of the
problem nevertheless strikes me in a way
which makes me somewhat sceptical as to
what at this time in the history of the nation
and the race we should call eugenics
education.

Our Treasurer, in answer to the invitation
which I sent to members of the Council,
has given me his outlook upon this particular
point, and I am going to quote him. He
says: ‘‘ So long as one is content to keep
the good and the bad far enough apart,
all goes well. It is so obvious that the bigger
vitality, the mental and physical range of
some men and women, immeasurably outstrips the similar qualities of others, so that
the choice between good and bad is never
in doubt.’”’ But he goes on to say: “It is
easy for the animal breeder who has stumbled
upon better types in quite short periods,
because he can fertilize many females by one
male and eliminate non-desirable types.
That is easy, but in the human animal it is
a different matter. The moment we get down
to definitions, to the separation of genetic
from environmental factors, the problem
becomes one for scientific analysis, for experiment, for criticism, and for research.” I

am bound to say that I am sympathetic with
our Treasurer over that aspect of our
eugenic problem. One or two generouslyminded members of the Council suggested
that I should give the Galton Lecture in the
place of Professor Crew. If I were giving the
Galton Lecture this is exactly the problem I
should deal with. I should try to examine the
whole field. In Galton’s day it was not so
difficult as it isin ours. Galton was an anthropologist of great distinction, he was a pioneer
in the anthropometric field. And, by the
way, what has happened to anthropometry
in these days? Why are we not measuring
people and weighing them and noting the
colour of their eyes and hair as he did?
The Swedes are doing it. In Sweden to-day
a book can be bought which tells the reader
what is the normal Swede, what is the
healthy Swede, healthy physically, and from
intelligence tests and so on. The Swede has
got himself ‘‘ taped,” we have not ; we know
much less about the British type to-day than
Galton did in his.

Turning now to the question of environment, many of you remember the flutter in
the dovecot when Julian Huxley gave the
Galton Lecture. I will confess to you that I
found Julian Huxley’s Galton Lecture not
devoid of fallacies, though at the same time
full of healthy criticism, because in effect
he said, “we eugenists must take more
note of environmental factors.”” Very well,
but is it true that environmental effort
to-day may lead to eugenic benefits tomorrow ? To what extent is it true, if it be
true at all? That was Julian Huxley’s
major premise. We all know that if a number
of growing boys and girls are given an extra
milk ration, their stature, their weight,
their health, and even their intelligence can
be increased; but between that and the
implication that you will improve—what
says our Founder ?—“ the racial qualities
of future generations,’ between those two
positions a great gap lies and only by
research can the gap be filled. Critics have
accused us eugenists of decrying the social
services. I say quite boldly in reply that
this is not true. We have never decried
the social services. We have never put any
6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

‘drag on the wheel of those who are trying to
improve human conditions through environmental agency. I myself have been preaching
the amenities to my fellow citizens for years,
though nobody listens very much ; but that
does not prevent me from being intensely
interested in the eugenic problem, which is
a different one, and I think we are getting
these things somewhat confused.

The critics also accuse us of making class
distinctions. Well, I am quite as much
interested in one class as another, as I believe
we all are. What we want is the truth on
this question. None of us, I take it, have
any bias or prejudice against blue blood or
red blood or pale green blood, but if a certain
class, gua class, produces through heredity,
as distinct from environment, a better race,
then we have got to accept that, be it
the poor, the middle, or the upper class.
But I do not think that as eugenists we are
very much worried about the sociological
distinctions between the classes.

Should we at this stage of eugenics “ go
into committee,’ as the saying is, over this
whole question of the geneticists’ standpoint? You will remember the manifesto
of the biologists who answered the question
put to them by the Science Service of
Washington, “how could the world population be improved most effectively genetically? ’’ The manifesto was published in
Nature last September, and it was commented
on very fairly, I think, by Dr. Newfield
in the October issue of the REvirw. The
gist of the manifesto seems to be that until
you have given people equal opportunities,
until you have removed race prejudices,
until you have given children a better
field for upbringing, until you have disseminated knowledge of birth control, until
you have effected permanent sterilization,
until there has been a wider spread of
knowledge of biological principles, until,
finally, there is conscious selection which
requires an accurate direction or directions
for such selection to take—until you have
done all these things, the manifesto says,
you cannot begin to do anything with
eugenics. Well, I dissent entirely, and I
think this manifesto from these distinguished

scientists, beginning with our potential
Galton Lecturer, Professor Crew, and ending
with Professor Waddington, with 22 names
in between, is a confusion of the issue. I
believe eugenists to have a scope and a field
quite apart from environmentalists, and I
believe that our “ Eugenic Aims and
Objects,” which were revised last year, and
which appear in our report, still indicate a
great scope for eugenics. There are problems
which are not environmental in essence,
there are problems which have to do with
heredity, there are problems which concern
all the efforts that could be made to improve
the stock. They are all stated in our
“ Eugenic Aims and Objects,” and although
these overlap again and again with social
services and with environmental efforts for
human betterment, they are essentially
genetic in their implication.

I said at the beginning that war is dysgenic.
We are agreed about that. It is estimated
that there were half-a-million births sacrificed as a result of the last war. The number
of births that will be sacrificed this time
nobody knows, because we do not know
how long the war will last. But war is
dysgenic because those 500,000 births would
have been amongst the more desirable, and
not the less desirable, of parents. In other
words, the war results in a lowering of
fertility in the very stocks that we eugenists
want to encourage, and it leaves the fertility in the less desirable stocks relatively
untouched. That is the special problem
presented to us eugenists by the war, and it
is one more reason, if another reason were
necessary, why the activities of our Society
should continue during the national emergency.

That is all I have to say. It was suggested
that there should be a short discussion, and
I think that is desirable. Probably you will
think it reasonable if I restrict the speeches
to five minutes each.

Discussion

Mr. B. S. Bramwell thanked the President
for giving such an interesting talk. They
all felt it a great loss not to have Professor
Crew with them on that occasion, but he
THE GALTON LUNCHEON 1940 7

hoped that his Galton Lecture would be
given at some future date and that also
another address might be forthcoming from
the President. The expression of his doubts
by Lord Horder had been most stimulating. He had shown an open mind, the mind
of one who was ready to learn at any age.

There was one question on. which he
desired to say a word or two, namely,
war marriages. On considering it from the
point of view of a citizen, his own opinion
was that where young people had had a
definite attachment to each other they
should take the risk and get married, but
from the point of view of a eugenist that did
not carry very far unless they were going
to have children. That brought one up
against the question of what was to be the
future of the children. It might sound rather
brutal in a way, but he thought the position
of the offspring of a war marriage when the
husband had been killed was more important
than the position of a widow. They could
all sympathize with the childless widow so
far as her loss was concerned, it was a
tremendous blow to her life, but from an
economic point of view he did not know
that she had suffered so much hardship.
These young people should be encouraged to
have at any rate one child, and where the
husband might be killed in a few weeks he
thought the state should be very liberal to
the orphans, even possibly at the expense of
the childless widow. The point was one,
however, that would need a good deal of
“rubbing in” to the politicians, because
widows had votes and children of tender
years had not.

The Hon. Mrs. Grant Duff said that she
felt very deeply indeed that the Eugenics
Society had work to do in war time which
was even more important, if possible, than
the work it did in peace. In “‘ Eugenic Aims
and Objects” the Soctety’s work was
described as being educational and research, endeavouring to ensure for the
future of humanity the very best things that
eugenics stood for. Any work that they could
do to make people realize more about these
things and their effect upon the future of
humanity was not only worth while, but

even more worth while in war time than in
peace.

Mrs. Neville Rolfe said that she was one
of those who attached very great importance
to public opinion, and she felt it vitally
necessary that the Eugenics Society during
the war should make the broad principles
of eugenics known, particularly to the
younger generation. She quite agreed that
there were a number of technical points
still undecided. It must be remembered that
there was a time lag of about thirty years
between the findings in the laboratory and
the. practise of the man in the street. The
principles of eugenics and the biological
principles that affected the development of
living things, plant, animal, and human were
known, but even to-day the majority of the
schools taught no biology. It was vital that
biological principles as related to human
problems should be part of the equipment
of every young person in the community.
Herein was a vital activity in which the
Eugenics Society should be engaged during
the war, when the potential parents of the
future were grouped together in the fighting
forces. The ideals of eugenics, with the
human responsibilities they involved, as
affecting behaviour, as affecting selection of
partners in marriage, as affecting parenthood, were vital matters on which information should be given to the ‘‘ under thirties ”
in the Defence Forces, munition services,
and so forth. As a believer in education,
which was the democratization of knowledge,
she considered that in this respect the
Eugenics Society to-day had a great responsibility if due weight was to be given during
the war to the technical knowledge available,
because, unless the young people were
interested, unless there was understanding
and appreciation of the position, that
technical knowledge would take very much
longer to become a useful factor in the
mental equipment of the community. The
means were various, the broadcast, literature, the Press—there were various: angles
of approach to-day in which the broad
principles of the responsibility of the individual for the future quantity and quality
of the race could be stated and brought
8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

home. The result would be to give to individuals at one and the same time the
feeling of freedom and of responsibility.

Mrs. How-Martyn wished to emphasize
the point that had been raised about the
children of war marriages and about possible
war orphans. The position made it incumbent upon them to push forward with the
idea of children’s allowances. In her own
view not only should there be allowances, but
every mother should be given a vote for
each child under sixteen years of age in
addition to a vote for herself. It would
be better to give the vote to the mother
because she would probably pay more
attention to it than would the father, and
a woman who had votes for her children
would be listened to by the House of
Commons.

Lady Chambers said that having been a
member of the Soczety from its inception,
she had always been extremely interested
in its educational work. She felt it important
to “ get over’ to the man in the street the
existence of such a thing as race responsibility and its imperative demands upon
every individual. If that could be got into
his mind, the sinews of war in the shape of
subscriptions would be forthcoming. This
was a Soctety which included scientific
workers doing investigation in a subject
which, as they confessed, they did not
understand completely, but, in so far as
they understood it, they wished to give
their help to those who needed it and to
circulate the knowledge which was of such
vast importance to the community. She had
always looked on the Soczety as a means of
distrrbuting over a large area the work of
the greater minds who were concerned with
this subject of eugenics and population, and
so to make more people understand in this
country and in all countries the fact of
racial responsibility and the need for continuing the race from their best stocks. In
order to do this she thought they should
encourage the marriage of all people who
were likely to be good parents both physically
and mentally and from the character point
of view.

Mr. Cecil Binney (Barrister-at-Law) said

that there was no question of the Society
deserting its ideals, but it was extremely
difficult during war time to get people to
pay attention to more important things, and
it might be that to that extent eugenics was
rather at a standstill. He spoke as one
who had been converted, not so much by
the Society as by the logic of events as he
witnessed them. It had been an admirable
idea to hold the Galton Luncheon, for
although it could not be said that the
Soczety had embarked on any new policy, yet
it was paying tribute to the fact that
eugenics was a live subject of supreme
importance for the community, and that the
work of the Soczety must go on. Obviously,
as a result of the war, new problems arose
and old problems became accentuated, so
that although they might have diminished
resources and less leisure yet they did have
greater opportunitites. He felt that by
taking an interest in the Eugenics Society
during war they were helping to keep alive
a great movement and one which might well
be in days to come of greater importance
in world affairs than the things which
engaged the minds of statesmen at the
moment. Finally he wanted to say how
much he appreciated what Lord Horder had
done to maintain the Soctety at a useful
level during this exceedingly difficult time.

Mr. Gun (Society of Genealogists) said
that it was an enormous pity that the
B.B.C. could not arrange for talks of the
kind that they had before the war. Nowadays every talk over the wireless seemed
as if it must have direct relation to our
war effort. Yet a proper teaching of eugenics
was necessary especially in view of the mad
racial theories which were now prevalent on
the Continent. Whether they could carry
the war into the enemy’s territory and show
that if eugenics was properly studied the
race of gangsters who now infested certain
parts of Europe might never have arisen he
did not know. But he thought that something on those lines must be tried, and he
agreed most thoroughly with Mrs. Neville
Rolfe that good heredity must be ensured as
far as possible if nations were to be free
instead of slaves.
THE GALTON LUNCHEON 1940 | 9

Mrs. Hubback (Principal of Morley College)
desired to associate herself with Mr. Bramwell and others in thanking Lord Horder
for the work he continually did for the
Society. She had, unfortunately for herself,
a very wide experience of voluntary associations of every kind and of their presidents.
She knew those presidents who were merely
decorative and those who in addition worked.
Their own President was one of the latter.
He attended all committee meetings and
followed every detail of the Soczety’s work.
Busy man as he was, he gave not only of
his time but of his mind. She wanted to
base this tribute on a wider ground because
they were grateful to Lord Horder, not only
for the work he did for the Society but also
for what he did for so many good causes,
some of them unpopular. She wished to
praise Lord Horder’s courage even more
than his ability and conscientiousness, for
it required much courage to speak as he
did for some causes that were with many
people almost a subject of levity.

Lord Horder had pointed out that one of
the chief tasks immediately in front of the
Eugenics Society was to inquire into the
eugenic aspect of family allowances. Many
who had been working for these for twenty
years or so felt that they were at last
becoming practical politics. This was so
mainly because many people regarded it as
a solution of one of the greatest economic
problems of the war, the problem of the
vicious spiral, the problem of ensuring that
the children in families with small incomes
did not suffer unduly from the economic
hardships of war, and of seeing that the
national income—that part of it which
could be spent—was most wisely spent.
That, of course, was not the aspect from
which eugenists primarily wanted to look
at it. If family allowances came about—
and she for one firmly believed that they were
coming—they were bound to come as a
poverty-relieving scheme, and they were
bound to be at a flat rate. But those who
were supporting a scheme along those lines
were doing so because they felt that it was
of the utmost importance that the principle
should be registered. Once family allowances

were the law of the land, it was essential that
any particular schemes which were ultimately
adopted in this country should have a
eugenic tendency.

Many of them deeply regretted the prospect of a declining population, and she
believed that family allowances had a
contribution to make in that respect. But
she wanted to make it clear that the greatest
“‘whole-hoggers’’ amongst them, while
believing in family allowances, did not
believe that such allowances, whatever the
scheme put forward, would by themselves
bring about any rise in the birth-rate. It
was a fact that the birth-rate had not risen
to any appreciable extent in countries
which had got family allowances already.
That, however, was neither here nor there,
because hardly any country had family
allowances of such an amount as to cover
the cost of a child, and if the scheme was to
have any effect on the birth-rate the allowances must be sufficient to cover that cost
at different economic levels. But even if that
kind of scheme were ultimately achieved,
they must recognize that family allowances at
their best could only be one of the factors that
might lead parents to wish to increase their
families. The other factor was the question of
public opinion, to which Mrs. Neville Rolfe
referred so eloquently. It was necessary,
especially in view of the successful researches in contraceptive technique, to
make people realize that having children
was not entirely their own affair. Some men
looked on having children as others might
look on having dogs or pigeons, a thing
entirely for themselves. The attitude which
it was necessary to get across in order to
bring about an increase in the birth-rate
was that having children was not an affair
of the parents only but an affair of the
community. If that feeling of responsibility were encouraged, then it must be made
possible economically for people to have the
children. They must remove the financial
burden of parenthood or help to relieve it
before they could ask people to look upon
childbearing as a matter which affected the
whole nation. This was not an easy subject,
and that was why those who believed in
10 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

family allowances were extremely glad that
the Society was prepared to face up to the
problem and to make available its resources,
first of all for an inquiry, and when the
inquiry was finished, for whatever action
might be necessary.

Lord Horder said that he was very grateful to Mrs. Hubback for what he took to be
in essence a vote of thanks. He was not
unwilling to believe that whatever he might
have done in respect of various activities
which in his judgment contributed to human
health and happiness had been the result
of courage rather than of intelligence! Of the
two qualities it was perhaps of courage that
there was the greater lack. A friend of his—
he called him a friend, but he rather thought
the intention of his speech was not too

friendly—once said of him that he seemed to
be interested in everything from birth
control to cremation. He accepted that
compliment at its face value. He was a
doctor and therefore his interest did begin
with birth, and even before birth, and as to
the disposal of the human body after death,
that also was a matter of sanitation, if
nothing else.

He hoped that those present generally
would agree with Mr. Binney that it had
been worth holding this Luncheon. Although
it might not have made any constructive
addition to their policy as eugenists, it had
demonstrated that they were alive, and that
they were bent upon extracting from this
evil thing, war, whatever good may accrue
to their fellow human beings.

ABORTION—RIGHT OR WRONG?"
By DOROTHY THURTLE

Author of the Minority Statement in the Report of the
Inter-Deparimenial Committee on Abortion

Origin of Inter-Departmental Committee

HE disappointing results of the Matern
| ity and Child Welfare Act of 1918 in
reducing maternal mortality and morbidity led to the appointment, in 1928, of
an Inter-Departmental Committee with the
following terms of reference: ‘‘ To advise
upon the application to maternal mortality
and morbidity of the medical and surgical
knowledge at present available and to
enquire into the needs and direction of
further research work.’’ This Committee
finally reported in 1932, and subsequently
a further investigation was undertaken by
medical officers of the Ministry of Health,
who paid visits to various centres and made
a detailed examination of actual conditions,
and of the working of the 1918 Act. The
results of this investigation were published
in 1937, and although the 1928 Committee
made reference to abortion, the medical

* Substance of a paper read at a meeting of the
Eugenics Society on March roth, 1940.

officers went further and recommended that
an examination should be made into the
influence which abortion may exert on
maternal mortality and morbidity and
future child-bearing.

The Inter-Departmental Committee on
Abortion was accordingly set up in May,
1937. It consisted of fifteen members, of
which five were women. Of these five, four
were titled women and the fifth was myself.
Two were doctors. One of the women
doctors resigned at an early stage, for
domestic reasons, her place being taken by
a male barrister, so that four women only
served on the Committee for most of: the
time. The male members were two barristers,
one being the Chairman, Mr. Norman
Birkett, three gynaecologists, one medical
officer of health, the chief London magistrate,
one coroner, one prosecuting solicitor, and
a representative each from the Ministry of
Health and the Home Office.

Memoranda was submitted by individuals
