; THE HEREDITY OF THE ROYAL CASTE

 
  
  
   

z@ ‘HE expression “‘ Caste ”’ derived from
the Indian word is particularly approja. priate to the European Royal Families,
mving regard to their constant interarriages, which present the nearest Western
to the caste system in India. The
5 of such close alliances are obviously
mtthy of study from the eugenic point of

ew. Woods in his Heredity in Royalty,
shed in 1910, examined certain families
Mh great thoroughness, but others he
ear ngely left out altogether, and he hardly
pr AP: pached the generations living at the
»-at which he wrote.

y he origin of the Caste goes back far into
miory, but for the present purpose it will

B seither possible nor desirable to begin
r than the eighteenth century, except
: foccasional reference. Taking the families
wthe present European monarchs, and of

k representatives of those monarchies
Mich have lately come to an end, we find
tin nearly every case the greater portion
. ne eighteenth-century ancestors were
Mriciled in the old Germanic Empire and
mage d to the numerous families which
g allegiance to that Empire, termed the
My Roman Empire, up to 1806. It would
: mistake however to regard them as
: —_ in the modern sense of the word.
Sinan was certainly their native language,
tagh many preferred to speak French, but
Minan nationality, as we now understand
3 not then exist. Each potentate
Mirded himself first and foremost as the
er of his own particular territory, and
Endly as a member of the Royal Caste.
Sloyalty to the Empire was a very halfmeted affair. The Elector of Saxony, to
an example, would find himself just as
em, or as little, at one with the King of
: ; Britain or the King of France as with
: of Prussia. He might well indeed
2 friendly to the King of France than
Kine of Prussia, being himself, like

      
  
  
   
 
   
   
 
  
  
  
   
   

  

—
fa
—
4 a
on ee |
ie 7

  
   
 
 
   
       
  
 
  
   
  
  
   

ee
a ev i [6

  

Siew ©
a 2 ee
= >

By W. T. J. GUN, FE.RHIST.S., F.S.G.

the French ruler, a Catholic, while the
Prussian monarch was a Protestant.

The main division indeed of those days, a
division which has persisted to a great
extent to the present time, was that between
the Catholic and Protestant sections, as
these intermarried but seldom. Occasionally
a Protestant princess might marry a Catholic
prince, but a Catholic princess was hardly
ever allowed by her Church to marry a
Protestant prince. This policy of the
Catholic Church has been of great advantage
to the Protestant section, the stocks in
which have been markedly superior to those
in the Catholic. Later the families belonging
to the Greek Church were similarly compelled to take brides from the Protestant
section only, and for purposes of heredity
are practically at one with them. Actually
the descent of the Protestant section has
been not so much German as Nordic; the
members of that section present in the main
the physical characteristics classified as
Nordic, and in their origin they may best be
described as Central European Nordic. As
such they have fitted remarkably well into
such countries as Great Britain, Scandinavia
and Holland. As far as this country is
concerned the characteristics of the Protestant section correspond with remarkable
closeness to those of the British aristocracy.
On the other hand the members of this
section who found themselves in such countries as Russia, Roumania or Greece have
been far less in tune with their surroundings
—an important point, especially in connection with Russia.

The Catholic section has much less Nordic
blood and necessarily inherits less of the
Nordic character. The Latin influence has
been very strong in this section, especially
among the Bourbons. Slav influences have
been very inconsiderable in the Caste, but
have come slightly more to the fore in
recent times. In the Caste as a whole the
20

proportion of Nordic to non-Nordic may be
estimated as at least three to one.

FIVE IMPORTANT CONNECTIONS

Among the ancestors of the present
European Royal Families special attention
should be paid to five connections grouped
round a common ancestor in each case.
These five connections may be termed
the Bourbon-Hapsburg, Hesse-Darmstadt,
Coburg, Danish and Beauharnais respectively.

Bourbon-Hapsburg

The most important common ancestors
are Emperor Francis (1708-65) and his
wife Empress Maria Theresa (1717-80).
Among their descendants there have been
an exceptional number of intermarriages,
less numerous now however than formerly.
The connection has always been most
rigidly Catholic and forms practically a
caste within a caste; some of its members
have a little Protestant descent, but none of
the Protestant families have themselves any
descent from this group, which as a whole
has shown decidedly the least ability of any
of these five connections. In the Spanish
branch in particular, there was much licentiousness, but a certain obstinate stupidity
was perhaps the prevailing characteristic,
often coupled however with a kindly disposition. In one or two cases actual feeblemindedness appeared, but insanity was
practically absent. “There is much _ less
Nordic blood in this group than in any of the
others.

Hesse-Darmstadt

The common ancestors of this connection
are two little-known personages of the
Protestant section, Landgrave Louis VIII
of Hesse-Darmstadt (1691-1768) and his wife
Charlotte of Hanau (1700-26). Among
their immediate descendants were several
families of attractive sisters. These ladies
married impartially into the Protestant and
Catholic sections, and nearly the whole
Royal Caste of the present time has some of
this Hesse-Darmstadt descent; our own

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

 
  
 
   
 
  
   
  
   
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
   
   
   
  
  
 
   
  
  
  
  
   
   
 
  
  

Royal Family however is a notable excep
tion. There has been much ability in this
group, especially in the arts, and remarkable
good looks, but an erratic and neuroti¢
strain has been much in evidence, with some
insanity, though feeble-mindedness has beer
quite absent. Women have been especiall
prominent. The pedigrees (see Tables 1 tq
5B) show the various lines of descent from
the common ancestors of individuals 1
whom a mixture of the above characteristics
has been very apparent—Emperor William
of Germany; the Czar Alexander II and
Alexander III of Russia ; the Czarina Alex
andra, wife of Nicholas II; Crown Prince
Rudolph of Austria ; and Louis II of Bavariz
(that strange monarch of marked artistic
tastes who was ultimately overtaken b
insanity).

Coburg

The common ancestors were Francis
Duke of Saxe-Coburg (1750-1806) and _ his
wife Augusta of Reuss (1757-1831). This was
decidedly the ablest of the groups; it had
much intellectual power and artistic tastes,
frequently coupled however with great
hardness of character. The descent was very
Nordic and so were the characteristics.
There was only one case of insanity, that of
the Empress Charlotte of Mexico, dud
however to very special circumstances, and
feeble-mindedness was conspicuously absent,

Danish

This forms a less definite group than the
others. It may be said to centre round
Christian IX of Denmark (1818-1906) and
his wife Louise of Hesse-Cassel (1817-98),
though the whole of the Danish connection
were descended znter alia from George II of
England (1683-1760) and his wife Caroline of
Anspach (1683-1737). In any case the
general characteristics of the group were
shared to a great extent by such families ag
the Wurtembergs and the Mecklenburgs}
and to a certain extent by the Guelphs.3
These characteristics were on the whole
rather commonplace, and the group produced!
few men or women of any eminence. A good;
deal of common sense was however evidentj
- | THE HEREDITY OF THE ROYAL CASTE 21

 
 
 
    
 

ee SOME HESSE-DARMSTADT DESCENTS
ae imon ancestors : Louis VIII Landgrave of Hesse-Darmstadt 1691-1768 and Charlotte of Hanau 1700-1726
_ an TABLE I
3 Three descents of William I, German Emperor, b. 1859
Landgrave Louis VIII

SS : | |
ee vandgrave Louis IX George Witte m

| |
‘fica Queen of Prussia Louise Grand Duchess of Saxe-Weimar Frederica Princess Charles of

ae Mecklenburg-Strelitz
| illiam ITI Charles Frederick
PR of /Prassia Grand Duke of Saxe-Weimar Louise Queen *! Prussia
. William I German Emperor = Augusta = William I German Emperor
4 E Frederick I berman Emperor
e William II German Emperor

   
       
    
  
 

TABLE 2

r descents of Crown Prince Rudolph of Austria 1857-1889. His mother, Elizabeth, was most unstable, but
ptionally beautiful ; he himself had much natural ability, but was very ill-balanced.

r Landgrave Louis VIII

me Landgrave Louis IX Caroline Margravine of Baden
‘3 | Amelia= Prince Charles Louis of Baden
s | | Caroline Queen of Bavaria

| |
Sophia, Archduchess Charles Louis Ludovicia, Duchess Max in Bavaria
Francis Joseph Emperor of Austrias- Elizabeth
Rudolph, Crown Prince of Austria

i TABLE 3
i descents of Louis II 1845-1886 and Otto, Kings of Bavaria. Both ultimately became insane ; they were very

; r 2 Landgrave Lonis VIII

me - Landgrave Louis IX George william

See |
paerica Queen | Caroline brincess Augusta biectress Frederica Princess Charles

of Hesse-Homburg of Bavaria of Mecklenburg-Strelitz
Charlotte i of
Saxe-Altenburg
Prince William of Prussia = Anna Louis I King of Bavaria = Theresa
i ~ |
or
a : Maria= Maximilian King of Bavaria

*:° Louis II King of Bavaria Otto King of Bavaria
22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

SomE HEsSSE-DARMSTADT DESCENTS
TABLE 4a
First three descents of Alexander III, Emperor of Russia. Heand his brothers were all good looking, but instabili

of character predominated.

Landgrave Louis VIII

Landgrave Louis IX

Louis I Gland Duke

Amelia, Princess

Frederica Queen of Prussia

of Hesse Charles Louis of Baden
Louie II Grand Duke of Hesse = Wilhelmina Frederick William ITI
King of Prussia
Charlotte Empress of Russia
M J = Alexander II Emperor of Russia

Alexander III Emperor of Russia

nem ain tall

TABLE 4B
Three further descents of Alexander III Emperor of Russia, making six descents in all.
Landgrave Louis VIII
:
Prince George William Caroline Margravine of Baden
Frederica cess Charles Louisa, Grand Prince Charles Louis |

of Mecklenburg-Strelitz

Duchess of Hesse

Louis II Grand =

of po
Wilhelmina

Louis III Grand Duke of Hesse

Louisa een of
Prussia Duke of Hesse
Charlotte | emperor of
Russia

|
Alexander II Emperor of Russia =

<
q
\

Maria

Alexander III bmperor of Russia !

(in striking contrast to the Hesse-Darmstadt
group) and many individuals were very
popular. Insanity was not absent. This
group was entirely Protestant and completely Nordic.

Beauharnats

The common ancestors were Claude de
Beauharnais (1670-1749) and his wife Renée
Hardineau. Owing entirely to the chance
that Napoleon I married the widow of
Alexandre de Beauharnais this French family
of the lesser nobility is now extensively
represented in the Royal Caste. The present
rulers of Sweden, Denmark, Norway, Belgium and Roumania are among those who

have Beauharnais descent, the three former.
sharing it with the French bourgeois family
of Bernadotte, the two latter with the:
similar French family of Murat. There was
ability in all these families, and the fresh
strains must have been of great eugenic
worth.

“ Unofficial’ Descents :

The Caste may have been, and probably
has been, affected by certain purely unofficial descents, the consideration of which
presents great difficulties but cannot be
ignored. The following cases would affect
a considerable number of descendants of
note :
E THE HEREDITY OF THE ROYAL CASTE

  
  
  
  
 
 
  
    
   
  
    
    
  
   
   

Lan Amelia Princess

le I Grand

Fie esse Charles hous of Baden
Louis I II Grand 25 Wilhelmina
; Duke of

E, Prince Gebr e William

suise Grand Duchess of Hesse
Louis II Grand Duke of Hesse

. The Emperor Paul of Russia was
Seat certainly not the son of the Emperor
=, but of some paramour of his mother,
Efamous Empress Catherine. Having
dt to Paul’s most unpleasant character,
peat eugenic advantages would seem to
B cen secured, though Peter had been
- - better than an imbecile. The actual
“was no doubt a Russian, and the later
menofis had therefore rather more Slav
ed than was Officially apparent.
rit has been asserted that King Louis
mnpe of France was a changeling. A
lausible story was put forward by
zen borough (an Italian married to an
Inman), according to which it was she
wwas really the Orleans baby. Colour was
ko the claim by the fact of Louis Philippe’s
ance, quite different to

pan appear
5 of his brothers and sister. But the

  

Prince Charles William of Hesse-Darmstadt |

23

SoME HESSE-DARMSTADT DESCENTS

TABLE 5a
fowr descents of Alexandra Empress of Russia 1872-1918. Very handsome, but highly neurotic.
Landgrave Louis VIII

Landgrave Louis IX

Caroline cess Frederica Queen
of Hoewe Horabarg of Prussia

Anna = Prince william of Prussia

== Elizabeth
Louis by Grand Duke of Hesse

Alexandra Empress of Russia

Es : TABLE 5B
i farther descents of Alexandra Empress of Russia, making six descents in all.
se Landgrave Louis VIII

|
Caroline Margravine of Baden
Pripee Charles Louis of Baden
= Wilhelmina

Prince Charles William of Hesse-Darmstadt
Louis IV Gran’ Duke of Hesse

Alexandra Empress of Russia

story otherwise is full of improbabilities,
especially with regard to dates, and cannot
be accepted. There is probably more substance in the often repeated statement that
Louis Philippe’s father, Philippe Egalité,
Duke of Orleans, was the son of a coachman ;
his mother’s conduct was notorious. This
might account for Louis Philippe’s appearance and ways, and more especially for the
fact that none of his children resembled him
in these particulars. By their time the
plebeian descent would have been getting
rather remote, which would not have been
the case if Louis Philippe had himself been
a complete changeling.

3. The parentage of Albert, Prince Consort, the most interesting of these cases, will
be considered later.

4. There has never been any doubt that
Francis, the husband and first cousin of
24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Queen Isabella of Spain, was not the father
of her children. Quite apart from the other
circumstances, if the official descent were
correct, the heredity of this family would
have been so bad that scarcely one could
well have escaped being feeble-minded.
Not only were Francis and Isabella first
cousins, but his parents were also first
cousins, while hers were uncle and niece.
From all but the finest stocks the result
must have been disastrous, and the stocks in
question were far from being among the
best. Actually Queen Isabella’s children
were quite up to the average, the Infanta
Eulalia rather above. It may be added that
it is doubtful whether Isabella herself was the
daughter of King Ferdinand VII. If not,
only four of her children’s sixteen quarterings
would properly belong to the Royal Caste.
This case is of course quite exceptional.

Intermarriages

I have taken particulars of the monarchs
and heirs to monarchs, also the representatives of deposed monarchs, in respect of the
relationship of their parents, covering the
last 122 years—t.e. since the Napoleonic era.
The total number examined is 109, 56 in the
Catholic and 53 in the Protestant section.
Of the 56 in the Catholic, in 12 instances the
parents were first cousins, in 23 they were
second cousins or nearer (such as first once
removed), and in the remaining 21 the
parents were more distantly related. In the
Protestant section, the parents were first
cousins in g cases, second cousins or nearer
in 14, and more distantly related in 30.
Taken altogether, out of the 109, 53 had
parents with at least a second cousin relationship, while the parents of 51 were more
distantly related, occasionally not related at
all. There is only one instance in the whole
109 of the offspring of double first cousins—
namely, the Emperor Ferdinand II of Austria and his brothers and sisters. This
proved disastrous. Ferdinand and his next
brother were feeble-minded and the others,
of whom Marie Louise, second wife of
Napoleon was one, were below the average.
The joint stocks in this case were Hapsburg
and Bourbon, neither brilliant and the latter

    
   
   
   
 
 
 

distinctly poor. The immediate ancestors of
Ferdinand II of Naples, the infamous
‘‘Bomba,’’ were also closely related; the
parents were first cousins and one set of
grandparents were also first cousins. Other
cases of the offspring of first cousins, 1
whom palpable defects occurred, were thos
of the Crown Prince Rudolph of Austria,
and the Archdukes Francis Ferdinand an
Otto of Austria. George V, King of Hanover,
also the child of first cousins, was blind, but
otherwise of good capacity.
It will be observed that in the whole 109
cases mentioned there is only a slight preponderence of children of close relatives.

Consanguinity in Recent Years

In recent years there has been no such
preponderance at all. The present monarchs
and their heirs, and the representatives of
the most important monarchs no longer in
existence, France, Prussia, Austria, Russia:
and Spain, may be examined in greater:
detail. :

(a) Parents, first cousins: The King of
Italy, Crown Prince of Norway, Grand Duke
Vladimir of Russia, Duke of Guise (France),
Count of Paris (France).

(5) Parents, second cousins: The King of
Bulgaria, Crown Prince of Roumania, Grand
Duke Cymil of Russia.

(c) Parents, second cousins once removed :
King George VI.

(z@) Parents, half second cousins:
German Crown Prince.

(e) Parents, second cousins twice removed :
Archduke Otto of Austria.

(f) Parents, double third cousins:
King of Roumania.

(zg) Parents, not nearer than third cousins :
Queen of the Netherlands, Princess Juliana,
King of the Belgians,. Duke of Brabant,
King of Sweden, Crown Prince of Sweden,
Prince Gustavus of Sweden, King of Denmark, King of Norway, Crown Prince of
Denmark, King of Greece, ex-German
Emperor, Prince William of Prussia, exKing Alfonso, Prince of the Asturias,
ex-King of Bulgaria.

Ex
The
THE HEREDITY OF THE ROYAL CASTE 25

' (4) Parents not related: Princess Elizabeth, ® Prince of Piedmont, King of Jugo
Slavia

- It should be specially noted that in the
penultimate group the parents were not
mecessarily as near as third cousins.
ee "In the cases of the King of Italy and the
Sount of Paris, the paternal grandparents

 
   
   
   
 

ere also first cousins, the paternal grandwarents of the King of Denmark and Norway
i yho were also maternal grandparents of the
mate be Kang George V) were second cousins and
» half second cousins, and the Duke of
t’s maternal grandparents were first
gousins once removed.
Bit will be seen that there is only a small perae of very close relationships among the
ee mediate ancestors of the present monarchs
-the other persons forming the group
i er survey. Ihe figures for parents are as
; : first cousins 5, nearer than third
Saisins 7, and not nearer than third cousins

     
  
   
    

a
; ‘0
s e
ly es S

  
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
   
 
   
 
   
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 

: al
ae | ie
rs
; ?

marentage of the Prince Consort

FAmong the offspring of first cousins, the
mdren of Albert Prince Consort and Queen
storia held an exceptionally high place in
” of general capacity. It has been
Eebted however whether this relationship
a. a cousins really existed, though such
have only comparatively recently
c i their way into print, notably in Mr.
rence Housman’s play Victorta Regina.

, > esse doubts unquestionably arose mainly
# the fact that Prince Albert’s mother,
Duchess of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha,
mately left her husband for a certain
a ftenant von Harstein, and was divorced.
a aawever was in 1826, seven years after
ce Albert’s birth in 1819, at which date
= ‘Harstein, who was younger than the
gress, would only have been fifteen years
mye. Previously however she had unquesmanly carried on a liaison with one Max
¥'s : mborsky, A.D.C. to the Duke, but
- fully as early as 1818 which would
have been a year after her marriage in

“ ’ : nearest “relationship *" between Princess
Speth’s parents is that of thirteenth cousin once
mved, through a joint descent from Henry VII.

1817, which was quickly followed by the
births of two sons in 1818 and 181g respectively.

The further legend of a Jewish paternity
for Prince Albert may have centred round
Symborsky, but it is unlikely that a Jew
would at that period have been an A.D.C. or
for the matter of that, a “‘ von.” In any
case a Jewish appearance, at any rate as
evidenced by a prominent nose, occurred in
several members of the Coburg family. This
might possibly have been due to an “unofficial ’’ Jewish descent in an earlier generation.

From the point of view of heredity in
general the official paternity is far from
improbable. Prince Albert in many respects
resembled his uncle Leopold I of Belgium.
Marked ability also appeared among other
descendants of his Coburg grandparents,
which was probably mainly derived from
Francis Duke of Saxe-Coburg’s mother,
Elizabeth of Brunswick-Wolfenbuttel, a most
determined and energetic woman, whose
family had shewn high intellectual qualities
for several generations. This family, though
also belonging to the House of Guelph, was
rather distantly related to the BrunswickLuneberg family which came to England,
and was altogether their superior in talents.

Descent by Alternate Sexes

Although, as has been pointed out, the
Prince Consort’s descent on his father’s side
is quite in accordance with many of his
characteristics, there can be no doubt that
he owed much to the maternal side, and in
one particular respect his descent in that
direction was specially notable.

It has often been remarked that characteristics are apt to descend from father to
daughter and mother to son, constituting a
line of descent where the sex is changed in
each generation. In most families it 1s
impossible to trace characteristics in this line
for more than a very few generations. The
public position of the Royal Caste affords
greater facilities for such study, and in the
case of the Prince Consort characteristics
can be traced in this line for many generations. The annexed pedigree carries back
26

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The Ascent from Albert Prince Consort by Alternate Sexes

Numbey of pages allotted
Albert III the Wise, Duke of Bavaria 1447-1508 - - - - - - - I
Sabine 1492—-1564= Ulric VI of Wurtemberg
Christopher Duke of Wurtemberg 1515-1568 - ~ = - - - - 7
Eleanor 1552-1618 = Prince Joachim of Anhalt-Zerbst e 3
Prince Rudolph of Anhalt-Zerbst 1576-1621 - - oe - - 4
Dorothea 1607—1634= Prince Augustus of Branswick-Wolfenbuttel
Antony Ulric Duke of Brunswick-Wolfenbuttel 1633-1714 - ~ - - = 4
Elizabeth 1658—1729= Bernard Duke of Saxe-Meiningen
Antony Ulric Duke of Saxe-Meiningen 1687-1763 - - - - - - > 24

*Charlotte 1751-1827 = Ernest Duke of Saxe-Gotha

Augustus Duke of Saxe-Gotha 1772-1822 - - 
Louisa 1800-1831 = Ernest Duke of Saxe-Coburg
Albert Prince Consort of Great Britain 1819-1861

* Charlotte Duchess of Saxe-Gotha, a most accomplished woman, receives repeated mention in the biography

of her husband.

this ascent to the fifteenth century, and it is
to be noted that the men in the alternate
generations receive in every case a memoir
in the Allgemeine Deutsche Brographte, some
of considerable length. Now it might be
argued that a prince would always receive a
memoir whatever his merits or demerits, but
this is by no means the case ; there were so
many princes in the old Germanic Empire
that of necessity only a small minority
receive a memoir. In Prince Albert’s case
the men in the line in question were all
above the average in general qualities and
frequently also in intellectual qualities,
markedly so in the cases of Antony Ulric of
Brunswick-Wolfenbuttel and Antony Ulric
of Saxe-Meiningen.

The Prince Consort was undoubtedly the
most intellectual member of the Royal
Caste of his time, and no similar descent of
any of his royal contemporaries is equal to
his. That of Queen Victoria was very
inferior indeed. Of her similar ancestors only
one of the men receives any mention in the
Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie, and then
only to the extent of half a column.*

DESCENT OF PRESENT ROYAL FAMILIES
It is now proposed to proceed to the Royal

* It is hoped on some future occasion to make a
thorough investigation of the ascending lines by
alternate sexes of other members of the Royal Caste,
including all the more important representatives at
the present time.

Memoir in Aligemeine Deutsche
Biographte

- - - - - 2

  
   
   
   
   

Families of the present time in connection
with their general lines of descent, but wit
special reference to the groups already:
indicated. It will be necessary to limit this
survey to the families of monarchs and the
representatives of monarchs.

British Line
The general aspects of the heredity of
King Edward VII and his brothers and
sisters has been already noted. Assuming
the official parentage of the Prince Consort,
we find three strong lines, Coburg twice,
and Gotha, and one Guelph, rather weak.
The marriage of King Edward to the daugh-j
ter of King Christian IX of Denmark
introduced the special characteristics of the}
Danish type, much less intellectual but also4
much less hard than the Coburg. King§g
George V took far more after his mother’s
side than his father’s, and his character was}
almost a replica of that of King Christian.
The description of the grandfather in The
Iumes obituary notice in 1906 might stand®
almost word for word for the grandson. 3
Princess Mary of Teck brought in fresh;
factors. It is true that the Danish type again..
predominated on the side of her paternal
grandfather, Wurtemberg, and on the side ;
of her mother, Guelph and Hesse-Cassel. *
The mother herself, the popular Princess ;
Mary of Cambridge, was decidedly of that 4
type; Queen Mary appears to have taken 1
more particularly after the maternal }
THE HEREDITY OF THE ROYAL CASTE

grandmother, Princess Augusta of HesseCassel, a very stately and dignified lady.

In one direction however a totally different
type of descent was introduced. The beautiful Countess Claudine Rheday, who induced
Prince Alexander of Wurtemberg to contract a morganatic marriage, sprang from the
Hungarian nobility of Transylvania. Her
sixteen quarterings have been worked out
and belong without exception to this class,
with no previous connection with the Royal
Caste. The families in the quarterings were
all Protestant, and occupied a position
singularly analogous to that of the AngloIrish aristocracy. Their characteristics too
were probably much the same, very temperamental’ allied to a great deal of charm.

t is to be observed that though only one
eighth of the ancestry of Queen Mary’s sons

is thus Hungarian, the ascent by alternative

sexes leads straight to those purely Magyar

lines. Their general descent is however

et eae of the Danish type, with this
of Hungarian and a dash of Coburg.

With the marriage of King George VI we
come to a complete break with the Royal
Caste. Queen Elizabeth’s descent is moreover by no means confined to landed
- families ; of her first eight quarterings, four
belong to such families, while four do not.
While the direct male line is Scottish the
remainder of the descent is mainly English,

with the addition however of both Anglo_[rish and French. The heredity of her
‘ daughters is most excellently varied.

-Italhan Line

~ It has already been noted that inter-marsages have occurred too frequently among
: the immediate ancestors of the present
- King of Italy. Further back, the House
-of Savoy had married outside the Caste,
“but the later descent is mainly from the
Bourbon - Hapsburg connection, on the
: whole however on its best side. The Aosta
t peanch, the best-known member of which
was the Duke of the Abruzzi, the great
: explorer and mountaineer, has shown greater
“sirility than the main line. The Duke’s
’gnother was a member of the Italian aris“$peracy unconnected with the Caste. King

 
   
 
  

eRe BY RPT oe eT:

 

27

Victor Emmanuel’s marriage with Princess
Helena of Montenegro has now however
introduced a wholly different strain, for,
technically royal, she had actually no
relationship to the Caste. This Slav descent
must necessarily bring in virility, but no
access of culture, and does not equal the new
element now brought into our own Royal
Family.

Belgian Line

This has proved one of the strongest from
the eugenic point of view. The Coburg descent of that very able man, King Leopold I,
has already been considered. On the side
of his mother, Augusta of Reuss, remarkably
little is known of characteristics; her
ancestors, though belonging to families considered Ebenbirtig,* had little territorial
power and remained obscure, possibly however chiefly from want of opportunity.

Leopold’s Orleans marriage introduced a
mixture of qualities. His son Leopold II
was perhaps the ablest monarch of the
nineteenth century, at any rate among
those born in the Caste, but he was utterly
ruthless and altogether detestable. There
were elements of harshness on both the
Coburg and Orleans sides. More remarkable
was Leopold’s financial capacity, rare among
members of the Royal Caste. Some Jewish
blood might well be responsible for part of
Leopold’s character and may have been
derived, of course “ unofficially,’’ from the
side of his grandmother, Augusta of Reuss,
whose features were of a distinctly Jewish
type.t
With Leopold’s nephew and _ successor,
Albert, the worst sides of the descent
disappeared. From his mother King Albert
inherited from both the Beauharnais and
Murat families and also from the Darmstadt. The latter group appears also in
the quarterings of the present King Leopold III on the maternal side. He has
descents from all the groups but the

* Of equal rank with the more important royal
families for purposes of marriage ces.

+ An examination, however, of her immediate ancestry affords no clue. In every direction they were
among the elder members of large families whose births
came closely together.
28

Danish, and this last is inherited by his
son, the Duke of Brabant, through his
mother, the lamented Queen Astrid. The
sixty-four quarterings of the Duke of
Brabant are most varied, thirty-nine belong
to the principal families of the Caste, ten to
lesser, but Ebenbirtig families, and thirteen
to families quite outside the Caste. Thirtythree of the quarterings belong to the
Catholic and thirty-one to the Protestant
section.

The Dutch Line

Queen Wilhelmina comes almost entirely
from families of the general Danish type,
essentially Nordic and essentially Protestant.
One descent from the Emperor Paul of
Russia is the most striking divergence.
Princess Juliana has a very similar type of
descent on her father’s side.

Swedish Line

The Swedes have had no reason to regret
the call to their throne of Marshal Bernadotte, a man whose abilities were little
inferior to those of Napoleon, and whose
judgment was greatly superior. His son,
Oscar IT, had no royal descent. He married
a daughter of Eugene Beauharnais by a
Bavarian princess, and the next generation
had accordingly one quarter of such descent.
Since then the main line has married continuously into the Caste, but the successive
families, Nassau, Baden and Connaught
(British) have all been above the average.
The Baden family were specially accomplished, but they and others brought in
much of the Darmstadt blood, which however
has often proved by no means harmful
when mixed with strains essentially sound.
The present Crown Prince of Sweden is
probably the most intellectual member of
the Caste at the present time, and it is quite
likely that much of his ability is due to the
Darmstadt descent.

The Kings of Denmark and Norway

These monarchs, who are brothers, inherit
the complete Danish type on their father’s
side, and include the Bernadotte-Beauharnais

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

   
 

descent on their mother’s. The combination
is thoroughly sound. The parents of th
Crown Prince of Norway are first cousins
but the joint stock, the Danish, is just th
type in which a reduplication would be leas
harmful.

The Greek Line

King George of Greece is doubly relat
to the present British Royal Family, sharin
with them the Coburg and Danish stocks
Unlike them he has also, through Prussi
and Russian lines, a great deal of Darmstadt'
descent. There has been distinct ability in:
this essentially Nordic family which settled
in Greece, but which has been greatly
handicapped by divergence of characteristics
from those of their people.

Roumanian Line

King Carol I of Roumania, a man of first-.
class ability, sprang from the Royal Caste.
as to exactly one-half of his descent, as to
the other half from the French non-royal
families, Beauharnais and Murat. His much
weaker nephew and successor Ferdinand,
descended through his mother from the
rather feeble Portuguese House of Braganza. Ferdinand’s wife, Princess Marie of
Edinburgh, partly Coburg, but with six
lines of Darmstadt descent on the side of her
mother, sister of Czar Alexander III, is a
woman of great force of character and many
attractions, sharing however some of the
defects of her first cousin the ex-Emperor
William, whom in many respects she greatly
resembles. Her family, the present King
Carol of Roumania and his brothers and
sisters, have a descent from all the groups
but the Danish, a somewhat significant
exception.

The King of Jugo-Slavia

His mother is a sister of King Carol II of
Roumania, and on her side he inherits the
very varied descent just set out, while on
that of his father his descent is purely Slav.
His position therefore resembles that of the
Prince of Piedmont, with however distinctly greater ability on the non-Slav side.
THE HEREDITY OF THE ROYAL CASTE 29

Bulgarian Line

- Ex-King Ferdinand of Bulgaria is one of
the strangest personalities of modern times.
Some of his characteristics can no doubt be
traced to the mixed Coburg and Orleans
ancestry, almost precisely the same as that
‘of Leopold II of Belgium, but a pronounced
orientalism in his character and still more in
‘his appearance can hardly be so easily
accounted for. His son Boris, the present
‘ruler of Bulgaria, has undoubtedly taken
more from the side of his mother, Louise of
‘Parma, of almost wholly Hapsburg-Bourbon
‘descent. From her he derives kindliness of
:disposition, and seems to have been fortunate enough to escape the weaknesses of
‘that connection, inheriting in fact the best
“of both sides.

SREPRESENTATIVES OF ExTINCT MONARCHIES
L «‘The five more important will be conidered, viz. the Prussian, Russian, Austrian,
panish and French (Orléans) lines.

 
   
  
  
 
   
  
  
   
 
   
   
   
  
    
  
  
   
  

' ussian Line
@..The ex-Emperor William I was certainly
t the greatest of recent European mon7 , but was in many respects the most
fate: esting. The earlier type of ability of the
Mein Hohenzollern family did not survive
Mee generation of Frederick the Great.
Ratriages of Kings of Prussia into the
mearmstadt connection followed in three
Mécessive generations, the third of which
mo rove in a descent from the Emperor
Mol of Russia. Finally the Emperor
wliam’s mother belonged to the Coburg
: p. From such a descent versatility
ment well appear and certainly did appear
me the case of the Emperor, who however
mecoubtedly inherited more of the DarmM@dt and Russian capriciousness than of the
Mburg sense; but his tactlessness quite
arly emanated from the side of his
. ner, whose great abilities, like those of
¢ father the Prince Consort, were much
alt by this unfortunate characteristic. It
: » be observed that the Emperor William
| . 2s with his maternal grandfather the
BHable descent by alternate sexes which
& been set out.

He married into a stock closely allied to
the Danish, the characteristics of which
were conspicuous in the late Empress; and
the ex-Crown Prince’s wife, Duchess Cecile
of Mecklenburg, a charming and popular
woman, has introduced into the Prussian
line an heredity which should keep up its
ability while lessening its eccentricities.

The Russtan Line

The marriage of the half insane Emperor
Paul into a much sounder Wurtemberg
stock partially saved the situation, but of
his sons Alexander I was very unstable,
while Nicholas I was a brutal tyrant,
though by no means devoid of ability.
Instability was further increased by the
successive marriages of Nicholas and his son
Alexander II into the Darmstadt connection.
Alexander III and his brothers and sisters
were typically Darmstadt, their good looks
were proverbial, but their characters ranged
from the merely unstable to the completely
amoral. The mother of Nicholas II brought
in the sensible Danish stock, and the last of
the Czars might have developed differently
had he not been so completely overshadowed
by his wife, with a Darmstadt descent in six
different lines. Her unfortunate family had
this descent twelve times over.

The present head of the Romanofis,
Grand Duke Cyril, has the much sounder
Mecklenburg descent on the side of his
mother, the Grand Duchess Vladimir, a
lady very prominent in the last Russian
Court, alike for her determined character
and for her taste in dress. This taste was
shared by her niece the Crown Princess
Cecile of Prussia, and inherited by her
granddaughter the Duchess of Kent.

The Austrian Line |

The Empress Maria Theresa was herself
above the average, owing to the fact that
her mother belonged to the intellectual
Brunswick-Wolfenbuttel family. Her own
marriage into the House of Lorraine was not
disadvantageous, but unions with very poor
Bourbon stocks in the next two generations
brought the main line to the verge of complete degeneration. Princess Sophia of
30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Bavaria, mother of the Emperor Francis
Joseph, partially saved the situation, but the
stock, with now a considerable admixture
of Darmstadt blood, remained on the whole
weak. Another Bourbon marriage and one
into the dull though worthy family of the
Kings of Saxony, did little to retrieve the
situation. The consort of the unfortunate
Emperor Charles, the ex-Empress Zita, is by
no means without ability, coupled however
with many of the well-known failings of the
Bourbons. Her son, Archduke Otto, claimant
to the Austrian throne, has certainly the
least satisfactory descent of any of the
prominent members of the present Royal
Caste. Of his sixty-four quarterings, thirtyfour, or just over one half, belong to either
the Hapsburg or Bourbon families, and he is
descended in no less than seven lines from
the House of Hapsburg-Lorraine, founded
by Emperor Francis and Empress Maria
Theresa.

The Spanish Line

It has already been shown that King
Alfonso XIII has in all probability much less
Bourbon blood on his father’s side than
appears officially. His mother belonged to
the branch of the Hapsburgs which was
founded by the famous general the Archduke
Charles, and included nearly all the abler
members of the Hapsburg family. From the
wife of Archduke Charles, King Alfonso has
a descent from the House of Nassau of the
Protestant section. There is a good deal of
variety therefore in his ancestry and still
more in that of his family, for Queen Ena,
Coburg on her mother’s side, derives on her
father’s partly from the main line of HesseDarmstadt and partly from the non-royal
family of von Hauke, with mixed German
and French descent and a connection with
Poland. The curse of hemophilia has come
upon some of Queen Ena’s children, who
have otherwise a descent which should make
for ability and which, like that of the
Roumanian family, includes all the groups
except the Danish.

French (Orleans) Line
The sons of King Louis Phillipe were all

  
  
  
   
   
   
  
  

men of parts, rather remarkably so, con
sidering that their mother belonged to th
Neopolitan branch of the Bourbon, 3a
decidedly poor stock. It was unfortuna
for the family that its head, the Comte d
Paris, was not the equal of any of his uncles,
thereby militating greatly against th
chances of recovery of the French throne
after the foundation of the Republic in 1870.
The present Comte de Paris, son of the
Duke of Guise, the head of the house,
spoken of as intelligent above the average
notwithstanding the close relationship of
parents and paternal grandparents.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

The effect of intermarriages on the Royal
Caste of the present day has quite clearly
been less injurious than is often supposed,
except in a few extreme instanees. In any:
case such intermarriages are decreasing, and.
will in all probability further decrease in the
future, till finally no Caste as such is left.
At the moment, however, royalties, with few
exceptions, are still mainly descended from
royalties. In the Protestant section the
stocks themselves have been sound enough
to stand the intermarriages that have taken
place ; in the Catholic, once so injuriously
affected, a certain improvement is now
evident. There is no strain now as feeble as
the Bourbon at its worst, but there is on the
other hand none so able as the Coburg at its
best. The Darmstadt influence is doubtless
still strong in the Caste, but its worst
features are certainly less in evidence.

On the whole the Danish type now
predominates. As has been pointed out,
this type bears a marked resemblance to the
English character, and a certain anglicization of the Caste has been much assisted by
the now almost universal knowledge of the
English language among its members. A
fitness for the part of constitutional monarch, as opposed to that of dictator, might
well be a corollary to such anglicization.
Under such conditions a suitable candidate
for any throne could certainly be found
among the Caste, indeed some male line
families could produce several, with a
reservation however as to the difficulties
E THE HEREDITY OF THE ROYAL CASTE 31
Joherent in the position of a Nordic monarch once adumbrated by Professor Schiller with
eigning over a non-Nordic nation. regard to the peerage. Unfortunately it is
« From the eugenic point of view the ideal only in very special circumstances that such
Solution would be selection on the system selection could be found possible.

    
  

2

 
 
 
   
    

SAFE
CHILDBIRTH

The Three Essentials
By KATHLEEN VAUGHAN, M.B.

“This work is the result of many years of painstaking observation and research.
_,.. The writer brings forward a number of facts of which no one can deny the
truth, of the very greatest importance in the study of the problem of maternal
mortality ... We regard this volume as a most important contribution to the
study of this subject.” Medical World.

24 plates Price 7s. 6d. Postage 6d.

BAILLIERE, TINDALL & COX
7 and 8 Henrietta Street, London, W.C.z2

a a a a ae ee DO eee ow lS

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIX, No. 1.
