Sterilization in America”

Magsor LEonarp Darwin.

The publication of the most important work on sterilization which
has yet appeared makes this a suitable occasion to reconsider this
difficult subject, especially in the light of the new evidence thus made
available. The book in question is ‘‘Eugenical Sterilization in the
United States’’ being ‘‘A Report of the Psychopathic Laboratory of
the Municipal Court of Chicago,’’ by Dr H. H. Laughlin’ The
author, who is well known to us as the Eugenics Director of the Eugenics
Record Office at Cold Spring Harbour, has been engaged in this investigation for ten years. His researches were begun in connection with
the American Breeders Association, with Mr. B. Van Wagenen as its
Chairman. The outcome is the volume now before us, consisting of
.500 large pages of rather small print.

What I propose here to do is in the first instance to state in my own
words the advantages and disadvantages of the sterilization of the
unfit which have been claimed or urged, together with a few comments ;
and then to allow the American evidence to speak for itself, mainly by
‘quotations, the pages in Dr. Laughlin’s book being noted for reference.
I shall make every effort to prevent my own views from influencing my
choice of extracts. It should be remembered that the Eugenics Education Society has never made any authoritative pronunciation with
regard to sterilization. If I should allow my own opinions to appear
they must be regarded as personal to myself.

The eugenical advantages of sterilization may be indicated by the
one fact that an immense amount of human misery, degradation, and
inefficiency might be avoided in all future generations by now preventing parenthood amongst those endowed with bad hereditary qualities.
In this connection it is especially necessary to note that it is not merely
the defects primarily attacked which must be held in view. Whenever
defects are promoted by the chance combination of a number of harmful hereditary elements or factors, and whenever the majority of these
factors when appearing alone would tend to give rise to harmful qualities, then the sterilization of those exhibiting such defects might pro-duce widespread results and might tend in time to raise the level of the
whole nation. At each generation the harmful factors carried by
defectives will tend to scatter, and when scattered, though decidedly
injurious, the results might be insufficiently marked to make it right
to prohibit parenthood. By the sterilization of defectives a contaminated tributary- to the great stream of life may be dammed at its
source.

Sterilization has been advocated by certain medical authorities
on the ground that it is beneficial to the health of those on whom the

*Laughlin, Harry H. Dr.;  Evugenical Sterilization in the United States.
‘Chicago : Psychopathic Laboratory of the Municipal Court, 1922. pp. 502.
Figs. 15. Charts 8.
386 EUGENICS REVIEW.

operation has been performed; a claim which is denied by others.
The application of sterilization to sexual criminals has also been advocated as a safeguard to the public; but the only forms of sterilization
likely to be adopted in the future would not afford this advantage. In
any case these are medical questions which will not here be discussed.
All that need here be said is that the operation on the male, vasectomy,
can be performed painlessly in a few minutes with local anaesthetics.
With females the usual operation, salpingectomy, is more serious;
perhaps as serious as that for appendicitis in the absence of all complications. The sexual life of the subject is in no way changed by
either of these operations, except in regard to sterility. If it should
be held that sterilization should be debarred in the case of females.
because of the nature of the operation, this would in my opinion form
no argument against the sterilization of males. Treatment with X-rays
may become available in the future as a sterilizing agency; but this is.
not the case at present (pp. 111, 112).

Passing on to the disadvantageous effects of sterilization, these
may be divided under six headings. It willbe for the reader to decide
whether this numerical superiority in the arguments against steriliza-.
tion gives any indication whatever as to the way in which the scales
should turn.

(1) Public opinion is said not to be ripe for the authorization of
sterilization. As far as this is true, it constitutes a most serious objec-.
tion to the enforcement of sterilization by legislation at the present
time; for any such action would be liable to arouse that type of controversy out of which the truth would be unlikely to emerge. But here
is no argument in favour of silence being maintained on this topic ; for
it is only as the result of free discussion that wise decisions can be
reached. Moreover, the public might be ready to sanction sterilization being voluntarily adopted under proper safeguards when any compulsory measure would be summarily rejected.

(2) It has been urged that sterilization would injuriously affect
the inborn qualities of the nation; though the plea is seldom stated thus.
clearly. No doubt in order to prevent sterilization ever being wrongly
applied it would have to be entirely prohibited. No doubt, also, if
sterilization had been permitted in the past, Shakespeare’s parents
migh: have been rendered infertile, a proceeding which would have
resulted in an immeasurable loss for all time. But any child’ born
of parents not both markedly abnormal! might prove to be a Shakes-.
peare, and if this argument is valid as regards sterilization, it must
hold good elsewhere. Granting its validity, all should marry as young
as possible and no one should ever limit the size of the family: for
otherwise the chance of creating a genius would be missed. This is
absurd; for it is obvious that many social conditions as well as the.
probable qualities of the offspring should always be taken into consid-.
eration in regard to the duties of parenthood. We should generally
look to probable rather than to possible results.

This argument may take the form that sterilization is likely to be
applied more often harmfully than beneficially from the racial ‘point
of view. This appears to me to be extremely improbable under any
conditions. Future generations would doubtless be damaged by atty
STERILIZATION IN AMERICA. 887

measure which would result in a diminution in the birth rate of the
upper half of humanity; that is amongst those above the average in
inborn qualities taken collectively and duly weighted. It is difficult
to conceive how sterilization could possibly on the whole produce this
result. |

(8) The seeds of hereditary defects are frequently carried by
apparently norma] persons, and from this fact it follows that the eradication of such defects by the prevention of parenthood only in the case
of those visibly affected must be a slow process. Though not clearly
stated, this is the underlying basis of certain criticisms of sterilization.
But no authority denies that the frequency w th which these hidden
defects would in the future, as it were, come to the surface could be
steadily diminished by the prevention of parenthood when they actually have become visible, To prove that our powers of doing good are
limited in certain directions has always appeared to me to be the
feeblest of all excuses for neglecting to do such good as is open to us.
We should lessen the flow of water from a contaminated source even
if we cannot dam it altogether.

(4) It is no doubt true that sterilization is not costly, and that
consequently it might be applied where other more costly means of
preventing parenthood would be preferable. Segregation is the kindest
course to adopt in the case of the great bulk of the feeble-in-mind; for
what is apt to be ealled liberty in their case would often be more correctly described as oppression. Moreover, many persons who are
mentally abnormal are a danger to society, especially in regard to
sexual matters ; and, when at liberty, modern methods of sterilization
would be no safeguard to the public in their case. By affording a
cheap substitute, the power to sterilize might tend to increase the unwillingness of local authorities to supply the funds for the much needed
accommodation of mental defectives; and it might also increase the
temptation naturally felt by allthe authorities concerned to let these
unfortunate individuals go free when segregation would for various
reasons be the preferable course to adopt. This is all very true; but
may it not be best in the long run to trust that the authorities will do
what is right rather than to tie their hands? Will it not often be both
wise and kind to allow a large measure of liberty to mental defectives,
at all events where the chance of an illegitimate child being born is
small? Might not sterilization frequently be a justifiable precaution
in such cases? To prohibit sterilization altogether might in the end
result in a serious diminution in the number of defectives wisely
allowed to remain at liberty.

(5) Another objection to sterilization well worthy of consideration is that its enforcement would constitute an indefensible interference with the liberty of the individual. This argument can, however,
hardly be said to apply to the sterilization of mental defectives. with
the consent of their relatives. As to compulsory sterilization in other
cases, it is open to the grave objection that it helps to open the door
to other steps in the same direction. May not the same be said, however, with regard to the detention of prisoners or lunatics, that being
the most complete interference with liberty that can be imagined? In
all these cases we have to balance undoubted evils as against undoubted
338 HUGENICS REVIEW.

benefits ; and, as to the compulsory sterilization of the grossly unfit, we
are probably not now in a fit state of mind to load the balance fairly
with the opposing arguments. |

(6) Lastly, it is contended that to permit or encourage sterilization would increase promiscuous sexual intercourse. This appears to
me to be the strongest argument against sterilization, and one that
needs careful consideration. Now certain virtuous persons in the last
century gave money to hospitals on the condition that no case of venereal disease should ever be treated within their walls. /The argument
of the donors was that the fear of venereal diseases is’a deterrent to
promiscuous intercourse, and consequently that this fear must be in no
way lessened. This argument is in my opinion perfectly logical; but
it is one which is nevertheless now rightly overruled. This is because
we realize more clearly than heretofore the terrible evils which can be
obviated by medical treatment, and also perhaps because we ascribe
less merit to virtue practised merely out of fear. May it not be that in
like manner we shall have to admit that the benefits of future generations which would result from sterilization to-day would be very great,
and that some risk of an increase in promiscuous sexual intercourse
would, therefore, be justifiable in order to secure these advantages for
posterity ?

The possible safeguards which might be introduced to lessen these
evil results must also be considered in connection with this argument.
As to persons certified on account of some permanent mental defect,
any liberty granted to sterilized patients might be cancelled if they
were found to be either diseased, or living an immoral life, or insufficiently protected or supervised by their guardians. Sterilization
might be made a criminal offence, as in certain American States, if
practised without legal authority. Other precautions would
doubtless suggest themselves as the result of experience.

In regard to this question of morality, it may at once be said that
‘we get no conclusive evidence from America. Most of the reports
quoted are from either legal or medical sources ; and neither law courts
nor hospitals form the best ground for the study of this problem. With
all the mass of venereal diseases around us, it is still a disputed question whether they do act as a deterrent ; and we may judge, therefore,
that sterilization would have to be practised far more than it has been
in America before its moral effects could be clearly traced, granted that
that would ever be possible.

Dealing now with the evidence before us in Dr. Laughlin’s book,
he tells us that ‘‘practically half of the States of the Union have taken
serious legislative consideration of the possibilities of improving
the natural qualities of its citizenry by means of eugenical sterilization’’(p.35). Out of the fifteen States in which sterilization laws have
been enacted, there are only nine in which they still remain on the
statute books (p. 97). In five States the laws are functioning in a
satisfactory manner, though in three of them only to a limited extent.
In three States the law is inoperative. In seven States the laws have
been declared unconstitutional, whilst in two cases their constitutionality has been upheld. In five States sterilization bills were vetoed
by the Governors on various grounds, these, of course, having no
STERILIZATION: IN AMERICA, 339

reference to any actual experience of their working. The grounds on
which the Governors based their action included the belief that the
proposed law was unconstitutional, that sterilization laws would not
lessen criminal tendencies (p. 43), that the scientific premises were too
controversial (p. 50), and that the bills were badly drawn (pp. 40, 41).
As an indication of public opinion in America it may be noted that a
sterilization law was thrown out on a referendum in Oregon in 1918,
58,319 voting against it and 41,767 for it (p. 42). Upto January 1921,
8,233 operations had been performed, 2,558 of these being in California,
‘and 1,009 in one institution. Sterilization seems to have been prac‘tised to a certain extent without reference to legislation, and in addition to these records (p. 119 and 351). The number of females operated
on was nearly as great as the number o* males.

The usual grounds on which sterilization acts have been declared
to be unconstitutional were that they were class legis'‘ation because
they only applied to persons in institutions, and because they included
‘cruel and unusual punishments.’’ It seems probable that a law
omitting all idea of punishment and applying gencrally to the whole
population could not be ruled out in the United States as being unconstitutional. ~

Opinions were obtained by Dr. Laughlin from the responsible
authorities either dealing with sterilization laws or in charge of institutions where sterilization laws had been authorized, and extracts from
the replies obtained will here be given as the best indication of the
trend of opinion of those who have had most experience. It has
already been noted that from this point of view California is the most
important State. Here, as in almost every other State, the act only
vapplies to individuals coming within the custody of certain state
institutions and to the ‘recidivists’ of all prisons, the motive being
mainly eugenical. (p.7). Its constitutionality has not been tested.
Next in importance comes Nebraska, where there have been 155 operations, and where the law is working satisfactorily. Another active
State is Wisconsin, where there have been 76 operations. In Oregon
and Indiana the laws have recently been declared to be unconstitutional,
the number of operations having been 127 and 120 respectively. The
first extracts given will relate to these five States only, the operations n
them amounting to about 93 per cent. of the total in the United States.

In the first place as to the opinions of the authorities with regard
to the value of sterilization laws. The medical superintendents of the
Southern. California State Hospital, where over a thousand operations
have been performed, wrote in 1921 that ‘‘ if you could devise a method
of procedure in the matter of sterilization which would result in a
universal application of this praciice you would have accomplished
more towards sustaining the menta! stability of the human race than
may be accomplished by any other means.’’ (p. 59). Another medical
superintendenc considers ‘‘the Sterilization Act the most important
law which has been placed on the statute books as a eugenical measure’’
(1916, p.57). In 1918, after four years’ experience, the California
State Commission Medical Supe intendent reported officially that ‘‘the
“onger we continue this work and the more study we give to it, the more
convinced we become of its beneficial curative and preventive tenden840 EUGENICS REVIEW.

cies.’’ (p. 58). In the five States above mentioned, nothing but
approval is expressed by the authorities, the quotations being too
numerous here all to be reproduced. As samples of medical opinion
in the other four states the following may be quoted :—‘‘Eugenical
sterilization is very important if carefully applied in cases which are
carefully selected by a competent board’’ (Nebraska, 1921. p.79).
In Oregon we are told, presumably on the authority of the State Board
of Eugenics, that °‘ the law is working satisfactorily in this State, but
we fev] it is too soon to say of just how much value it is going to be,’’
(1921. p.88). The medical superintendent of a feeble-minded institution in this same state, however, gave it as his opinion that ‘‘its
eugenical value was considerable’’ (1921, p. 90). The superintendent
of a boys’ school in Indiana declares that *‘ after several years’ experience with these derelicts, I am of the firm opinion that sterilization
should be practised with care and good judgment for the betterment
of social conditions’’ (1918, p. 64). And in Wisconsin one medical
superintendent declared the policy of sterilization to be ‘‘excellent’’
(1921, p. 95). These quotations give, I believe, a fair indieation of
the opinions held by the authorities concerned, chiefly medical, in the
five States where most experience has been gained. One medical officer, however, expresses the opinion that ‘‘sex sterility would be liable
to produce increased prostitution’’ (California, p. 59. 1918). .
As to public opinion in these five States, we have here no very conclusive evidence. From Indiana we hear that ‘‘medically the statuteis of small value, because public sentiment is not yet educated up to it’’
(1921, p. 64); whilst a medical officer in Oregon considered the law
‘“‘valuable as an educational measure’’ (1918, p. 89). In the face of
this general medical approval of sterilization, and of no very serious
signs of opposition, why has sterilization been so little practised ?
The main reason appears to be the question of constitutionality, a
question the full force of which we do not here readily appreciate. If
a law is declared to be unconstitutional it will be thereafter as if it had
never been enacted. Ifa doctor carries out an operation under a duly
enacted state law, and if that law is subsequently declared to be unconstitutional, he may be prosecuted as if he had not been covered by
the law. In the Californian hospital, where so much has been done, a
medical officer states that ‘‘if our law should be declared unconstitutional it would leave us subject to the whims of those who have been:
sterilized and probably result in court action for damages in a number
of instances’’ (1921, p. 59). It is little wonder, therefore, that where
sterilization laws are in force the authorities endeavour to prevent the.
constitutional question being raised in the courts ; and that for this reason
as a general rule they do not now ‘sterilize any cases without first
receiving the consent of the relatives,’’ (1921, p. 58). In Nebraska
(and in Iowa) the ‘‘consent of the nearest relative’’ is required under.
the state law, a provision against which a protest is raised by a medical
officer (1921, p. 78).
As an indication of public opinion it may be noted that medical
officers are as a rule, but with exceptions, having ‘‘very little difficulty
in obtaining’’ the consent of relatives (California, 1921, p. 59. Wisconsin, 1918, p. 98). An earlier Californian report, made when the.
STERILIZATION IN AMERICA, 841

fear of unconstitutionality was probably less felt, states that they
‘‘seldom operate upon a woman without getting the consent of her
nearest relative, and that people are beginning to realize the advisability of cutting off the power of bringing children into the world by
those who have become insane by inherited weaknesses is shown by the
readiness with which they ordinarily give consent ... .’’, 1916, p. 58).
In Nebraska we are told that “‘no controversies have been invited nor
entered into, prejudices in most cases have been overcome and religious
scruples have always been respected,’’ a statement which indicates
that public disapproval would easily be aroused. Indeed, in one
Oregon hospital the “‘protests and annoymg complications’’ connected
with obtaining the consent of relatives led to the abandonment of
further efforts (1918, p. 89). .

With reference to the relative merits of custodial care and sterilization, a California medical officer gives it as his opinion that ‘‘possibly
segregation in the long run would work to better practical advantage
than wholesale sterilization’’ (p. 60). However, in the official report
of 1916 from the same State we are told that if no patients were discharged when sterilization seemed urgent the result would be that ‘‘we
would be overcrowded with the class of cases who are unfit to bring
children into the world.’’ Dr. Laughlin tells us that objections to
sterilization have been raised on the ground that it might diminish the
support given to segregation (p. 128).

As to the nature of the cases dealt with, in the California hospital
where so much has been done, they “‘select for sterilization (a) all
cases in definitely feeble-minded class of child-bearing age who may
leave the institution, especially of higher mentality and immorality
history ; (b) border-line defectives or sub-normals with a bad immoral
or hereditary history who are committed here as feeble-minded’’
(p. 60). Again, we hear from a medical officer that many of those who
have been sterilized ‘‘are able to go on parole or be discharged and make
their way in the world. This relieves the State and the Counties of
the expense for their support as well as making them happy in the
thought of being self-supporting’’ (p. 59). In Wisconsin, where the
Act has only been applied to a single school for the feeble-in-mind,
they hope to be able to parole some of the pupils when sterilized ‘‘to
their friends where they can lead a broader life than ‘in the institution,
and when a single. indiscretion, should they escape from their guardians,’ would not be followed by the birth of an offspring whose whole
life would be a tragedy’’ (p. 95). We hear that in Oregon the result
of sterilization being applied to insane and feeble-minded persons sent
home on parole is that public sentiment is not ‘‘aroused and the work
is moving smoothly.’’ In Nebraska custodial care is advocated rather
than sterilization in the case of feeble-minded women because of the
nature of the operation (p. 75). One report from California states
that ‘‘most of our cases are in young people who are about to leave the
institution’’ (p. 60); a statement endorsed elsewhere, (p. 53). From
Indiana we hear that ‘‘before resorting to sterilization we secure a
family history which sorts out abnormal relatives as far back as the

andparents, and beyond’’ when possible (p. 64); similar precautions
being also alluded to in a report from California (p. 59).
’

.

342 _ EUGENICS REVIEW. | bens
With regard to the reports from the other States, where steriliza+

tion has been little practised, but few quotations will be given ; for they
are chiefly valuable as showing why it has not been introduced. Dr.
Laughlin tells us that an adverse decision in regard to the constitutionality of the statute in New Jersey led to the law becoming a ‘‘dead
letter’? (p.80). In North Dakota the Board ‘‘do not favour eugenical
sterilization and’’ nothing has been done for some time, the question
of morality being apparently involved (p. 87). We hear that in
Connecticut ‘‘considerable doubts exist as to the constitutionality of
the law.’’ Local public opinion in this State ‘‘is adverse to eugenical
sterilization. In a large part this adversion seems to be of religious
origin’’; the possibility of an increase in venereal disease also being
mentioned, (pp. 61, 62). In Iowa, where the law has fallen into disuse, and where there is considerable opposition ‘‘on the part of friends
of the patients’’ (p. 68), an opinion is expressed that public sentiment
*‘will have a tendency to become more favourable’’ (p. 66). Similar
opposition is noted in Michigan (p. 73). In New York the belief is
expressed ‘‘that it would be impossible to operate to any extent until
there has been an educational campaign among the public’’ (p. 84).
In regard to the opinions here recorded of medical officers, the statement coming from Nevada—‘‘I do not believe in sterilization’’ (p. 79)
—stands out as a marked exception; this being a State in which no
operations have been performed.. On the whole the opposition to
sterilization is greater where it has been less practised; a fact to be
accounted for either because it was this opposition which lessened the
use made of the law, or because experience does overcome opposition to
some extent. | |
The first hundred pages of this volume contain the matter which is
of the greatest immediate interest to British eugenists. The Author
now passes on to analyse the State laws by subject. He tells us that
the three motives which have led to the enactment of sterilization
statutes have been ‘‘eugenical betterment, therapeutic value to the
patient, and punishment’’; these two latter motives being condemned
by him, rightly as I hold. It is interesting to note that the words
‘inheritance’ or ‘heredity’ are included in the statutes passed in nine
states, and that the subject is definitely alluded to in many others.
Can we quote any. British parallel cases? It is enacted in several
states that ‘‘the personal records and the family traits and histories
of all persons’’ recommended for sterilization shall be ascertained as
far.as may be (p. 104). The precautions to be taken and the court.
procedure in the several states are contrasted (p. 107). With reference to the application of sterilization to criminals, a number of valuable references to and extracts from published works are given (p. 119).
In several cases such expressions are used as whether ‘‘the inherited
tendency to crime’’ exists or not. This way of regarding the question
has always seemed to me. to be misleading; because that which is inherited is certain ordinary qualities in excess, these in combination
making the resistance to temptation very difficult. Dr. Laughlin
considers that ‘* the proof by pedigree studies’’ of harmful heredity
qualities is as necessary before sterilization with criminals as in other
cases. But on the average must not habitual criminals be endowed to

Foomoy
STERILIZATION IN AMERICA. 348

a superior degree with the harmful innate qualities favouring crime?
Here our author seems mainly to have the American constitutional
issue in view. Several statutes have sought to limit the practice of
sterilization to cases authorized by law, severe punishments being
authorized if operations are performed when not so sanctioned (p. 126).
Many of the statutes are considered very defective because they do not:
make it clear that sterilization is only of eugenic value when applied
to ‘* those potential parents of defective offspring who . . . are to be:
discharged into the population at large while still physically able’’ to
procreate (p. 180). In this section the author here makes many observations which would be of great value if sterilization were to come
within the field of practical politics.

So much space has been allotted to the evidence of those who have
had actual experience in regard to sterilization that little more than
the subject matter of the remaining chapters can here be recorded,
though they in truth constitute more than half ofthe volume. Next in
order follow nearly two hundred pages concerning the litigation which
has arisen in connection with sterilization, together with certain legal
opinions specially obtained for this work. Here we learn that ‘‘legal
opinion is divided more on the subject of the policy of eugenical sterilization than upon its constitutionality’’ (p. 336). In fact lawyers
seem to be more averse to sterilization than are the medical officers
who have had experience in the working of laws. In another chapter
Dr. Laughlin discusses the general question of interference with the
liberty of the subject, vaccination, quarantine, immigration, segregation and marriage restriction being discussed for the purpose of illustration (p. 348). The legal aspects of birth contro] are also considered
(p. 846). Then follows a chapter on eugenical diagnosis, or the
method of attempting to forecast the quality of the offspring on the
basis of pedigree facts. Here we learn that in the United States there
are 150 professional eugenical field workers employed in such investigations. Long lists of humah traits are given, with references to
authorities in regard to their inheritance, together with other references useful to the eugenist. Here, again, much faith is placed on
pedigree work. There is, however, one point to which in my opinion
inadequate attention is given, it being as I believe only once mentioned
in this volume. The following words are quoted from the journal of
the American Institute of Criminal Law and Criminology :—‘‘And it
is surely within the rights of the State to prevent habitual criminals
and defective delinquents from procreating children at all, since they
are manifestily unfit for rearing them. It is not germs of criminality
we ought to fear, but lack of constructive parental capacity.’’ The
eugenist will not agree with the last sentence; but here we do find a
reason why it would be socially advantageous if parenthood were.prevented in the case of degenerates however free their pedigrees might be
from defects. How far this argument can be pushed is another matter .
Then follow chapters on the surgical aspects of sterilization and on the
physiological and mental effects of the various operations. The last
four: chapters-deal.with a.model eugenical sterilization law, which is
set forth in full, and the preparation of which must have involved an
immense amount of thought and labour.
344 EUGENICS REVIEW.

In all these chapters the constitutional issue in the United States
keeps cropping up, and may have affected the author’s judgment to a
greater extent than he perceives himself. Nevertheless, what is
written in the chapters here so briefly mentioned constitutes a valuable
treatise on general eugenics. And if the question whether sterilization
should be authorized in this country, either as a voluntary or compulsory measure, should ever be decided in the affirmative, then the whole
of this work will come to be of the greatest value. In any case the
students of sterilization, whatever may be their views, will have to
turn to Dr. Laughlin’s great work for many a year to come.
