170 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Drysdale, C. V., D.Sc. The Small Family System: Is it Injurious or
Immoral? London. A. C. Fifield; 1913; price 1s. net; pp. 1109.

WITH such an untiring advocate of neo-Malthusianism as Dr. Drysdale
for author no one can entertain a moment’s doubt as to the answer which
it is the purpose of this book to give to the question contained in its title.
In fact, Dr. Drysdale’s enthusiasm for the artificial limitation of the
family leads him to attempt much more than the supplying of a negative
answer to what is a very pertinent, a very important, and a highly practical question—one, moreover, which eugenics cannot and should not
avoid. And this enthusiasm is the cause of the weakness of the book. It
is just another case of preoccupation with a single idea leading its
possessor to argue in effect that its practice will provide the surest
short-cut to the millenium; whereas one of the most hopeful signs of today is our realization of the truth, that there are no short-cuts to the
perfection of individual and social life, but that progress lies along a
hundred different, though converging, paths. Accordingly, while we are
quite ready to agree with Dr. Drysdale that the artificial limitation of
the family may not be injurious and is not immoral, we do not look for
the same wide and wonderful benefits from its practice. Indeed, it is
impossible to escape the conviction that Dr. Drysdale’s case is not only
weakened, but sometimes rendered positively ridiculous by the lengths to
which his over-zealous advocacy carries him. For instance, he would
have us believe that that complex of problems generally lumped together
for convenience under the title of the housing problem is to be solved
by neo-Malthusianism, because “ we feel that even as things are, a man
and his wife and one or two children can have two rooms and live in
some approach to decency. With a greater number of children this
position is hopeless .... However much we may urge the necessity
for better and cheaper accommodation, we cannot get over the fact that
while this is being settled—and it will only be settled slowly—the most
acute phases of the housing problem would be solved in a year or two
by the adoption of family limitation by the poor.” Can we seriously
regard the adjusting of the size of the working-man’s family to the number
of rooms available as a solution of the housing problem? Such a suggestion if carried into effect would rather appear to us to be a highly
unsatisfactory way of escaping the problem altogether.

The sociologists, whose duty it is to lead us in a scientific study of
social phenomena, have taught us, having regard to the complexity of
all social problems, to look with suspicion upon the too extreme claims
of those who maintain that amazing and unprecedented benefits must of
necessity flow from the particular single line of action which they elect
to advocate. What, then, are we to think of the assertions contained in
Dr. Dunlop’s preface, that, following upon the general adoption of neoMalthusian practices, “ Poverty would, in two or three years time, be
banished from this country, and, in a generation or so, from the whole
world; there would be a rapid improvement in the quality of the race;
and the day of the abolition of war would be actually in sight ” ?

Dr. Drysdale’s consideration of the moral aspects of the question is,
we feel, particularly umsatisfactory. Not at all on account of the conclusion at which he arrives; but because some of the most vital considerations leading to a similar conclusion find no place in his argument.
We await a more convincing answer. R. DIXON KINGHAM.

Webb, Heten. Life and Its Beginnings. London. Cassell and Co.; 1913;
price 2s. 6d.; pp. 137.
Dr. HELEN WEBB treats the subject entirely from a biological stand
point, but the book, though written for girls under 12, should be read by
them with the assistance of an older person with a sound elementary knowREVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 171

ledge of biology and physiology, who would be able to supply them with
the fuller particulars which would certainly be required by a child who
had read the book with intelligence. It is an excellent handbook for
parents. G. M. CHAMBERS.

Chesser, E. SLOAN. From Girlhood to Womanhood. London. Cassell
and Co.; 1913; price 2s. 6d.; pp. 142.
THIS book can be given to any girl above 12; it explains simply the stage
of development from girlhood to womanhood and gives her sensible and
practical advice as to the best means of becoming a happy, healthy, and
attractive woman. Dr. Sloan Chesser puts forward a high ideal of life.
G. M. CHAMBERS.

Chesser, E. Stoan. Woman, Marriage and Motherhood. London.

Cassell; 1913; price 6s. net; pp. 287.
WE have here another of the popular books of the day dealing with social
questions affecting marriage and motherhood, written chiefly from the
point of view of women. There is much good work in it. The earlier
chapters are historical and treat briefly of the evolution of motherhood, of
marriage laws and customs, and of the legal position of the wife and
mother at various times and places. The results of sweated labour, the
social effects of factory work on the homes and of our prison system are
clearly stated. There is an account of the attempts, both on the Continent
and in England, to provide pure milk for infants, to feed nursing
mothers, and to establish schools for training in the art of home making
and baby rearing.

The most obvious omission is the absence of any reference to religious
ideals and sanctions as influencing matters connected with sex and social
reform. There is also no attempt to deal with the extremely important
variations in outlook upon all these questions which result from the
physiological and psychological differences of sex. It is the necessity
for the constant readjustment of these two points of view—a readjustment
required by the ever varying pressure on one or the other of a changing
civilisation—that constitutes the extreme difficulty of handling these
problems.

It is to be feared that more better organisation of society, with increased inspection and training and more humane treatment on all sides,
although it might achieve considerable temporary improvement and is
therefore worth working for, would not really help much to a more
permanent solution of the eternal problem which confronts humanity.

Cc. D. W.

Sandeman, Georce. Social Renewal. London. W. Heinemann; 1913;
price 2s. 6d.; pp. 150.

“THE collective or individualist theory of society is inadeauate to
its real nature, and is therefore false. Society... is... a real thing
on ifs own account, with a design of its own, a life of its own, and
Principles of its own. This may be called the realist theory of society
...” (p. 33). This great thought is supported by somewhat arrogant
denunciations of the modern social reformer. He is rebuked, for instance,
for supposing the social problem to be entirely one of “heredity and
breeding” (p. 19): as if anybody ever really supposed it so! But
Mr. Sandeman reaches his high-water mark of exaggeration on page 5.
“The workers,” he observes, “. . . desire to enter into possession; they
want abundance of life; they want to grow up... and to be free. The
reformers and philanthropists intend exactly the contrary; their idea is
to elaborate and to aggravate, and to perpetuate the tutelage of the
workers.” After pointing out the more obvious errors of other people,
Mr. Sandeman presents his own discovery. “Real society” is “humanity
itself”; and the only thing that can renew society is “ charity.” There
