SELECTION IN MARRIAGE

By J. W. SLAUGHTER

In both its scientific and its practical aspects eugenics is liable to
too narrow an interpretation at its present stage of growth.
Some conceive it to be an interesting mathematical exercise
which arrives at ‘coefficients of correlation” as regards
heredity ; others figure it as a group of forked lines showing
pedigree relations; others identify it with measures for the
segregation, and even more violent elimination, of forms of
degeneracy, such as feeble-mindedness. Physical deterioration
and the inheritance of liability to disease obtain attention from the
medically trained, and indications are not lacking that eugenics
may in future become a department of politics and form a
basis for urging, or criticising, measures of social reform. <A vast
range of discussion, from the transmission of acquired characters
to the employment of women, is considered relevant to the
eugenic idea.

There is sufficient justification for all these modes of interpreting the term eugenics ; the danger rather lies in too completely
identifying it with any one of them and consequently forming a
too narrow conception of what the science aims at. There is
the obvious and crying practical need; there is a sufficient proof
that man is not an angel but an animal, and therefore subject to
biological laws. Evidence is being rapidly accumulated to show
the specific ways in which these laws act and there is the gradually
dawning knowledge that a race has control of its own destiny, if
it will only apply this knowledge.

Like all proposals that have a propagandist character,
eugenics has assembled about itself a number of phrases and
catch-words. These are admittedly indispensable but are in
constant need of criticism because they create an atmosphere in
which facts become distorted. Perhaps the chief of them is that
SELECTION IN MARRIAGE I5r

known as “‘the elimination of the unfit.” The intention implied
in this phrase seems unequivocal, but discussion naturally arises.
as to the identification of the unfit and as to the methods by
which the implied intention is to be carried out. But the users
of phrases seldom consider either objects or methods. There is
no inclination here to minimise the menace of degeneracy, which
is present and insistent, but merely to indicate that methods for
coping with it only partially fill the measure of the eugenist’s.
ambition. A nation hardly fulfils its destiny by saving itself
from ruin, just as a man is hardly a useful citizen who spends his.
life in guarding his body from disease. The fact is that the
unfit, or at any rate those who are recognised as sufficiently bad,
could be adequately dealt with by a few very simple expedients.
The greater part of feeble-mindedness, for example, could be
eliminated by segregation of those unfortunates for one generation;
the criminal insane could be easily discovered and dealt with in
similar fashion. Indeed, the only obstacle to ‘the elimination
of the unfit ” is the influence exerted by other catch-words which
mean nothing at all but which are none the less important social
forces, such as ‘‘ humanity ”’ and ‘‘the sacredness of the individual
in a democratic society.” This aspect of eugenics is described
by the phrase which is now gaining currency, ‘“‘ negative eugenics.”
In view of the implied contrast in the use of the terms “‘ positive ”
and ‘‘ negative,’ it needs to be pointed out that the former
includes the latter in so far as selection of one person involves
the exclusion of others. This may even go so far as the organisation of means for active exclusion, but active exclusion by
itself does not necessarily involve positive selection. In short,
‘‘ the elimination of the unfit ” does not imply an increase of the
‘fit’; if there were any necessary connection the need to interfere
would vanish, as the competition would assume the form of
natural selection.

The relation of positive to negative eugenics invites some
further, if somewhat technical, discussion. If one pictures the
curve of frequency used to illustrate the distribution of a talent
or other character in the population, it is seen that the large
number possessing the character in average degree is massed in
the middle, whilst the two wings show the diminishing quantity
152 J. W. Slaughter :

of persons possessing the character in greater and in lesser degree.
‘The curve is mentioned here, because it forms the basis of all
discussions of the subject and in this immediate connection
suggests one or two points of importance. The first is that the
whole amount of a character is not increased by the elimination
of those who do not possess it, or who possess it in only slight
degree, although the average is raised by the necessary re-count.
If it is contended that the entire curve will be altered by reason
of the law of regression, the obvious reply is that for eugenics
the curve must show the distribution of an ability character, for
which the feeble-minded, for example, cannot be counted. Even
af counted their influence through regression is practically
inoperative on account of special factors. If, then, the aim of
eugenics is an increase of those possessing ability or other
character defined as “worthy,” it does not appear that this
object can be obtained merely by the employment of negative
agencies. Moreover, it may be assumed that degenerates of the
obvious kind will in the very near future be debarred from
parenthood ; for it even now appears that the small modicum of
intelligence which is applied in the conduct of national affairs is
warming into life in just this connection. On the other hand,
dwelling upon negative eugenics, in the sense of discouragement
of parenthood, has in one respect harmful consequences. Some
of the best elements of the community, already subject to many
influences making for abstention from parenthood, are frightened
from this responsibility by the idea that they may possess some
latent strain that will bring injury to their offspring.

For the present purpose there 1s no need to enter on a discussion of the biological factors of variation and heredity.
Knowledge of these processes may be assumed, with, however, a
single reminder, with regard to the significance of mating. This
act seals the hereditary fate of the offspring for good or evil.
Many people expect to attend to the business of marriage first
and to become eugenists afterwards. The result is the usual
haphazard one, with the added consciousness of what might have
been. It is therefore clear that to influence marriage, and by it
mating, is the chief eugenic aim. But this statement rallies
nearly all the objections to positive proposals. Everyone of the
SELECTION IN MARRIAGE 153

average amount of intelligence and feeling, will agree that the
eugenic aim is an ethically good and even noble one. With
some it unites with the sentiment of patriotism and seems the
solution of the problem of national efficiency; with others it
forms a basis for ideas of progress and thus unites with the
enthusiasm for humanity in a modern and significant form of
religion. Still these same persons may feel that the aim is a
fanciful one because the means suggested for its realisation
seem to them to be unacceptable on various grounds. There
is, for instance, a deep-rooted objection to anything resembling
standardisation and certification. No one wants to be brought
before a board or jury and put on trial to ascertain his
eligibility for matrimony; it is accepted as part of the sacred
right of the individual to commit matrimony if he likes, provided
he can find a partner in his crime. But the idea of standardisation and certification must not be rejected too summarily; it
operates, for example, in whatever prestige comes from educational
rank. As this rank has an economic as well as a social aspect it
has a very important influence on marriage. It may be conceded
that no individual and no board has knowledge that is sufficiently
far-seeing to determine what intellectual or moral qualities are
most worthy to be encouraged. Such an estimate may be left to
the “general sense” of the community, which is only a synonym
for standardisation of an unconscious and inexpert kind. In
matters of health, however, certification has a very definite place.
It may be given greater or lesser importance in the ensemble of
factors which have to be considered in individual cases, but the
time is probably not far distant when it will be regarded as
indispensable. As courtship is a process of suggesting or displaying qualities and possessions, it may be that part of its
regular routine will be the exhibition of the life insurance policy ;
fond mothers should be at least as interested in this as in the
young man’s actual or prospective balance at the bank. It will be
agreed then that in so far as qualities can be standardised
and certified, this should be done; in so far as they cannot,
inquiry must be made into the means which have a eugenic
influence.

Another form of this objection is that deficiency of knowledge
154 J. W. Slaughter :

renders interference dangerous because no one can know what
human factors are most important for the permanent and ultimate
interests of humanity. The reply to this is that the expert knows
little enough but that the general public is more ignorant still.
The objection supposes that a greater wisdom exists in collective
humanity than in any individual or special group of individuals.
This is not borne out by history, for undoubtedly the “ genius of
humanity ” has led it for ages together into fanatical and fatuous
bye-paths. Again the objection implies that if no interference
takes place man will remain as he is. Persons holding this view
are numerous and are psychologically interesting. That which
is habitual with them is a part of the nature of things; the social
order of the last three decades was that with which humanity
began. New “natural rights” require only a few years for their
full development. It is to be expected that persons of this kind
should fail to see that human selection is going on all the time,
that it is haphazard, irrational and often regardful of harmful
ends. The enormous variability or organic plasticity of man
means nothing because its curve seldom has two nodes falling
within the span of an individual life. These representatives of
short-sighted folly are amongst the most dangerous persons in
the community; to their credit is not merely the stoning of
prophets but the wrecking of empires. There is at present every
indication that the British Empire will follow in the steps of its
predecessors and for precisely the same reason.

A third type of criticism of positive eugenics comes from the
deep-rooted conviction in the popular mind that mating is something spontaneous and undetermined; that it is the natural
expression of affection and that interference for whatever purpose
would destroy its essential meaning. This view is usually
expressed by women who are thoroughly sympathetic with the
general aim of eugenics, but who maintain that for the woman
it is the man and never the child, that is the object of marriage.
This is probably true but does not matter, as that element which
stands in the foreground of consciousness is always the product
of a great subconscious complex of factors; what these are will
be elucidated by the psychology of mating.

There appear to be four kinds of selection biologically
SELECTION IN MARRIAGE I55

operative with varying degrees of directness, namely, natural,
artificial, sexual and social selection.

1. Natural selection seems to be decreasingly effective among
human beings; perhaps the growth of civilisation demands its
suspension. There are, to be sure, many persons, biologically
ignorant, who confuse natural selection with war and with the
elimination of undesirable individuals like criminals. In the first
case there is an evident ambiguity in the use of the word
“struggle.” The struggle for existence on which natural selection
depends among the lower animals is not to be understood as a
war of each or any upon the others, but as a competition for the
food supply. The word “ fit”? does not imply the best fighting
qualities but covers all devices which aid directly and indirectly
in obtaining the means of subsistence. The competition is, as
Darwin pointed out, keenest between varieties of the same species
or between closely related species; this because they require
approximately the same kind of food. How this kind of struggle
can be seen in war between nations, in what many modern
writers call “social Darwinism,” requires a peculiar kind of
imagination in which the biologist is deficient. Again, one has
heard in recent discussions of the operation of natural selection
until very modern times and of its influence being counteracted
by the growth of humanitarianism. Evidence of this is discovered in the growing kindliness in the treatment of criminals.
This again illustrates a misunderstanding of the most elementary
conception,—the selection is not a test of fitness for survival but
of ability to participate in a particular form of group life. The
history of deportation and of the far western States of America
makes it clear that these same tendencies under simpler and
more primitive conditions are the best of all qualifications.
True cases of natural selection might be found in deaths from
starvation, which occur with great infrequency, and which as they
usually fall upon the aged have only slight racial consequences.
It appears, then, that natural selection is only slightly operative
among human beings, and that this is probably involved in the
very fact of group life. There are some writers who, having
arrived at this point, forthwith conclude that man is not affected
by biological forces. The training of such persons is usually of
156 J. W. Slaughter :

the historico-philosophical order, which gives them great command of sweeping abstractions but renders them incapable of
comprehending the most completely verified knowledge.

2. Artificial selection is well understood and requires only
the briefest mention. Everyone knows that the human species
has continued its existence and built up its civilisation, largely in
terms of artificial selection, under the common designation of
‘‘the domestication of plants and animals.’’ There is no one
who could confuse domestication with taming, but not all are
able to see that the instrument of artificial selection, selective
mating, can produce equally great results when applied to other
higher species, including man.

One of the misconceptions of eugenics identifies it with
artificial selection, holding that it is a matter of breeding for
points determined by a board and that marriage is to take place
under the supervision of the police. This view is sometimes
represented in the weekly press by that type of journalist who is
possessed of unusually comprehensive ignorance and who, so to
speak, throws water and calls it vitriol, hoping thus to create a
public commotion.

3. From the operation of sexual selection, according to
Darwin, are derived those characteristics of appearance and
behaviour which are without survival value but which play a
part in sexual attraction. This category would include the
brilliant markings of birds and mammals, songs, antics, struttings,
and the other modes of display characteristic of the mating
season. To be added to these secondary sexual qualities are
most of the weapons of offence and defence, as well as masculine
strength, characteristics which were used by the males against
each other in their competition for female favour. In these
mating characteristics Darwin discovers the origin of the sense
of beauty—a discovery for which he has been seriously criticised
by some of his fellow-naturalists. No doubt, as Wallace
points out, many of the markings have a survival value as
recognition marks, and it is really as difficult as Hirn finds it
to believe that the pea-hen is possessed of so delicate an zsthetic
judgment as to distinguish slight differences in the pattern of the
pea-cock’s tail. But for all that, the fact remains that it is through
SELECTION IN MARRIAGE 157

the choice of the female that the peacock’s tail has come to be, and
that, as is well shown by Scott, the most important forms of
beauty are rooted in the sexual diathesis. It is worthy of remark
that among the lower animals the act of selection is always by
the female, with the consequence that characters described as
beautiful belong to the males only. It is obvious that with the
growth of civilisation there has come a certain reversal of the
direction of selection, with consequences illustrated in the existing
beauty of women and the hideousness of men. This applies
equally to dress and other forms of decoration. That which
renders man the agent of selection is his superior economic
position. It is likely that in the future the direction will be again
reversed and that for the privilege of selection woman will pay
the price of the loss of her beauty.

It is difficult to over-estimate the part played in human
evolution by the ideal of personal beauty. Beauty is the most
likely explanation of that divergence of races which is a standing
puzzle to anthropology. Every group, and indeed every individual, is fairly optimistic about its own appearance, particularly
when it is a partial consequence of the standardised artificial
methods. Such commonplace facts as the destruction by certain
Africans of children not sufficiently black and their general
disgust with white skin, the small feet of the Chinese women, the
flattened noses and foreheads, the filed or blackened teeth, the
tattooings, rougings and hair-dress, the blocked lips, the ear-rings,
the contracted waists or thighs, the elongated breasts, the
ponderous rings of metal on the legs of Hindoo women and the
fingers of Europeans, these with thousands of other examples
indicate what consequences the standard of beauty may effect
within any group. Like other group characteristics beauty has
its more and its less permanent aspects, but even short-lived
standards, as those of the consumptive-looking young man or of
the Gibson girl, have appreciable and probably measurable consequences on the average constitution. Personal beauty may
within wide limits be anything, it merely requires to be established
and sanctioned, but once established it becomes a mode of
selection,—those who approximate it are chosen for marriage,
the others are left.

2
158 J. W. Slaughter :

4. The facts indicated make it clear that sexual selection
among human beings is not free in its action but is complicated
with other factors, and is, indeed, merged in the last and most
important mode of selection, that which may be described as
social. The flow of affection is as spontaneous as the flow of a
stream, but equally with the latter has a course determined by
conditions. A large section of the history of culture is concerned
with the growth of marriage, and it might well be contended that
the first condition of civilisation was the establishment of groupcontrol over this same function. Sir Francis Galton has
illustrated this method of regulation by reference to several
well-known forms in primitive and historical times. These are
the regimes of exogamy and endogamy, which require that
marriage take place outside or inside the place, or totem, group;
polygamy, monogamy, celibacy and the degrees of kinship. The
sanctions which support and enforce these various modes are to
be found in custom, law, and religion.

Certain of the influences operating upon marriage at the
present time will now be indicated. The one that bears greatest
resemblance to those of importance in the past concerns membership in the religious body. The Church discourages marriage
unions with those who are not of its party and, other things being
equal, this acts as a prohibition on all persons to whom the
religious institution is of great importance. In a larger sense
marriage is peculiarly the concern of the Church as one of the
great Sacraments. In another paper in this REvIEw the relation
of the Churches to eugenic proposals is well discussed; the
psychologist might add to that, that religion has made and held
its place in the world largely by reason of its relation to the
reproductive life. Its control and utilisation of the racial instinct
in the interests of idealism has probably been an essential
condition of the growth of civilisation. 1f the Church is to grasp
its modern opportunity, failing which there is little need of it,
clearly it must utilise its two Sacraments of Confirmation and
Marriage for their true purpose, namely in the interest of an
idealism which recognises the responsibility laid upon the present
by the future. No one knowing the facts can doubt that the
clergyman could be a most important agent of selection in mating.
SELECTION IN MARRIAGE 159

If he would display in this connection a fraction of the
energy shown in regard to deceased wives’ sisters and divorces,
he would do more in the interest of humanity than is achieved by
all his other functions put together. What he requires is greater
scientific knowledge, and it seems a pity that some of his teachers
are so benighted as to believe that this knowledge is in opposition
to the interests of the institution for which he labours.

The most important of the influences affecting marriage and
therefore affording conditions which determine the course of the
affections is social status. This is not the place for its full
analysis but it defines one of the primary types of relationship
among members of a society. It does not matter very much
what the bases of status, or its insignia, may happen to be,—these
change with altering conditions. The prestige involved may be
due to the individual’s own efforts and be the natural result of
actual superiority. The normal case, however, is that of
membership in a class, and the most essential condition is that
of leisure or freedom from participation in any kind of work
which is useful and, therefore, degrading. The insignia of status
are usually those means which indicate one’s freedom from toil
or else they are the symbols of those few occupations which are
socially approved. Almost universally, then, social classes are
distinguished by position on the economic scale, some particular
part of which scale comes to have additional significance, as, in
England, the possession of land. These factors, in order to give
real prestige, must be supplemented by another—the idea of
descent. From the earliest times distinctions in pedigree have
been important in establishing status; the greatest prestige naturally belonging to those fortunate individuals who were descended
from gods. In medizval and modern Europe aristocracy has
been defined largely in terms of purity of quarterings. This idea,
taken by itself, is, of course, only another delusion; there is no
reason to suppose that the line which produced unknown John
Smith only came into existence with his father or grandfather,
or that a line which can be traced to the time of the Conqueror
is therefore the older of the two.

The idea of descent in order to have significance must therefore be supplemented ; in practice this supplementation has taken
160 J. W. Slaughter :

the form of records of grades of occupation. No one can have
pure blood whose father or grandfather did anything useful.
The hierachy of occupations is probably a permanent part of
social psychology; what is desired here is to show its highly
artificial character when linked with the idea of descent.
Democracy means nothing more than a toleration of inferior
occupations on the scale of status; it has nothing to do with the
creation of status, which is a matter of psychology. As regards
marriage, status defines precisely the grades of eligibility ; indeed,
this may be taken as one of its constituent factors. Nothing is
so desirable as to marry as “‘high” as possible, nothing is so
undesirable as “low” marriage. The rule is that the peer
does not marry the dairy-maid and if anyone chooses to be
the exception both he and his descendants will be subjected to
the heaviest of all penalties for those to whom a lowering of
status is necessarily a matter of importance.

It is obvious that these are significant facts for eugenics.
In the first place the barriers between the classes restrict, and
even make impossible, a general freedom of selection of mates;
secondly, marriage is in close connection with, and is also
auxiliary to, the observance of certain ideals, modes of living,
insignia and manners which happen to have obtained a higher
recognition than others in the social order. If the matter rests
at this point status may be regarded as disadvantageous but in
fact it has one other element, the idea that entrance to a class is
due to ability and that, therefore, status is really selective. In
view of modern conditions this factor will be of paramount
importance for a titular aristocracy whose feudalistic and
economic bases are rapidly passing away. In this light the tracing
of a line of descent from the first ancestor who had sufficient
ability to secure the position in the social scale, through a
succession of ancestors upon whom was placed the necessity of
maintaining it, and who were, therefore, of proved ability,—this
would be a eugenically sound principle for an aristocracy. The
present method of making new peers, etc., which has in fact been
the method practised for centuries in England, is selective and
eugenic, but is often corrupted by mere wealth. These intruders
into a social class are, of course, despised by those already there,
SELECTION IN MARRIAGE 161

for whom naturally exclusiveness is a vested interest. But this
matters little. One change that would make the aristocracy
much more selective is the abolition of primogeniture. It appears
that the balance of advantage is on the whole against the first
son if he is also the first or secondchild; it would be much
better if title and possessions could go to the ablest of the children.
This would abolish an artificial and absurd security of possession
and would furnish a motive for the first-born to endeavour to
exert himself, which is not at present universally the case.

There is hardly any limit to what can be accomplished in the
development of the race by an enlightened Sovereign, who, being
more and more removed from the political field, exercises a
correspondingly augmented influence as the head of public
opinion. By reason of the privilege of conferring marks of
distinction, he might become a real guide of evolution by selecting
for honours of various kinds those individuals who have been
most markedly successful, not in the accumulation of wealth
merely, but in carrying on the work of the world. The first
step towards this is the reduction of the politician to his proper
grade. The present age places an absurd valuation on political
success; the politician is, as a matter of fact, merely a puppet of
public opinion whose greatest desire is to keep his place as long
as possible while doing that minimum of work which is forced
upon him. The grades of successful individuals being thus
established, it is clear that the social recognition accorded them
will give them and their offspring better opportunities of preserving, continuing and augmenting the value of their stock. To
the aid of all these agencies will come those influences which
operate upon: mating for the preservation of what is known
as “family honour”; indeed, this term covers much of what has
already been described.

All these considerations make it evident that mating is now,
even more than in primitive times, determined by convention,
custom and tradition. The curious psychological fact is that the
members of a group are only partly conscious of the rules that
they observe ; obedience to law is probably most thorough-going
when knowledge of the law is only vaguely present to consciousness. Being uncritical, this kind of partial knowledge regards
162 J. W. Slaughter :

conventions as if they werein the order of nature. In polygamous
countries a woman feels it a degradation to marry a man who can
only afford one wife; in monogamous countries the reverse is the
case. The conditions determining most beliefs and modes of
action are sub-conscious and exercise control without being
recognised; this is, in brief, the psychology of taboo, which, with
the great mass of the population, takes the place of criticism and
rational choice. The pressing problem is as to how these group
influences may be modified. The means are to be found in the
psychology of suggestion, coupled with educative agencies. Any
point of view, however absurd, will gain adherents if it is kept fora
sufficient length of time in the public consciousness; a small group
standing shoulder to shoulder can in time bring about a revolution
inopinion. The virtue of repetition, the summation of suggestion,
which sells pills and pickles, which makes Free Trade or Tariff
Reform a national issue, this force operating as a slight but
persistent influence when linked to eugenic proposals will in a few
years’ time make these proposals a living force to the common
man. But the movement is to be also an educative one. With
intelligent people knowledge of the facts of human heredity will
be quite sufficient. Responsibility toward offspring is in most
families of primary importance; when this responsibility is made
prospective, the work of the eugenist will have been done. When
parents realise that the kind of children they have is a ten-fold
more important matter than any subsequent provision of education,
of wealth, and all the rest, that terror of parenthood which is so
rapidly diminishing the ranks of the worthy will have passed
away. When knowledge is sufficiently widespread these factors
will become an integral part of the psychology of love.
