Fertility Differentials

SOME FACTS

TO MATCH THE information relating to England and Wales in 1961, published in the
March 1967 issue of the REVIEW, some similar information has become available for
Scotland, and for the United States of America.

Here are some index figures for the family size of married women aged under 45 in
Scotland, classified by socio-economic group; they relate to a 10 per cent sample, and are
standardized for age and marriage duration:

Professional workers—self-employed 97
Professional workers—employed 83
Employers and managers—large units 83
Employers and managers—small units 87
Workers on own account (non-professional) 96
Skilled manual workers 101
Unskilled manual workers 120
Agricultural workers 114
General average 100

The range of variation is wider than in the corresponding data for England and Wales—
20 per cent on either side of the mean as compared with about 10 per cent, or less, south of
the Border. The position in Scotland to-day bears some resemblance to that in England
and Wales ten years before, in 1951, when an upward movement in the fertility of selfemployed professional workers began the formation of a U-shaped curve of differentials.

Data are now available, for all of Britain, to show how fertility varies with the terminal
age of education of husbands and wives. Here again, a U-shaped curve is in evidence.
For England and Wales, in cases where the age at which education ceased is the same for
both spouses, the average family size after 20 to 24 years of marriage is:

EDUCATION AGE FAMILY SIZE

Under 15 2:05
15-16 1-78
17-19 1-85
20 and over 1:99

For marriage duration 15 to 19 years, the figure for ‘20 and over” is 2:15, and is higher
than for any younger age at termination of education.

The Scottish data have a similar trend, but again with a smaller rise for the besteducated.

A corresponding shape exists in both countries for men who married less well-educated
wives and for women who married better-educated husbands. But family size falls more
uniformly as the terminal education age rises for the following two categories.

a. well-educated wives;
b. poorly-educated husbands.

It would seem that in such categories the relatively poor education of the husband leads
to low fertility—perhaps for economic reasons—and this is not redeemed by the wife’s
own knowledge.

140
FERTILITY DIFFERENTIALS

The data for the United States do not appear in an official Report, as in Britain, but
in four short articles published in Eugenics Quarterly.* These deal respectively with (i) the
general child-bearing pattern, (ii) occupation differences, (iii) educational effects and
(iv) income and socio-economic status. The author rightly concentrates his main attention
on the same factors as have been mentioned above, namely socio-economic status and
education. Here are some of his figures for family size according to number of years of
school or college completed by the wife:

1950 1960
College: 4 years or more 1:75 2°46
High School: 4 years 1-92 2°54
Elementary or none 2-86 3-25
All 2°29 2-70

They show the average family size for white women aged 35 to 39 and, rather surprisingly,
indicate a fairly considerable range of variation—wider than in Britain—and no U-shape.
There is, however, a considerable narrowing of the range by 1960, and data for children
born between the two censuses, quoted by the author, show a general positive association
between education and fertility. The only exception is a rise from those with no more than
three years at High School to those with only elementary or no education; this exception
gives the distribution a U-feature.

Non-white data show similar trends.

The information for socio-economic status (based jointly on the three factors of
education, occupation and income) and for income alone discloses a range of differentials
similar to that shown for education above, except that the lowest socio-economic groups
exhibit an even higher average family size than the uppermost figure of 3 children: they
go up to over 4 children (white) and 5 children (non-white). Thus apparently those who
rise in the social scale, despite a poor education, learn to limit their families more successfully
than those who fail to rise in the scale.

It may be said, in summary, that the census statistics for all three countries contain
basically the same features and trends. It is interesting and encouraging to note, however,
that Britain for once appears to be ahead of the United States in adopting a more eugenic
fertility pattern.

* Articles by S. Mitra in the June and September 1966 issues.

141
