GENETIC AND SOCIAL ASPECTS OF THE
EPILEPSIES OF CHILDHOOD*
By CHRISTOPHER OUNSTED, D.M., D.C.H.

Introduction.

PILEPSY and other convulsive disFrees single problems in _ hospital
pediatrics. Children presenting with fits
outnumber the combined total of all those
with tuberculosis, asthma and rheumatism:
diseases generally regarded as the chief
scourges of childhood. (Bridge 1949.)

Estimates of incidence in the general
population, vary, but there seems to be
general agreement that, among men calledup for military service, the incidence of
epilepsy is I in 200: in the population as a
whole the incidence may be 1 per cent.
There are then, probably, not less than
quarter of a million epileptics in this country
and they represent a substantial burden of
illnesses and economic loss..

In children, of course; there is a higher
incidence of all types of convulsive disorder
if one includes infantile convulsions. Precise
figures are hard to get. Probably not less
than 3 per cent of all children are affected
in the healthier provinces of England. Some
estimates give higher figures: none that I
know of gives a lower.

The Principle of Multiple Aetiology

Any epileptic seizure is the result of
multiple ztiological factors (Ounsted 1954).
Some of the factors which may converge to
generate a single fit or a chronic epilepsy are
illustrated in the diagram (Fig. 1).

The list is not exhaustive.

May I illustrate with a single example?

Graham is a little boy who came to us
first when he was six months old. He had a
single generalized tonic-clonic grand mal
seizure whilst suffering a feverish bronchitis:
a simple febrile convulsion. His father had

* A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics
Society on November 17th, 1954.

orders form, numerically, one of the

33

had petit mal epilepsy from early childhood.
At this point we had, therefore, to consider fever; age; sex; and a possible genetic
factor.
Three months later the boy returned and
was admitted to hospital. He had status

epilepticus limited mainly to the left side of

his body. This attack seems to have been
due to thrombosis in his right middle
cerebral artery: an acute mechanical insult.

The child was left with a shrunken right
hemisphere, a left hemiplegia and some
mental retardation associated with aggressive behaviour. |

When. he was four he began to have fre-.
quent minor focal epileptic fits at the rate
of five or six a day. His fits and his mental
disorder caused a severe and chronic emotional disharmony between the parents. The
disharmony itself appeared to increase the
child’s symptoms—for both the fits and the
aggressive outbursts lessened when, he stayed
with more tranquil relatives; only to relapse
when he returned home.

We had now therefore to add in a chronic
anatomical lesion, the shrunken hemisphere,
which contained an active epileptogenic
focus; an emotional and _ environmental
factor, and the factor of retarded mental
development; remembering still the influ-.
ences of sex, age, and genetic endowment.
Other factors were soon added, he began to
have fits when asleep, a physiological trigger,
and, of course, he was given various drugs.

Clearly no one factor could be regarded
rationally as the sole cause of his symptoms.

This is perhaps an extreme case but it is .
generally true of all convulsive disorders
that zxtiology is multiple. The ictus epilepticus is the resultant of many variables. The
seizure-discharge is the final common path,
if I may use that analogy, of interacting |
factors which vary widely from child to
34 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

CONVULSIVE DISORDERS OF
———_—_—_———— CHILDHOOD ——_

AETIOLOGICAL FACTORS

     
  

  
 
  
 

Chronic Analomical

estons

Hereditary Factors

      
   

AGE

  
     
  

1) General Lesions
2) Specific Genelic Scars Cysts Tumours
Digease PREVIOUS FITS 4

   
 
 
 

SEX DRUGS

   
 

Physiological Triggers
Sleep Menstruation
Fluid retention
Over breath ing
Rhythmic Stimuli

         

     

    
 
   
   
  

 

(f4

   

     

yy
Lp

 

\N:

Yi

     
  
   

  
    
    
   
  

WS 5

 
 

 

  
   
 
 
 
   
   

Acute Metabolic Insults

eg. Foisons Psychological Factors
\)Boredom Frustration
Anxieby Social Conflict
2) Mental Retardation
3) Specific psycological

sease

Omission of drugs
Hypoglycacmia
Py pecateaen

  

Acute Infections
1) Specific
2) pepe

—

  
  
 
 
      
 

Fic. 1
child; and vary in any child, from time to Again, all forms of minor epileptic fit were
time. once called “ petit mal’’. These seizures
proved heterogeneous and they are now
The Semantic Confusions divided into at least six distinct subgroups:
Any discussion of epilepsy is confused only one of which retains the title of “ petit
from the start by the imprecision of termino-  mal’’. This term is now restricted to brief

logy, and by the semantic difficulties in- lapses of attentive behaviour associated with
volved. The terms ‘‘epilepsy’”’, and “epilep- the famous 3 c/s generalized, wave-andtic fit’’, although we all know roughly what spike (the dart and dome) discharge in the
they mean, have no agreed limits. More electroencephalogram; but it seems probable
serious, perhaps, are the difficulties of classi- that this pure petit mal requires still further
fication. At one time convulsive disorders division by the criteria of different responses
were divided into three groups, namely to certain drugs, and by variations in the
infantile convulsions, symptomatic epilepsy details of the E.E.G. pattern.

and idiopathic epilepsy. These terms have
now become so loose in their application that The Results of Genetic Surveys

their meaning and utility is lost. Many genetic and social studies of epilepsy
ASPECTS OF THE EPILEPSIES OF CHILDHOOD 35

have been made. If restricted to chronic
epilepsy, and confined to adults, they
generally agree in giving an equal risk of
epilepsy to the parents, siblings and children
of epileptics; and in giving a risk-value of
2,3, or 4 per cent to these relatives (Alstr6m
1950; Harvald 1954).

Surveys of this type ignore the richness
and variety of man’s epileptic experience;
and in practice it is found these results cannot
safely be used for eugenic or clinical purposes.

Studies made on selected samples give
conflicting results.

The influence of heredity is reckoned high
by those who study children (Bridge 1949);
low by those who study adults (Alstrém
1950); high by those who use twin material
(Lennox 1947: Conrad 1935); low by those
attempting general geographical ascertainments (Alstrém); high by those who use
E.E.G. evidence (Lennox, Gibbs & Gibbs)
—lower by those relying on clinical evidence.

Conflicting results of this type, together |

with the great variety in etiology and
manifestation, have persuaded some authorities in America and Scandinavia to abandon
genetic analysis as meaningless. But, as
Dr. Slater pointed out and demonstrated,
the main virtue of genetic analysis is precisely that it clarifies diagnosis and, by
establishing distinct diseases, resolves just
such confusions as we have here to face. Nor
can one, in practice, escape from the genetic
issue. One-third of all parents of epileptic
children ask me genetic questions: many
others centre their anxious ruminations on
the genetic theme.

_ There are strong cultural traditions about
eugenics in epilepsy dating from _preChristian times, and still powerfully linked
with the numinous awe which epilepsy
evokes. In at least three countries eugenic
practice is backed by legal sanctions.

Possible Modes of Genetic Influence on
Epilepsy
There are five ways, I think, in which
genetic endowment may contribute to
convulsive disease.
First, it is plain that, given adequate
provocation, all our brains are capable of

generating a grand mal seizure. Electroshock treatment produces attacks not, in
themselves, different from the spontaneous
seizures of epileptics. As Lennox put it
“Man is built to convulse’’. The inherent
seizure-mechanism is almost certainly present in all mammals. It is doubtless of
genetic determination.

There are some who hold that no other
genetic factor is involved: that the varieties
of epilepsy are wholly determined by the site
and extent of acquired cerebral damage and
that this damage alone divides epileptics
from their fellows. This view is certainly not
wholly true. There are a group of rare
diseases in which simple single-gene determination is unequivocal, and in which
epileptic seizures commonly occur. Phenylketonuria and epiloia are examples. In these
diseases the fits are a secondary manifestation of a specific biochemical or anatomical
perversion. Diseases of this type segregate.
Their distinctive lesions are qualitative.
They may be subjected to analysis in terms
of mendelian ratios.

An alternative mode of indirect genetic
influence is through a defect-in a quantitative
character of polygenic origin. There is rather
a strong suggestion that low intelligence, in
general, predisposes to seizures of all types.
Here we deal with an essentially nonsegregating quantitative variable, polygenetic in origin in the main, and biometrical
analysis is the appropriate method of study.

If there are genotypes which predispose
directly to epilepsy, they may also be of two
main, types.

There may be simple single-gene epilepsies,
segregating by some distinctive clinical or
E.E.G. features (so that factor analysis
reveals their characters), breeding-true, and
potentially subject to analysis in terms of.
mendelian ratios.

On the other hand there is the concept
of a genetically determined, quantitative
seizure-threshold; varying from person to
person; potentiating all types of seizure. The
concept, in fact, that all men are epileptic
but some are more epileptic than others.

There are then these five possibilities.
There is an implicit assumption in much
36 ‘ THE EUGENICS REVIEW

work in this field that only one or two of the
possibilities can be true. There is, however,
no a priori reason why all five modes should

not operate. They might even all be at work

in a single patient.

The Nature of the Present Series

When, we set out six years ago with the
aim of studying the natural history of convulsive disease in children we were a good
deal baffled, by the many confusions of
terminology, by the conflicting results of
other workers and by the contrast between
the complexity of the problem and our
ignorance. So we made no attempt whatever
to select our cases in any way, nor to place
our patients in distinctive diagnostic categories. We have admitted to study all
‘children who had any sort of fit: those with
febrile convulsions and those with epilepsy:
those whose fits arose from the gross insults
of meningitis or camphor poisoning, and
those whose fits were wholly cryptogenic.

The sample now analysed is a consecutive
series of such children: all have been, studied

personally: none was discharged, but 14 per

cent have been lost to observation. The
children were studied through the pzediatric
departments in three hospitals in our region.

(We have, of course, made attempts to get

total ascertainment of all cases in specified
areas and in control series in order to get an
idea of general incidences. But children
discovered in this way cannot be subject to
the same sustained observation over the
years as can those who come to hospital.)

There are approximately 1,000 affected
children in this sample from 800 families.
More than 80 per cent of the children were
admitted to hospital at the time of their
first fit or were seen in out-patients within a
month of their first fit. The children, and
their brothers and sisters and families were
then followed up, and studied through the
years.

We have, of course, principally been interested in the control and cure of the fits, and
in the prophylaxis of established epilepsy.
But one cannot study one aspect in isolation
and we have tried to record data about the
physical, mental and social maturation of

these children; for example, the curiously

various development of dominant laterality;.
the emergence and resolution of speech
disorders; the unfolding of intelligence and
personality; the serial changes in the E.E.G.
records.

Genetic questioning can be made reasonably thorough in these families, since one is
enabled to pursue inquiries through the
grandmothers and one can repeat Inquiries
at each visit.

Methods of Analysis

No standard agreed method for analysing
our particular study is available in the
literature.

Most of the standard work on children
with epilepsy comes from Johns Hopkins
Hospital (Bridge 1949). Here they used a
rather individual method of assessing the
weight of the genetic factor. An affected
child was ‘awarded a score of I, 2, 3, or 4,.
depending on how many epileptic relatives
he had, and how close in kinship the affected
members were to him. An epileptic parent

or sibling gave a score of 2; other relatives

a score of 1. The total score expressed the
weight given to genetic endowment in the
propositus (Bridge 1949). It is, perhaps, a
rather unusual method, and one which does
not seem greatly to attract those of stricter
genetic schools.

The results, however, were of interest.
Forty per cent of epileptic children had at
least one affected relative; Io per cent scored
4+, the maximum permitted. These are
substantially higher figures than those
obtainable from any sample of adult epileptics. Furthermore the Johns Hopkins workers showed that children with positive
family histories of epilepsy had a better
prognosis than those with a negative
history.

In our analysis we have used the standard
and generally accepted genetic techniques
for computing the risks to kindred of various
degrees. But we now divide all those
affected, initially, by nine diagnostic labels,
which crudely designate the setting and
outcome of their diseases. |

These groups are, briefly:
ASPECTS OF THE EPILEPSIES OF CHILDHOOD 37

(x) Simple remittent febrile convulsions
(CvR).
(2) Febrile convulsions which continue
until death (CvC).
(3) Febrile convulsions associated with
infection of the brain (‘B’’).

(4) Epilepsies which remit (ER).

(5) Epilepsies which resist treatment and
persist (Ec).

(6) Febrile convulsions which are followed
by an epilépsy which then remits
(CvER).

(7) Febrile convulsions which are followed
by an epilepsy which resists treatment
and persists (CvEc).

(8) and (9) Other convulsive diseases—
which continue and remit respectively.
This is a rag-bag containing camphor convulsions; vitamin deficiencies;
anesthetic seizures and the like
(OR: OC).

Remission means freedom from fits for more
than half a year at the time of analysis. I
think that the nature of these different
groups is best explained by dealing with each
group in turn. It is relevant at this point to
notice that these subgroupings are not based
on any presumptions about etiology nor
upon criteria derived from the epiphenomena
recorded by electroencephalography. One
finds in almost all work on epilepsy that
division into special categories is made on
etiological assumptions. This leads inevitably
to a petitio principi: as the genetic analysis
precedes.

I have taken the risks to siblings as the
most reliable measure, and have computed
the risks severally for each diagnostic type
within each subgroup.

Corrections for age are made from age-ofonset curves obtained from the whole
material. Corrections for ascertainment in
these particular histograms is based on
ascertainment by family.

(3

The Sibling-risk Patterns
(A) Simple febrile convulsions.

The histogram for simple remittent febrile
convulsions is shown in Fig. 2. These are
the commonest of all the seizures of

childhood, and they have many names:
benign convulsions, infantile convulsions,
teething convulsions, and so on.

ECV,

 
  
 
  

PROPOSIT| WITH REMITTENT
FEBRILE CONVULSIONS.

  

)
£13 Siblings: 570
6. {2 |
Y) Il

10
4 9 Hitt
uv 8 Hh
ws 7 atte:
8
3S 5

4
0 3
Peng
) 0 HEE Mi. BS .

G is Ep fae CvEr . Er Ec OR Oc
Cve CvEc
Fic. 2

The pattern of risks for the brothers and
sisters* of these children is as follows (Fig. 2):

a

1. (a) For any convulsive disorder ... .
(6) For any sort of febrile convulsion ... te 3
(c) For any sort of epilepsy : 9°7

2. (a2) For simple remittent febrile convulsions wee 1485

(6) For febrile convulsions continuing to
death 0-7

(c) For febrile convulsions which | are followed by an epilepsy which then remits 2
(dz) For febrile convulsion, followed by a
continuing, resistant, epilepsy
(e) For remittent epilepsy,

0-2
nearly 4
(f) For continuing persistent epilepsy ... 3-5
(g) and (h) For the other two types, less than -5

(B) Febrile CoATSTGMS evoked by infection of
the brain.

Next we may consider the pattern of risks
to siblings when the seizures of the propositi
were evoked by infection of the brain; by.
meningitis or encephalitis (Fig. 3).

*In the following Figures the numbers of siblings
quoted are the reduced number after age correction to
the nearest whole number. .
380 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

 

%
(a) For any convulsive disorders pe Oe
(6) For any sort of febrile convulsion ... 5:5
(c) For any sort of epilepsy 1-8
° " u
20 0B.
19
18
'7
4 6 PROPOSIT!: CONVULSIONS WITH
203] MENINGITIS OR ENCEPHALITIS
eas
-~ 12
Fa
at
yn 9 Siblings: 108
~ 8
Ce
Pre
—~3 §
o» 4
ras
2
So 4
UO oO EA
G G Ep Cve CvEr Er Ec Or Oc
Cve 2 HCVEC
Fic. 3

These are low risk figures for all the subgroupings; these risks are barely if at all in
excess of the general risks. This, of course,
is aS one would expect.

(C) Convulsions evoked by other insults.

The risks to brothers and sisters in the
group in which the seizures of the propositi
were evoked by camphor poisoning, forcedhydration and so on, are shown in Fig. 4.

Again these are like those found in the

meningitis group; giving risks close to the
general expectation.

Thus it is clear that, by using the siblingrisk pattern as a measure of the etiological
weight of genetic endowment in the propositi,
we have shown that, when febrile convulsions
are evoked by slight insults genetic endowment seems to play a major etiological role;
but in the two control-series, in which gross
insults evoked the seizures, genetic endowment played a negligible part.

We may now consider the more chronic
epilepsies: | |

No division is made at this stage by the
type of seizure—petit mal, grand mal and
so. on—nor by presumptive etiology. The

Corrected Pisks to Siblings

oe VI OR.

'7 PROPOSITI: CONVULSIONS ASSOCIATED

 

: WITH OTHER INSULTS, REMITTENT.

13

4

Il

10

: Siblings: 74

Fe

6

5

4

3

2

}

0 K .

G E En Cyr CvER Er Ec Or Oc

Cve CvEc
Fic. 4

only division made is whether or not nature,
abetted by treatment, has led to a sustained
remission of the fits; a quite practical and
objective division.

(D) Remittent epilepsy

The propositi were children who had simple
epilepsies which have gone into a sustained

I Er.

  
  
  

PROPOSITI: EPILEPSY, REMITTENT.

Siblings: 230

    

”

on

¢

—

Ae

Y)

#9

ane

"ae HH!

@ 6 HE

3 #85

yo 4

—

¢ 3

to 8 ag ft =
G C Ep Cvr CvEr EreEc OR Oc

Gvc. CvEc

Fic. 5

remission. The risk-pattern for their brothers
and sisters is shown in Fig. 5. The main
features of the risk-pattern are these:
ASPECTS OF THE EPILEPSIES OF CHILDHOOD - 39

| ° %
(a) For any convulsive disorder ... we 1753
(b) For any sort of epilepsy . 7:5
(c) For simple remittent febrile convulsions 9°5
(z@) For simple remittent epilepsy (the disease of-the propositi) . w 25
(e) For febrile convulsions which “proceed
to epilepsy, which finally remits » 2°75

The risks for those epilepsies which resist
treatment are rather low.

(E) Continuing epilepsy.
We may next compare and contrast the
sibling-risk pattern for propositi whose epi
lepsies have proved resistant to treatment »

(Fig. 6). The main feature of the pattern of
a iv Ee

  
 
  

PROPOSIT!: EPILEPSY , CONTINUING

13

o=5

Siblings: 274

   

Corrected Risks fo Sublings.

O-NKwAUD ISCO

     

G C “CvErR Er Ec OR Oc
Eve.“ CvE¢
Fic. 6

risks here is the overall similarity to the
pattern obtained for the remittent epilepsy
group. Again the risk for any sort of convulsive disorder is about 17 per cent; again
the benign febrile convulsions (10 per cent)
overtop all the epilepsies combined (7 per
cent).

In the detailed part of the histogram there
are differences. I would just mention one.
Most of the epileptic siblings in this group
had severe resistant epilepsies: whereas most
of the epileptic siblings in the previous group
had benign remittent epilepsies. There

seems at once to be no strict segregation .
with regard to

dy?)

but some “ breeding-true
outcome.

(F) Febrile convulsions followed by remittent
epilepsy.
Next we have the group in which the propositus had, first, febrile convulsions, then
epilepsy and finally went into remission.

%
25 V CveEr.

 
  
 
    

PROPOSIT!: FEBRILE CONVULSIONS
FOLLOWED BY REMITTENT EPILEPSY

 

18
'7

”n 6

GW is

54

3 5 Siblings: 116
Ht

42 10

yn 9 N

% 8 N

<9

ieee N

3 § om NN

2 4 Ba N

Oo 3 srost AY

waa ee N

a iis

5 0 at: N <3 as x

G C Ep Cvr CvEr_ ER Ec OR Oc
Cve CvEc
Fic. 7

As might be expected the pattern of the
sibling-risks (Fig. 7) lies between that for’
simple febrile convulsions and that for remit- —
tent epilepsy. In fact, in the detailed part of
the histogram, these are the only two
diseases for which there appears to be any
substantial risk: 103 per cent for benign
remittent convulsions; 54 per cent for remittent epilepsy. The propositi had both convulsions and epilepsy, but these diseases
divided in their siblings. This group, in fact, '
doesn’t “‘ breed true ”’

(G) Febrile cpmanelstans followed by continuing
epilepsy.

The group of febrile convulsions proceeding to continuing epilepsy did not seem to
present any special features and I had confidently expected that the histogram here
would, by analogy with the last one, give a
pattern lying between that for simple convulsions and that for continuing resistant
epilepsy. The sibling-risk pattern (Fig. 8)
40
20 Vio vtec:

16 PROPOSITI: FEBRILE CONVULSIONS

14 FOLLOWED BY CONTINUING EPILEPSY.

Siblings: 75

      

Correcled Risks to Siblings

O- YPWEOD YOO

CvEr ER Ec Or Oc
Cve CvEc

shows that this assumption was false. The
pattern is quite distinctive. It is unlike any
for simple convulsions or the epilepsies, but
it does not differ much from the pattern
obtained for the meningitis group. Indeed
I think that this is quite strong evidence that
these children were in fact having some acute
cerebral damage, an encephalitis it may be,
or a cerebral vascular accident at the time
of their initial convulsion, and that it was
this damage that determined both the initial
febrile convulsion and the subsequent seizures, rather than any special genetic endowment. Perhaps these figures serve to show
how genetic analysis helps one to pick a
way through this complex subject.

(H) Febrile convulsions continuing to death.

We now turn to a small but interesting
group of children who had febrile convulsions
which continued until death or shortly
before it. .

They are, typically, children aged less than
four months who develop a respiratory
infection, have fits and die. Nothing very
much is found by post-mortem examination.

These children are a rather special group
from our local point of view, because we go
to great pains to prevent, and control, febrile
convulsions in small sick children. For
example, all small children admitted to our
wards with severe feverish illnesses are given

- THE EUGENICS REVIEW

prophylactic anti-convulsants on admission,
whether they have had a fit or not, and all
emergent seizures are treated vigorously at
their inception with anti-convulsants by
intramuscular injection.

This group are, then, our failures in spite
of these measures.

I had regarded them as being children who,
by reason of the frailty of their natures, and
the severity of their infections, were dying a
toxemic death with the convulsions as
merely agonal symptoms. Again the genetic
analysis suggests this opinion was illgrounded. | 
The sibling-risk pattern is shown in Fig. 9.
The overall risks are higher than in any
other subgroup: nearly 30 per cent. The
risk pattern is distinctive. The risk for
epilepsy is substantially higher than the risk
for febrile convulsions, and the epilepsies
encountered were in the main resistant to
treatment: the risk for this severe form of
epilepsy is 10 per cent.

70 Vir Cyc.

   
  
   

PROPOSI!IT!I WITH FEBRILE
CONVULSIONS CONTINUING

Siblings: 58

Corrected Risks to Siblings

9 if
O Sisssss oH
G GC Ep Cvre CvEr Er EcvOrR Oc
c vc Cv Ec
Fic. 9

Thus it seems plausible to suppose that
this sort of mortal convulsive disease had in
fact a powerful genetic determination. Perhaps we should regard these deaths as the
genetic wastage of the severe epilepsies.
ASPECTS OF THE EPILEPSIES OF CHILDHOOD ~~ AI

1. Temporal lobe epilepsy.

In many epileptics there is conclusive
evidence that the fits derive from small focal
areas of cerebral damage. One cannot, how
ever, assume their epilepsy owes nothing to,

genetic endowment, although in practice this
assumption is rather frequently made.

Temporal lobe epilepsy, the most fashionable of epilepsies just now, is of particular
social importance because there is a rather
complex association between temporal lobe
lesions and certain types of aggressive and
psychotic behaviour.

From the present sample I have selected
fifty-eight children who had frequent minor
lobe seizures and who showed a focal spike
discharge in one or other temporal lobe.
There were also, of course, many children
with other sorts of epilepsy who had tempotal lobe discharges in the E.E.G.: but
these are, here, excluded, as are also, children whose seizures were, clinically, temporal lobe attacks but whose E.E.G.s are too
immature to show the characteristic local
‘discharge.

This group, then, is small but strict.

In no case did we find a relative with temporal lobe epilepsy by the same criteria. But
the histogram of sibling-risks shows a pattern,

Pie
24 TX Tp.GROUP
22

 
    
  
 
  

RISKS TO SIBLINGS IN CASES
OF PROVED MINOR TEMPORAL

LOBE EPILEPSY (58cases)

Siblings: 126

ted Risks to Siblings
Oo

9
8
7
6
= 3 sisses
eae
O-23
) 0 sisass
NFS Ce Ep Cvr CvER Er Ec Or Oc
Cve CvEc
FIG, 10

very like that for. other forms of epilepsy
(Fig. ro). There is some evidence that
genetic endowment plays a part here.

The risk of any convulsive disorder in
siblings is 15 per cent, the risk of epilepsy
64 per cent.

This result has, of course, no direct bearing
on the value of surgery for this disease. It is
simply a reminder that one cannot get away
from multiple etiology.

TWIN STUDIES

Introduction

Twin studies are of particular interest in
epilepsy because much of the most-quoted
evidence in favour of genetic determination
derives from twin-studies made severally
by Conrad (1937), by Rosanoff (1934); and
in the E.E.G. field by Lennox (1947) and the
Gibbses (1940).

The larger studies agree in showing:

(i) There is a high concordance between
monozygous twins—both twins being
affected in more than two-thirds of all
pairs. .

(ii) The concordance of dizygous pairs,
although much lower, is in excess of
that predicted from the risks to
siblings.

This second observation has led to the
theory that there is some _ relationship
between twinning and epilepsy. There are
in fact two such theories: one proposes that
the association is genetic, and the other,
more plausibly, suggests that twinning predisposes to epilepsy because twin-birth involves a greater risk of cerebral birth-injury.

Twins in the Present Sample
(A) The association between twin-birth and
epilepsy.

Among all the children in this sample
there were twenty-six pairs of twins. Of
these pairs, twenty contained one or more .
affected child. In six pairs neither partner
was affected. Nineteen pairs were proved

_ dizygous; five pairs were proved monozygous;

two pairs were doubtful—probably one was
dizygous and the other monozygous.
42 : THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Thus the incidence of the twin-born index
cases was just under 3 per cent; among all
children, 2 per cent; among all affected
2.4 per cent. These figures do not differ
significantly from the incidence of twin-born
children in the general population in our
region. Our results, therefore, in no way
support either theory associating twinning
with convulsive disease. :

In fact the distribution of diagnostic labels
among the affected twin-born in the sample
tended to favour the febrile convulsion
group as compared with the epilepsies.

(B) Concordance between dizygous and monozygous twins.

After eliminating all pairs ascertained
through a child whose fits were determined
by cerebral infection, and after rejecting
those pairs in which the unaffected member
died without known fits in early life, twelve
dizygous and three monozygous pairs are
left. It is, of course, a small group but can
be used as a check on the validity of the
sibling-risk patterns which I have just
described.

There were two pairs wholly concordant
for diagnosis, mental development, and
nature of seizure—and closely concordant
for number of fits, age of onset and age at
‘final fit. Both these pairs were dizygous and
oppositely sexed. The diagnosis was.simple
remittent febrile convulsions in each case.

(C) Dizygous twins

Of the twelve children in the six partially
or wholly concordant dizygous pairs, eleven
had a febrile convulsion as their first fit.
Two of these children had those convulsions
which continued to death. Our computations
of the sibling-risks in these groups gave a
higher overall risk to siblings than in any
other group, slightly greater than one
quarter in all. Moreover febrile convulsions
are restricted to a narrow age-range and
these seizures require a specific environmental factor, namely an acute infection.
Dizygous. twins share a common environment at the same age. In siblings the interplay of environment, age and_ genetic

endowment occurs in series; twins, however, '

are exposed in parallel. This crude 50 per
cent concordance of dizygous twins serves
rather to support the computations - of
sibling-risk that have been given.

N.53.
Graham

   

R L
2 fs 4
FIG. 11

The pedigree of a partially concordant
dizygous pair is shown in Fig. 11. Very
briefly all affected members, there are five
of them, have had a similar sort of epilepsy.
All have had grand mal fits, of frequent
occurrence, beginning in the first or second
year of life and remitting completely within
two years of onset. All five patients had
their fits, in the main, between 2—5 a.m.
when, they were asleep. The variations of
interest are these: the first seizure: of the
twin girl (number 2) was evoked by an acute
tonsillitis; it was in fact a febrile convulsion.
The boy (number 3) alone in his family had
a bout of status epilepticus, he, moreover, is
mentally abnormal: he is grossly overactive
and aggressive. He has some mild intellectual retardation together with a_ specific
speech defect. He is left-handed although all
his relatives are dextrous. He belongs to the
group of hyperkinetic epileptics which I will
mention later.

It is tempting to regard this pedigree as
showing the simple autosomal dominant
transmission of a pure remittent epilepsy of
rather high penetrance.

There were another pair of oppositelysexed twins discovered among the siblings
who were concordant for febrile convulsions
in childhood, but later diverged. The girl
had no more fits, but the boy had a remittent
ASPECTS OF THE EPILEPSIES OF CHILDHOOD 43

_ epilepsy and developed aggressive outbursts
which have now brought him into the hands
Of the police.

(D) Monozygous pairs.

There were three monozygous pairs in the
residual group of twins. One pair was partially concordant, two pairs were wholly
discordant.

(a) A pair of girls of proven monozygousity have been observed for seven years.
The unaffected twin is in all respects normal.
The affected twin had a febrile convulsion
as her initial seizure and then developed an
intractable epilepsy which has proved wholly
resistant to treatment. She therefore belongs
to that group in which our sibling-risk test
(Fig. 8) suggested that genetic endowment
plays a negligible role: the convulsions plus
‘resistant epilepsy group. She is mildly
psychotic. There is good E.E.G. evidence of
focal brain damage.

(6) The other discordant monozygous pair
are boys. Their family tree is shown in Fig.
12. The points of interest here are that the

N 70
David

 

Fic. 12

affected child has had two bouts of severe
focal grand mal seizure with fever. He is
mentally normal.. His paternal grandfather
has had grand mal epilepsy virtually all his
life—he is 69 and still having fits.

E.E.G. studies have been made on both
twins. Both records are alike: both are quite

normal. The parents’ E.E.G.s are both
normal in every way.

(c) The partially concordant pair were
girls. They were last born in a sibship of
eleven. None of their relatives had had any
form of convulsive disorder. These twins
were alike in personality; intelligence and
appearance. One twin (Elsie) is left-handed,
the other (Amy) is right-handed.

The twins had their first convulsions
together on the third day of mumps just
before their fourth birthday. They had
convulsions together in the prodromal phase
of measles, six months later and again .with
whooping cough in the same year. Amy had
no more fits. Elsie developed a mild epilepsy
of grand mal seizures, which occurred just
after she roused up in the morning. The
attacks were soon controlled and she went
into full remission three and a half years ago.
She has been off all drugs for a year.

E.E.G.s made shortly after Elsie’s last fit
gave identical records for both twins. The
similarities covered both the normal features
and the abnormal feature of paroxysmal,
generalized slow-wave outbursts. Whilst
both twins have remained in remission we
have repeated their E.E.G.s. Amy’s record
has been maturing well; Elsie’s, also maturing, is now, however, discordant and shows |
a focal spike discharge in her left temporal
leads.

Here then there was, first a concordance
for febrile convulsions, then a divergence for
epilepsy, but a concordance for E.E.G.
findings; finally, after a long period of remission and maturation, a divergence in the
E.E.G. traces. |

The findings here seem to fit quite well
for the histogram of sibling-risks for the
group to which Elsie belongs, the convulsions plus remittent epilepsy group (Fig. 7)
for here we found that there was no breedingtrue in siblings. The siblings in this group
often had febrile convulsions and often
remittent epilepsy, but the double-diagnosis
was absent.

This twin material is small indeed but for
what it is worth, it does not seem, notably, to
conflict with the evidence from the siblingrisk estimates at any point.
44 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Maturity and the Genetic Factor

Those cerebral systems which generate
seizures in children are not absolute systems,
except at the time of the ictus epilepticus
itself.

The stability, or the instability, of the
seizure mechanism is affected by many parameters, by variables, that is to say, not
_ themselves inherentin the seizure mechanism.

Paramount among these controlling parameters is the general maturity of the child.
Most of the convulsive disorders of childhood
die out with advance of maturity. Children,
in a word, tend to grow out of their fits. This
is evidently true of febrile convulsions. It
is also true of epilepsies which spring from
gross anatomical cerebral damage.

Salaam epilepsy, the so-called akinetic
seizure, is the characteristic epilepsy of
young children with gross cerebral damage
and mental defect. These attacks die out
and disappear before the fourth birthday in
the majority of those affected. The anatomical lesions remain; the mental defect
remains; the characteristic E.E.G. pattern
lingers on, but the fits themselves are
inhibited by quite a slight advance in
maturity.

Among the more harmful of the assumptions about the genetics of epilepsy is the
concept that, if an epilepsy is genetically
determined, then the disease must endure

throughout life and is not susceptible of cure. »

(I suppose we all meet this idea in whatever
field we work.) In the case of the childhood
epilepsies there are sound a priori reasons
for a contrary assumption. Namely, that a
common, non-mortal, genetically-determined
disease of early onset is likely to be reduced
in severity, before reproductive age, by the
action of modifying genes. It is, in fact, true
that the majority of the convulsive disorders of childhood remit before the fifteenth
birthday. |

We must now consider the relationship
between immaturity and the direct genetic
element in seizures.

The threshold for seizures is low in the
first four years of life in all children whatever
their genetic endowment (Ounsted 1951).
For example, in a personal consecutive series

of 150 children with purulent meningitis,
which I take as the maximum stress, the

incidence of convulsions was 8 per cent in

those aged more than four; 45 per cent in
those aged less than four years.

The Sibling-risk patterns related to the age
of onset in propositi.

After eliminating from the present series
all those whose seizures were related to
cerebral infection: and after setting aside
those children whose first fit occurred after
the eighth year, I have arrayed all remaining
children in three groups, depending on the
age at which they had their first fit. A¢tiology and diagnostic labels are, in these
propositi, ignored. Age at first fit is the sole
criterion. The age-groups are:

(i) The first year.

(ii) The period from 1—33.

(iii) The period from 3} to 8.

Next the sibling-fisks patterns were computed for each group and now, for each
diagnostic category: using the same standard
corrections as before and arriving at three of
the sibling-risk patterns. Fig. 13 shows the
results.

Risks to Siblings related to Age
2 at FIRST SEIZURE.
O-lyr. See

1-3h yrs
3h-8 yrs.

 
  
  

a
SO
5529050

xg
OJ
Oa

 

  
    
 

oO
Y

    
  
  
 
       
  

SEER
S282 >
OO
Od) x XX >

oO

  
      
  
  
  

   

OD
x

  

O99
>

     
     

°
xP sx

OOO
POX OS

 
     
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 

S525
S55

Risks to Siblings
Ox KO)

=, \/
S550
24
PSR
eee

SO

 
 

O
>

 

O)
0

 

  
 
 
 
 
  

55S
oO

a
oO

0

Cs)

Lx
b
b

     
     

   

     
 
 
  

O- NWHAUOODA MW}

 

ALL FORMS CONVULSIONS EPILEPSIES

Fic. 134
ASPECTS OF THE EPILEPSIES OF CHILDHOOD

% Risks to Siblings related to
Age at FIRST SEIZURE.

22 O-lyr B
20 1- 3h4yrs §

: 3,-8yrs

>
&= q
o
|
A
v

CV

Stblings
>

Risks to
PAN YWOOS = SG

Cvc CvEr CvEc ER eC
FIG. 13B

D LLM.

The striking feature is that the risks to
siblings of children whose first seizure was

in the middle-age period (1—34) are sub- .

stantially higher than the risks when the
first seizure of the propositus occurred either
within the first year of life, or when it
occurred after the age of 34. This dominance
of the middle-aged group is evident throughout the histogram and holds both for the
epilepsies and for the evoked convulsions.
The differences are most unlikely to be
due to chance. If we take the sibling-risk
patterns to be a measure of the etiological
weight of genetic endowment in the propositus, then it follows that seizures in this
crucial age period seem to have a powerful
genetic determination and that this genetic
determination is to convulsive disorders of
all types rather than to some _ specific

epilepsy.

Theoretical implications _,

The simplest interpretation of these results
is that a general, main or non-specific convulsive genotype exists and that the phenotypic expression of this genotype is rather
strictly conditional on a specific degree of
immaturity. It is indeed a rather useful
hypothesis that this genotype itself operates by producing an imbalance, either local
or general, in the rate of maturation of
the various cerebral systems involved. An

45

imbalance whose expression in seizure is
soon overcome by the natural advance of
maturity, leaving perhaps a_ detectable
trace in the E.E.G. patterns.

By implication a theory of this kind
involves the concept of a quantitative

_ seizure-threshold. But this does not neces
sarily imply that the main, common, specific
convulsive genotype must be polygenetic.

_ On the contrary, a single-gene pairis all that is

required; for the phenotypic expression of such
a gene will be progressively and quantitatively
modified by the operation of those genes which
control the natural progress of maturation.

This hypothesis is far from being established, but it is a useful mental tool. It
serves to reconcile the conflicting results of
other workers, suggesting why genetic factors
are prominent in children but much less
obvious in adults; it reconciles the discrep-ancies between the E.E.G. and clinical findings; it offers some sort of coherence to the
facts I have put before you tonight. The
theory can be subject to critical test by
long-term clinical and E.E.G. studies in the
maturation of whole sibships.

This, then, perhaps we may find. We may
also find specific epilepsies of simple genetic
origin with clear-cut E.E.G. and clinical
features. I think two or three may already
be discernible in the murk. A light-sensitive
form of pure petit mal: and, perhaps, a form
of grand mal remittent epilepsy.

I should have liked to give some further
results. In particular to have discussed the
risks to relatives of other degrees, the evidence on modes of transmission, the rather
curious finding that aggressive psychopathy
was suspiciously common among the fathers
of children with severe epilepsy, and so on;
but time is running on, so may I now turn
very briefly to mention certain social aspects of the problem?

Social Problems |

Every epileptic child presents a social
problem, for a whole family is involved when
a. child has fits. The parents have been
frightened by the somewhat dramatic nature
of the attacks; they fear that their other
children may develop the disease; they are
46 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

concerned about the future mental development of the affected child. The first point
that we have to clarify for them and for the
officers involved is that “‘epilepsy’’, quite
clearly, does not designate a socially homogeneous group. On the contrary, the group
of epileptic people covers the whole range of
human disabilities and abilities. The fits
themselves may be merely a few mild seizures
in the privacy of bed: or may be many
seizures occurring in public. The children
may be physically normal, or they may have
some mild or severe neurological lesions.
They may be aments, or they may be
geniuses—it is traditional to mention
Dostoyevsky; perhaps patients are more
encouraged by the examples of Julius
Caesar and the Pharoah Aknaton, now
that these epileptic worthies have become
immortal in technicolour.

There used to be an idea that epileptics

had a particular sort of personality, but I do’

not think that this view is now very widely
held. In fact one does seem to find certain

sorts of personality going with certain types

of epilepsy. Dr. Pond, I think, gave a very
clear description of the shy turned-in nature
of children with petit mal; by contrast there
1s brash assertive personality of some braininjured epileptics; or the bland amorality of
the psychopath.

Epileptics with normal mentality

In the present sample some three-quarters
of the children showed no physical or gross
mental abnormalities. Many of these children
had had fits at school and had been notified
as epileptics, so that the question of special
schooling had been raised. Happily the
School Medical Service and our clinics for
these children have worked in close collaboration, and in no case has it proved necessary
to commit a mentally normal epileptic to
institutional care. Among mentally normal
epileptics there has been no case in our
experience in which the fits themselves
proved a permanent bar to normal schooling. There have been a substantial. number
who have been excluded from school for a
time because of frequent fits, but fortunately
we have been able to get sufficient control

mal.

of the fits in all these children to return them
to school within less than six months in
every case. For mentally normal epileptics:
normal life is the rule.

Epileptics with simple mental retardation

Many epileptics are also mentally abnorSimple mental retardation is the
commonest deviation found. Here again it
seems to us that any form of special isolation
is unnecessary and uneconomic. These
children do well if they are treated simply in
accordance with their I.Q. and the fits are
ignored from the point of view of disposal.
Permanent segregation of epileptics with
mild mental retardation and poor social
backgrounds is, in practice, what happens
in some (though by no means all) epileptic

_colonies. This practice seems to have rather

little to recommend it. Inasmuch as these
people are retained in segregation until
reproductive age the practice is dysgenic,
since assortative mating between persons each
with two inheritable conditions is encouraged.

Neurotic reactions in epileptic children

Neurotic symptoms are not rare in epileptic children and in their parents: and are to
be anticipated when any social rejection
occurs. Usually the symptoms are quite
superficial, They stem from the ancient
myths which still control so much thinking
(both lay and medical) about epilepsy.

A simple mechanical explanation of the
nature of the seizures goes far in relieving
these undesirable reactions.

Fear of an intractable life-long illness is
another potent source of neuroticism in these
families. This fear, as you will know, is not
often founded in fact, but it is, alas, often
still encouraged. by medical opinion. Adequate management, therefore, involves,
whenever possible, the firm assertion that
full cure is possible and probable. Too much
scientific caution has unhappy consequences.

Psychotic Epileptic Children

There are a group of epileptic children
who present an unsolved social problem.
These are they who have violent aggressions
or an intense sustained overactivity.
ASPECTS OF THE EPILEPSIES OF CHILDHOOD 47

From all the children in my series who
have had severe mental disturbances I have
selected seventy in whom sustained hyperkinesia (overactivity) was the prominent
disability. These children showed also the
symptoms of distractibility, perseveration,
-euphoria and aggressiveness which are commonly found in brain-injured children. A
detailed clinical account of this group will
shortly be published (Ounsted 1955). I wish

here just briefly to mention the genetic and.

social problems presented by these children.
The pattern of sibling-risks for this group
is shown in Fig. 14. The pattern of risk is

xX Psy. GROUP

 
     
 
 
      

RISKS TO SIBLINGS IN CASES WITH

YW)

‘on 16

5 7” HYPERKENETIC PSYCHOTIC
\

3

o' BEHAVIOUR (70 cases)

tt

= 10

ae

~< .

uv 8 Siblings: 82
a

ie 7

a 4

Yo

ig

Oren ss
Fi HH ing

All Cv Ep Cur CvEr Er Ec Or Oc
Cvai2C vee
Fic. 14

clearly closely similar to that for the remittent epilepsies (Fig. 5). The pedigree shown
in Fig. 11. illustrates that this disorder may
occur in only one member of a family
although many kinsmen have similar epilepsies. In fact in no case did we find two
members of the same family afflicted with
this type of mental disorder. It seems,
therefore, to be unlikely that eugenic
measures will reduce this, the most socially
undesirable, group of epileptic children.
Nevertheless the majority of the parents

of these children restricted their families

when a child developed this psychotic
reaction, and this seems natural—for these
children occupy the whole attention of their
parents. This fact has undesirable social
consequences. The devotion of parents is
found to be directly proportional to the

degree of dementia. The worse the child, the
more devoted are the family.

(“ Excessive parental devotion”’ is not a
remark that one can safely inscribe in one’s
clinical notes, for anxious parents are
sharpish and apt to read one’s notes upsidedown as one writes them. So I have been
compelled to invent the grim neologism
‘“ hyperpeediophilia ’’ to record this parental
attitude.)

Now these overactive psychotics when in

‘the atmosphere of their homes, do badly;

and they do well if placed in institutional
care; so well, surprisingly enough, that a
month or so in hospital often induces a
remission which endures for several months,
only to relapse again. It would seem desirable, therefore, if places were available, and
the parents willing, to give these children
the advantage of some institutional care.

But their devoted parents resist all
attempts to remove these children—even for
a few days—if one does not, early in the
evolution of the child’s illness gain a rather
intimate relationship with them.

Here and indeed throughout the epilepsies
we are now just beginning to move into the
field of prophylaxis, and it is with this aspect
of illness that the Eugenics Society is especially concerned.

The role of eugenics in the prophylaxis of
epilepsy

The role of the geneticist and the eugenic
counsellor is necessarily large in the epilepsies of childhood. This is evident from the
fact that genetic ideas enter in any discussion
of these diseases. .

What answers can we give?

I think the answers can be generally of a
positive and cheerful nature. The general
risk that the child of an adult epileptic will
himself, when adult, be also an epileptic lies
between 2 and 4 per cent: a low risk. To
impose a general bar on procreation for
epileptics seems, therefore, likely to be
dysgenic. |

In Sweden the marriage of persons with
cryptogenic epilepsy, has been illegal for
197 years, since 1757. The incidence of
adult epilepsy in 1949, after nearly 200 years
48 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of this law is the same or slightly higher
than the incidence of adult epilepsy found in
all Western countries; namely 1 to 4 per
cent.

On the other hand it seems likely that we
shall soon be able to discern some rare but
true-breeding epilepsies, in which abstention
from child-bearing might recommend itself
to some potential parents. Of greater overall
importance, I think, is the possibility that
genetic considerations will clarify the position about the main convulsive genotype.
When this has been achieved it seems
probable that, by ascertaining those families
in which fits are likely to occur in early
childhood, we may by direct medical pro' phylaxis tide those children through their
early years of risk and so, perhaps, effectively
reduce the heavy burden of chronic epilepsy.

Summary

1. Epilepsy and other convulsive disorders
present numerically one of the largest problems in pediatrics, and children with these
diseases outnumber the combined total of
those with rheumatism, asthma and tuberculosis.

2. The etiology of convulsive disorders
is complex; multiple ztiology is the rule.

3. Diagnostic labels give a false impression
of homogeneity. Terminology is imprecise;
semantic confusions abound.

4. The conflicting results of various surveys complicate the picture. Extrapolation
from selected samples is dangerous.

5. One-third of all parents of affected
children ask questions of a genetic nature.
Treatment and prognosis are often based on
genetic considerations. Genetic. investigations cannot, therefore, be avoided. Genetic
analysis is a valid tool for clarifying the
diagnostic confusions.

6. Five possible modes of inheritance are
described.

“~», A personal sample of 1,000 affected |

children is described. The limited scope and
biased nature of the work are stressed.

8. Some of the results are given in the
form of the risk-patterns for varieties of
convulsive disorder among the kindred of

affected children. This method attempts to
give a qualitative and quantitative measure
of the genetic element in the various
epilepsies.

g. Febrile convulsions and the epilepsies
as a whole do not segregate.

10. Some genetic determination is probably to specific, potentially segregating,
epileptic diseases.

II. Some genetic determination probably
operates through quantitative variations

‘in the seizure threshold.

12. Most genetic determination is conditional for its expressions upon immaturity.
13. Acquired epileptic foci may require an
appropriate genetic background for their

expression.

- 14. A small series of twins are presented.
There is no association between twinning
and epilepsy.

15. Social studies suggest that the term
“Epileptic ’’ does not segregate a socially
homogeneous group.

16. With modern treatment epilepsy is
no bar to normal school and family life for
those who are mentally normal.

17. Many children with epilepsy have
mental disorders; those children should be
treated socially on their mental grading
alone. Administrative segregation in terms
of the epilepsy is wasteful and valueless.

18. Simple quantitative mental retardation is the commonest deviation and requires
measures appropriate to the I.Q.

19. Neurotic symptoms are not rare but
are commonly superficial and may be
relieved or prevented.

20. Aggressive and overactive behaviour

patterns are common and require special
methods of management. The hyperkinetic
psychosis in epileptic children is briefly
mentioned and the genetic background
sketched.
_ 21. Parental guilt-feelings are often
centred on a genetic idea. Parental devotion
increases with severity of the epilepsy and
the degree of dementia. A syndrome of
excessive parental devotion—hyperpezediophilia—is described together with its social
consequences.
. ASPECTS OF THE EPILEPSIES OF CHILDHOOD

22. The possibilities of the eugenic and
medical prophylaxis of chronic epilepsy are
discussed in the light of the concept of a
‘main common convulsive genotype, whose
phenotypic expression is conditioned by a
specific immaturity.

Acknowledgments

I wish to thank Dr. Victoria Smallpiece, who
directed this work, and the Research
Advisory Subcommittee of the Oxford Regional Hospital Board for much valuable
support.

Annals of
Human Genetics

Formerly “Annals of Eugenics ’’
Edited by L. S. PENROSE

Contents of Vol. XIX. Part 3. February 1955

Muscular dystrophy in Northern Ireland.
II. An account of g additional families.
A. C. STEVENSON.
III. Linkage data with particular reference
to autosomal limb girdle muscular dystrophy.
A. C. STEVENSON, E. A. CHEESMAN and MARY
CLARE HuTH
The electron microscopy of human hair pigments. N. A. BARNICOT, M. Ss. GC. BIRBECK
and F. W. Cuckow.
The transformation of discrete variables.
; F. N. Davin
Blood groups in abortion and sterility.
R. Gruss and S. SjosTepr.
The pattern of amino-acid secretion in
cystinuria.
H. Harris, Ursuta Mittwocn, ELizABETH
B. Rosson and F. L. WARREN.
' An etiological study of congenital heart
disease. M. CampBELL and P. E. POLANI.
Reviews.
Subscription price, 578. net per volume
Single issues 15s., plus postage

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
Bentley House, 200 Euston Rd., London, N.W.!

 

49 References

Alstrém, C. H. (1950). Acta. Ropobine et Neurol. Sup.
63. Copenhagen.

Bridge, E. M. (1949), Epilepsy and other Convulgjve
Disorders in Children. McGraw-Hill, London.
Connie, (1937), Stschr. f. d. ges. Neurol. u. Psychiat.

» 271.
Harvald, B. (1954), Heredity in Epilepsy. Munksgaard,
Copenhagen.
Lennox, W. G. (1947), Am. J. Psychiat., 103, 457; (1951),
J. Amer. Med. Ass., 146, 529.
Lennox, W. G., Gibbs, F. A. (1940),
Psychiat., 44, 1,155.
Cuneo (1951), Lancet, 1, 1,245; (1954), Brit. Med.
aed 9 929
Rosanoff, A. y., Handy, L. M., Rosanoff, I. A. (1934),
Arch. Neurol. Psychiat., 31, 1,165.

Arch. Neurol.

Slater, E. T. O. (1953), Prospects in Psychiatric Research,

pp. 63-67. Ed. Tanner, J. M., Blackwell, Oxford.

SSTUVNNIUANTUTCHUAUGUEULEUUUOULUUER EEUU de EEE

THE WORLD’S GREATEST
BOOKSHOP

a *f®OR BOOKS:

FAMED CENTRE FOR
MEDICAL BOOKS

 

Bookbuyers throughout the
_world turn to this bookshop asa
knowledgeable source of
information on all their book.
requirements. And from
generation to generation they
praise and recommend Foyles—and
buy their books here.

i

119-125 CHARING CROSS ROAD
LONDON, W.C.2

GERrard 5660 (16 lines) Open 9 to 6 (Thurs. 9 to 7)
Two minutes from Tottenham Court Road Station

NNUHUHUUUUIUUUUAI.A TEEGATE

UU UUM UMUC UU

STV MANVUNUUULLEAUU LULU

SUUTUTA TATA

Sv NT
