RACE MIXTURE*
By K. B. AIKMAN, MD. MRCP.

HE immense advances in the last

hundred years in the medical sciences

and their application have greatly
reduced death-rates, not only in civilized
countries, but in savage countries as well.
As a result there has occurred a general
increase of population and thus of migration,
which has had important effects—economic,
social, moral, religious and biological—both
on the peoples who have provided the
emigrants and on those who have received
them.

We must accept it as a fact that large
numbers of different races cannot live side
by side and compete for their daily bread
without the production of racial mixture.
There is one exception to this generalization :
in proportion as there is intense antagonism,
usually religious, the mixing of the races will
be lessened. The practical drawbacks, however, to such a method of race-separation,
are proved by the history of India. We need
merely note that race-mixing will take place
when opportunity occurs and ask ourselves
how far is this process desirable. It is a
question that cannot be answered in a word,
because the nature of the races crossed is
important.

THE PRIMARY RACES

Mankind may be divided into three
Primary Races: (1) The Negro, blackskinned, with short woolly hair and, typically, African; (2) The Mongolian, yellowskinned, with long straight hair and, typically, Asiatic; (3) The Caucasian, whiteskinned, with abundant wavy hair and,
typically, European. These groups may be
subdivided, but I propose to do so only in
the last case, classifying the Caucasians as
the Fair Caucasians of the north and west of
Europe and the Dark Caucasians of the south
and east.

* Abridged from a paper read before the Eugenics
Society on June 2oth, 1933.

161

So great are the differences between these
three Primary Races that they are comparable to the differences between the species of
the zoologist rather than to those between the
varieties. Therefore, the crosses between
Primary Races will be described as hybrids,
and the offspring of the more closely related
varieties and of the half-breeds, as mongrels.

EFFECTS OF HYBRIDIZATION

It may be said that the bulk of medical
opinion is against hybridization between the
Primary Races and that the best eugenic
opinion is definitely against it. Thus, Major
Leonard Darwin wrote: ‘‘ Theoretical reasons can be adduced for believing that
inter-breeding between widely divergent
races may result in the production of types
inferior to both parent stocks: and that
this would be the result of miscegenation is
at all events a common belief.’’ Professor
Ruggles Gates also supports this view. The
biological objection is based upon the fact
that, in these crosses, groups of inherited
characteristics remain associated or “‘ segregate,” with the result that the offspring has
a “‘ chaotic constitution.” Each variety of
man or of animal, in the course of time,
acquires a constitution adapted to its
particular mode of life and to the diseases to
which it is exposed. When such constitutions
are mixed by inter-breeding, a new constitution is produced, which is not adapted
to the mode of life of either parent and too
often is not fitted for any actual environment whatever.

As examples of simple skeletal maladaptations, we find hybrids with skulls too large
to permit of their birth; others with teeth
too large for their jaws; and others with
either the upper or the lower jaw a misfit
with its neighbour. There are, however,
many more complicated disabilities, such as
altered resistance to disease and disharmonies of the internal secretions. It is found
162

that the greater the difference between the
races crossed, the less likely is the result to be
beneficial: that the Caucasian is nearer to
the Mongolian than either is to the Negro,
and that the Dark Caucasian is nearer to the
Mongolian than is the Fair Caucasian, and
so the Dark Caucasian cross is the less
harmful of the two.

These generalizations, to which there may
be exceptions, are supported by the American, Professor N. S. Shaler:

“It is not only a general belief that
hybrids of blacks and whites are less
prolific and more liable to diseases than
the pure bloods of either stock, but also
that they seldom live so long. Statistics
lacking on this point, I have questioned a
large number of physicians well placed for
judgment in this matter. All of them
agreed that the offspring of a union
between pure black and white parents is,
on the average, much shorter lived and
much less fertile than the race of either
parent. My father, a physician of experience and a critical observer, who had spent
more than half a century in Cuba and the
slave-holding South, stated that, in his
opinion, he had never seen mulattoes,
that is a cross between white and pure
black, who had attained the age of sixty
years, and that they were often sterile.
The judgment of medical men seems to be
that when the blood of either race preponderates, and in proportion as it verges
to one or the other, the longevity and
fertility increase or decrease.”

THE FACTOR OF ENVIRONMENT

This opinion, then, supports the view that
hybrids are usually worse than mongrels.
I would, however, remind you that there is
more in this matter of heredity. There is
environment as well. While it is no doubt
hereditary effects which interest us in the
first place, we must cultivate a broad outlook
and give full consideration to those other
effects which are scarcely less important
because they are environmental. That at
any rate is the eugenic standpoint. Racemixture may alter many factors in the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

environment, such as family-life, language,
education, religion, and the whole standard
of living and of civilization. We must, then,
answer the question: Is the environment
of the hybrid likely to be as good as that of
the child of pure race? The answer is, No!
Often it will be worse even than that of the
race of the inferior parent. Too often the
hybrid is illegitimate, hating his white
father and despising his black mother. But
even if his parents are married and there is
no racial prejudice against mixed marriages
where they live, it is exceedingly unlikely
that the environment will be good, for at
least one of the parents is almost certain to
be reckless, improvident, disinclined to
settle down, and with poor ideals of parenthood.

In considering how these factors will
affect the offspring, it should be recalled
that the character of a child is formed at a
very early age, and that it is impossible to
over-estimate the importance of the parents
as a factor in his environment. No one,
certainly no one who has been married,
could doubt that the married life of parents
of such widely different races as European
and Negro would be grossly inharmonious,
with consequent disadvantages to the children of the marriage.

The United States presents these problems
on the largest scale and has devoted much
research to them. Indeed, in many States
the American view is crystallized into laws
absolutely forbidding marriage between
white and coloured persons. Furthermore,
as the statistics of divorce show, family life
in the United States is less stable than it was.
I attribute this instability, in very large
measure, to the mixed blood of the bulk of
her citizens. It is said that people of
foreign birth and their children make up
one-third of her population, while another
third has had one foreign parent. Under such
conditions, it must be increasingly difficult
to find two partners for life with similar
ideals, tastes and outlook, and there would
be a growing tendency for marriages to result
purely from mutual sex-attraction. This is
indeed a valuable ingredient in married life,
but marriages of which it is the main
RACE MIXTURE

foundation are not likely to be a permanent
success.

It is noteworthy that many of the American cases to which I refer are marriages
between Europeans of different races. If
instability is a characteristic of such marriages, it must be commoner still in the
hybrid marriages between the Primary
Races, and commoner still when these unions
occur without a marriage ceremony.

CROSSES BETWEEN ALLIED RACES

On the other hand, crosses between races
that are closely akin, whether of men or of
animals, may result in superior and vigorous
offspring, at least in some cases. This is of
especial interest to ourselves, because it
supports the view of such authorities as
T. H. Huxley that the races which intermingled in these islands must have been
closely allied by blood; for it cannot be
denied that the intermarriages of all the
peoples who crossed the North Sea, both
with each other and with the earlier inhabitants of Britain, produced a vigorous and
efficient people.

That this kinship may have been closer
than is popularly supposed is also suggested
by the fact that, among the more distinct
nationalities of Europe, it is very difficult to
decide where to place the line dividing those
who are good or bad for crossing with each
other. So much is this the case that one
authority, Professor Eliot of Harvard, considers that the marriage of people of different
European races produces children weaker
and less able than those whose parents
belong to the same nation.

AMERICAN VIEWS AND EXPERIENCE

The prejudice and emotion that may be
aroused by this question of race mixture are
abundantly shown in the diametrically
opposed opinions, expressed with the greatest vehemence, which may be found in the
copious (mainly American) literature on the
subject. This vast literature, these prejudices
and emotions, not only give a measure of the
importance of the problems concerned, but
illustrate one of the drawbacks to the close

163

intermingling of different races. Booker T.
Washington, himself a coloured man and the
founder of the Tuskegee Institute, Alabama,
the foremost Negro educational establishment in the world, said that ‘‘ the problem
is not so much what the white man will do
with the Negro, as what the Negro will do
with the white man and his civilization.”’
Other serious writers hold that the ultimate
future of the United States of America will
be to be inhabited by a mixed race of Caucasian-Negro hybrids and mongrels with a
dash of Mongolian from the Red Indian
stock. It happens that South Ameriea is
already peopled mainly by such a mixed race,
although the proportion of American Indian,
that is to say of Mongolian, is higher in most
parts; and, with the South American
example of instability, backwardness, political and other weaknesses at their door, it is
small wonder that the white Americans are
alarmed for the future of their country,
quite apart from any emotions which might
be attributed to race-prejudice.

Nor is political instability the only issue,
for the biological weakness of the hybrid
stock is attested by such an authority as
F. L. Hoffman, of the Prudential Insurance
Company of America, who asserts that the
people of mixed race in the United States
are physically inferior to either the pure
white or black. This inferiority, he says, is
shown in their weaker vitality and less
resistance to disease. This view is reinforced
by the interesting observation in the Philippines, that, among the men of the United
States’ Forces invalided home, the ratio of
blondes to brunettes was as 100 to 126.
Moreover, it was the brunettes among whom
the proportion of mixed bloods and especially of Negro-white mixtures would be
highest, who suffered especially from neurasthenia and tuberculosis.

MONGOLIAN HYBRIDS

When from the Caucasian-Negro hybrid
we turn to the Caucasian-Mongolian, we find
(according to Dr. J. A. Mjgen, of Norway,
who has made a special study of the hybrids
between the Lapps, who are Mongolians, and
the Scandinavians, who are exceptionally
164

pure Fair-Caucasians) that the offspring are
inferior to either of their parents. “ They
are often mentally and physically unsound ;
they are more likely to be a burden on the
State, both from moral and physical infirmity ; they are far more subject to tuberculosis.”” He urges that “until we have
more definite knowledge of the effect of
race-crossings, we shall certainly do our
best to avoid crossings between widely
different races.’”’ ‘‘ Crossings,’ he repeats,
“between widely different races can lower
the physiological and mental level.”

Professor H. Lundborg, of Sweden, supports this view and urges that “‘ we must also
pay great attention to immigration so that
inferior individuals belonging to foreign
races cannot enter the country and settle
without any hindrance. A mixture between
nations who, from a race-biological point of
view, stand high and others containing lower
race-elements is certainly to be condemned.”’

In connection with the Mongolian-Negro
hybrid, there is little recent scientific
observation. As the Mongolian is closer,
biologically, to the Negro than is the
Caucasian, my impression is that the Mongolian-Negro cross is less detrimental. Cases
occur, for example in Jamaica, but they are
not regarded with enthusiasm, either socially
or biologically.

SOCIOLOGICAL PROBLEM OF RACE
MIXTURE

That is the biological side, but we must
remember that immigration of different
races leads to the complication of a whole
host of administrative problems which are
all too difficult already in modern civilization. One need only instance the segregation
of races, as in the “ Jim Crow”’ cars on
railways in the Southern States; the racial
friction which often expresses itself in lynchings; the economic problems and trade
disputes due to wage-cutting and to different
standards of living; the legal problems,
often of the most distressing kind, due to
laws in the United States rendering illegal
marriages between white and coloured persons, and the profound effect upon the life

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of the nation produced by the Negroes and
hybrids.

It is not generally realized how great is
this effect already. It is likely to become
even greater. Not only because the number
of people with some negro blood in their veins
is increasing (and I would remind you that
there are some twelve million Negroes and
coloured persons in the States), but also
because the Negro is increasing in material
prosperity and in education. It will become
progressively more difficult to limit his
political power in the Southern States and
his political power in the North is much
greater than it was before the war. Little
wonder, then, that there are many Americans
who feel that all is not well with their
culture, art, music, sexual-morality, familylife and religion, and who attribute much of
the alleged deterioration to the effect of the
extraordinary mixture of races and colours
and unassimilated aliens present in the
“Melting Pot,”’ as Israel Zangwill termed
the United States.

A CONTROLLED EXPERIMENT

But for those who feel that we cannot yet
see the end of the greatest experiment on
earth in race-mixing, a striking historical
case exists in the fate of the people of
the Northern Kingdom of Israel, after they
began freely to intermarry with foreigners.
It may be recalled how they rapidly forsook
their religion and became idolaters, soon
acquiring all the vices of the surrounding
nations and losing their own virtues. They
deteriorated until they became so weak that
they fell a prey to their neighbours, the
Assyrians. Later, the same thing happened
to the Southern Kingdom of Judah. The
prophet Nehemiah well knew both the direct
and the indirect effects of race-mixture, and
it was not without good reason that he cried
to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, after their
return from Babylon: “Shall we then
hearken unto you to do all this great evil, to
trespass against our God in marrying strange
women ”’ (xiii, 27). The parallelism is striking. The same sequence of events occurred
both in the Northern Kingdom of Israel, and
then, more than a century later, in the
RACE MIXTURE

Southern Kingdom of Judah: race-mixture,
deterioration ; defeat and captivity.

Here we have two clean scientific experiments, both on a nation-wide scale. The
second may be regarded as a control. Both
produced the same result and clearly demonstrated cause and effect. If, in Palestine, the
result of this mixing of rather similar races
was unfavourable, which cannot be denied,
we should expect an even less favourable
result when the primary races are crossed.
And, indeed, we find that our deductions are
justified, and that when a similar experiment is made in modern times history repeats
itself. In the United States there was a
people, mainly of Caucasian stock like the
Israelites, and like them believing in a
monotheistic religion and enjoying a relatively superior civilization. The introduction
of people of a different race, idolaters and of
a relatively inferior civilization, has led to
racial mixture. The result, in the words of
Professor Van Dyke of Princeton University,
is ‘‘ perhaps the greatest and most perplexing
problem that any nation has ever had to
face.” While W. P. Livingstone declared,
“so gigantic does the problem appear, so
difficult of peaceful solution, that the nation
is helpless in face of it. ... It remains,
what it has been for a century, the darkest
and most menacing cloud on the horizon of
national life.” Can it be doubted that the
many Americans who agree with these
writers wish that their nation had devoted
more time in the past to the study of
eugenics and ethnology and had acted on its
results ?

POSSIBILITIES OF THE FUTURE

Any race which is in possession of a land
should take all these facts into consideration.
Such a race is morally bound to give the
closest attention to the effects of racemigration, not only as it affects the present
generation of its citizens, but as it affects the
future generations, both as regards their
heredity and their environment.

It is surely of great significance that all the
peoples of our own Celtic-Anglo-Saxon stock
who have had the most practical experience
of these problems are doing their utmost to

165

exclude the Mongolian and the Negro races
from their countries. I need only refer to
recent legislation in Canada, Australia and
the United States to show this. But this is
much more than an Imperial problem, it
affects the future of the white race itself and
through it the future of civilization.

The Report of the Census Director of
South Africa stated that, unless increased by
accessions from abroad, the European race
in South Africa “‘ must for ever abandon the
prospect of maintaining a white civilization,
except aS a proportionately diminishing
minority in face of an increasing and
ultimately overwhelming majority. It may
then be forced to abandon its domination or
even abandon the country.”’ These are the
words of a serious official report and they
should make us think. The Negro in the
past has not shown any great genius for
stable political institutions. The native
states established a century ago in South
Africa ended in collapse. The Black Republics of Hayti and Santo Domingo in the
West Indies are examples of Negro rule after
a considerable degree of white influence and
their record is one of wholesale massacre.
Even in Liberia, at the present day, slavery
and torture are common. Thus, there is
good reason to fear that if Africa is to fall
back under Negro rule, it will deserve its
name—the Dark Continent.

When we turn to the Mongolian races of
Asia, we must recognize that, speaking
practically, they are the most serious
menace to the Caucasian race. Even now
we are feeling severely the commercial
competition of one of them and there is
nothing incredible in the idea of another
invasion of Europe from the East. It has
happened several times before, and evidences
of these invasions remain, not only in
written history, but in the Hungarians and
the Lapps, who are Mongolians, and in the
Alpine Sub-race which is Asiatic in origin.

We have all heard of the Yellow Peril, and
a recent writer expresses his opinion of its
reality in three words—“ Ex oriente—Nox!”’
That is one view of the ethnological future.
For us it is a gloomy one, but there is
another—and you may take your choice—
166

which is that the world will ultimately be
peopled by an intimate compound of white
and yellow and black. It may be! Some
people profess to look forward gladly to that
time when national rivalries shall be no more,
because nations will have ceased to provide
that variety which is the spice of life, all
sunk into a monotonous morass having the
colour of coffee and milk. But if these
alternatives are to be avoided—and I hope
that this is still possible—it can only be
through our studying the problems of racemixture and by acting before it is too late.
The impression I have formed is that, until
our real knowledge of heredity has made
very great advances, any policy of encouraging racial mixtures is a gamble which is
unjustified. Our progress will be more
certain and more rapid if we apply the
principles of positive and of negative eugenics
to the races which already exist. Eugenists
are absolutely confident that all these races
can be improved biologically and no one
denies that they are also capable of improvement socially and environmentally.

THE NEED FOR “SEGREGATION ”

Difficult as it undoubtedly is, some form
of mass-segregation of races seems to be
desirable but, by this term, I do not mean
complete segregation. The ideal would
seem to be that teachers, administrators,
judges and doctors should have access to the
more backward races and that interchange
of ideas should be allowed full play. In this
way, each people would make its contribution to the culture of the world and would
have the opportunity of fuller development.
If some of these races showed themselves
more fitted than others to certain districts
of the world and proved their survival value,
they would tend to spread and the present
inhabitants of these districts would in time
be reduced to vanishing point. This has
been the course of biological progress in the
past and it is still its truest course in the
present state of our knowledge.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

We have seen that the effects of hybridization between the Primary Races are bad, both
biologically and socially, and that they are
likely to be especially bad if one race is
primitive, while the other is in an advanced
state of civilization.

Among primitive peoples of the same
Primary Race, there appears to be less
objection to intermarriage. Biologically,
there may be an accession of hybrid vigour
and the production of more efficient types :
on the other hand, there may be degeneration. In the present state of our knowledge
we cannot predict the result and so are not
justified in encouraging such unions. We
must bear in mind that these Primary Races
are capable of much subdivision and we
must carefully study the mass of material
which is available; if only because this is
essential to any intelligently planned scheme
of Empire migration.

Socially, intermarriages between some of
these primitive peoples may be unobjectionable, because they are sufficiently primitive
to have escaped the devastating complexities
of civilization, but each case must be
considered on its merits.

Among civilized peoples of the same
Primary Race, intermarriage is less desirable
than is commonly thought. Biologically,
there are the same possibilities of hybrid
vigour and of degeneration and the distinction between Fair Caucasians and Dark
Caucasians is probably important. Socially,
however, the complexities of the civilized
mind militate against the harmony of such
married lives and this must have great
weight with the eugenist.

Much of what I have said may be summarized in one verse of Kipling’s poem,
‘“ The Stranger.”

‘“‘ This was my father’s belief
And this is also mine :
Let the corn be all one sheaf
And the grapes be all one vine,
Ere our children’s teeth are set on edge
By bitter bread and wine.”’

——— ST

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 3.
