THE EUGENICS REVIEW

stage is properly set for a rational approach to
the understanding and interpretation of projections. For example, the single page devoted to
the choice of a time-span explains how for some
purposes it is advantageous to look far ahead
while for others only the next few years need be
contemplated. Similarly the value of a set of
alternative projections and the best concepts for
a range of such a set are expounded succinctly
and clearly. P. R. C.

SOCIOLOGY

Hobhouse, L. T. Sociology and Philosophy: A
Centenary Collection of Essays and Articles.
Preface by Sydney Caine. Introduced by Morris
Ginsberg. London, 1966. G. Bell for the London
School of Economics. Pp. xxvii+340. Price 45s.

THIS VOLUME CONTAINS twelve essays and
articles reprinted from various sources and an
interesting introduction by Professor Ginsberg.
This reprinting is very welcome; all the papers in
the volume are written with the clarity and
vigour so characteristic of Hobhouse and can be
read with profit to-day. It is a great service to
have rescued these writings from the semioblivion of encyclopaedias and learned journals
and to have made them easily accessible to a wide
public. Hobhouse, who died in 1928, was the
most outstanding English sociologist during the
first quarter of the present century. His work
covered a very wide range; he was a scholar in
more than one field and he also made notable
contributions to the discussion of the social and
political problems of his day.

The topic which inspired his main work was
that of social development, a topic which, as
Professor Ginsberg says, is again attracting
attention after having been out of favour for a
time. Hobhouse was careful not to equate social
development with progress; for him social
development was a process of mental learning
through experience the course of which had to be
traced by establishing the facts while judgement
of facts had to be kept distinct from judgement
of values. When expounding his view of social
development, which can hardly be contested,
Hobhouse was concerned in some of his writings
(though in none which are included in this

102

volume) to confute the somewhat crude attempts

to interpret social development as having a basis

in biological evolution, which were current at the
beginning of this century. In this he was fully

justified, but from some of his work he gives the

impression that he underrated the importance of
the genetic endowment of individuals; in any

case he did not concern himself with those

problems which are of special interest to students

of eugenics.

Of the essays in this volume, that on sociology
is the one which will probably be of greatest
interest to readers of THE EUGENICS REVIEW.
This essay, which originally appeared in the
Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics in 1920,
sets out the task of sociology as Hobhouse saw
it, and can be read with profit by those who work
in any of the special social sciences, demography,
for instance. His view is summed up in a
quotation which Professor Ginsberg extracts
from another article, not reprinted here, which
appeared in 1908: “General Sociology’, he
wrote, “is neither a separate science complete in
itself before specialism begins, nor is it a mere
synthesis of the social sciences consisting in a
mechanical juxtaposition of their results. It is
rather a vitalizing principle that runs through all
social investigations nourishing and nourished
by it in turn, stimulating inquiry, correlating
results, exhibiting the life of the whole in the
parts and returning from the study of the parts
to a fuller comprehension of the whole’.

A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS

ECONOMICS

Meade, J. E. The Stationary Economy. London,
1965. Allen and Unwin. Pp. 238. Price 35s.

ALMOST EXACTLY THIRTY years ago Mr. (as
he then was) James Meade published his
successful textbook An Introduction to Economic
Analysis and Policy in which he expounded, at an
introductory level, the then new ideas about
employment and income, and about imperfect
competition. He was concerned to stress especially their implications for policy problems,
and he actually used some of the new technical
concepts in advocating particular economic
policies. This latest volume from Professor
