Second International Conference

of Human Genetics

The Conference
HIS NOTABLE CONFERENCE, in the
spacious premises of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, opened in Rome with speeches and a
reception at the Campidoglio on the evening
of September 6th, 1961. The succeeding days,
up to and including September 12th, were fully
occupied with morning and afternoon sessions
held in three parallel series of invited and contributed papers. The evening entertainments and
receptions, and the Conference publications
and printed ephemerata, were all of a lavishness
and style suitable to the eternal city. Rome,
when climatically temperate as it was, can
scarcely be bettered anywhere for conferences
of a technical nature where yet the participants
are awake to beauty and culture in other fields.
Professor Luigi Gedda, the Conference
President and creative magician, must receive
the thanks of all for his magnificent success
in organization, and likewise the munificence
of the City of Rome, the Italian Government
and the Vatican must be promptly acknowledged.
The total membership of the Conference was
around 700, and many members’. were
accompanied by a spouse whose interests lay
outside genetics. Thirty-one nations were included, led by the U.S.A. with 184 representatives,
the U.K. with ninety and Italy with seventythree.

The Substance of the Conference

The originally proposed title of the Conference had included the words ‘“‘and Eugenics,”
but this tailpiece had been dropped without
explanation during the months preceding.
There was no antagonism to eugenic interests,
papers or ideals, but the emphasis lay elsewhere
because, in truth, interest as yet is mainly elsewhere.

Human genetics, one was forced to recognize
more fully than ever, is still very largely in the

descriptive phase of its evolution as a particularized science. That description is centred
upon living cells, personal traits, visible
symptoms and so on. Many seethe with descriptive excitement based upon the modern
analysis of blood groupings, or the new techniques for making clearly visible human chromosomes and their anomalies which can then be
correlated with symptomatic phenomena in
living persons. Twin studies, too, are still the
mode of dissecting and describing phenomena
where genetic and environmental influences are
tangled.

The obvious stress, among so many geneticists,
upon the abnormal is understandable. It is easier
at this stage of knowledge to describe and study
defined abnormalities, fairly discrete symptoms
and appearances, than it is to analyse the background to those variations included in normality.
Genetics, not circumscribed by the adjective
‘“‘*human,” is now in a very different state. The
greater ease of experiment and the sense of
purpose engendered by the controlled evolution
of domestic animals and plants, have led
standard geneticists towards both the normal
and the future. Non-human genetics is well
advanced from the descriptive phase to the
practical and immediately advantageous.

In his opening address Professor F. J. Kallman
stressed that little sense of responsibility, except
in the realms of radiation hazards and personal
counselling, has yet overtaken human geneticists.
The exclusion of eugenics from the Conference
title is simply a facing of this unfortunate fact.
Perhaps a subsidiary factor is the emotion so
often aroused by the discussion of the genetics
of mental traits, intellectual potentialities and
their attempted measurement, and the passage
of abilities and abnormalities alike from the
present into the future. Descriptive and anatomical human genetics escape such emotional
overtones.

The fact that moral issues, via radiation

209

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1962, 53, 4.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

hazard, begin now to afflict human geneticists,
may perhaps encourage those among them who
already see the moral issues which are inseparable from population limitation among the
myriads of diverse humanity.

Contributions

The Eugenics Society was well represented at
the Conference and there were speakers in many
varied sections and on many topics. Elder
Statesmen of the Society including Sir Ronald
Fisher and Professor R. Ruggles-Gates; J. A.
Fraser Roberts, who was a Chairman of Sessions
and other members of the Society’s Council—
J. M. Tanner, P. R. Cox, C. O. Carter, A. E.
Mourant, H. Lehmann, E. T. O. Slater and
A. C. Stevenson—all made their contributions,
the last as representative of W.H.O. Additionally there were papers from other Fellows
of the Society, from A. W. F. Edwards, a recent
Darwin Research Fellow, R. F. J. Withers and
from the General Secretary.

The style of presentation of papers generally
was most varied and sometimes disappointing.
Indeed the technique of presentation and
delivery often fell short of what it ought to have
been. Happily, however, it may be recorded
that this criticism did not apply to the British
contributions which were, almost all, models of
suitable compression and brevity. There was
realization of the good sense—seemingly not
understood by all too many others—of the rule
that contributions should be limited to fifteen
minutes spoken at not more than 100 words a
minute. The simultaneous translators and those
born to non-European languages were most
grateful to those who recognized these points.
So were those Chairmen who remained
conscious of their duty to check the overvoluble.

All Conference members were provided with
two bulky volumes of advance Abstracts in
four languages.* All contributions to the Conference are later to be published in full.

The gallery of exhibits, mostly in illustration

 

* These volumes have now been separated by Excerpta
Medica Foundation into single-language parts and are
published as Excerpta Medica: International Congress
Series, No. 32. The English version is obtainable from the
Secretary, Excerpta Medica Foundation, 67¢c New Bond
Street, London, W.1 (Pp. 187, Price 40s.)

210

of particular papers, included a table bearing
some of the Eugenics Society’s post-war publications.

Radiation Hazards

On private initiative, an attempt was made to
induce the Conference to pass a resolution that,
in this time of peril by nuclear warfare, a sperm
bank be set up which should be protected from
harmful radiation, and which should be extended to include dedicated human volunteers
and animal specimens. A draft resolution to

- this effect was negatived, with many abstentions;

but a continuing committee to investigate
possibilities in more considered detail was asked
to report later.

The Conference did, however, pass unanimously a resolution on the hazards of ionizing
radiation. A form of words was adopted which,
signed on behalf of the Conference by Penrose,
Boyes, Kallman and Gedda, will be sent at
once to all national governments.

A convincing feat of oratory was also performed by the Deputy-Director of Euratom at
the formal closing session of the Conference
when he drew attention to the special need for
people well versed in physics and biology
together and not one or the other discipline
alone.

Third Conference

The Conference agreed a plan for the organization of its successor, probably in 1965. Plans
are to be in the hands of the six-man Standing
Committee with whom will be associated
twelve others elected by the Conference on a
regional basis.

SOME CONTRIBUTIONS

The following summaries of a variety of
papers are based on the printed abstracts of
the Conference, and Dr. C. o. Carter’s report
in The Lancet.*

E. SILVERSTRONI (Rome) described the development of the first large-scale attempt at
negative eugenics through counselling. He
estimated that there were two million individuals

* 23.6.6]—by permission
SECOND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE OF HUMAN GENETICS

in Italy heterozygous for the gene responsible
for Cooley’s anaemia, resulting in the death of
1,000 homozygotes a year. By “pre-matrimonial
prophylaxis” —that is, dissuading heterozygotes
from marrying each other—these deaths were
preventable. Centres now established in many
areas in Italy were engaged in testing every
child in the elementary schools for heterozygocity.

R. B. CATTELL (Urbana) described the partition
of the variation observed in intelligence and
other personality traits into genetic and environmental variation, and the interaction of genes
and environment, by a “multiple abstract
variance analysis.”’> Like other observers, he
found about three-quarters of the variation in
intelligence test score to be due to genetic
variation. Similarly hereditary factors were
more important for excitability, the cyclothymic-schizothymic scale, and super-ego strength.
Tendermindedness versus toughmindedness, and
general inhibition, were largely environmentally
determined. Such assessment applied only to
the particular culture being studied.

C. S. FORD (Harwell) noted that five years ago
Tjio and Levan had announced almost apologetically that man had 46 and not 48 chromosomes. To-day we knew of seven forms of
anomalies of the sex chromosomes, eleven types
of chromosome mosaicism, three types of
autosomal trisomy, and several examples of
chromosome translocation. It was remarkable
that whereas with trisomy 21 (Downs’ syndrome)
about half the offspring also had Downs’
syndrome, the ten known children of women
with trisomy of the X chromosomes were all
normal.

K. PATAU and his colleagues (Wisconsin)
suggested that many patients with multiple
anomalies might be instances of partial trisomy
and that each main anomaly was due to the
presence in triplicate of a specific “trisomy
locus.””

Discussing natural selection and human
chromosomal aberrations, L. S. PENROSE
(London) noted that while those heterozygous
for a translocation had reduced fertility, those
homozygous for such translocations might
have normal fertility. There were no clear
instances of chromosome inversion in man, but

in Drosophila chromosome inversion might be
associated with super-fertility. |

J. V. NEEL (Michigan) emphasized the importance of polymorphic systems in which a number
of alleles at a gene locus were present in the
population, at a frequency which could not be
attributed to mutation pressure, and therefore
presumably had adaptive significance. At many
gene loci there might be ancptimal level of heterozygosity, and many malformations of ill-defined
genetic basis might be due to the patient’s
failing to reach a level of heterozygosity obligatory for normal development. Heterozygosity
could lead to the production of hybrid molecules and not just to the mixture of two molecules. Thinking along these lines, several
authors had reported studies on the effect of
race-crossing, which might be expected to
increase heterozygosity, and of inbreeding,
which might be expected to reduce it.

With regard to the social problem of differential fertility in civilized communities, J. v.
HIGGINS and his colleagues (Minneapolis),
in a large family study of the intelligence of
both parents and their children, found that there
were more children per family for parents with
1.Q.s of above 130 and below 70 than for those
in between. But the large family size of parents
of low I.Q. was balanced by the finding that
many of the sibs of these parents were childless.

C. O. CARTER (London) reported that a disquieting feature of the social scene in northwest European countries and north America
had been the negative correlation of social
class and educational status, with fertility.
Because of the considerable degree of educational opportunity, and social. mobility, in
these countries it was probable that this association resulted in the loss of gehes predisposing
to the development of socially valuable qualities,
including intelligence. The Scottish surveys of
1932 and 1947 showed that. the. gains in height
and weight known to have occurred over this

period had not been paralleled. by any appreciable gain in intelligence. |

The association might be attributed to the
practice of deliberate planning: of family size
being adopted first by the more intelligent and
capable parents, while those less gifted tended
still to have natural families. .It might be expected

211
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to disappear as the practice of planning family
size spread through the community.

Recently there had been encouraging signs
that not only was the association disappearing,
but it was tending to be reversed within the
section of the community in which family size
was planned. In the 1951 Census of England and
Wales it might be seen that men in Social Class I
had a higher fertility than men in any other nonmanual occupation. In the United States the
1951 Census showed a marked reduction in
differential fertility by social class and educational status when compared with that seen
in the 1941 Census. In Sweden an admirable
follow-up of national service recruits of 1944
indicated that, except perhaps at the lowest
level, there would be a positive correlation
between ultimate fertility and intelligence test
score at the time of recruitment to national
service.

It was suggested that when family planning
was complete in these countries there would be
positive selection for genes predisposing to
intelligence, and perhaps other socially valuable
qualities, at least as intense as that obtained,
with high natural fertility and high infant
mortality, up till ten to fifteen generations ago.

P. R. COX (London) said that the main aim
of his paper was to present some recent statistics,
collected from a variety of sources, to illustrate
the speed with which the composition of human
populations was changing as they grew. Many
of the more important changes were associated
in some way with genetic differences. The most
obvious and well-known divergencies were those
occurring in the world as a whole, between races,
continents and nations, but equally striking
developments were occurring in some individual
countries in which different races and other
groups were becoming more or less dominant
in number.

His paper concluded with a brief reference to
the desirability or undesirability of the trends
indicated and the extent to which it might be
envisaged that agreement on a course of action
to encourage the desirable and discourage the
undesirable might be attained.

H. J. MULLER (Indiana), whose paper was read
for him in his absence, described how modern
medical and other techniques, by enabling

212

practically everyone to live and breed ad lib,
had abandoned man’s genetic constitution to a
chaotic interplay of individual circumstances
and caprices, allowing a continued accumulation of diverse genetic impairments. How
could this threat to our most precious heritage
be met?

Authoritative control, with its debased values,
class and race biases, and personal infringements,
would institute consciously directed degradation.
But in a democracy, measures intentionally
encouraging or discouraging childbearing in
given sectors of the population would not be
tolerated. True, individual genetic counselling
could somewhat reduce the production of
definite abnormalities. Nevertheless, in the far
larger matter of bringing about an overall
positive correlation between size of family and
the multiple-factor basis of better health,
intellect, and character, genetic enlightenment
and moral suasion were likely to defeat their
own purposes. For the more capable and conscientious were the very persons who, recognizing
their short-comings, would oftenest curtail their
families, while the others reproduced relatively
faster.

This dilemma was circumvented by the broadening of the possibilities of reproduction
afforded by modern techniques of germcell
storage and introduction. Thereby, couples
actuated by more enlightened ethical standards
and aided by genetic counselling, would be
enabled to choose voluntarily when they so
desired, the sources of germinal material for
their family. Although those already better
endowed would oftener utilize such opportunities, they could usually find still better
genetic material. This procedure would provide
a genetic leaven in the population. Moreover,
the more poorly endowed, influenced by these
examples, would increasingly elect to make
similar privileges available for their own families.
Herewith the proper psychological imperatives
for determining marriage choice and family
size, namely, compatibility and love of children,
achieved still ampler scope yet the genetic
constitution became increasingly influenced in
the direction of man’s higher values.

G. C. L. BERTRAM (Cambridge) said that
population was increasing rapidly, primarily
SECOND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE OF HUMAN GENETICS

as a result of benevolent effort and the increase
was neither planned nor uniform.

The world population to-day was not merely
the past population multiplied. Growth had
occurred at widely varying rates at different
periods. The same process continued to-day,
though now individual control of reproduction
was an added complication that was spreading
fast, with the growth of a new personal freedom.
Hence, although world population forty years
from now was likely to double, it would not be
merely doubling of the population of each area.
There would be variations irrespective of any
population policies developed by the nations.

Similarly, within populations all would not
contribute equally to the increase. There would
be no special significance in these observations
if all people were identical. But there were great
variations of inherited attributes within populations and between populations. Genetic variety
was of course sharpened or modified by environmental factors, educational, traditional, sociological and so on. So long as there was suitable
adjustment to environmental demands precise
anatomical details—skin pigmentation, etc.—
mattered little. Physiological superiority might
come to matter more, however, under progressively crowded conditions.

Yet diversities dependent upon those genetic
factors which determined intellectual ability,
vigour, pugnacity, etc. were far more important
already, and likely to be more so in the future.

World problems were likely to get more and
not less difficult, and, within all populations it
became progressively more important to upgrade human inherited capacities of the desired
kind. Such upgrading was scarcely assured if
left to chance, though chance would long have
influence. The new freedom of personal planning
in reproduction was spreading, but it must be
spread universally and with speed. This was
because we had a regard for individual welfare
within the complex interrelationship of needs
and numbers. But would that lead to higher
mean ability within populations? Or would an
overall plan not come to be essential ?

J. A. FRASER ROBERTS (London), in introducing
from the Chair the Symposium on Methods in
Human Genetics, said that in general, though
with some notable exceptions, human genetics

had to be content with a relatively small part of
what could be discovered under experimental
conditions. Even in achieving this much, however, the methods used were necessarily more
complicated both in the assembling of the data
and then in their analysis. A wide diversity of
techniques was needed, so varied indeed that it
was difficult to summarize or classify them.
In recent times consideration of the methods
used in the collection of data had perhaps been
somewhat neglected in comparison with the
elaboration of statistical techniques used in
their analysis. This was not so in the field of
epidemiology, in which many analagous problems arose.

Appropriate planning in the collection of
data might simplify subsequent analysis, though
usually at the cost of sacrificing the number
of those subjects protentially available. This,
however, might be well worth while with conditions which were not unduly rare, and of
course in the study of normal differences. For
example, it was sometimes better to confine
attention to close relatives and to those living
within some defined geographical radius, and
to set other limits of exclusion, with the result
that for the same amount of effort more data
were obtained and what was even more important, with a nearer approach to completeness
in sampling. Again, with conditions which were
not too uncommon, empirical figures for risk
of recurrence could be based simply on subsequent children, ascertainment being through
the affected child, or second affected child, as
was appropriate.

The ascertainment of the frequencies in the
population of abnormal genetic or partly genetic
conditions was fundamental. We could never
have too much information on incidence in
relation to geography, sex, age and numbers of
other variables. Breeding systems and the consequences arising from their differences and
changes were of the greatest importance; and
it might be that more than the simple coefficient of inbreeding was required. Twin
studies still held much promise for the future
and in this field a variety of special methods had
been evolved. The study of linkage had been
greatly facilitated by the development of adequate statistical techniques and advances need

213
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

only await the assembling of suitable data.
In the fitting of Mendelian ratios more remained
to be done in improving the efficiency of statistical methods. But it was probably in the study

214

of common conditions in whose causation
heredity played some part that preoccupation
with improved methods could be most prouiable
in the immediate future.
