HAN SUYIN

China’s Population

TWO RECENT BOOKS

‘wy NVARIABLY WHEN THE subject of China
comes up in the West the “‘peril”’ of its populaation growth is formulated, sometimes with
most alarmist prognostications. The emotional
one of such effusions are always reminiscent of
he Yellow Peril complex, and there is little
jttempt to place the facts in perspective. Even the
blurb to the first book to be considered here*—a
holarly work by Dr. Ping-ti Ho—asseverates
nat ““China’s population is not only a national
roblem but a serious concern of the Soviet
inion and the Western world’’; in fact, China’s
bopulation may worry others, but does not seem
fo worry the Chinese.
| Studies in the Population of China, 1368—1953
kas already been reviewed from the demographic
angle, f and I shall not labour the point which Dr.
Ho makes and which should provide us all with
ome rethinking: that for the past one hundred
ears, from 1853 to 1953, the population growth
¥ China has been at the rate of 0-3 per cent per
ear. To-day an average of 2 to 3 per cent
| revails in countries such as Ceylon, Malaya,
a0s and Thailand, and the growth of population
i China is the Asian average of 2 per cent. With
ndustrialization, better basic technology, ineased agricultural production, China maintains
hat she can sustain a population double the
resent size.

What is fascinating is the feeling this book
ives us of living with the particular problems
yhich the computers of the Ming dynasty, when
ata was first collected, had to face in their
punting of heads. To ensure that the officials did
ot falsify their returns through carelessness,
hecking was instituted : each household that had

   
   
   
   
   

¢ Ho, Ping-ti. Studies in the Population of China, 1368953. Harvard East Asian Studies 4. Cambridge, Mass.,

959. Harvard University Press. (London, 1960, Oxford
Mniversity Press). Pp. xiii -++ 341 + xxxii. Price 48s.

r ¢ THe EuGenics Review. July 1960. 52, 114.

been entered being given a household certificate,
which was subsequently to be produced, and if
there were discrepancies the unhappy census
officials were to be decapitated. A good example
of the thoroughness with which the Ming conducted these registrations. Another interesting
fact is that a legal definition of ‘“‘household”’ had
to be made, and this leads to a computation of
the average size of the Chinese family in historical
times and to-day, varying from 3-8 to 5-8 persons
per family.

Then there is the constant under-registration
through the centuries. A natural reluctance to
being registered, ticketed, organized, inherent to
the human being, pervades each census up to
1953, so that the 1950 edition of the history of a
certain county contains the truthful remark:
“‘The changes in the numbers of households and
mouths in the official registers are all unauthentic.”

Other censuses followed the first Ming census,
and again evasion continues, to mitigate the
burden of labour services and land tax and other
taxes which would ensue upon total registration.
In the 1812 count, from sex ratios worked out by
Professor Ho, a large surplus of males appears
the rule. This, says Professor Ho, may be due to
the practice of female infanticide then prevalent
in certain areas such as Hupei, where it was the
custom to rear not more than two sons and one
daughter and to drown the unwanted baby girls.
Time and again infanticide was prohibited by
official decree, but continued. “The poor worry
about daily sustenance, the rich are concerned
over future dowries.”’ Hence the drastic reduction
in infants, particularly female. Even then (in the
eighteenth to nineteenth century) orphanages
were erected by the Chinese imperial government
to save many thousands of female babies, and
the custom slowly became abhorrent “‘even to the
gentry”” some time before Christian missionary

229

EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1961, 52, 4.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

effort, with its own orphanages and educational
work, began in earnest. But Western influence
completed the end of this practice.

Wars, floods, famines, during the last century
took their toll of millions of Chinese, and it is
related that in the Taiping wars alone several
million were killed.

All in all, it seems, the census of 1953, after the
communists came to power, is probably the most
accurate ever done. It is fairly certain that collection of data, if not perfect, was at least efficient
through the numerous overlapping organizations
which permeated the total population. There was
simply no place to hide from a census, and the
new enthusiasm for “‘scientific accuracy’’ probably left little room for laziness among the
cadres doing the returns. The figure of
582 million given by the 1953 census surpassed
by 100 million previous estimates. Doubt was
cast upon its authenticity. Professor Ho is
inclined to think that this is correct, because
censuses until then all suffered from underestimation. It is certain that in 1953, due to the
general election of deputies to the National
People’s Congress and preparations for launching
of the first Five Year Plan, the need for authentic
population figures was substantial.

The official estimate of 582 million in the
census of 1953 suggests a growth over the century
1850 to 1953 of only 0-3 per cent. The period
1850-1950 was full of calamities, famines, floods
and wars, and in the Second World War at least
20 million people are estimated to have died. I
remember, doing midwifery in Szechwan during
the War, how high the infant mortality rate was,
in the region of 500 per thousand, and this among
the people that did avail themselves of ““Western”’
medicine. What it must have been in unreachedat villages is not known.

This study of Dr. Ho’s, fascinating, eminently
readable, packed full of interesting details, is
thought-provoking as well as intensely good
reading. Meanwhile, the world population continues to grow, not only in China, but everywhere else as well.

From the chronological viewpoint, Dr. Yang*

* Yang, C. K. A Chinese Village in Early Communist
Transition. Cambridge, Mass., 1959. Harvard University
Press. (London, 1960, Oxford University Press). A
publication of the Technology Press, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. Pp. xii + 284. Price 52s.

230

 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  

starts where Professor Ho left off, and hi
Chinese Village in Early Communist Transitiog
brings the story of the Chinese family up to date,
In the preface to his book he makes an illuminats
ing comment. 3
It is now well recognized (he says) that it w the strength of such forces [the peasant villagd
forces] that has carried the communist revolutiog
to its initial victory. What goes on within the
seemingly simple peasant communities is likely ta
remain a vital factor affecting the social transfor ‘
mation of this ancient land. :
Thus, in a couple of sentences, Dr. C. K. Yang
sweeps away a good deal of the misconceptiong}
that have been propagated abroad about th :
communist revolution in China. The fact that th
revolution is based upon the village peasantry, ol ie
as C. K. Yang says “80 per cent of the country
600 million people”, though not over emphas
sized, is kept as it should be, solidly in min ‘
through the book.
The book is lucidly arranged, and the authog
starts with an analysis of a Chinese village in preq
communist days. The village he picks is a subur
ban village, located near and therefore subject J
the influences of a city, in this case Canton. It%
these villages, now grouped together into com
munes, which at the moment (1960) are becoming
rapidly agro-industrialized through the develops
ment of modern means of transport, the encoug
agement of small factories and industries withig
each commune, and the link up with oth
communes and with the main city. Dr. Yang
book is valuable in pointing out the early stegy
by which the more or less isolated village (even &
surburban) is brought to function as a unit in §
web of communities, which will eventually mal
accessible to the villager the same kind of socig
facilities (hospitals, clinics, schools, cinemas, etc.
as are accessible to the town dweller. a

Much of the information is derived from p reports. By choosing a village near Cantog
which is linked by railway and telephone to thg
British colony of Hong Kong (and 99 per cent q
the latter’s population comes from the sam
province, Kuantung), information would be nc
only accessible, but checked and verified.

In such a large country as China there
great differences in village structure: the arig
northern plains, with their small huddle of mug

  
 
  
  
 
  
  
CHINA’S POPULATION

huts, their crops of cotton, their bitter winters,
differ much from the sub-tropical brick and tile
agglomerations of the south, with their relative
abundance of wooded land, their round-the-year
green. In the village selected, called Nanching,
there were, in 1951, about 200 houses for a population of 1,100 divided into 230 families; paddy
fields and vegetable gardens surrounded the
houses, irrigation ditches criss-crossed the area,
patches of higher land were covered with fruit
trees. Transport was by human carrier, costly and
expensive, though a stream allowed small boats
to be rowed into the village at high tide. The
families were divided into clans, with demarcated
areas of influence for each. An occasional bus, on
iwhich a sign painted above the windows read
In case of accident, each rests with its own fate”’,
ymbolized the spirit not only of the village but
fof the whole land.
. Fate was the explanation for disaster. Fate
ruled life, and in spite of the proximity of
anton (incidentally, the distance of Nanching
from Canton, the main city, is not mentioned, a
apse in a book such as this), the village was
strongly traditional and little urbanized. It posessed none of the amenities of the city: absentee
landlords lived in the city, poor children had no
chooling and began to work as soon as they
were able, labour in coaxing land to yield a crop
Was the central theme round which all individual
md social activities were organized. Water
wvailability was the chief determinant of the
nd’s value. The struggle for water and for
igated land was carried on, sometimes collecively, the family and sometimes the clan being
he basic organized unit. There was need for
hore and more land, but no advance in the
sanner of its tilling. Beginning in 1933 and 1934
ices of food-stuffs dropped due to world dewession, hardships multiplied. The falling prices
f silk, for instance, delayed marriages in silkRising districts. In Nanching the return to the
illage of many who had left it for the town, and
pw unemployed came back, led to a demand for
ore land, and this to collective action to remim some from the river; a hint of the sponmeous collective actions which to-day are the
fe in China’s countryside.
EThe possessions of the average peasant consted of the house he and his family lived in,

   
 
  
  
   
 
   
  
   
   
   
   
 
 

what little land he might have, a few simple farm
tools he used. Since he had very little cash he
could not hire human labour, work animals, or
buy enough fertilizer for proper maintenance.
Only three well-to-do peasants in the whole
village had acquired some insecticide. Credit
facilities were in the hands of usurers, and only
worsened the situation. Private ownership
accounted for 93-8 per cent of the cultivated
land, five families owning about 26 per cent, 200
families the remaining 74 per cent. The landless,
constituting the bottom group, made up about
twenty families. Handicrafts were undeveloped,
except for silk embroidery often resulting in loss
of eyesight. 51-4 per cent of the village families
were in debt.

It was in this deteriorating village structure,
with no hope of advance, that the communist
revolution was to effect the sweeping changes
which have now culminated in the commune
system. Professor Yang’s step by step, always
intensely fascinating yet sober accounts, make us
feel village life as it was, and give us the shock of
transition in its earliest form, the class struggle.
This was the preliminary and necessary step to
land reform, which was to change the whole
social structure. Here Dr. Yang’s words are
illuminating, and once again challenge the
emotional propagandist who would have us
condemn, without due study, the steps taken to
lift two million villages, many of them much
worse off than Nanching (which as I knew it was
deemed a “rich” village), out of constant insecurity. ““The basic factor [of the village] was an
agrarian economy that failed to provide minimum security for the village’s population...
normal family events, such as marriage, sickness
or death, sank the family in debt, calamities put
them at the brink of starvation.”

The second part of the book goes on to describe the preliminary steps of land reform; they
should be read with interest, and along with their
reading I would recommend another book,
Revolution in a Chinese Village by David Crooke, *
as an adjunct and a help to the reader to understand the process whereby land reform, redistribution of land, abolition of rent, the establishment of a relatively uniform standard of living,

* 1959. Routledge. Price 21s.

231
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

came about. The fact that the new taxes came to
about 30 per cent of the yield, a total which
according to Dr. Yang was greater than the
previous total of taxes and rent, the immediate
difficulty in getting credit, a dislocation of certain
forms of supplementary income, lack of transport, combined in the first years; and although
the acquisition of rent-free land by the poor and
landless alleviated the economic difficulties of
the largest group, this created difficulties which
in their turn had to be dealt with. In other words,
Dr. Yang does not minimize the fact that all was
not plain sailing, and that in such a vast transformation there is bound to be hardship for years
to come.

Dr. Yang goes on to trace the alterations in the
kinship system, in marriage customs, in the status
of women, the renovation of education with a
number of short term training courses set up for
peasants in various types of economic and
political projects. Festivals were continued,

232

new types of entertainment of the audienceparticipation type, group singing, etc., introduced. The change in ideology was slow;
from complete reliance on “fate”, from ritual
worship of various deities in control of floods
and weather, the peasant was to be weaned
to self-reliance, to belief in collective efforts of
his group; and the deities, relegated to the back of
the house, gradually lost their adherents. But
this change of attitude takes time, especially
among the old.

In a postscript Dr. Yang gives a quick analysis
of the commune. Here again I am all praise for
Dr. Yang’s impartiality and objectivity.

This book is a major addition to our knowledge of one of the most important human beings
on earth to-day: the Chinese peasant. Important
both by his number, his toil, and the new directions given to him. I hope Dr. Yang will continue his study of the peasant collective in the
commune and its future developments.
