REVIEWS OF BOOKS

of contraception has emerged even in urban
areas. SAVITRI THAPAR

PSYCHOLOGY

Cattell, Raymond B. The Scientific Analysis of
Personality. A Pelican Original. Harmondsworth, 1965. Penguin. Pp. 370. Price 6s.

RAYMOND CATTELL IS such a prolific writer of
books in the area of personality and of experimental articles, that this Pelican will be welcomed
for providing a relatively simple overview of his
contributions. For the most part it covers the
same ground as Personality and Motivation
Structure and Measurement, but seems to have
rather more to say about practical applications
of personality tests (in education, counselling,
clinical work, social investigations, etc.). Moreover, like all his writings, it sparks off novel
ideas on every other page. Thus it is the ideal
answer for the student who has been told to
read up something about Cattell (and one hopes
that most serious psychology students are so
told).

Whether it can safely be recommended to the
intelligent layman or the scientist from another
discipline who wants to know what personality
psychology has accomplished, is another matter.
Cattell is the leading exponent in America, like
Eysenck in England, of the view that clinical
(e.g. Freudian) and literary approaches to personality will get us nowhere; we must measure
personality characteristics objectively, and sort
out the complexities by correlational (factor)
analysis. Most of the book indeed is devoted to
expounding these arguments, describing illustrative tests, and bringing out the implications
of the very large number of factors that he has
discovered. But though one sympathizes with
his aim and applauds his ingenuity and energy
in pursuing it, the reviewer at least is less certain
that he has reached his goal, or that scientific
personality testing for practical purposes is now
feasible; and the generality of psychologists
also seem to have their doubts. So often Cattell
appears to over-reach himself, as when he
claims to be able to raise the variance in school
achievement which can be predicted from about
25 per cent by intelligence tests alone, to over
75 per cent by combining intelligence, personality

and motivational tests. He can and does quote
numerous examples of striking group differences,
good achievers obtaining different factor scores
from poor ones, delinquents, leaders, homosexuals, neurotics, etc., differing from normals.
But the personality test scores of individuals,
and these group differences, tend to be highly
unstable and chancy, and there is really very
little evidence that personality tests can give
consistently accurate diagnoses. Indeed Cattell
himself points out, more clearly than in his
previous writings, how much test performance
depends on the characteristics of the measuring
instrument, how the individual reacts to it, his
temporary moods, the social role he is playing,
etc.; and while in theory these can also be
measured, we have not got very far in controlling
or allowing for them in practice. Cattell’s psychology, then, is supremely adventurous and
provocative, which is all to the good, but apt
to be over-optimistic and dogmatic. Another
example of this dogmatism may be drawn from
his discussion of hereditary vs. environmental
determination of his factors, where he claims
to have arrived at the perfect technique for
analysing such questions. Surely a technique
which fails to show that more intelligent parents
give greater intellectual stimulation to their
children than dull parents, and which proves
that spelling ability is more dependent than most
cognitive traits on heredity, should be regarded
as decidedly fallible. Or is one merely being
obscurantist?

Besides these more basic sections, the book
contains a lot of very sensible (though equally
provocative) discussion of the scientific psychologist’s approach to human affairs, education,
clinical diagnosis and treatment, guidance, etc.
Cattell writes vividly; and although the more
theoretical parts are heavy going, there is very
little statistics, and what there is is explained
with remarkable clarity. One feature of the
volume that may intrigue psychologists is the
extent to which he seems to be seeking a rapprochement with Eysenck, whose philosophy is
indeed similar, but who differs from him on a
number of rather fundamental points which are
here glossed over. Finally: a minor complaint.
No bibliography is provided, only a few references for further reading at the end of each

37
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

chapter. To include all the citations might
admittedly have required overmuch space; but
one would like to be able to identify more of
the major sources referred to.

P. E. VERNON

Vernon, M. D. The Psychology of Perception.
London, 1965. University of London Press.
Pp. 235. Price 25s. |

IT 1S PROBABLY less often that a paperback
is republished by a different publisher in the
ordinary form than the reverse. This book was
first published as a Penguin Book in 1962. It
has had a wide circulation and commended
itself to the London University Press. This is
justified. It is an interesting and readable book,
and presents a wide range of the psychological
facts and phenomena of perception in a way in
which ordinary readers as well as beginners in
psychology will find rewarding.

The author is mainly influenced by Gestalt
psychology. She is guarded aboutits physiological
aspects, although she makes some excursions into
neurology. She does not allow herself to become
involved in the many theories about perception
which have been discussed at length in some
American works recently. Another point about
the book is that she does not deal very fully
with the problems of sensation as contrasted
with perception—or perceiving, as Bartlett used
to persuade us to call it. This makes the book
more accessible to students who are not prim
38

arily interested in the sensations. It is perhaps
a danger to concede too much to them, especially
the social psychologists, many of whom appear
to think that the experimental psychology of the
sensations is a waste of time and energy. In a
book of this short length it would not be practicable to deal more efficiently with the sensory
basis of perceiving. In one place where Professor
Vernon does touch on this aspect, however, a
little more precise and up-to-date information
would have been a great improvement without
any increase in length, namely in the field of
colour vision and colour blindness. What she
says at points almost smacks of the 1890s, but
its status is safeguarded by a kind of generalization which can hardly become erroneous whatever changes in knowledge take place.

The great virtues of the book, however, lie in
the comprehensive reviews of all sorts of factual
data about perceiving, its development in
children, and its many aspects, in the perception
of movement, causality, space, colour, size,
shape, and its relationships to attention, motivation and personality, normal and otherwise.
The book is liberally illustrated with intriguing
diagrams, figures and examples of perceptual
material used in laboratory experiments. Its
greatest defect is that it hardly touches upon
perception in any sense modally except that of
vision—but in the field of vision it is good, and
each chapter is provided with an excellent series
of references for further reading. |

R. W. PICKFORD
