The Eugenics Society and Social
Research

HE OFFICIAL COMMITTEE on Social

Studies, under the chairmanship of Lord

Heyworth, has been collecting evidence

on the financing of social research from a number
of bodies working in this field.

As part of the Eugenics Society’s recent
activities are eptiomized in its answers to the
Committee’s questionnaire, Fellows and Members may be interested to read the following
paragraphs derived from the evidence submitted
by the Society.

* * *

The Aims of the Eugenics Society primarily
are concerned with the social implications of
human genetics and the attendant responsibilities. They may be summarized thus:

To study the influences that may modify inborn
human qualities; to formulate and support policies
for developing these qualities to the utmost
advantage; to promote research on eugenic prob
lems; to foster a responsible attitude to parenthood; to guide public opinion in these matters.

Research: Financial Support

On occasion in the past the Society (through
its own officers or appointees) has carried out
specific inquiries such as that on Promising
Families in 1956. However, this procedure has
been little followed in recent years, though one
or two small-scale sample surveys have been
made, notably of public opinion upon population, heredity and eugenics. On the other hand
several Darwin Research Fellows have been
appointed, and paid at M.R.C. rates, to work on
their own initiative within a wide field defined
by the Society.

Since the war approximately £25,000 has been
spent in the direct subsidization of very varied
research carried out by others. Additionally,
cognate bodies have been subsidized by the
provision of rent-free accommodation in the
Society’s house. In the last five years it has in
the main used its resources to support appro
priate research work which has been initiated by
other bodies or individuals.

The normal arrangement for selecting research
projects has been that applications for grants
are considered in detail once a year by the
Executive Committee and then recommendations are made to the Society's Council for final
decision. Within the resources available, those
research projects have been helped which (a)
have fallen within the general interests of the
Society, (b) have been unlikely to receive support
from elsewhere, or (c) have shown promise of
attracting further funds from elsewhere once a
promising start had been made.

Availability of Funds and Workers

There is no doubt that it is difficult to find
funds for research in the most important area of
interest where biology and sociology meet.
Funds for research in pure biology and genetics,
in medicine and in psychiatry, are not truly
difficult to obtain if the prospective workers are
of the proper calibre.

Good workers tend, from an early stage in
their careers, to move into those fields where
funds are available for research and where other
distinguished research work is already in progress. There is at present, in the opinion of the
Society, a marked lack of funds and of organized
research in the fields where the biological and
the social sciences meet. Problems, whose solution depends essentially upon a combination of
biological and social inquiry, are seriously
neglected and fall between the two stools of the
biological and the social disciplines. The result
is that at present funds and research workers may
be found with much greater ease for purely
biological research, or for research in the social
studies as such, than for the extremely important
field where biological knowledge should be
applied to problems of society. In the opinion of
the Society this vicious circle needs to be broken

207

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1964, 55, 4.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

by consciously directing research into this
borderline area.
A few examples may suffice.

(a) What really is the basis for the sociologically
unacceptable characteristics of ‘‘Problem Families’? Joint study is needed, to elucidate the
relative roles of genetic and of environmental
factors (both those operating within and those
operating outside the immediate family) if an
adequate social assault is to be made on the
problem. Further twin studies and studies of
foster children are needed, and geneticists,
psychiatrists and sociologists must join in an
ad hoc team which would investigate seeming
lack of capacities as well as of opportunities.

(b) The well-being of new multiracial communities
must be built not only upon varied social
customs but upon varied actual fertility, and
upon the “‘fitness’ of whatever hybrids may
appear. Work in Liverpool on European x Negro
hybrids, and in Birmingham on the differential
fertility of immigrant Irish, Pakistanis and West
Indians, has already yielded important results.
This kind of research needs much extension.
(Recent work has been paid for by an anonymous benefactor working through the Society’s
General Secretary.)

(c) The new interest in criminological studies so far
is confined to the sociologists with their emphasis on environmental influences. Indubitably
the pendulum at one stage swung too far in the
other direction, but that should be no reason now
for neglecting the inherent or genetic factors.

(d) The interconnection, between (i) the inheritance
of intelligence and other forms of ability, (ii)
opportunities for social mobility, and (iii)
differential rates of fertility, is of the greatest
importance in explaining the structure of society;
it demands the combined work of biologists and
social scientists.

The form of research in which this Society is
interested is, in the beginning, cheap because
insignificant apparatus or facilities are required.
But the stage is now being reached where considerably more funds are required because of
the growth of interest in and need for wide
sampling of populations by social workers and
by questionnaires and because of the need to
trace individuals and happenings over a long
period (cf. the Terman inquiries in California
which have extended over forty years, tracing
traits from one generation to another).

APPENDIX
The Eugenics Society’s Subsidized Research Projects 1958 — 1963

1. £500 for two years to set up an autonomous
Artificial Insemination (Donor) Investigation Council
(AIDIC). The primary objective was fact finding.
The Council later presented evidence to the official
Feversham Committee. Professor A. S. Parkes was
convener.

2. £150 for The establishment of family records in a
group practice in Edinburgh. The application was
made by Professor Kennedy on behalf of Dr. E. V.
Kuenssberg and Mr. D. A. Sklaroff. The objective
was the capability of observing familial conditions
from one generation to another.

3. £250 for a survey in Liverpool, of Some aspects of
the genetics and biological fitness of Negro by
European hybrids, the work to be carried out by Dr.
G. A. Harrison. The objective was the collection of
evidence, on a detailed case to case basis, of strictly
measurable attributes.

4. £1,000 for An historico-demographic investigation
based on the British peerage. The application was
made by Professor Glass on behalf of Mr. M.
Hollingsworth. The objective was to obtain evidence
of changes in the British birth rate before the age of
contraceptives.

5. £1,600 spread over two years to investigate The
genetics of obesity in man. The application was made
by Professor D. R. Newth on behalf of Mr. R. J.
Withers.

6. £500 (through the Oliver Bird Trust) to the Popula208

tion Investigation Committee for A field study on
marriage and family growth, under the general
direction of Professor D. V. Glass. One of the main
objectives was, by questionnaire and interviews, to
elucidate the actual extent to which families are now
planned in the United Kingdom.

7. About £6,000 spread over about four years, to
promote Domiciliary and special problem birth
control facilities in two provincial cities under the
direction of Dr. Mary Peberdy and Dr. Dorothy
Morgan. The funds were partly derived from the
Marie Stopes Memorial Foundation (a subsidiary
of the Eugenics Society) and were drafted through
the Oliver Bird Trust and the Family Planning
Association. The objective was both to render a
personal service, and to demonstrate the factual
acceptability of birth control facilities, to feckless
women with problem families, so long as those
facilities are taken to their homes by a doctor or
social worker. The longer-term objective is to
persuade local authorities to recognize that to
provide social workers is cheaper and more sensible
than to maintain on the rates a growing number of
problem families and their increment of undesired
children.

8. £1,250 spread over two years for Population Studies
in Newcastle under Dr. E. G. Knox. The studies
were concerned with a facet of medical geography.

9. £100 emergency grant for equipment, etc., to enable
10.

11.

_ THE EUGENICS SOCIETY AND SOCIAL RESEARCH

Dr. I. Shine to embark upon A medical and demographic investigation, while on duty in the Colonial
Medical Service at St. Helena, under the general
sponsorship of Dr. A. C. Stevenson.

£500 for work, under the control of Professor A. S.
Parkes, upon Zhe low temperature preservation of
human spermatozoa.

£1,000 to initiate An investigation on social mobility
and differential fertility by Dr. John Gibson and Dr.
Michael Young, under the sponsorship of Professor
J. E. Meade and Professor J. M. Thoday. The
objective is a detailed understanding of phenomena
of wide social importance.

12.

13.

£2,800 over several years to the International
Planned Parenthood Federation, mainly in aid of its
administration. This cash payment was additional
to twelve years’ rent free accommodation for the
Federation’s Headquarters.

£2,000 over the five years were expended for the
general work of the Population Investigation Committee, to support the training of Dr. E. M.
Williamson in practical Medical Genetics; for
visiting speakers for the Society for the Study of
Human Biology; for emergency aid in anthropological preparatory work for the International
Biological Programme.

209

ER—D
