LAWS ON HEALTH AND MARRIAGE
By C. P. BLACKER, Mc., MD. MRCP.

HE Council of the Society has

appointed a committee to draw up a

pre-nuptial health schedule which can
be voluntarily exchanged by persons contemplating marriage. This will probably be
issued before the end of the year and may be
ready for publication in the January issue
of the REview. A summary of the literature
upon health certificates before marriage,
which I prepared for the committee, was
published under the title of ‘‘ Fitness for
Marriage ”’ (April 1935, p. 33). In this article
I propose to deal with the laws which have
been passed in other countries bearing upon
health and marriage. Legislation on this
subject exists in Turkey, Germany and the
Scandinavian countries.

TURKEY

It is perhaps a surprising fact that the
most comprehensive law is that which
operates in Turkey. This was framed in the
light of articles 123 and 124 of the Turkish
“Law on Public Hygiene.’”” I am much
indebted to Professor Refik Saydam for a
French translation of these articles and of
the official Turkish Memorandum on the
pre-nuptial medical examination. These
documents run as follows :

Law on Public Health: Article 123. The
marriage is forbidden of persons afflicted
with syphilis, gonorrhoea, soft chancre,
leprosy or mental disease. The marriage of
such persons can only be celebrated after it
has been proved by a medical certificate
that the danger of contamination has been
removed or that a definite cure has been
established as a result of treatment duly
applied.

Article 124. The marriage of persons
afflicted with advanced and transmissible
tuberculosis is to be delayed by six months.
If during this period improvement is not
established, the marriage must again be
delayed for six months. At the end of this

period the medical authorities involved are
bound to inform the betrothed couple of
the danger of the illness and the inconveniences of marriage.

RULES FOR PRE-NuPpTIAL MEDICAL
EXAMINATION

Article 1. The pre-nuptial medical examination is free in all offices and sanitary
establishments of the State. Official doctors
are bound to conduct the pre-nuptial
examination without a fee only in the abovementioned offices and establishments.

Article 2. Certificates of health, delivered
by private and official doctors, other than
those in the service of the Government, will
not be valid unless they are legalised by
these last. Before legalising the abovementioned certificates, the Government doctors will make a search through the official
registers to ascertain whether the candidates
for marriage are or are not afflicted with any
of the diseases which, according to articles
123 and 124 on the law on public hygiene,
are specified as prohibiting marriage. The
certificates of health which do not carry
the official seal of the Bureau of the Government Doctor, as well as his signature, will
not be valid.

Article 3. The pre-nuptial medical examination is to be carried out in the manner
mentioned below: The doctor will examine,
before everything else, the general condition
and exterior habitus of the candidate for
marriage ; and, in the event of his not having
noticed symptoms or signs which justify
suspicion of the existence of one of the
diseases mentioned in articles 123 and 124 of
the law on public hygiene, the examination
of men will be conducted differently from
that of women.

Article 4. Examination of Men:

1. In the mouth: mucous membrane of
cheeks and lips. The tongue and its lower

I9I
192

surface. The vault of the palate and the
pharynx.

2. The skin of the thorax, the abdomen
and back. (These regions will be examined
in the naked state.)

3. The lymph glands of the axilla, the
groin and the elbow.

4. The sex organ: presence or otherwise
of secretion following pressure of the urethra.

5. The knee jerks will be examined with
attention.

Article 5. The examination of the mouth
of women will be identical with that of men.
In the case of virgins, besides the examination of the mouth, the doctor will limit
himself to the examination of the lymph
glands of the elbow.

Article 6. If, in the course of the examinations mentioned in articles 4 and 5, above,
there are found indications or reasons
justifying the suspicion that the candidates
for marriage are afflicted with one of the
diseases preventing marriage; or if the
above-named examinations do not prove
satisfactory, the medical examination will
be furthered in the following manner: If
tuberculosis is suspected, the thorax will be
percussed and auscultated and sputum will
be collected in the presence of the doctor.
In the event of syphilis being suspected, a
specimen of blood will be taken in the
manner indicated in the special chapter of
instructions bearing upon the treatment of
syphilis ; in the event of gonorrhoea being
suspected, the secretion of the urethra will
be collected. Blood and urethral secretion
will be sent to a laboratory to be examined.
In the event of leprosy or mental diseases
being suspected, the doctor will pursue his
investigations along the usual lines conforming with scientific procedure; to reach a
decision he can, if necessary, send the
candidate to a specialist. In those localities
where laboratory examinations are not made,
the doctor will mention the fact in his report.

Article 7. The materials for analysis are
sent, under seal, to the relevant establishments, with a confidential report, and by a
method over which the candidate under
examination has no control. In like manner

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the doctor will be informed by a confidential
report of the results of the examination.
In the event of the doctor who has examined
a candidate for marriage forming the impression, either by the results of his own
examination or by those submitted to him
by the State laboratories or medical specialists, that the candidate is afflicted with one
of the diseases mentioned in articles 123 and
124, he will not deliver the certificate of
health. He will retain in his file the various
documents and notify the case to the Government doctor of the locality.

Article 8. The marriage will not be authorised of persons who have the bacillus of Koch
in their sputum, or who have tuberculous
laryngitis or clinical signs of advanced
tuberculosis of a contagious character. To
such candidates for marriage will be applied
the dispositions of article 124 of the law on
public hygiene.

Article 9. Pre-marital examinations will
be considered among matters of urgency.
The official doctors will, in conducting their
examinations, give special precedence to
candidates and pathological material which
are sent to them with a view to establishing
a definite diagnosis.

Article 10. In the State offices, the premarital medical examination will be confidentially performed in a special room. A
member of the family may be present during
the examination of women. The doctors are
bound to treat as secret the results of their
examinations.

Article 11. Candidates who present themselves for pre-marital medical examination
are bound to furnish official documents such
as a birth certificate, a passport and an
identity card. In the event of doubt being
entertained about the authenticity of these
documents, the candidate will not be examined before he has established his identity.

Article 12. Private doctors will perform
the pre-nuptial examinations in a manner
which conforms with the dispositions of the
above regulations. They are forbidden to
deliver certificates of health without having
established the identity and without having
examined the candidate.

Article 13. Private and official doctors
LAWS ON HEALTH AND MARRIAGE

who do not conform with the obligations of
the present ruling will be punished in a
manner which conforms with the dispositions
of article 282 of the law on public hygiene.
In the event of acts being committed which
demand punishments relevant to the Turkish
penal code, the dispositions of the Turkish
penal code will be applied.

Article 14. This ruling, drawn up by the
Council of State, will enter into effect on the
date of its publication.

Article 15. The Executive Council of
ministers is charged with the administration
of the present ruling.

As viewed from the standpoint of this
Society, the most noteworthy feature of the
examinations conducted in Turkey is that
eugenic considerations are completely
omitted. The law specifies that marriage
must not take place if either partner is
afflicted with syphilis, gonorrhcea, soft
chancre, leprosy, mental disease and transmissible tuberculosis. The candidate for
marriage is not asked to furnish any particulars about his ancestry or about his
previous medical history. The certificates of
fitness are issued solely on the basis of the
results of a medical examination.

In this connection, it is perhaps worthy
of remark that a compulsory exchange of
health certificate can only be satisfactorily
carried out under such conditions as these.
If the examinations are compulsory, it can
be taken as certain that there will be many
refractory candidates who will be anxious
to conceal particulars about their ancestors
or past lives. Hence the precaution that the
sputum has to be collected in the presence
of a doctor, and the rule that the materials
for laboratory examination have to be
conveyed to the laboratory otherwise than
by the person from whom they have been
obtained. In such circumstances little
reliance can be placed on statements made
by the applicants themselves. Only the
objective results of a medical examination,
conducted by a disinterested person, will
provide reliable guidance in issuing certificates of fitness. It is pleasing to observe that
the Turkish Government attaches such

193

importance to questions of public health that
it is willing to establish facilities for prenuptial medical examination free of charge,
and that such examinations are to be regarded by Medical Officers of Health as
having priority over their other duties.

GERMANY

Reports have recently appeared in the
Press to the effect that certificates of health
before marriage are shortly to be made
compulsory throughout Germany. At the
present time, however, they are only compulsory for persons who apply for marriage
loans. Applicants for these are furnished
with a leaflet issued by the Ministry of
Public Health for the Reich, which stresses
the importance of personal health and of
racial hygiene, and are expected to fill in a
schedule. This consists of four parts:

1. A statutory declaration made by the
applicant in the presence of a municipal
authority, who refers him to an approved
examining doctor.

2. A medical history, to be filled in and
signed by the applicant in the presence of
the examining doctor. The latter is charged
with the responsibility of confirming that
the applicant’s signature corresponds with
that on Part I, the statutory declaration
made in the presence of the municipal
authority.

3. The medical findings: to be filled in
and signed by the examining doctor.

4. The opinion of the examining doctor as
to whether the marriage should or should
not take place, or should be postponed.

The following is a translation of the
schedule :

These sheets are to be collected and sent
on the first of each month by the attesting
doctor to the Reichsgesundheitsamt, Berlin,
Klopstockstr. 18.

Administrative District ....ccccccccccccceees
Province, district, etc.)
I. PERSONAL SHEET FOR CANDIDATES FOR
MARRIAGE LOANS
To be filled in by the candidate and given

to the examining doctor, after the official
testimonial has been given.
194

ReSidence..........cccsecccccccccccccsecce

(also Administrative District)
Street and Number of house...............ce000.
Status or vocation.........
Nature of school attended..........ccccccccceeees
In which class on leaving...................00005

I have made the above declarations to the
best of my knowledge. I further confirm that
I will not knowingly make any false declarations to the examining doctor. At the same
time, I release this doctor or any other
doctors called in from their obligation to
silence towards the official authorities who
are responsible for decisions connected with
the loan.

9

(personal signature) f

The above personal signature of the
applicant(s) is hereby officially witnessed.

The applicant is referred to Dr................
for medical examination.
StaMp.........sceeeeeee signature of municipal
authority.

Space for remarks by municipal authority
and examining doctor.

SCHEDULE FOR INVESTIGATION OF MARRIAGE
FITNESS

Surname and christian name of person
OXAMINE ........c cee eceesee ere nceeeeeeceeceenceeeees
Residence...............eee00

II. Previous History

1. Established or supposed cases of weakmindedness, epilepsy, mental diseases, convulsions, malformations, defects (ie.
inherited blindness, deafness and dumbness,
etc.), skeletal deformities, diseases of metabolism, tuberculosis, alcoholism, drugaddiction, suicide, constitutional illnesses,
confinement in houses for lunatics, mental
defectives or epileptics :

*In case of change of religion, the original religion
must be declared.

{ The personal signature must only be made in the
presence of a municipal authority.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(a) in grandparents ............cececeecececeeees
(b)  ,, parents ..........ccececcecececeececeeseees
(c) ,, brothers and sisters of parents and
their children................ccccsseees

(d) ,, brothers and sisters of person
EXAMINE ............cccscsecsececs

2. Chronic infectious or constitutional
illnesses (including vocational illnesses), addictions or defects, from which the applicant
has him/herself suffered................ccceeseeees

3. By female applicant — Number of
pregnancies .............6. Live-births.........
Still-births............ Abortions.............4.

@eeeeeneeeneeeeseeeaeeneseeeeeeseee

(Personal signature of applicant)

The signature must be made in the presence
of the examining doctor and compared with
the signature of the applicant given on page
I.

III. Frnpincs*

. (a) general condition
(5) skin and visible mucous membranes
(c) cardiovascular system
(4) abdominal organs

2. State of lungs (if necessary Radiological findings).

3. Urine...... Albumen...... Sugar......

4. Signs of venereal disease (if necessary
by serological test of blood) Wassermann
TEACHION 2s scccessscencnse

5. Signs of weak-mindedness, epilepsy,
mental disease, alcoholism, and drug-addiction.

6. Traces of acute infectious disease.

7. Traces of other grave infectious disease.

8. Are there any good grounds for supposing the applicant incapable of procreation or
child-bearing ?

I

IV. OPINION

1. The person examined is fit...... not fit
we eeee for marriage.
2. Unfitness for marriage is likely to be

temporary

account of............
permanent on ace
* Marriages between persons suffering from hereditary
mental or physical diseases, infectious illnesses, or from
any other illnesses that threaten life, are not in the
interests of national health.
LAWS ON HEALTH AND MARRIAGE

3. Although the state of unfitness for
matriage cannot be established for certain,
the person examined should be advised
against the intended marriage on account

beeeeeeneees the ............193..
(place)
Signature and qualifications of examining doctor.

* Here are to be taken into account
present transitory or chronic conditions, and
also the unfavourable combination of particular symptoms of disease in the intended
marriage.

It will be observed that the German
certificate differs in several important
respects from the Turkish. In the Turkish
certificate, the applicant is not asked to
answer written questions about himself ;
in the German, such particulars are asked of
the applicant. In the Turkish certificate no
account is taken of the applicant’s family
history or of the occurrence among his
ancestors or collateral relatives of hereditary
diseases or defects ; in the German, a comprehensive question is asked upon this
subject.

Information from Germany as to the
accuracy of the replies submitted by applicants to questions about their family history
and medical history is not yet available and
it is not clear how German health authorities
succeed in checking mis-statements. That
the possibility of such mis-statements is
anticipated is shown by the footnote to the
effect that the signature of the statutory
declaration must be examined by the examining doctor and compared with the signature
to that part of the questionnaire which
relates to the applicant’s previous history,
which has to be signed in his presence.
This precaution is obviously designed to
prevent the impersonation of an applicant
with bad prospects of satisfying the requirements by a person with good prospects. At
the same time, it should be borne in mind
that at present these schedules are filled in
only by persons applying for marriage loans
and it is probable that difficulties arising

B

195

from mis-statements would not, in these
circumstances, be as frequent as they would
if the same questions were asked as a routine
in all marriages as a preliminary to allowing
the marriage to take place.

From the eugenic point of view the most
noteworthy feature of the questionnaire is
paragraph 3 of Part III (the doctor’s
opinion), and the footnote which belongs to
it. These, in the original German, read as
follows :

“3. Obgieich die Befunde eine Eheuntauglichkeit nicht sicher bedingen,
ist dem

der
Eingehung der beabsichtigten Ehe
abgeraten worden wegen.* .. .

* Hier sind voriibergehend oder standig
vorhandene Umstande und auch das in
der beabsichtigten Ehe etwa ungiinstige
Zusammentreffen bestimmter Krankheitserscheinungen zu beriicksichtigen.”’

Untersuchten von der

It places considerable responsibility on the
doctor to have to advise against a marriage
by reason of a state of unfitness which cannot
be established for certain. The vague word
‘““Umstande’’ presumably covers genetic
considerations ; and in view of the attitude
of the German Government towards marriage
between so-called Aryans and Jews, it might
also be held to refer to the applicant’s race.

NORWAY

A law, passed on May 31st, 1918, prohibits
marriage in cases in which one of the parties
has syphilis in a contagious form. In the
case of other infectious venereal diseases or
epilepsy or leprosy the other party must be
informed and both parties must be warned
of the dangers of the diseases by a physician.
A form is issued which has to be signed by
both the betrothed persons. No doctor’s
certificate appears to be required. Nothing
is asked about hereditary diseases occurring
in the ancestry.

The following is a translation of the
questions asked in the schedule employed in
Norway :
196 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

CERTIFICATE FROM THE BRIDAL COUPLE IN
CONNECTION WITH THE BANNS

Before banns can take place, the bridal
pair, separately, have to reply—in writing—
to the following questions :

x. Are you closely related, or allied by
marriage, to your fiancée as mentioned in the marriage law, parts 7
and 8.

Pari 7. Marriage must not take place
between relatives in straight up- or
downwards line (your mother or
daughter) or between sister and
brother. |

Part 8. Marriage must not take place
between relatives, one of whom has
previously been married to the other’s
relatives in straight line up- or downwards (e.g. not marry your first
wife’s mother or daughter).

2. Have you previously been married
and if so to whom?

3. Have you illegitimate children and
if so how many ?

4. Are you suffering from
a. Syphilis which is still infectious ?
b. Other venereal disease which is in
fectious, from epilepsy or leprosy ?

The correctness of my statement is certified
by honour,

@eeesvreeeeenseeoseeeeeeenseoene

Date and signature.

Wrong statement may lead to penalties up
to 2 years imprisonment according to the
Criminal Law, part 166.

HOLLAND

It has been stated in various quarters that
legislation with regard to marriage exists in
Holland and in Austria. I received a communication from the secretary general of the
Minister for Social Affairs at the Hague
informing me that certificates relating to
marriage and health are not used in Holland.

AUSTRIA

The following is a translation of a letter
I have received from a representative of the
Bundesminister in Vienna.

Bundesministerium fiir soziale Verwaltung.
ZI. 117.852-Abt.8/1934.
To the Eugenics Society,
69, Eccleston Square,
London, S.W.1.

In the territory of the State of Austria,
there was established, in the year 1922,
in and for Vienna, a State Marriage Advice
Centre. This was ‘under the part-time
direction of a specialist doctor and was
open to all. This Advice Centre has
outgrown its original function of an
Advice Centre for persons about to be
married and finally established itself as a
Marriage and Sexual Advice Centre which
dispensed information on all questions
relating to the sexual life. This Advice
Centre did not furnish certificates or
references. It confined itself to advising
by word of mouth.

The Advice Centre was closed on the
13th February, 1934, and hitherto has
not yet opened again. Whether an Advice
Centre for persons about to be married
will again be established, cannot yet be
prophesied.

28 December 1934.

For the ‘‘ Bundesminister ”’
MULLER.

Birth = 5/
Control

» To-day

Marie Stopes

INustrated: pocket size.
BALE & DANIELSSON, W.1.

 

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVII, No. 3.
