REFORM OF VITAL STATISTICS

Outline of a System of National Reistration
By SIR BERNARD MALLET, K.C.B.

(President’s Address at the Annual General Meeting of the Society, May 8th, 1929.)

S long ago as in November, 1918,
Major Darwin read an important
paper before the Royal Statistical

Society on ‘‘ Eugenics in relation to Economics and Statistics,’’ and at the meetings of
the International Commission of Eugenics
(as it was then called) in London in 1925 a
discussion on the question of Registration
was initiated by Dr. van Herwerden with
an account of the Dutch scheme of registration through a personal analysis card, when
Dr. Myjoen also described the Norwegian
system for the identification of the individual known as the Norwegian Identity Book.
The subject again came up at the meeting
of the Federation of Eugenic Societies at
Paris in 1926.

But it hardly requires the quotation of
authorities to justify the importance of good
statistics, the need for which is continually
confronting our Society in the course of its
every-day work. There is hardly a question
in the whole range of population problems—
whether we are thinking of quantity or
quality—on which we do not feel the want
of more accurate statistical knowledge and
research. I may mention such questions
as the causes of the growth and decline of
populations, the question whether a stationary or declining population is, or is not,
favourable to quality, or to economic progress, the effects of contact and intermixture
between different races and civilizations ; all
the questions connected with the phenomenon of the differential birth rate, in this and
other countries, sterility, still-births, abortion, and mental deficiency. The differential birth rate and mental defectiveness are
questions of special interest to this Society
at the present time, and though I should be
the last to hint that our present information
does not fully justify the strong stand we
are taking on them, no one who has occasion

87

to deal with them will deny that in
many directions it requires amplifying
and strengthening.

As regards differential fertility, the
official statistics in this country could, as I
shall mention later, easily be improved ; and
as regards mental defectiveness, as Professor Carr-Saunders informed the Population Conference at Geneva two years ago
and has recently again stated, there is little
reliable information which enables us to
compare the relative contribution to the
population of mental defectives (or of the
criminal class) with that of the rest. Upon
the answer to this depends the greater or
less desirability of measures for sterilization
and segregation. Another very serious gap
is the lack of information concerning the
endowment of different social groups in a
community. This could only be obtained
by means of some kind of census of physical
and mental capacity kept up over a series of
years, which is also necessary if we are to do
more than guess whether a given population is or is not deteriorating, as a result of
the disproportionate multiplication of inferior stocks, the prevalence of birth control,
the intermixture of nationalities or races,
and so on.

I have only indicated a few points requiring further research and statistics, and it
would be misleading to suggest that the best
of registration systems would take us very
far at first, or supersede the necessity for
supplementary ad hoc investigations. It
will be at once admitted that good vital
statistics are the basis of all eugenic
research; and I had better now go on to
indicate in what respects our present vital
statistics, excellent as they are compared
with those of many foreign countries, and
the foundation of all the work which population experts and eugenists have so far
88

accomplished, might be extended and improved if our politicians and administrators
could be persuaded of their importance, or
if private eugenic research were properly
endowed, as it is in the United States.

As long ago as in November, 1916, in my
first Presidential Address to the Royal
Statistical Society on the ‘‘ Organization of
Registration in its bearing on Vital Statistics,’ I expressed the opinion that we were
nearly at the end of what purely administrative action under our then existing powers
in the General Register Office could do in
the way of obtaining further information on
which statistical research might be based,
and gave an account of the particulars in
which the records necessary for the improvement and extension of our vital statistics were either ‘‘ altogether wanting or
defective in accuracy.’”? To remedy these
defects we required (and still require) two
things : (1) power which could only be given
by legislation to obtain fuller information
by way of ‘‘ questionnaires ’? on the occasion of the registration of births and deaths
by members of the public; and (2) a very
considerable reorganization of the registration service of the country. Under the
first head I will do no more than refer to
one suggestion, among many made in that
address, i.e., that of fertility tables which
might be derived from fuller birth registration information. But I may also quote—
just as one instance—a paragraph which has
a direct bearing on eugenic study.

“As a record,”’ I wrote, ‘‘ the present
entry is defective in that it either fails to
identify completely the person to whom it
relates or fails to point directly to the next
step in tracing the family history. Thus
in the death entry of one of the hundreds
of John Smiths, there may be no clue to the
marital condition or to any family relationship of the deceased man, and all we can
learn from the record is that a certain John
Smith, aged 54, a carpenter, died at such a
place on such a day of such a disease. If,
however, the entry contained statements as
to the date and place of his birth, and that
he was the husband of Mary Smith, formerly Jones, to whom he was married on

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

such a date, there would be something
resembling a complete identification of the
deceased man and indications from which
the family history could be traced by any
interested person. In the same way, the
birth entry of John Smith tells us only that
he was born at such a place on such a date
and that he is the son of John Smith and
Mary Smith, formerly Jones, but it gives no
clue to the next step backwards in the
family history. If, however, the entry contained the date and place of marriage of his
parents it would direct us at once to the
documentary record of that event.’’

The defects to which I drew attention on
that occasion remain so far unremedied.

LESSONS OF THE WAR

The outbreak of the War revealed the
weakness of our system from the point of
view of the organization of the man-power
of the country. No means existed of computing, except by estimates from the preceding Census, the number of men in agegroups or occupations; and in less than a
year from the beginning of the War it was
found essential to pass through Parliament
the National Registration Act of 1915, by
means of which it became possible, within
a very few weeks, to furnish accurate figures
to the Government of the number of men,
with their addresses and occupations, available for the Army, for the provision of
munitions of war, and for the maintenance
of essential civil services. The Act was
made to apply to women also; and the
foundations were accordingly laid of a
permanent Registration, which, taken in
conjunction with reforms in our registration
of Births, Marriages, and Deaths and with
Census taking, would certainly, as I shall
indicate, have placed Great Britain in the
forefront in the questions with which I am
dealing to-day. It had always been held
that the British population would never
tolerate the use of identity papers, but the
experience of the Act of 1915, which obliged
every adult individual to carry a National
Registration Certificate and to register
every change of address, completely disposed of this assertion ; and no difficulty of
REFORM OF VITAL STATISTICS

any kind was found in the administration of
this temporary Act.

As I was responsible for the Act I was
therefore soon led to consider the possibilities presented by a permanent organization
on these lines, and particularly the idea that
a General Register might be made to subserve the purposes, amongst others, of Births
and Deaths Registration and of the Census
in a more complete and reliable form than at
present, and I suggested this solution in the
address to which I have alluded. In 1918
I succeeded, in the last year of the War, in
persuading the Government to appoint a
committee of experts, of which I was Chairman, to draw up a permanent scheme for
registration. This was done, but unfortunately the matter got no further, for the
Government, in the press of other preoccupations at the close of the War, did not see
their way to carry out its recommendations; and the temporary measure, having
served its purpose, was allowed to lapse, and
an opportunity lost which may not soon
recur.

The Report, however, remains presumably on record at the Ministry of Health,
and supplies ample material for the study of
the registration problem in England.

We found in existence in England a
very considerable number of registers
being kept at considerable expense
for various special purposes, some of them
covering very large sections of the population. These registers are kept under different Acts of Parliament, by various authorities, in varying areas, for independent
purposes, without any provision for their coordination one with another.

The most important of these numerous
special registers in relation to the system of
general registration were the Electoral
Registers for Parliament and Local
Government, the school attendance registers, the Census (decennial only) and the
registers of births, marriages, and deaths,
which afford much of the material required
for general registration. Our particular
problem was therefore largely administrative ; how to relate them to one another and
prevent overlapping and waste of labour and

89

money. It was recognized that these special
registers would have in some measure to be
retained, and others, such as a special register of persons in receipt of the public assistance from rates and taxes administered by
various authorities, would have to be
created. It was considered, therefore, that
all these special and separate registers
should be co-ordinated by the institution of
continuous registers of the whole population, kept locally (on the lines of the then
existing National Register of 1915) by the
same authority as was responsible for births
and deaths registration, which would link
up the special registers into one coherent
register by fusing the canvasses at present
undertaken for the electoral and school
attendance registers into one comprehensive
inquiry, as well as such information for the
use of special registers as could most conveniently be obtained in this way ; and also
by making all the registers mutually accessible by a system of reference marking. The
general register would further enable all the
others to be kept free from errors whether of
duplication, omission, or the retention of
“* dead ’’ entries.

THE NEED FOR CO-ORDINATION

The advantage of this from a statistical
point of view is obvious. It is generally
the association of facts which is found to be
lacking when further statistical information
regarding the population is called for. We

have now no organized means of collating

the numerous items of information collected
and recorded as a result of the many paternal activities of the modern State. By the
means indicated, the numerous official inquiries and registers, now made and maintained independently of each other, would be
co-ordinated into a single system which
would provide a dossier for each individual
containing those particulars regarding him
which the State is concerned to know. For
identification purposes (the primary object)
the new local general register would contain
all the essential particulars as to each
individual. One or more cards or sheets
devoted to each individual, showing his
record from its commencement with the
go

entry of birth, would furnish evidence both
of his age and identity. (There are many
John Smiths, but presumably only one born
at a certain address on a given date, to
parents of recorded names, ages, and occupations, etc.) To this would be added as
time went on the chief registrable events
of his life—changes of address, occupation
(as already registered under the National
Unemployment Insurance Act), marriage,
the birth of children, etc.,—most of the information required being already recorded
in one official register or another, but without any provision for the association of the
whole.

IDENTIFYING THE INDIVIDUAL

Further, each individual was to be furnished (as under the National Registration
Act) with an Identity Card or Certificate
reproducing from the Register all the particulars necessary for identification which
would have to be produced on such occasions
as change of address, school entry, factory
employment, health and unemployment insurance, marriage, birth certification, etc.

The scheme was to be completed by the
creation of a Central Index Register, having
for its primary purpose the maintenance of
the local general registers, so far as concerned removals and prevention of duplicate
entries ; and would thus serve to keep accurate other special registers, such as those
for health and unemployment insurance, old
age pensions, and so on, and it could, as I
shall indicate later, be made the main instrument for obtaining information interesting
to eugenists.

Such, in the barest outline, were the proposals of our Committee. It would not be
worth while to go into further detail. All
that need be done is to indicate in very
general terms the principle to which any
good system should conform. The first of
these 1s the identification of every individual
within a community in order (a) that he
shall be made responsible for the fulfilment
of his obligations to the community, and (b)
that he shall be ensured his rights as a
citizen, whether these take the form of
franchises to be exercised or dues to be

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

received. The larger the responsibilities,
the more extended the rights, the more
diversified the communal services, the more
imperative becomes the need for full and
accurate identification of all the inhabitants.
With an extended franchise, universal and
compulsory schooling, insurance for health
or unemployment, the treatment of infectious diseases, infant welfare and protection,
compensation for accidents, old age pensions, widows’ pensions, and War pensions,
the necessity of safeguarding the marriage
ceremony, not to mention police and
military service, the identification of each
citizen in the locality in which he resides
becomes an essential condition alike of any
assurance of personal rights and of the effectual and equitable administration of national
and local services.

Upon this identification of every citizen in
his own community depends the second
great object of a Register, that in which
eugenists are interested, viz., the acquisition of statistical information about the
population (or any particular section of it), ’
partly for the purposes of research, and
partly to promote legislation and administrative action for social progress and the benefit
of the community. I need only allude to
the value of the data obtained from the questions asked in the British Census of 1911 as
to fertility, and the establishment of certain
facts as to the differential birth-rate which
we owe to researches on our vital statistics
by such statisticians as my former colleague,
Dr. Stevenson. The most important practical aims of our Eugenics Society are
founded on such statistics as these.

Further progress is checked and hampered by the fact that in England we have
to work under a system of Births and Deaths
Registration instituted before vital statistics
were thought of. Not only would the creation of a general simple comprehensive
registration system give boundless possibilities of extension in the matter of information
obtainable, but a great improvement in the
validity of our existing data. I may give
one illustration of how this would occur.

The information now supplied by the
public on the occasion of the registration of
REFORM OF VITAL STATISTICS

Births, Marriages, or Deaths would be
checked and supplemented by the records of
the individual or family which would
gradually be accumulated in the General
Register ; and the production of the identity
card, containing name, address, occupation,
etc., on each occasion of the registration of
any one of these events would ensure a uniformity of statement as to occupation, which
is one of the principal difficulties met with in
the preparation, for instance, of occupational
birth and death rates. Further, the registration of births and deaths has to be related to
the size and make-up of the population in
which they occur, in order to provide satisfactory evidence of the trend of natality and
mortality. This information is supplied at
present in Great Britain only by the decennial Census ; and in the intervening years by
estimates of the probable numbers, which
are often very far from accurate. The existence of a Register which would enable us to
ascertain the population of any local area
at any given date, not only in mass but in
full detail of age, sex, and marital condition,
would at once remove the difficulty which
largely vitiates the calculation of local birth
rates and death rates—calculations upon
which sanitary progress in great measure
depends. It would, in fact, provide us with
an elementary census annually or as often as
might be required, at a minimum of trouble
and expense.

I look upon this perfecting of our vital
statistics as perhaps the most fundamental
advantage we should get from the Register.
There are so many directions in which
hygienists and eugenists would benefit from
more accurate and extended statistical information, that I have no time to touch on
this branch of my subject. But I may just
quote one example which has been suggested
to me.

Uniformity in occupational classification
would enable us, as I have already suggested, by comparing the number of deaths
or births registered under the heading of,
let us say, Colliery Carters, to be sure that
these events are really to be referred to the
existing population registered under that
occupation in the Census. It would also

OI

enable us to face another problem of great
complexity, but of very considerable and
direct interest to eugenists, namely the
transference of individuals or families from
one class to another. In his Galton lecture
this year Major Darwin made clear how
great in absolute magnitude this transference is; his conclusions are, however,
based primarily on the contrast between the
birth rates, as modified by infantile and
child mortality, in the different classes.

ANALYZING SOCIAL SELECTION

The effect in which eugenists are most
directly interested depends, however, not
only on the fertility of the married, but on
the proportion of celibates and the age of
marriage. These factors probably heighten
the contrast in reproduction between social
classes, while full allowance for mortality
will tend somewhat in the opposite direction.
Full data as to births and deaths in consistently classified occupational groups would
supply a direct answer to the questions of
very considerable eugenic urgency, as to
which occupations are producing more children than are needed to maintain their numbers, which classes are producing less, and
in each case by how much. If it appears, as
has been estimated, that the professional
and clerical groups of occupations are producing no more than half the children needed
to maintain a stationary population, it is
evident that any eugenic policy which does
not recognize the need for effective action in
increasing the natality of these classes, is in
this respect seriously incomplete.

The analytic data necessary for making
both precise and detailed calculations as to
social transference analogous to those quoted
by Major Darwin, would become available
shortly after the establishment of effective
registration. Some fifty years later, however, a new source of information more
direct and detailed in some respects would
begin to emerge. The comparison of the
occupations of men then living with those of
their fathers and grandfathers would supply,
after the event, an analysis of the selective
processes at work in our society, both in the
action analogous to natural selection, in
modifying the predominant type of man in
the population at large, and in their effects
upon the constitution of the social structure.
The effects of immigration and emigration
would be taken fully and automatically into
account, and we should have not merely,
with respect to occupations such as the
physicians’, the gross fact that their numbers cannot be all drawn from parents of the
same occupation, but the detailed statement
of the actual occupations of their parents.

PEDIGREES AND SOCIAL PROMOTION

A particular question which has been
brought to the notice of eugenists, and one
which a satisfactory system of social statistics should be capable of answering, lies in
the relative importance in social promotion
of, on the one hand personal ability, and on
the other comparative freedom from the burden of offspring. It is arguable, as indeed
our Malthusian friends strongly argue, that
in all classes the limitation of offspring to a
few children gives to those few great advantages in their upbringing and education:
they have, in fact, a better start in life.
It should be possible to determine whether
or not this better start in life is an important
factor in determining the relative composition of the different social classes.

I will now turn to a point which bears
even more directly on eugenic study. It
will be remembered that our scheme involved the creation of a simple, skeleton,
central index register of the whole population, fed from the local register, for the
purpose of maintaining the accuracy of these
registers in the matter of removals and so
on. It is that aim which might give great
opportunities. For if, to the particulars
‘required merely for identification purposes
there were added notes of the parentage,
marriage, births of children, change of occu‘pation and cause of, and age at, death,
information would be afforded by which the
genealogical history of each family could in
time be traced. The mere possibility of
tracing pedigrees for three or more genera‘tions, indeed, would be of little eugenic
importance taken by itself. But taken in
conjunction with other data which would or

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

might be recorded, most valuable results
could be obtained.

In view of the knowledge we already
possess on the subject of the differential
birth rate, and of the measures advocated to
prevent the disproportionate multiplication
of inferior and undesirable stocks, it is vital
that eugenists should have the means of
discriminating more scientifically than has
yet been possible between the stocks whose
increase should be encouraged and those
whose heredity, or heredity combined with
environment, make their reproduction harmful to the community. If we had the
means of tracing from our records individuals of families which had been, perhaps
for more than one generation, in receipt of
some form of public assistance, of those
who had a record of criminality, or had
been lunatics or mentally defective or
suffered from certain forms of disease, we
should be on even more certain ground than
we are at present in advocating the necessary measures for limiting the fertility of
such individuals and classes.

An objection might be raised in England,
from the ‘‘ strong and widespread feeling,”’
as Major Darwin has expressed it in his
work on Eugenic Reform, ‘‘ that no individual should be, as it were, branded for life
on account of any disability discovered or
misdemeanour committed in youth, and with
this sentiment all must sympathise.”

I see no insuperable reason, however,
why, under proper safeguards a good part
of this programme should not be realized,
if once we could secure the establishment
of the General Register with the co-ordination to it of the special registers which
already exist and which will be created, and
of the Census. It will no doubt be necessary sooner or later to have a register of
persons in receipt of public assistance from
the various authorities. We already get information, inadequate no doubt, from the
Census as to feeblemindedness and blindness ; and causes of death in death registration combined with morbidity statistics
which could be made available from health
insurance, will supply some of the information wanted as to disease. If such informaREFORM

tion were linked up by the General Register
we should have data, which could in time be
extended and improved, related to the
individuals registered.

THE PROPOSED DUTCH SYSTEM

Whether we could secure sufficient information for our purposes about criminality, certain transmissible diseases, etc.,
from other extraneous sources which could
be incorporated in a Genera] Register or
from direct inquiries, would depend very
much on how far societies like ours were able
to inculcate a eugenic consciencé in the
public and in governing authorities. It is
at all events encouraging to know that certain other countries are hopeful of obtaining
information of eugenic importance from
genealogical registration and personal cards.
I need only allude to what Dr. van Herwerden told us in 1925 in London, when she
quoted from the description given at the
meeting of the Institut International de Statistique at Brussels in 1923 of the Dutch
system proposed by M. Methorst. She
mentioned some of the results to be expected
from the tabulation of the cards—the influence of the age of the parents on the
death-rate of the children; the influence of
consanguinity ; the correlation of male and
female births ; the superiority or inferiority
of the first-born; death-rate in relation to
occupation ; family and hereditary diseases ;
the same occupation running in a family;
the frequency of twins. M. Methorst stated,
in addition, that efforts should be made to
add information as to individuals from other
sources and from special inquiries—such as

information about deafness, blindness,
criminality, mental infirmity, capacity,
income.

Part of the information we require can no
doubt be derived on broad statistical lines
from an improved registration of births,
marriages, and deaths; but for tracing anything like a life history of the individual
and linking up his history with that of his
parents and grandparents general registration of the population is essential. Eugenists, therefore, have the strongest interest

OF VITAL STATISTICS

93.

in supporting proposals for the creation of
Registration accompanied by Personal Identity Cards wherever such a system is not in
existence.

I have perhaps dwelt on the desirability
of General Registration longer than the
possibility of attaining it at the moment
warrants. We missed a great opportunity
in 1919; but my hope is that the complexity
of modern social conditions may in time
make a general registration system an
administrative necessity.

For the present, however, we can at least
expect a gradual improvement in our present
system of registration of Births, Deaths, and
Marriages and in the Census. It is good
news in this connection that a recent Act has
at last removed the legislative bar (of which
I spoke earlier) to obtaining fuller information from the public and to the reorganization of the registration service. Outside
bodies like our Society should therefore have
a better chance of a hearing in the future
than they have had in the past, and should
not relax their efforts to press reasonable
demands.

In this connection, I may recall Major
Darwin’s letter nearly two years ago—in
July 1927—to the Ministry of Health, asking for the careful consideration of certain
demands.

The first of these was for the inclusion in
the Census for 1931 of a repetition of the
questions asked in the Census of 1911 (but
omitted from that of 1921), as to the duration of marriages and the numbers of children born and surviving, which provided
material, on a national scale, for analyzing
the fall in fertility since 1876, the year of
our highest birth rate, by social class, occupation, birthplace, and locality of residence.
The repetition of these questions would give
us invaluable information as to the changes
in fertility now taking place in social classes.

Secondly, Major Darwin asked for improved methods of determining, from the
data obtainable from Births and Deaths
Registration, the rates of population growth
or decrease among the different social clases
of the community. <A paper by Dr. Stevenson, the greatest authority on the subject
94

—indeed I may say the greatest of living
medical statisticians—read in February,
1928, before the Royal Statistical Society
clearly showed how the information required
could be obtained by a few small changes
in the tabulation of Birth and Death Certificates.

These are very modest requests, but we
shall not get what we want, let me emphasize, unless we continue to press for them.

When we consider all we want (including
other requests made by Major Darwin at the
same time), and what we have any practical
chance of getting, the difficulties, it must be
admitted, loom large. But I think that
statistics, in spite of the distaste which they
inspire, have a way of coming by their own.
Directly you have a policy to advocate or a
position to defend you must use figures.
And with the lively and growing interest
there now is in the public and the Press in
biology and heredity, and all the questions
covered by these terms—birth control, sterilization, mental deficiency, family endowment, and the increasing urgency of population questions in the broadest sense—I
believe the public demand for guidance in
these subjects will make it impossible for
Governments, however reluctant, to stand
aloof for many years.

I have lately become connected with the
formation of an International Union for the
Scientific Investigation of Population Prob
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

lems, and its component bodies the National
Committees in all the principal countries in
the world, of which the British Population
Society is one. I think that this Union,
which commands important scientific support in many countries, should have a
powerful influence in stimulating research
into all these questions, and should be able
to bring effective pressure to bear in the
matter of Government statistics, particularly in the direction of standardization.

I notice that Professor Thor Anderssen
of Norway, in a paper he printed last year
on the Geneva Population Conference, expressed the opinion that scientific statistics
should be the first consideration for the new
Union, and that civil registration of the
populations should be their basis. If the
Union should display activity. in this
matter, as I believe it will, it should be able
to give a powerful stimulus to the cause
which I have been advocating this afternoon,
and it is my hope, that in this country at all
events, the Eugenics Society and this new
British Population Society will be of mutual
assistance to each other. If the new Society
in time succeeds in obtaining sufficient support, financial and other, to enable it to do
its part in promoting research under the
International Union, it should be of great
value to us by providing some of the
material upon which our educational work
depends.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 2.
