AN IRISH INSTANCE OF PRACTICAL EUGENICS

Y a lucky chance a correspondent,
who prefers to remain anonymous,
has sent us an account of a system

of practical eugenics in Ireland. Unlike
Monsieur Dachert’s well-planned scheme, it
seems to have been largely unconscious, the
joint product of economic urgencies and an
ancient social tradition. We give the account
in Substantially our correspondent’s own
words :

The eugenic customs I spoke of were in
my youth—I am in my seventy-eighth year
—practised by the peasantry of the Province
of Munster, if not of the whole of what is
now known as the Irish Free State. The
people at that time might be divided into
big farmers, small farmers, and labourers ;
and nearly universally each class married
only its own members. ‘The custom of giving fortunes to daughters and to sons who
married girls with farms, was the real cause
of this system, as only big farmers could
give big fortunes, whilst the servant girl
was able to bring nothing to her husband
but a feather bed.

A custom that lasted for generations
brought about a sort of caste spirit in the
community ; and so, apart from money and
land, the big farmers married amongst
themselves. Ireland was at that time a very
poor country; and as a result both the
small farmers’ and the labourers’ families
were often under-nourished. It was actually
possible to pick out the children of the wellto-do farmers from those of the others at
a national school simply from their superior
growth and nutrition. It was difficult for a
man with any serious physical defect to get
a wife, and for a girl so handicapped practically impossible to get a husband. The reason was, probably, that a farm could only be
properly worked by thoroughly healthy
people; and in many respects the health of
the wife was really more essential than that
of a husband. Obviously, the weakly
labourer had little chance of a wife.

There is a great deal of insanity in my
county and I have interested myself in

19

tracing its history in my native valley. In
every case I know I can trace a hereditary
taint. I know of cases of families that have
had the taint introduced by inter-marriage
with others well known to have had cases of
insanity in its members for generations. I
have been astonished how little it has been
regarded amongst the people. The explanation probably is that only odd members become insane, and that they are at once
removed to the asylum, where they are soon
forgotten. Also, these families have produced many persons of outstanding ability
as an offset to the afflicted.

Associated with a tendency to insanity in
families is the occurrence of cases of various
grades of mental deficiency. These, I think,
are mostly rather of high-grade type; I have
known and know a few—very amiable gentle
persons, incapable of working a farm, but
useful under supervision in farm work.
‘These never marry and have no offspring.

A history of tuberculosis in a family is a
serious cause of difficulty for its members in
getting married. Amongst the Irish, generally, fine physique and beauty are greatly
valued.

I cannot say if these customs prevail
amongst the urban populations in Ireland:
I think they probably do to a great extent,
because the town folk of all but a few of the
large cities are in very close touch with the
rural communities.

In a supplementary letter our correspondent refers to the very effective check on
inbreeding exercised by the Catholic
Church, which rules the great majority of
the population of the Irish Free State. He
writes :

As a result of the Church prohibition, for
centuries the custom has become something
like a taboo in the community and marriages
within that degree [of third cousin] are
popularly regarded as unlucky. Most of the
marriage customs in Ireland of eugenic
value are really founded on the necessity
for robust, healthy people to meet the exacting conditions of farm work. Up to about
20

thirty years ago all butter made in Ireland
was made and prepared for market in the
farm. The most important work of the wife
was to prepare the butter ; and this was very
heavy work. ‘The chief product of these
dairy farms was, and is, butter, and its
quality was of primary importance for the
welfare of the farm. It was thus essential
that the wife should be able to make good
butter.

I know personally of three or four family
histories that would, I think, make eugenic
enthusiasts pause before deciding on the
wisdom of sterilizing members of families in
which cases of insanity and mental deficiency occur. Here is one:

A family of four sons and one girl. Two
of the sons were men of brilliant intellects,
both priests. One was one of the ablest of
the Irish bishops, and the other would almost
certainly have been one had he not died at
an early age from typhus fever. "The two
other brothers might be regarded as feeble
minded. The sister was just of normal
ability, but her only children—two sons—
are of exceptional ability; one is now a

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

member of the Irish Free State Cabinet,
and I notice that he is one of its most able
meinbers in defending government action on
public platforms.

The feeble-minded brothers married and
had children. ‘Those of the elder are men
and women of just average ability. The
younger died young, leaving a boy and girl.
The latter is quite a competent doctor in
charge of a large dispensary district. The
boy is quite a charming personality, but
wholly worthless for practical purposes ;
he has let a fine farm go to rack and
ruin.

This is an interesting case, on which,
however, we must suspend judgment until
we know something of the ancestry. If an
able family mated with a defective strain,
or if two individuals of such mixed ancestry
married, a mingling of able and defective
children would be likely—this, we think,
occurred with the early Spanish Hapsburgs.
And the moral seems to be not that sterilization 1s risky, but that decent stock
should never marry beneath its own
standard.

 
