176 EUGENICS REVIEW.

arts practised by late Aurignacian and early Neolithic man encourages
Sir Arthur in the hope that somewhere in the world we shall find the
passage of the one type of culture into the other.. One of the most
interesting facts which emerges from the investigation of Neolithic
remains in Crete is the close connection which obviously existed between
early civilisation there and in Egypt. Sir Arthur Evans records the
existence of a mound 45 feet th&k consisting of deposits of Neolithic
remains in which, at a depth of 19 feet, fragments of pottery are found
which must have been imported from Egypt at the time of.the earliest
dynasties. The greater bulk of the deposits must therefore be coeval
with pre-dynastic times; and the civilisations of Egypt and Crete seem
therefore to have been connected since the beginning. Which of the
two is mother and which is daughter? Prof. Elliot Smith has given
reasons for believing that civilisation in Egypt is of indigenous origin.
The cause which converted the nomadic Neolithic tribes into stationary
settlers is clearly in evidence—it is the everlasting fertility of Egyptian
soil renewed by the inundations of the Nile. Here, then, if anywhere,
we must look for the spot where the human race first came to anchor,
where cities were first built, and the State, as distinct from the tribe,
was born, and the culture of Crete must be regarded only as one of the

earliest off-shoots from this original focus of civilisation. .
E. W. MacBRIDE.

REPORTS.

Penal Reform League Record, 1918; pp. 104; price Is.

Anyone who has any care for the helping of the helpless, and who
believes in prevention rather than cure, should invest a shilling in this
Record. They will find it, contrary to expectation perhaps, absorbingly
interesting and refreshing, for it touches upon so many questions from so
many aspects, and always with the human and the commonsense one well
to the fore, so that it may be truthfully recommended as a very human
document. It deals with the problem of delinquency in general, and in
particular, in our own Courts, and in the U.S.A., with the effects on boy
conduct of birching, and also, indirectly, of mothers’ pensions. It gives
first-hand evidence of prison conditions and necessary prison reforms,
quoting largely from Thos. Mott Osborn’s rather wonderful experiences
at the Sing Sing Prison, discusses the death penalty in civil and military
life, the correlation between our bad educational system and delinquency,
the essentials of a satisfactory national education, the troubled problems
of adolescence, the extension of the probation system, the Women Police,
etc., and lastly reviews many books dealing with all these subjects, from
the pens, not so much of theorists, as of practical workers, who have .come
spas to face with the real difficulties and have made some headway against
them.

The book is really both useful and suggestive as compendium of what
has been done in the way of penal reform, which is, alas, very little, what
still remains to be done, and along what lines further action ae be
taken. A.
