THE SOCIETY’S COMING OF AGE

The Growth of the Eugenic Movement
By MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN, D.Sc.

Forming, with considerable omissions, the Galton Lecture for 1929.

honour to-night as the great pioneer in

the eugenic campaign of the last century, had been in bad health for a few years
before his death, which occurred in January,
1911. He was then our Hon. President,
and in spite of his eighty-eight years and
his failing strength, he continued to take an
interest in our proceedings until the end.
At about that time, Mr. Crackanthorpe,
then our President, expressed a wish to
resign that office. The result was that I,
who was then not even a member of this
Society, to my great surprise received an
invitation to succeed Mr. Crackanthorpe in
the presidency at the next succeeding annual meeting. This was almost exactly
eighteen years ago, and this invitation I
accepted with much searching of heart and,
I believe I may truthfully say, only out of a
compelling sense of duty.

Having but recently resigned the presidency, it seems appropriate that I should
begin this address by saying a few words
about what has taken place in the field of
eugenics during my seventeen and a half
years’ tenure of office. As to the Society
itself, in 1911 our offices, as depicted in my
memory, were situated in an attic in a not
too respectable London street. There was
to be found our indefatigable Hon. Secretary, Mrs. Neville-Rolfe, who had, I believe,
played a leading part in the formation of
the Society in 1908. There she toiled all
day long, sometimes with one not too highly
paid assistant, and sometimes with none at
all. Before long she had collected round
her a group of energetic voluntary workers,
and thus set an example which has been followed ever since to our great advantage.
To all these volunteers, in all these eighteen

S FRANCIS GALTON, whom we

years, I should like to pay a warm tribute
of thanks. My point for the moment is,
however, that a comparison between the
attic of 1911 and our present comparatively
luxurious offices in Grosvenor Gardens,
gives a fair measure of the growth of the
importance of the Society in all other
respects ; a growth which has been the result
of the continuous exertions of many of its
members, as well as of the receipt of large
anonymous donations from two or three keen
advocates of eugenic progress.

The most remarkable change which has
taken place in regard to eugenics during
these years has undoubtedly been a great
alteration in public opinion, a change difficult to demonstrate by reference to dry
facts. Soon after I accepted the invitation
to become your president, I met a friend,
a distinguished fellow of the Royal Society,
and the look of mingled surprise and pity
which flashed across his face when I told
him what I had undertaken to do has left an
indelible impression on my mind. I am
sure that Sir Bernard Mallet has had no
such telling experience. ‘Twenty years ago
great ignorance in regard to eugenics was
almost universal. Our office attendant reported one day that someone had asked him
whether eugenics was not merely another
name for free love ; whilst amongst the more
instructed, our Society was often held to
be concerned with little more than sexhygiene and the cure of certain diseases. At
the International Eugenic Congress held in
London in 1912, the subjects which elicited
marked signs of interest or approval were
generally such as lie outside our proper field
of study ; temperance reform and the treatment of tuberculosis, forexample. At that
time the mention of eugenics in society was
10 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

often greeted with nothing but a silent
smile, in circumstances when now it would
perhaps more often evoke direct opposition.
That our path is not yet quite straight is
hardly a subject for regret, because no reformer can hope to be successful until he has
passed through the fire of keen opposition.
That we are winning, though winning
slowly, is perhaps best proved by the number of books now being published in all languages on this subject, some very wise and
some certainly very foolish.

As to the practical proposals put forward
by eugenists, they have not changed to any
marked extent during the period under
review. This is not surprising, for our
policy is for the most part based on the
broad principle that like tends to produce
like, a principle which has been known from
time immemorial.’ No doubt a vast amount
of scientific work has been done in recent
years in all branches of science; but on the
whole the result has been and will, I believe,
continue to be, to strengthen rather than to
change the eugenic superstructure built on
this scientific foundation. When I joined
our Soctety, eugenists were advocating most
of the practical proposals which find favour
with us now-a-days.

METHODS OF PROPAGANDA

As to certain minor changes which have
taken place in our methods of advocacy, I
am inclined to rejoice that there is no longer
such a constant harping on the relative importance of our old friends, nature and nurture, this being a comparison impossible to
define with scientific accuracy. No doubt
the emphasis on this contrast was very useful during the opening of our campaign, and
no doubt in scientific researches the effects
of heredity and environment should always
be kept as distinct as possible. Indeed, we
must continue to point out that the differ
 

’ By this principle is here meant that if a large
number of specimens are selected on account of an
excess in any quality from a species living under
natural conditions, their offspring will show, in the
same quality, on the average an excess in the same
direction as their parents, though not to the same
extent.

ence between brothers who are not twins, as
compared with the difference between
‘identical ’ twins, gives a fair measure of
the effects of heredity ; whilst admitting at
the same time that the contrast between a
man educated in a highly cultured home and
his twin brother who had lived all his life
amongst naked savages—if such a pair
could be found—would give an equally fair
measure of the possible effects of environment. We shall best win over our opponents to our side by a frank statement of our
belief in the great effects, both good and
bad, of human surroundings; for it is only
after such an acknowledgment that we can
fairly advocate an unprejudiced study of the
effects of heredity.

Natural inheritance, on the one hand, and
the transmission of human characteristics
from generation to generation by the agency
of environment on the other, are, of course,
radically different processes. ‘This difference may be illustrated by the fact that our
civilisation, in so far as it has come to us
from previous generations as the result of
tradition and social contact, might conceivably be almost wiped out in the course
of a century, whereas any alteration in
the inborn predispositions of a race can only
take place but far more slowly. Nevertheless the results of these two modes of the
transmission of human qualities are often so
much alike as to be indistinguishable, with
the result that our social policy ought often
to be the same whether we are looking to
nature or to nurture. To take a single
example, Dr. Goring, whose works now
attract far too little attention, stated that
the son of a criminal is ten times more likely
to become a criminal than is the son of
honest parents. To what extent this transmitted criminality is separately correlated
either with natural inheritance or with bad
home surroundings is a problem which cannot now be solved. Nevertheless this crude
general correlation between the qualities of
fathers and sons is in itself a fact of great
importance ; because it certainly gives some
indication of the probable results to be obtained by lessening the fertility of criminals
in any one generation on the criminality of
THE SOCIETY’S

the next succeeding generation, and this
without reference to any theories concerning
natural inheritance. We know for certain
that many good and bad qualities observed in
parents are apt to appear again amongst
their children, though we can give no complete explanation of this re-appearance ; and
on this fact can be based a strong argument
in favour of endeavouring to reverse the
existing differential birth rate. If we can
get social reformers to acknowledge the
benefits which could be derived from
changes in the fertility of the different types
of human beings, without necessarily convincing them that their views in regard to
the effects of environment are mistaken, we
shall have gone more than half way towards
winning them over to our side. Here is a
line of advance which has been too much
neglected in the past.

The publication of an outline of a practical Eugenic Policy by our Society constituted, in my opinion, a very notable step in
advance in regard to our eugenic propaganda. Having said this much, I should,
however, like to add that I most certainly
do not look upon this Outline as constituting the articles of a eugenic faith, nor do I
hold that all our members should be expected to toe this line. Individual differences should always be admitted and even
welcomed. All that is desirable is that
there should be a pronouncement concerning
our aims sufficiently definite to act as a flag
around which we can rally as an efficient
fighting force and then all advance together
in the same general direction. I trust that
this Outline will always be kept up to date,
but only by the adoption of well-considered
changes, and also that opportunities will
constantly be taken for making it widely
known. Having said so much, perhaps I
may state that, whilst fully admitting that
birth control is to be advocated in certain
circumstances, as set forth in the present
Outline, I should have liked also to have
seen included an emphatic assertion as to
the incalculable harm that has been done by
the comparative decrease in the fertility of
the best types since the middle of the nineteenth century, however brought about.

COMING OF AGE II

Moreover, systems of family allowances,
provided that they are organized like insurance systems, the payments out being
proportionate to the individual subscriptions, might also have been declared to be the
best financial method of promoting fertility.
These two points were, however, rightly not
included in the Outline, for in these respects
I was in a minority.

RESEARCH AND REFORM

Turning from practice to theory, it has
been suggested that eugenics should be
divided into two sections, under the headings of research and practical reform; and
the question has been raised as to which is
the more important. To this we may reply,
as we did in regard to heredity and environment, that both are absolutely necessary if progress is to be made, and that to
contrast their importance is generally a
waste of time. On the one hand, the advocacy of eugenic reform, if founded on-a false
scientific basis, might have disastrous
results. On the other hand, except for the
highly important effect of stimulating the
imagination, scientific research will only
benefit mankind if it is followed up by the
practical application of the discoveries thus
made. ‘The demand that we should seek
truth for truth’s sake is generally made by
those who wish to save themselves the
trouble of seeking to ascertain what should
be the ultimate aim of scientific research.
The fate of science is no doubt to keep
digging away more or less blindly into the
mountain of ignorance, and then quite unexpectedly to strike on some rich vein of
knowledge. The wise man of science will,
however, first learn to recognize the golden
treasure when it is seen, and then dig by
preference in those strata where it is most
likely to be found. Nevertheless, looking
to our own Society only, I suggest that we
should devote our energies almost exclusively to the propaganda side of the question; because I believe that the ways of
science will always prove to be so far more
pleasant than any attempt to force unpalatable truths on an unwilling public that, if
12 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

both are admitted, the propaganda side of
our work will not survive in the struggle for
existence within the Society ; just as, according to Gresham’s Law, light money, being
generally preferred by purchasers in times
gone by, always tended to drive heavier coin
out of circulation; if I may, for this purpose only, compare science to an inferior
currency.

SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH

Nevertheless, I should like here both to
mention a few of the less obvious lines of
research which seem to me at the present
time to be especially desirable in order to
strengthen our eugenic foundations, and to
express the hope that they will be undertaken at some university or other institution. First of all, may I make a strong
plea for a psychological and physical examination of a large number of children, all
of the same age, of women who have been
actually certified as being mentally defective? This would give us one of those
crude correlations which, I have suggested,
might often be of great value in the advocacy of practical social reforms; for, anyhow, we should thus learn what kind of children would be prevented from entering the
world in the immediate future by the prevention of parenthood among the types of
defectives now most often certified. We
could not, it is true, thus at once disentangle
the effects of heredity and environment,
which should no doubt be our aim, especially in the scientific study of causation.
The simplicity and intelligibility of these
crude correlations, as I have called them,
nevertheless make them facts of great practical value. Another investigation much
needed is a systematic inquiry into the
various methods of sterilization, including
the use of X-rays and also of injections, if
this latter method can be made really
effective. The whole question of human
sterility is indeed in great need of further
investigation ; for we all know of cases when
a child was desired but when for some unexplained reason none appeared. It may here
also be noted that, from the point of view of

pure science, though it would be of doubtful
direct value to eugenics, the effect of X-rays
on the range of distribution of qualities in
the next succeeding generation of animals
or plants should be studied, the object being
to ascertain if small mutations are promoted
by this process in the same way as are large
ones. ‘The heredity of stupidity and also as
far as possible of temperamental inferiority,
together with the relationship between the
1.Q. and the size of the family in the various
social strata, are also subjects greatly needing further inquiry. ‘Turning to reforms of
greater magnitude, the whole system of
registration in this country ought to be
completely remodelled, for the sake both of
efficiency and of economy. ‘The merits of
our fellow citizens are never intentionally
hidden, and if the registration records included as far as possible all human defects,
the tracing of pedigrees of scientific value
would thus be greatly facilitated. | Most
important of all would be the establishment
of some system of human stocktaking, such
as that so ably advocated a year ago to-day
by Dr. Bond.

One of the many ways in which Sir Francis Galton showed his genius was by his
selection of the study of twins as a method
of research in human heredity, a field of
inquiry by no means yet exhausted. I
should especially like to see this line of
research pursued in the following manner.
By means of all the best-known psychological, temperamental, scholastic, and
medical tests, a considerable number of
twins should be examined, all of them being
what are known as ‘ identical ’ twins; that
is to say twins of the same sex and very
much alike in physical features. Now, it is
generally held that the similarity between
such twins is due to a similarity between the
hereditary ingredients, call them what you
like, of the germs from which the two individuals originated. May we not, therefore,
assume that those tests in which the twins
showed the greatest degree of similarity
would also be those in which heredity
counted for most? A number of sibs not
twins should also be examined in the same
way for the purposes of control; that is, in
THE SOCIETY’S

order to get a scale by means of which the
similarity shown in the different tests could
be compared. The whole scheme would need
careful consideration in advance, but it
ought to be possible in this way to form
some estimate of the -relative value of
various tests for eugenic purposes.

RISKS MUST BE TAKEN

Returning to questions of practical policy
there are certain conclusions which, though
perhaps not now widely held, have, during
recent years, become more and more firmly
impressed on my mind. Some of these are
of minor importance; as, for instance, the
fact that the removal of children from bad
homes must, for several reasons, inevitably
result in an increase in the numbers issuing

from such homes ;* this being a considera- |

tion at present altogether neglected by
philanthropists. I am to-night, however,
only concerned with certain broad underlying principles which should guide our
eugenic footsteps. Our aims should, of
course, always be moderate and reasonable,
but when once they have been definitely
selected with great care, they should be pursued without any hesitation whatever.
There may possibly be an element of contradiction in this advice, or rather it may point
to the fact that, in all social questions, compromise is always necessary to some extent.
As to moderation, that I have always advocated, whereas my belief in the merits of
boldness has only been slowly acquired.
When attending my very first committee
meeting as your prospective, but not your
actual, president, a proposal was suddenly
sprung upon me that an International Congress of Eugenics should be held in the following year in London. My heart went
right down into my boots, for I anticipated
a complete failure, with myself as the figurehead of the sinking ship. I had not the
courage, however, to show my cowardice at
the very beginning of my career, and I gave
an inwardly trembling consent. Iam sure
I shall be in agreement with all who remem
*For the reasons for this conclusion, see my
Eugenic Reform, p. 193 n.

COMING OF AGE 13

ber the occasion when I say that, as the
result of the exertions of our Hon. Secretary, the Congress was, in fact, a brilliant
success. And this was the first of a series
of events which have made me inclined to
say that, having adopted a moderate policy,
our cry should be boldness and ever boldness.

The advocacy of boldness implies the
necessity for facing danger, and certainly in
our eugenic campaign we shall never be
free from doubts and difficulties. It has
often been said that in science every statement should be actually proved before it is
enunciated, whereas it would be wiser to regard no scientific statement whatever as
being quite beyond the reach of criticism. A
short while ago Newton’s Laws of Motion
were held to be incontrovertible truths,
whereas it has now been shown by Einstein
that they are not the last words of science
on these subjects. Mathematicians were,
however, fully justified in acting as if these
laws represented the truth, because they
were the nearest approach to the truth then
available. Every scientific theory should
always be regarded as a provisional hypothesis ; and yet these theories must often be
accepted as the only guides we have for practical purposes. Even if we only rely upon
the best established scientific conclusions,
some risk is always accepted by so doing,
and the practical question is as to the degree
of risk that we are justified in facing.

Looking at the matter definitely from the
point of view of the scientific investigator,
he should, on nearly all occasions, try to
consider what theory will best fit the facts
before him, provided he is always ready to
abandon his suggestions in the face of new
facts. The man who cannot school his mind
thus to act had better keep clear of scientific
speculation altogether. If I may go near
home for an illustration of what I mean, my
father thought out his theory to account for
the growth of coral reefs before he had ever
seen a coral island, though he did not publish his views until he had collected a great
mass of material. The framing of that
theory not only made him observe these
reefs with greater insight when he did see
14 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

them, but it has stimulated geological
thought and research for nearly a century.
Even if it will have to be abandoned altogether in time, which I may say seems to me
highly improbable, its publication will have
done more good than harm.” On the other
hand my father certainly made an undeniable blunder concerning the Parallel
Roads of Glen Roy ; but when he “‘ frankly
admitted his own explanation to have been
erroneous,” his mistake was soon forgotten.* In fact the framing of an erroneous theory seems often to have been a
necessary step in the path of progress,
whilst no doubt the exposure of the error
was equally necessary for a further advance.

NATURE AS A GUIDE

As to the necessity for taking risks, we
may perhaps learn something by considering whether nature herself has not often
been very rash in her procedure. Certainly
in the evolutionary process innumerable
species have advanced along paths which
led only to entire extermination. But some
of the fittest types always did survive, and
with that result nature seems to have been
quite satisfied. In considering the risks
run during this forward march, I should
like you to try to imagine, if it is not too
fanciful, what would have happened, when
the earth was only inhabited by certain
primitive jelly-like organisms, if Dame
Nature had applied for advice to some
learned society situated in some other
planet. If the inhabitants of that other
planet had by that time risen to the same
level of civilization as that to which we have
now attained, might not the reply have been
somewhat as follows? ‘‘ We are still disputing,’’? Dame Nature would have been
told, ‘‘ and often disputing very keenly as
to the methods by which the evolution of living organisms has been brought about. The
broad fact of the descent of man is no longer
in doubt, but we have so far failed to reach

*See The Coral Reef Problem, W. M. Davis,
American Geog. Soc., 1928.

* Darwin as Geologist, Geikie, Cambridge Press,
1909, p. 83. :

unanimous conclusions as to the part which
has been played in the past by natural selection. The idea of making practical use of
the theory of selection must, therefore, be
abandoned until we have completed those
exhaustive experiments by which alone absolute certainty can be reached.”? Now, if
Dame Nature, greatly impressed by the cogency of this reasoning, had up till now persistently followed the advice she then received, what would have been the course of
events on earth? I, myself, have no doubt
that instead of sitting round this comfortable table, we should now all of us be, if I
may so put it, merely jelly-like kind of creatures, living monotonous and unthinking
lives on some otherwise unoccupied mud
bank. It is true that those scientists who
look askance at the deliberate application of
selection to man do not hesitate to advocate
selective breeding in the case of domestic
animals; but how anyone can suppose that
what is folly in the one case can be wisdom
in the other has not been made clear to me.
If Dame Nature seems often to have been
playing a risky game, and at times to have
lost heavily, yet she has always won in the
long run; and we ought not to be afraid to
follow her bold example in some measure.

If we are looking for guidance to nature,
we may also note that she certainly does not
neglect nurture ; for she teaches the animals
and plants under her care to strive to improve their surroundings as much as they
can; different kinds of ants, to take a notable example, both executing great feats in
architecture and also keeping slaves .and
domestic animals. Each organism seems to
have been produced so as to fit into its own
particular niche in the society of organic
life ; and our ideal should also be that everv
man should be found doing the work he is
best fitted to perform. All our citizens
should only be employed in healthy, useful,
and honourable employments, those doing
the best work being the best paid. Nature
also seems to make it a rule only to bring to
maturity, and arrange marriages for such a
number of organisms as can make a living
in the same way as their parents, all the rest
being ruthlessly exterminated. To those
THE SOCIETY’S

who dread over-population, nature seems to
reply:

‘* But war and pestilence, disease and dearth
Sweep the superfluous myriads from the
earth.’”

Here we must, however, abandon nature as
a guide, and we must seek to obtain the
advantages resulting from this struggle for
existence in some less wasteful and cruel
way. According to a recent estimate,
twenty million babies are now born annually
inevitably destined only to live short and
useless lives, and this number should be
diminished as far as possible. Such a reduction in the infantile death rate would, no
doubt, lessen the efficacy of natural selection, and here eugenics demands the replacement of nature’s methods by some artificial method of selection. Our aim should
be not only to lessen the fertility of all inefficient citizens as far as is practicable, but
also that all those doing work which is really
beneficial to mankind should have families
fully large enough to fill their places when
they die and somewhat larger than the
families of those employed in such callings
as ought to be less practised or altogether
abolished. In these ways not only would
the appearance in future generations of good
qualities in infinite variety be promoted, but
the evils of over-population might be
avoided. In order thus to make eugenic
principles widely applicable, many difficult
problems will have to be solved. Though
these difficulties will be largely of a
social character, yet we shall often have to
seek guidance from science, and the advice
then received should always be treated with
the greatest respect, except when we are told
to take no risks.

These considerations lead us on to one
other point of great practical importance
which I wish to emphasize to-night, and that
is that we ought to study the whole mass of
the people when framing our eugenic policy ;
just as nature, by enforcing a continuous
struggle for existence, passes every single

 

5 Erasmus Darwin.

Temple of Nature, Canto IV,
370.

COMING OF AGE 15

individual in review. No doubt many keen
eugenists have at times advocated schemes
for the promotion of the fertility of small
selected groups of highly intellectual persons, and beneficial effects lasting for a few
generations certainly might thus be produced. The formation of anything like a
separate eugenic caste appears to me, however, to be quite impracticable; though, of
course, the future may perhaps prove that
here I aminerror. As to the other end of
the intellectual scale, one of the first aims of
our Society was the reduction of the fertility
of mental defectives, and that was certainly
a wise choice. The attention of the public
could have been directed to no other eugenic
reform with equal ease, or with equal educative effects. In my opinion, however, recent
investigations indicate that, whatever might
be the beneficial effects of reform in this
direction, it could not be relied on as a method
of promoting steady and continuous progress in the innate intellectual qualities of
the nation asa whole. If that be our object,
we must place complete trust neither in the
formation of eugenic castes nor in the elimination of mental defect.

SKILLED AND UNSKILLED LABOUR

If we pass on to study our population from
this large point of view, it will be found convenient to divide it, for statistical purposes,
into classes according to the incomes received,
a proceeding only to be condemned if an
unfair use is made of this classification.
When the nation is thus divided in tabular
form, it can at once be seen that the millionaires are so few in numbers that they
could not produce any racial effects on future
generations worth considering. Indeed,
nearly the same can be said of those possessing £10,000 a year or over; for they amount
to only about one in four thousand of our
total population; and are comparable, as
regards numerical frequency, to Galton’s
eminent persons. Paupers no doubt form
an important group, because the numbers
included are great; but if we want to study
what is taking place in the bulk of the
nation, it is such a contrast as that between
16

unskilled labourers, on the one hand, and all
skilled workers on the other, that we must
mainly hold in view, because of the great
numbers involved.

DIFFERENTIAL BIRTH RATE

It is in connection with the differential
rate of multiplication of the different sections of the population that the study of the
central groups is of great importance. Both
fact and theory point to the conclusion that
the ill-paid are on the average somewhat
inferior in hereditary qualities to the wellpaid ; and if it should be proved, as is very
likely, that the difference is now small, this
would only indicate that the deterioration of
the nation consequent on the more rapid
multiplication of these slightly inferior
types is at the present time correspondingly
slow, though none the less sure. It is, moreover, important to note not only that the
ill-paid must of necessity also be somewhat
inferior on the whole in general culture,
because of their inferior opportunities ; but
that this inferiority must to some extent be
transmitted to future generations by tradition and social contact. In regard to this
transmission of culture, certain investigations recently made by Dr. T. H. Stevenson are of interest. He divided the male
population into five groups according to the
occupations given in the census of 1911 ; and
in selecting the occupations to be included
in each group, he considered culture rather
than wealth. He then ascertained the
natality and the mortality of each of these
groups, the differences between these
figures giving some indication of the relative
rates of multiplication of these classes.
These estimates are certainly not very
reliable, as Dr. Stevenson has pointed out;
but they are the best available. These
results indicate that, taken all together, the
higher cultural groups show a lower rate of
multiplication than do the lower groups ; this
being analogous to what has been so often
found when comparing the richer with the
poorer strata. To say the least, this
differentiation is, however, far more clearly
noticeable between his three great central

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

groups than between them and the groups at
the two ends of his series. In fact, if a
differential rate of multiplication is a danger
signal to the nation, whether we are looking
to inborn qualities or to culture, this danger
signal seems to become most clearly visible
when studying the great central masses of
the population.

If we seek for the causes of the lessening
of the differences in rate of multiplication at
the two ends of the series, we find that
several factors have been at work. A partial
explanation is to be found in the fact that
certain classes of the grossly inferior, not
only have a high death rate, but may also
find the road to marriage beset with diffculties, their rate of multiplication being
reduced in both ways. As to the highest
cultural groups, we might expect, not only
that their social ambition would be to some
extent held in check by their intellect, but
also that those who have reached the top of
their profession would see little chance of
climbing any higher. Social ambition being
a main cause of family limitation, it, would
not be surprising, therefore, to find that
families decline less rapidly in numbers, or
even begin to increase, when looking to those
nearer and nearer to the top of the cultural
ladder. ‘The recent investigations of Huntington and Whitney, which are set forth
in their interesting book, The Builders of
America, in the opinion of these authors,
definitely confirm this conclusion. This is
a work which I cannot refrain from here
quoting in a somewhat different connection.
There we learn (p. 26) that it would require
an increase of 48,000 offspring of unskilled
labourers in order to produce one single
additional entry in the American Who’s
Who: whilst the same result would be
obtained by an increase of only 1,600 in the
offspring of skilled labourers. ‘The contrast
would indeed be far more remarkable if we
were to look to the professional classes as
compared with unskilled labour ; but in that
case the difference in social status would do
far more to account for the difference in success as thus measured. Here certainly we
have a convincing proof that the child of the
unskilled labourer is at a definite disadvanTHE SOCIETY’S

tage for all his life as compared with the
child of the skilled artizan, whether that
disadvantage be due to inferior inborn qualities or to inferior early opportunities.

In short when trying to ascertain the
effects on the future welfare of our country
likely to result from the differences in the
rate of multiplication of the various classes
of the community, taking the difference in
their value to the nation into account, we
see that it would be folly only to study the
two extreme ends of the series.

TRANSFERS BETWEEN CLASSES

When dealing with eugenic problems in
this broad way we soon find that the numbers which we have to consider are huge. To
show how huge they are, may I ask you to
visualize as well as you can an imaginary
cinematograph picture which I am about to
describe. You are to see in imagination at
the beginning of any year the whole population of the United Kingdom drawn up in a
single line as on parade, the men being
arranged in accordance with their earnings
or wages, best paid on the right, worse paid
on the left. You then see the central man
picked out, and a post erected where he
stood, with his wages marked on it. ‘This
year the figure would be about 52s. a week,
so I am told on good authority. Although
the parade is then seen to break up, yet the
worse paid men continue to stand on the left
side of the post, and the better paid on its
right. As time goes on, the worse paid on
the left will be seen gradually to increase in
numbers as compared with the better paid
ranks, this being the result of their higher
birth rate. At the beginning of the next
succeeding year, the parade being again reformed in the same manner, many persons
will then be seen to pass in front of the
central post in both directions, because of the
rise or the fallin their wages. Those moving from amongst the worse paid, who have
been increasing more rapidly in numbers, to
join the better paid half must, however, be
far greater in numbers than those moving in
the opposite direction, this being the necessary result of the equalization of the num
COMING OF AGE 17

bers on the two sides of the central post.
Now it is this annual crossing of the central
line on balance by large numbers of the
worse paid to join the better paid ranks
which I wish you to bear in mind for a few
moments; for before proceeding to discuss
the actual numbers involved, it is necessary
to prevent any possible misconception on one
or two points.

When first visualizing the fact that large
numbers of persons are constantly passing
into the better paid half of the community,
we may be tempted to exclaim what a blessed
state of things is this! This would, however, indicate a total misconception of the
situation. We have imagined a central post
having been erected at the beginning of a
year, a post which might now be marked
52s. a week. At the end of the year this
central post might, however, come to be
marked 53s. a week, and this would no
doubt indicate a desirable change for the
better in the standard of living. On the
other hand, it might come to be marked
only 51s. a week, which would indicate a
corresponding change for the worse. And,
whatever changes were to take place in
median wages, the number of persons crossing the line in both directions might be
exactly the same, and consequently no such
movements of persons on our imaginary
parade would give us any indication whatever as to the changes in economic prosperity which might be taking place. The
point on which our attention should be concentrated is as to both the magnitude of and
the direction in which the stream is flowing ;
that is to say whether the increase is proportionately greater in the families best endowed by nature or art, or in those worst
endowed in these two respects.

It should perhaps here be noted that we
must imagine all women and children being
paraded with the breadwinner of the family,
be he husband or father. Now if any
resentment should be felt in any quarter at
the idea of women being always paraded
with their menfolk, may I say in palliation
of my offence that I have elsewhere declared
my belief that the duties necessarily performed by women are amongst the most
18 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

noble of all human duties, and that eugenic
progress will in the long run depend more
on women than on men. My point here is,
however, that the young son, not yet at
work, of a man drawing less than the
median wage, will bé seen standing with
his father on the left side of the post; but
that if he gets to work during the year, and

begins by drawing more than the median

wage, at its close he will be seen to pass in
front of the central post. In fact the promotion of sons to a financial position above
that of their fathers would account for a
considerable proportion of those annually
crossing the line.

At this point the statistician may perhaps
point out that by selecting the centre of our
imaginary line as the point where the post
is to be erected, we have chosen the place
where the numbers annually crossing in
front of it would be the greatest. This is
true, but it is also true that wherever the
post was erected, except perhaps quite near
either end of the line, more or less considerable numbers would every year be seen to
pass in front of it from amongst the less
well paid classes into the better paid ranks.
Now if this crossing the line produces, as
we have seen, a tendency for the nation to
deteriorate both in culture and in hereditary
qualities, it follows that this tendency must
be operative amongst all the central classes
of the community. As to hereditary deterioration, natural selection is no doubt
always at work weeding out certain innate
human defects ; but-in the ill-paid ranks this
evolutionary process seems only certainly
to be producing beneficial results in regard
to physical qualities; and natural selection
certainly cannot now be relied on as a safeguard against forces tending to produce a
deterioration in mental qualities. In fact,
those crossing the line in an upward direction will not only always be somewhat inferior on the average to the better paid
ranks which they are joining, but they
themselves will continually show a decline
in inborn mental qualities as the generations succeed each other. Then as to culture, we all rejoice at the efforts now being
made to improve the lot of all classes of

society, efforts which may for some time to
come result in a continuation of the recent
improvement in social conditions. But this
increase in culture, due to improved surroundings, would have been much greater
had it not been for the constant drag downwards resulting from this increase in the
numbers of the less cultured. In any case,
in the long run any steady deterioration in
inborn qualities would prove to be the prevailing force, and our present increase of
culture may be but a temporary and delusive
prelude to racial decay.

Before quoting any figures, it should be
stated that. any estimate that can now be
made is liable to a considerable amount of
error, and that the only available safeguard
is to select methods of calculation which will
not exaggerate the facts. And here one
cannot but ask, who is to blame for the
fog which now surrounds us? Sometimes —
I am inclined to attack the whole system of
democracy, because it produces leaders who
study how to follow rather than how to lead ;
a state of things which they hide by claiming the whole credit for such advances as are’
made. _ Legislation certainly should not
proceed far in advance of public opinion ;
but the true leader of men will always
fearlessly express his views as to what
ought or ought not to be done. He will not
allow his mind to become warped by the
desire to catch votes, and he will not be one
of those who only move when shoved on
from behind, if I may so express it.
Though Lord Balfour and M. Doumer are
now the only two prominent statesmen in
the whole world who, to my knowledge,
have ever publicly discussed these racial
problems, yet I have some hope that better
times are coming. A small but important
reform in our system of registration of
births may soon be introduced by the
Ministry of Health, which would make it
possible to estimate with considerable accuracy the rates of multiplication of the
different social classes. We hope, also, that
certain questions included in the Census of
IQII will be reintroduced in 1931, and that
in this way a study of past events will be
facilitated. In any case all that we eugeTHE SOCIETY’S

nists can do is to keep on constantly bringing these questions before the public, so
that in time the pressure necessary to force
politicians to take racial questions into
serious practical consideration will be forthcoming. | |

NATIONAL DETERIORATION

Now for the actual numbers that might in
imagination be seen in the United Kingdom
at the present time annually crossing in
front of the post marking off the worse paid
from the better paid half of the community.
Feeling quite incapable of solving this problem myself, I applied to Dr. R. A. Fisher
for help, as I have often done before in
regard to statistical questions. Hilis estimate is that on balance every three years
there now pass from the worse paid to the
better paid half of the nation more than two
million persons. Is not this astonishing!
I was prepared for large numbers but I did
not expect to be called upon to visualize
the march of a large army every single year,
year after year. And let it be remembered
that there are good reasons for believing
that these huge numbers have not for long
been crossing the central line, generation
after generation in the past, and that we are
consequently dealing with a ‘‘ new and formidable fact,’’ to quote Dr. Stevenson’s
words. Let it be remembered also that,
according to that same authority, the results would be much the same whether the
nation were paraded according to wages or
according to culture.

In order better to realize the gravity of
the situation, we may with advantage bring
a somewhat different picture before our
minds. Let us imagine that the worse paid
or the less cultured half of society, whichever we may be considering, instead of increasing in numbers had remained stationary during the present century, whilst the
numbers of the upper half had continued to
diminish as at present; and that this deficiency had been made up by some 20,000,000
immigrants coming to us during that same
period from a country which had only risen
to the same level of social conditions as that

COMING OF AGE 19

reached by the lower half of our own population. In this way we get a fairly correct
picture of what has actually taken place.
If it is remembered that this huge body of
persons, whom I have likened to immigrants, has actually been absorbed into the
more cultured half of our nation, it surely
becomes evident that our country must have
been greatly damaged by its efforts thus to
digest and assimilate this mass of inferior
material. For social contact is always a
two-edged weapon, those who are being
pulled upwards always dragging some way
down the hill some of those above them.
Worst of all, these annual invasions into
our upper ranks as the generations succeed
each other are becoming very slowly worse
and worse in regard to their hereditary mental qualities. © Bring this picture before
your minds, and ask yourselves in all
seriousness whether the nation will be able
much longer to stand the heavy strain thus
imposed upon it. My own firm conviction
is that, though the physical surroundings
of the mass of the people may continue
either to improve or to remain stationary for
some time to come, possibly even for some
centuries, yet, as things are, eventually the
tide must turn and a visible decay of our
civilization must begin to make its appearance. Iam equally certain, however, that
by the adoption of proper reforms, this coming retreat could be converted into an advance, and I cannot but hope that if we |
could make our political leaders visualize
this picture of an entry of a host of somewhat inferior immigrants into the front rank
of our nation, they would see to it that these
questions are at once fully investigated and
ultimately that the appropriate reforms are —
adopted. |

PROGRESS AND POLICY

As already remarked, our Society was
founded in 1908, and this year, therefore,
we celebrate its coming of age. On this
occasion we are, I hold, fully entitled to
rejoice at the steady progress which has
been made in eugenics during our minority,
20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a progress much greater than I should have
ventured to predict eighteen years ago.

Besides indicating the changes which have

occurred, I have also in this somewhat
rambling address endeavoured to emphasize
three conclusions which appear to me to be
of the greatest importance. The first is
that if no risks are taken, no progress will
be made, or rather that we shall continue
to go very slowly down the hill as regards
hereditary qualities. The second point is
that, just as in the struggle for existence
slight differences do not escape the net of
natural selection, so must we, in our efforts
to promote the progress of our race, consider every class of the community and all
the innumerable improvements in human
qualities demanded by an advancing civilization. My last point is that the nation
will not for an indefinite period be able to
resist the downward drag due to the high
rate of multiplication of its inferior types.

CORRESPONDENCE

To the Editor, Eugenics Review.

S1r,—The following extract from a review of
the ‘‘ Speeches and Addresses of His Highness
Sayaji Rao III, Maharajah of Baroda” (Times
Literary Supplement, Thursday, March 7th,
1929), may be of some interest in connection with
Dr. Schiller’s proposals for the reform of the
House of Lords:

‘* Maharajah Sayaji Rao Gaikwar is one of the
foremost and most interesting personalities of
India. Having been brought up in comparative
poverty, he was, as a connection of the ruling
house of Baroda, adopted as successor to a
Prince deposed by the British Government and
was recognized by the latter.

If any government were, however, to select
some of its wisest citizens, men and women
learned in biology and sociology and above
all noted for sound common sense, and if it
were to commission them to frame a scheme
for the improvement of the race, that
scheme would contain, I cannot but believe,
the substance of the reforms mentioned in
our Outline of a Practical Eugenic Policy,
probably together with other reforms; and
if that government were to persist in the
course thus laid down for, say, a couple of
centuries, the improvement in the moral,
mental and physical conditions of the people
would be so marked that all other civilized
countries would feel bound to follow the lead
thus given tothem. The nation which first
sets out on this path of eugenic reform will
not only have added a page to its history of
which its nationals ought for ever to be
proud, but will have conferred an incalculable benefit on all mankind.

‘This form of succession, combining selection
with hereditary right, has often proved its value,
and is greatly prized by the Indian nobility.
The present Maharajah has done credit to his
selection; he is known and honoured as a fine
representative of a fine race... etc.”

(The italics are mine.)

It appears that a system whose value is unrecognized in contemporary Europe still finds
recognition to-day in Asia.

One presumes that the success and esteem
enjoyed by this practice in India is due to the
untrammelled power of selection of an enlight-.
ened aristocracy.

Yours faithfully,

EILEEN BELFIELD.
Barn Hill, Brampford Speke, Exeter.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 1.
