76 EUGENICS REVIEW.

upon this will come an appalling moral degradation which will gradually permeate the masses.... The most honourable traditions of
humanity will then reckon for nothing”? If an emotional basis of
character training must inevitably lead to this, then surely it is all the
more urgent that an ethical ideal of racial responsibility shall be inculcated into the rising generation, and their sentiment of duty towards
their neighbour extended to include the future generation. This will
furnish both a scyentific and an ethical appeal, and perhaps do something to stem the downfall of western civilisation which Dr. Foerster
foresees in the inevitable weakening of the religious organisations during
the period of transition from an ignorant to an educated populace!

Boaz, FRANZ. Changes in the Bodily Form of Descendants of Immigrants. New York: Columbia University Press. London.
Henry Frowde; 1912; pp. xii. + 573; price 7s. 6d. net.
THIS volume contains a complete account of the researches undertaken
by Professor Boaz at the request of the United States Immigration Commission. It is reprinted from the reports of that body. The author’s
main conclusions were made public some time ago, but in this volume
may be found, in addition, a detailed tabulation of the anthropometric
data on which they are based, and also a consideration of some of the
criticisms which have been directed against them. The most remarkable changes pointed out are in the dimensions and form of the head
among Hebrews and Sicilians. The relation between the length and
breadth of the heads is usually expressed as the “cranial index,” that
is to say the breadth is recorded as a percentage of the length. In
persons whose heads are long and narrow the cranial index will be low,
and where it is short and broad, high. Hebrews born in Europe appear
to have a cranial index of about 83, whereas the heads of Sicilians in
Sicily have an index of 78, about that of Oxford undergraduates. In
America the Hebrew skull gets relatively longer and the Sicilian
relatively shorter, the index changing in the first case to 81 and in the
second to 8o.

As a simple explanation of the change observed in the former case,
it has been suggested that in Europe the babies are kept swaddled in
manner which binds them hand and foot. Thus constrained they are
placed on their backs, so that the skull, while in a plastic condition, is
subjected to a more or less continuous pressure from behind, and its
length decreased thereby. Consequently, the cranial index of the
European-born Hebrew does not represent the true racial skull form
but merely an artificial condition, due to a restrictive method of clothing
babies which is abandoned in the free air of the great American Republic. The children who pass their early infancy in the United States
lie as it pleases them and their heads attain a natural length, which
shows itself in the decrease of the cranial index.

This explanation is carefully considered by Boaz, but he gives many
reasons for not accepting it. Evidence is also brought forward to show
that the apparent change is not merely due to a change in the type of
Hebrew immigrant. It is also noted that the relative length of the skulls
of Hebrews appears to increase with the length of time spent by their
mothers in America before their birth. In estimating the reliability
of these and other results obtained, it must be borne in mind that the
numbers dealt with are rather small, and it has thus been often necessary
to compare or class together measurements and indexes which, in their
original form, could not be fairly compared and grouped together. This
necessity has involved the application of rather elaborate corrections
to the crude data—a process which sometimes introduces an element of
doubt as to the meaning of the conclusions arrived at.

EDGAR SCHUSTER.
