POSITIVE EUGENICS.
By R. A. FISHER.

THERE is scarcely any movement of social life with which the
eugenic movement is not closely concerned and in which the
understanding of eugenic principles does not give a deeper
insight and a more lively interest. Particularly is this the case
with what has come to be called Positive Eugenics. To
increase the birth-rate in the professional classes and among
the highly skilled artisans would be to solve the great eugenic
problem of the present generation and to lay a broad foundation
for every kind of social advance. No object involves more
profound social problems than this one or appears to offer more
tremendous difficulties. The classes concerned are outside the
scope of direct legislative interference, and owe their national
value to the very fact that by their brains and skill they support
society, and are not supported by it. To restore to these classes
the conditions which they have previously enjoyed, to give to
them more ample facilities for marriage and normal family life,
and more promising prospects for their children of both sexes,
is the social aim to which eugenists, however anxious they may
be to avoid social controversy, inevitably become more and
more committed.

That marriage should be postponed, and that families
should be limited in classes in which earnings are on the whole
good and the standard of living on the whole high, is at first
sight surprising. But it is clear that these two forms of
restricted fertility, the main cause of which is unquestionably
economic, is not ordinarily immediate need, but inadequate
prospects. It is far from ignoble to look forward and anticipate
the difficulties of giving to boys and girls a satisfactory start
in life. To meet these difficulties money must be saved, for
the need of security is better satisfied, even in these able classes,
by an income from savings than by one from ability. At every
turn the man with a large family has undertaken risks and has
sacrificed his security and his freedom. Nevertheless the
POSITIVE EUGENICS. 207

instinct for normal family life is strong, and will be
strengthened rather than weakened by the Malthusian selection
at present in progress. Moreover, the professional classes,
equally with the skilled artisans, have evolved protective
societies, which give them, to some extent, the security which
they need. It is to the eugenic importance of these professional
societies and trade unions to which I wish to call attention in
the present article.

External conditions are not in themselves of prime importance, but we do require to know what conditions are most
favourable to the highest types of ability, and in particular
what conditions will give to them and to their children the
greatest security. The value of a type is not dependent upon
the conditions of his life, but the survival of a type may so
depend. The protection afforded by professional societies
undoubtedly renders the professions more favourable ground for
men of intellect and honour, but the status and dignity to which
some of the professions have laboriously reached can only be
maintained by a succession of persons duly qualified to justify
that trust in their wisdom and integrity to which, in the long
run, the respect paid to lawyers and doctors is due. Hence a
profession must have power to select its own members, rigorously to exclude all inferior types, who would lower both the
standard of living and the level of professional status. In this
process the eugenist sees a desirable type, selected for its
valuable qualities, and protected by the exclusive power of its
profession in a situation of comparative affluence. In the
professional societies there is a power of positive eugenics
strong enough to turn the tide of national decadence.

In order to discover along what lines professional
organisations should develop in order to bestow the maximum
eugenic benefit let us inquire more closely what it is exactly
that determines the liberty and dignity of any individual in
relation to his employment. It is obvious that in the work of
all classes there is too much which is undignified and too much
which is servile, nor can we doubt that the same work could
all be successfully done without personal degradation. ‘What
we wish to discover are the principles upon which a trade union
208 EUGENICS REVIEW.

or a professional society should act in order to raise itself to
a position of dignity and influence, and the mental qualities
in the workers which are likely to make any elevation of
condition possible or necessary.

The relation of the innate qualities of the human material
to the prevailing conditions is a general but not a rigid one.
We cannot equate character to status, closely as they are
linked. In those circumstances which call for the highest
qualities these will reveal themselves, where they exist, and
become well developed, while other circumstances have power
to depress and degrade those who fall under their influence, but
to both processes innate quality sets its limits. Incompetent
and untrustworthy men can do no service save under immediate
and constant supervision; they cannot rise to opportunities for
intelligent initiative and responsibility. On the other hand,
where confidence, self-respect and love of liberty are firmly
rooted, servile conditions cannot easily be _ established.
Character and status must advance together step by step, and
if the prime object of eugenics is to foster the race of men with
high character and ability, the means by which the status of
any form of employment may be raised must not be neglected.

We may obtain an effective classification of types of employment merely by the consideration of the degree to which
supervision is carried; work being done, as most work is, for
someone else, this one must satisfy himself about the work,
and the form his interest takes has a most important bearing
on the matter. In the lowest forms of servitude reward and
punishment are most closely associated with the tare and
diligence shown by the worker in every detail of his labour;
a slave followed closely by an overseer with a whip serves to
typify the conditions of employment suitable for the lowest
human types. The incentive in this case is immediate. When
wage deductions are made for careless breakages the incentive
to care is but slightly deferred. A schoolmaster will find thit
good work can only be extracted from some boys by the fear
of immediate punishment, for others weekly or terminal reports
afford a sufficient stimulus. Others, again, are capable while
at school of foreseeing and striving to fit themselves for a
POSITIVE EUGENICS. 209

future career, while there are some who work apparently without
immediate object, from interest or from a general instinct to
excel. Here as elsewhere the amount of freedom from supervision depends on the remoteness of the object pursued and
thence on those qualities of mind which allow of the constant
pursuit of a remote purpose. So a craftsman who is proud
of his work will not allow any trifling and temporary advantage
to injure his reputation, and may be trusted to select his
materials, choose his own methods, and to take his own time.
He is, indeed, subjected to a supervision, accurate as any, but
less close and irksome than the ordinary workman, for his
reputation for knowledge, skill and honesty has only been
built up by many years of good work; his status and freedom,
in fact, represent the critical judgment of those who have known
him for a lifetime.

In this distinction between a close inspection of the process
and results of labour, and a general reliance upon established
reputation and character, we have a measure of the liberty and
dignity attained in different forms of employment. The position
of the learned professions affords an excellent example of the
further use which can be made of this principle. The individual
physician does not have to start on a level in competition
with the quacks in order to win a reputation for wisdom and
integrity ; on the contrary, he takes his status as a member of
the medical profession. The profession here undertakes the
responsibility of investigating his brains and character, and
hall-marking him if he be good enough. The profession has,
moreover, used its powers, which are still insufficient, so well
that the public has an implicit trust in the hall-mark. The
extent of the achievement of the medical profession in Great
Britain may be gauged by the tremendous rise which has taken
place in the status of the physician in the last 300 years. From
a calling of doubtful credit medicine has attained to a high
code of honour and a rigorous professional etiquette; from
ignorance the doctor has risen to a high level of scientific
knowledge, and concurrently the average income of physicians
has risen.

The plain path for any co-operative body of skilled men,
professional or artisan, is by degrees to insist upon their right
210 EUGENICS REVIEW.

to a larger and larger degree of liberty in all that concerns their
calling, and concurrently to fit themselves for this increased
responsibility. They must ever insist upon a higher standard
both of skill and honour from their own members. They must,
therefore, exercise a more rigorous selection in their membership, and acquire and utilise stronger powers of exclusion and
expulsion. Such a policy has never failed, and it is only by
adhering strictly to both sides of the programme that the
smaller or weaker professions and trade unions can build up
for their members a position of independence and prosperity.

The eugenic importance of progress along these lines lies,
first, in the protection of high types from the competition of
inferior men with a lower standard of living. No less important
is the fact that an exclusive profession can, as some of the
trade unions do, offer advantageous prospects to the sons of its
members. They thus can mitigate and even annul that
insecurity of prospects which we have seen to be at the root of
the dysgenic birth-rate. A strong policy adopted by a
profession of favouring the sons of its members would also
react on the types of men available to enter the profession.
Even the best professions are at present largely recruited from
non-professional classes, principally because the professional
classes as a whole do not produce enough children to take their
places, partly, of course, because a proportion of the children
of the professional classes are not suitable candidates. There
is no doubt, however, of the large proportion of ‘‘ new blood ”’
which enter the professions in every generation, that it is, on
the whole, inferior to the professional families of long standing,
and that it renders particularly difficult the maintenance of a
high tradition of professional etiquette. The professions as
corporate bodies, and the families of their members have thus
every reason to co-operate with one another. The one needs
men of high tradition and ability, the other careers of security
and honour. The closer this co-operation becomes the greater
benefit will accrue to the hereditary qualities of the race.

Each of the professions has its own special difficulties and
its own special facilities which it can give to its members, but
there are four principal methods of wide application by which
POSITIVE EUGENICS. 2II

material advantage may be given to the families of members
with direct eugenic advantage. The eugenic effect of the
scholarship system in our public schools and universities has
been pointed out by Dr. Schiller, and there is no good reason
why endowed scholarships should not be restricted to the
children of members of particular professions, as so many are
already to the sons of clergymen. This could not fail to give
to the able professional man a measure of security against the
burden of his children’s education.

In a similar manner direct advantage could also be given
in the form of facilities for professional training. The long
special courses rightly demanded from candidates for the
different professions are as heavy a burden as is a good
schooling, and in many cases, such as in engineering and
medicine, it is in the power of the profession to offer such
special facilities, by scholarships or otherwise.

Wherever it is possible it would be of the greatest eugenic
advantage if entrance to a profession were restricted not only
by examination but by requiring the nominations of each
candidate by a number of members of the profession. To
require the signature of half a dozen or more members would
tend to restrict entrants to a desirable class and in addition give
a considerable advantage to the children of the professional
men.

In many cases, as in the admirable example of the medical
profession, professional services may be freely interchanged
between members. The doctors aid one another greatly in this
respect, and schoolmasters could do so even more.

As an extension of these four methods, of which there may
be found an enormous variety of applications, there 1s a wide
field of possibility in reciprocal arrangements between different
professions by which these advantages can be interchanged.
Such reciprocal arrangements will in general require equality
of status and similarity in the conditions of entrance, but the
grouping of different professions into larger co-operative bodies
is, no doubt, already possible between the different specialised
engineering societies.
212 EUGENICS REVIEW.

It is only attempted here to sketch in outline the general
principles applicable to the whole of the professional classes
and the skilled artisans; particular instances are put forward
tentatively, and the writer feels that the working out of
particular schemes suitable to the special conditions of different
bodies would be a work of the greatest eugenic importance.
Such work can only be done by the professional bodies themselves, but the advocacy of such schemes on the grounds of
their national and social importance is the work of the Eugenics
Education Society. Nothing could be more desirable than for
the Society to put itself in direct and sympathetic touch with
the special aspirations of professional bodies. The present
distribution of the birth-rate is draining the nation of its best
ability, and if I am right in supposing that the root cause of
this dysgenic selection is the difficulty of giving to children of
the professional classes an adequate start in life, a programme
of co-operation with the professional classes should constitute
the first great step in Positive Eugenics.
