PAUL BLOOMFIELD

Some Studies of British Heredity

FOUR RECENT BOOKS

of social stability. This is not a paradox, but

tempo is the least studied aspect of social
change and it seems to have needed grave events
in Africa to draw public attention to a factor as
essential for good progress as for the proper
performance of a symphony—in which, too, a
co-operative effort has to be made to get the
right result. Violins, double-basses, trumpets,
etc., are not expected to sound the same notes in
unison, but they are asked to keep time consonantly with a general design. We should, moreover, be surprised if we came across a score
marked prestissimo throughout. Although in
colonial as in domestic affairs there are differences of opinion as to what the best tempo of
change really is, the British record is a remarkable one. In a word, the talent of the British for
colonial administration owes a good deal to
their experience at home, in the fortunate Mather
Country of bloodless revolutions.

Dr. Wagner’s admirable, full and authoritative English Genealogy* is a thousand-years’
history of families rising and falling. It embraces
revolution and evolution, immigration and
emigration, touches tactfully on eugenics and
inspires reflection on the nature of class and the
mechanism of change—from which the concept
of tempo is inseparable. A right understanding
of class is at least as desirable as a sense of
judicious timing, for though we may not always
be going to have the poor with us, class (possibly
masked, as individual character itself may increasingly come to be) is inherent in every body
politic. This is not to say that social snobbery
will never be eliminated, nor, on the other hand,
that republicans and marxists have not already
found means of bottling and serving up some of
the old wine.

From the point of view of both politics and

| erscci SOCIAL MOBILITY is a guarantee

eugenics England is shown by Dr. Wagner to
have gained from not being too caste-conscious.
Relatively, our Society with a capital S has for a
long time been open to charm, push, talent and
money. When in 1842 the daughter of an
English earl married an Esterhazy, “‘her position
in the society of Vienna” (according to G. W. E.
Russell) “was soon found to be intolerable,
because the experts in genealogy discovered that
her grandmother’s father had been a banker, and
that therefore the requisite Sixteen Quarterings
were in her case incomplete’. In. England long
before that, nabobs like Robert Pitt, industrialists
like Sir Thomas Lombe and Jewish financiers
like Sampson Gideon had seen their sons and
daughters marry into the aristocracy without
risk of ostracism. To this day charm rather
perhaps than talent or even a large bank balance
is the surest spell for procuring the suspension of
condescending attitudes by people with pedigrees.
Though we must not make too much of it, the
undertow is there. In the mid-nineteenth century
Lord Stanley at the Colonial Office never once
talked to his eminent Under-Secretary, James
Stephen, about anything but public business. On
the last page of Social Mobility in England (edited
by D. V. Glass and published six years ago)
Rosalind Chambers writes: “The members of
the Women’s Institutes, the Red Cross and the
W.V.S. may work together harmoniously in
their activities. The policeman’s wife may be an
official, the doctor’s wife an ordinary member;
the railwayman’s wife may run a club for old
people and the general’s wife be her subordinate. But they will not invite each other to lunch.”
An illustration of Dr. Wagner’s axiom that a
social class is “‘an endogamous class . . . whose
members normally marry within it”; invitations
to lunch—one must again qualify with ‘“‘normally’—precede proposals of marriage.

Dr. Wagner’s history reveals not just one

Oxford teed. Anthony a ee Cc cies gradually expanding endogamous superior class,
Price 55s. but also alongside of such a class (let us call it
161

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1960, 52, 3.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

by its current name of Establishment), individuals
of uncommon ability founding families, families
becoming cousinhoods, endogamous classes
becoming mutually acceptable to one another—
and to the Establishment. The circumstances
under which such classes emerged are ably
touched in. Soldiers, courtiers, sectarians—homebred or immigrant—manufacturers, administrators, all sorts have in their time invoked the
genealogists and the College of Heralds. It has
always, and justly, been felt it was something,
to “arrive”, an agreeable form of success which
the Establishment has known how to acknowledge with ceremony and the bestowal of
dignities. On at least one historic occasion it was
the new arrivals who took the initiative—by
inviting the Establishment to lunch. In June 1831
T. F. Buxton, later the emancipator of the negro
slaves, and his Quaker in-laws entertained the
Prime Minister, Lord Grey, and many other
leading Whigs and Tories to a feast of beefsteaks
at the Truman brewery in Spitalfields. If these
high-minded men intended to show that they
had arrived, it was less in order to inflate their
own status than to remind those whom it
might concern that they and the voters behind
them were a force to be reckoned with. The party
was a great success. Two years later their
Abolition of Slavery Bill—drafted by the James
Stephen whom Stanley treated so coldly—
became law. In 1833 also Macaulay made the
famous speech in which he prophesied that the
day of Indian independence would be “the
proudest in English history’’.

Macaulay, like Buxton, belonged to one of the
most interesting of the endogamous classes to
whom Dr. Wagner draws attention, an intellectual and philanthropic aristocracy mostly of
middle-class origin. Macaulay’s brother-in-law
Sir Charles Trevelyan reformed the Civil Service,
Buxton’s sister-in-law, Mrs. Fry, reformed the
prisons, his nephew, W. E. Forster, reformed
public education. Among Buxton’s abolitionist
allies and prominent members of the Evangelical
Clapham Sect was the wealthy and benevolent
William Smith, M.P. for Norwich. With this
Mr. Smith we come to the second of our books.
_ For of Mr. Smith’s five daughters (he also had
five sons) one, Joanna Maria, married John
Bonham-Carter*. Mrs. Woodham-Smith in her

162

life of Florence Nightingale—whose mother was
Joanna Maria’s sister Fanny—tells us that “none
of his [William Smith’s] ten children died before
the age of sixty-nine, six lived to be over eighty,
and Fanny lived to be ninety-two’. Florence
Nightingale herself was over ninety when she
died. The Hampshire family into which Joanna
Maria introduced the Smith vitality, longevity,
charm and good-will was already well endowed
by nature. In spite of a Dissenting phase they
went through they remained to all intents and
purposes Establishment; the law had its indulgences for people of that social calibre. In
Portsmouth they were paramount. “The family”’,
says Mr. Victor Bonham-Carter, “‘controlled the
parliamentary nominations almost without exception until the Reform Act of 1832... .
Between 1747 and 1835 Carters were Mayors of
Portsmouth thirty-two times, while the thirtyfive aldermen elected between 1778 and 1832
were ail Carter nominees; likewise the majority
of new burgesses.” In the main, then, this is a
story of social stability. Did the Carters (BonhamCarter after 1827, when the fourth John Carter
inherited his Bonham cousin’s property) . . . did
the Carters justify, have the Bonham-Carters
justified, their pull? They have been public
servants, civilly, and militarily by land and sea.
They were liberal in sentiment, and the members
of the family whom the eminent A. V. Dicey,
husband of Elinor Bonham-Carter, infected with
his distaste for Gladstonian liberalism did not
on that account become reactionaries or drones.
Anyhow Elinor’s youngest brother did his best
to provide a counter-irritant by marrying the
Prime Minister Asquith’s daughter Violet.

The Prime Minister Baldwin, son of one of the
Macdonald Sisters}, came maternally from a
Dissenting family very different from the
Carters so long and comfortably entrenched at
Portsmouth. The Reverend George Macdonald
was not an Englishman from the south but a Celt
from Skye; he was dependent for a living on a
meagre salary, and so far from being entrenched
anywhere had to change his manse every three
years. Between 1784 and 1814 his father, he
himself and his son, all three in the ministry,

* Bonham-Carter, Victor. In a Liberal Tradition.
London, 1960. Constable. Pp. xiii + 255. Price 30s.

t Baldwin, A. W. The Macdonald Sisters. London,
1960. Peter Davies. Pp. x + 238. Price 30s. :
SOME STUDIES OF BRITISH HEREDITY

moved house no less than fifty-six times. But if
these rolling stones gathered no moss they
exhibited a second and more significant kind of
mobility. In spite of the awkward mode of life
willingly embraced by him, George Macdonald
and his splendid wife, born Hannah Jones, raised
a delightful and successful family, and were the
grandparents of Stanley Baldwin and Rudyard
Kipling. At the end of his book, which is very
well done indeed, Lord Baldwin gloomily asks a
question—and answers it himself. As follows.
“‘Why was there such a flowering of talent for
two generations, and then from that fertile plot
hardly anything more? . . . As with empires so
with families, the causes of their rise and fall lie
far beyond our measuring. Poodles may be
bred to type, but not Macdonald sisters.”

The charm, wit and character of the Macdonald
sisters was a product of the conjunction of George
Macdonald with Hannah Jones, who had
eleven children of whom eight grew up. In the
third generation, over which Lord Baldwin
mourns, there have not been eight times eight
times eight children, that is to say 512: there
were only twelve, including Kipling’s beloved
elder daughter who died aged seven and his
only son who was killed in the first world war.
The third generation cannot in fact be denied
talent (witness the book under review, if one
may Say so), and in the fourth, not marked in the
author’s table, there is a decidedly promising
writer. Lord Baldwin’s final remark is perhaps
the only flaw in a warm and sensitive book. For
who at any time contemplated trying to breed
Macdonald sisters to type, as if they were
poodles? The famous four who got married—
Mrs. Kipling, Lady Burne-Jones, Mrs. Baldwin
and Lady Poynter—no more chose their
husbands with any idea of breeding to type than
out of any nostalgie de la boue or other dysgenic
impulse. The most engaging of them, Georgiana
Burne-Jones, in marrying her Ned _ infected
into the stock an element of the hypersensitive
that was unlikely, among its potentially interesting consequences, to reinforce the peculiar
sturdiness of the Macdonalds. Their descendants
have had lively minds, and they were the greatgrandparents of the promising writer alluded to
above who, it is true, had the distinguished
Professor Mackail for a grandfather.

Eugenists sometimes predict ability but genius
never. The man of genius in the Macdonald connection was Kipling, son of Alice Macdonald
and John Kipling, whose father was another of
those Methodist ministers and a man “‘of strong
intellectual, literary and artistic gifts’. Lord
Baldwin’s description and well chosen quotations, for which his book is remarkable all
through, testify to the elder Kipling’s humanity
and good sense, and of his awareness equally of
Western materialism, Eastern callousness, and
the inconsistencies found at both poles... .
The really strange thing is that the young
Rudyard, equipped as he was with affectionate
parents, that wonderful old grandmother and
such sympathetic aunts, should have been left in
charge of the abominable Mrs. Holloway while
his father and mother were in India. There, at
Southsea (by Portsmouth), in the reign so to
speak of John Bonham-Carter II, the little
fellow was put to the torture. “In 1871 there had
arrived a sturdy child of nearly six . . . happy,
noisy, spoilt, and quite free from shyness. In
1877 when the rescue came, the boy was half
blind and cowed to the point of suffering from
delusions.”’ How was it that his aunt Georgiana,
with whom he spent his holidays, never smelt a
rat? At least she “saved Ruddy from. total
despair’. Her gifts of sympathy constituted her a
very important person in the Morris circle to
which her husband belonged, and she was.
William Morris’s best friend and confidante.

There is no harm in guessing that Mrs.
Macdonald, born Hannah Jones, with what
Lord Baldwin calls her “‘gloom-shot wit”, was the
best of nature and nurture to her daughters;
she was a woman of great character. The same
primacy can be accorded another Hannah,
Hannah Smith, born Whittall, of our last book*,
though with the reservation that her children’s
most distinguished ancestor had been on the
father’s side—James Logan from the north of
Ireland who was Chief Justice and acting
Governor of Pennsylvania in the 1739s. A Family
of Friends tells a most odd, absorbing story. The
outline of it is this. Hannah Whittall, daughter
of a rich Pennsylvanian Quaker glass manufacturer, married one of her father’s employees,

* Allerton Parker, R. A Family of Friends. London,
1960. Museum Press. Pp. 232. Price 27s. 6d.

163
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Robert Pearsall-Smith. Robert, carrying his wife
with him, became a preacher of the “Higher
Life’. He had his father-in-law’s loyal support.
These attractive fanatics made a hit in England
among the more eccentric members of the
aristocracy, whom they reciprocally found to
their taste. Of their three children who survived
infancy Alys became Bertrand Russell’s first
wife, her sister Mary took as her second husband
the great Bernard Berenson, and the son, Logan
Pearsall-Smith, developed into an expatriate
anglophile man of letters of the class of Henry
James, H. O. Sturgis and T. S. Eliot. One of
Mary’s children by her first husband married
Oliver Strachey, the other married Virginia
Woolf’s brother Adrian Stephen, grandson of the
James Stephen of the Colonial Office already
mentioned more than once in this article.

There was, indeed, so much more that was
fascinating about the overtones of the Smiths’
social mobility than the brave author of this
book about them was in a position to convey,
that it might seem rather a duty than a pleasure
to look at it from a social-historical viewpoint.
And yet, since the indications seem to be that
one must go to Bloomsbury for part of the
explanation of what happened, the duty would
not be a distasteful one. For in the early days of
the Smiths’ romantic period there was preparing to conglobulate in Bloomsbury a very
special, interesting assortment of endogamously

164

inclined individuals, the heirs of the Clapham
Sect with additions and subtractions. The
significance of the kind of re-crystallization of a
class which this meant, lies in the progressive
social developments they foster. Though many
of the Bloomsbury coterie were tout ce qu’ il y a
de plus choosy, unchristianly determined to
suffer fools not at all, highly sceptical of vulgarisation undertaken with even the best intentions,
for all their reaction against the ancestral
Evangelicalism (and philistinism) they extended
the range of Clapham philanthropy. They used
their prestige to combat genteel anti-semitism,
the cruel inconsistencies of conventional morality, the ill-treatment of animals. Lord Keynes
took a keen interest in eugenics. . . . Why the
Pearsall-Smiths fitted in is soon explained. They
were sensitive and intelligent. They had charm.
They had character.

One point remains to be made quite clear at
the end of a short and necessarily discursive
review like this one. Whatever the respective
merits of the four books discussed (and Lord
Baldwin’s is about as good as it could be of its
kind) it should be understood that Dr. Wagner’s
English Genealogy is an important standard
work, learned, readable and suggestive, and
justice is best done to it if one says so, hoping
those interested in the subject will lose no time
in getting it for themselves.
