THE POPULATION PROBLEMS OF INDIA

AND PAKISTAN
By Dr. S. CHANDRASEKHAR

Professor of Economics, Annamalai University, India

NDIA’S population problem arises
| primarily out of an extremely high fer
tility, accompanied by a high mortality
which is only slowly declining. The resulting
increase in numbers, which amounted to
more than four million a year in an undivided India, apart from the very low survival value, need not constitute a problem
if the additional population could be absorbed
without reduction in the standard of living.
But this standard is so low that any further
addition to the number of poor families could
well be disastrous; and such families are
indeed so numerous that any further increase
in the total population must intensify what
is already a great problem. India’s density in
agricultural as well as in the poorer strata of
urban society, though not as great as in
certain overcrowded parts of the world, is too
great to permit an attitude of latssez-faire ;
it is difficult to see how more people could be
taken care of. Nor is there any migration
outlet for the Indian people. Even if some
countries could welcome Indians as immigrants, they cannot possibly receive four
million people a year ; nor is it reasonable to
expect such a large number of “ stay-athome ”’ people to move out of India every
year. The net addition of four or more
million a year, or fifty million in a decade, or
a grand total of 350-400 or even more million
in India, need not constitute a problem if an
overwhelming majority of the population,
not to speak of everyone, enjoyed the irreducible minimal requirements of decent
human existence in terms of food, health,
clothing, shelter, employment and leisure for
recreation. But this is not so in India and,
what is worse, is the well-known and depressing qualitative aspect of the Indian
population problem. And as the quality of
the people is related to its numbers it cannot
be improved. unless these are controlled.

JO

Hence the importance, if not the danger, in
the number of India’s teeming millions to her
economic and social development and her
place in the modern world.

Growth of Population

The population of the combined Dominions
of India and Pakistan to-day is nearly 450
million, or about a fifth of the total world
population. The estimated population of the
two Dominions for 1947 was 336 million for
India and 71 million for Pakistan, but these
are only estimates, probably under-estimates,
as there are many unknown factors in Indian
demography.

In the sixteenth century, according to
some rough estimates, the population of the
subcontinent was about 100 million. In the
middle of the nineteenth century the figure
reached about 150 million. In 1881, when the
first regular, although incomplete, census was
taken, the population stood at 254 million.
In 1931, fifty years later, the census revealed
353 million, representing an increase of
10°6 per cent over the 1921 figure. The last
census of 1941 showed a total of 389 million
—i.e. an increase of 50 million (15 per cent)
over the 1931 figure. The 1951 census may
show a similar increase, if the present trends
of mortality and fertility continue.

The vate of increase of the Indian population, though high, has not been abnormal.
For instance, between 1872 and 1941 the
population of undivided India grew by 54 per
cent. The United Kingdom during the same
period increased by 56 per cent., and Japan
by 136 per cent. So the rate of increase has
not been very rapid. But the growth over
the years has not been uniform, forthe controlling factor has not been increasing fertility but fluctuating mortality. The population has responded to the presence or absence
of wars, famines and epidemics. As these
THE POPULATION PROBLEMS OF INDIA AND PAKISTAN 71

checks appeared or disappeared, the population grew and declined accordingly. Voluntary limitation of births has not played any
significant rdle in determining the size of the
Indian population. Till 1901 the population
was almost stationary. The years between
Igor and 1921 witnessed an irregular and
spasmodic growth of population. But between 1921-31 and 1931-41 the country
registered a growth of 10°6 and 15 per cent
respectively. And if the present public health
conditions continue unaccompanied by any
famine, the 1951 census may show a large
addition.

But the problem in the Indian subcontinent is not the rate of increase but the net
addition to the existing population every
decade. Because of the large existing
population even a modest rate of increase of
10 or 15 per cent yields a net gain of some
50 million (as during 1931 to 1941), in itself
larger than the population of any European
country except Germany or Russia, or any
Latin-American country. And it is this large
net addition that constitutes the problem,
for it nullifies all efforts to improve the
admittedly very low standard of living of the
Indian people. All efforts to increase the
production of food, other commodities and
services to give a better share per head to the
existing population are largely frustrated by

fertility is the most important, for international lack of balance in fertility constitutes the crux of the world population
problem. Within a nation fertility differentials between different ethnic, cultural,
economic and religious groups constitute a
serious problem in the formulation of any
democratic population policy.

If Indian vital statistics are accepted as
fairly reliable, despite their well-known
inadequacy due to under-registration, we
find that the birth rate is between 45 and 50.
The figure for 1941 is 43, and this is comparable to high birth rates in Egypt (47 in 1940),
Palestine (40 in 1935), Puerto Rico (40 in
1942), and Mexico (42 in 1940). A discussion
of the corrections to be made in the estimated
and recorded rates of fertility cannot be
entered into for lack of space, but Table 1
gives India’s birth and death rates per
thousand from 1885 to 1935. The significant
fact about the birth rate is not that it is one
of the highest in the world, but that it has
shown no signs of decline during the last
fifty years. It is obvious from the table that
there is no definite downward trend and the
little variation that is seen must be taken to
be a natural and normal fluctuation for such
a high figure.

As for rural-urban fertility differentials,
the experience of India conforms to that of

TABLE 1
BIRTH AND DEATH RATES OF INDIAN SUBCONTINENT PER THOUSAND SINCE 1885

Birth Rate
Year ,
Recorded Estimated
1885-90 —_
1890-01 —
IQOI-1I 50°7
IQII-21 49°3
1921-31 46°7
1931-35 46°7

 

an increasing addition to the population.
Thus, in the present circumstances, improvements in the Indian standard of living and
the increasing growth of population are
incompatible.

Fertility
Among all demographic factors the rate of

 

Death Rate Natural Increase
Recorded Estimated Recorded Estimated
4 6°5
3 5°I
9 12°9
II 15°5

other countries. In Western and industrialized countries, the decline in fertility began
in urban areas, and the rural areas tended to
follow the downward trend after a time lag.
This has been so because industrialization
has been accompanied by the widespread
adoption of the planned-family habit.
Though India may conform to this
72 oo ' THE EUGENICS REVIEW

experience eventually it has not done so yet.
The lower fertility in Indian urban areas must
be explained in terms of the adverse sex ratio
in the cities where the relative paucity of
females and the absence of wives are noteworthy. Indian industrial workers have a
rural background, and they come to the
cities in seach of employment only when they
are faced with agrarian distress. As such
they come to the cities single, unaccompanied
by their wives and children. When agricultural conditions improve, many of these
industrial workers return to their villages
and to agriculture. Another reason for this
rural-urban fertility differential may be the
high infant mortality rate in the cities. Thus
the differential cannot as yet be explained in
terms of either the availability or the adoption of contraceptive techniques.

An examination of the fertility rates by
occupational and income groups reveals,
however, a slight decline in the high income
groups. These groups generally embrace the
so-called higher castes, who have better
educational qualifications, better jobs and
consequently a higher standard of living.
Here again the lower fertility cannot be
explained in terms of birth control. Though
adequate data on the question are lacking,
it seems probable that the cause lies in the
social ban on widow remarriage, which
withdraws many women from potential
motherhood. As this ban is not generally
observed among the lower income groups
(which roughly correspond to the so-called
low castes), their fertility is high. Thus, the
small decline in fertility that is registered for
certain groups of the Indian population has
not become a marked trend and the differential is not large enough to have an adverse
effect on the future growth of population.
The population in 1951 for both the Dominions will be about 450 million, if the
present fertility and mortality rates continue. So if there is no change the only factor
that will contribute to the reduction of the
future growth of the Indian population will
be not the deliberate control of the birth
rate but high mortality. And this is something that cannot be looked upon with
equanimity.

Mortality

The population growth of the subcontinent
during the last century has been conditioned
mainly by the high but fluctuating death
rate. Famines, epidemics, the general insanitary environment and wars have contributed to the death rate, though the last
factor has almost disappeared in the last halfcentury. During ‘ normal ’”’ years the death
rate has been consistently high because of the
striking lack of public sanitation and
hygiene, and widespread mal- and undernutrition of the population. The death rate
rose distressingly during bad years, when
epidemics and famine broke out owing to
scarcity of food. It can be said with some
truth that famine and epidemics alone have
controlled the growth of population in the
Indian subcontinent during the last hundred
years.

The death rate is high—30 per thousand.
The recorded death rate was 24 per thousand
for 1931, and 22 for 1940, but these are
under-estimates because of incomplete returns. This means that more than ro million
people die every year in India and Pakistan!
While the all-round death rate is appalling
enough, the death rate by various age groups
is equally unusual. The most disquieting
factor of the death rate is the high incidence
of mortality among first-year infants, women
in childbirth and women of the reproductive
age groups. The infant mortality rate is very
high—nearly one-fourth of the babies born’
die during their first year! According to
official estimates, about half the deaths
among infants occur in the first month and,
of these, nearly 60 per cent in the first week.
Mortality remains high throughout early

childhood. About 49 per cent of the total

mortality in any given year is among those
below 10 years of age, while the corresponding figure for England is only 12 per cent.

To sum up the mortality figures: out of
every hundred babies born, one-quarter die
by the time they can reach their first birthday. When the fifth birthday arrives, 40 per
cent have disappeared through death, and
when the twentieth birthday is at hand only
50 per cent are left! Only 15 per cent
survive to the sixtieth birthday.
THE POPULATION PROBLEMS OF INDIA AND PAKISTAN 73

As for maternal mortality the figures are
equally shocking. Sir John Megaw, when he
was Director-General of Medical Services in
India, made a random sample survey, and
arrived at the maternal mortality rate of
23°5 per thousand births. That is, at least
200,000 women die every year during childbirth; and of every thousand girl-wives
100 are doomed to die in childbirth!

But despite the present mortality rates,
the average annual addition to the population of both the Dominions was five million.
During the last two decades there has been,
however, a steady fall in the general mortality rate. A further fall is bound to occur
if the large-scale programmes for improving
the health of the country by various planning
committees are effectively put into operation.
It has been calculated that even a slight
improvement in the present health conditions can save three million infant lives.
When this is done the population will increase not by five but by eight million a year.
And it is possible that the 83 million increase
that took place between 1921 and 1941 could
take place between Ig41 and 1951. To repeat : a planned and purposeful control of
mortality without a corresponding control
of the birth rate can only have disastrous
consequences for the Indian people.

To-day, however, the death rate is the
decisive factor in Indian demography. No
comment is necessary on this inordinate and
tragic loss of human lives. Nor is this all.
There are many who do not die but who,
because of the high and severe morbidity,
cannot be counted among the truly living,
i.e. among those who are healthy, active and
gainfully employed.

Morbidity

If the available information on birth and
death rates is somewhat incomplete and unreliable, that on the incidence of diseases is
even more so. Rural India and Pakistan,
which together shelter nearly 80 per cent of
the total population, have no adequate hospitals, clinics or other general or specialized
medical services. Thus there is no way of
estimating the total morbidity of the
population. Some information, however, is

available for urban areas, and such figures
must be multiplied five- or six-fold to get a
complete picture for all India.

For instance, according to official sources,
in normal years, malaria is responsible
directly for at least one million deaths every
year. This really means that at least three
million people die of malaria every year. If
three million people die of malaria, it also
means that at least ten million people suffer
from it. The cost of treating the affected
people—granting that they get some kind of
treatment, expert or quack—and maintaining them in low health, and the indirect cost
of man-hours lost in the fields, factories and
offices, must be enormous. When patients
have recovered from an attack of malaria
their efficiency, already low as a result of
poor nutrition, is impaired still further,
making them less resistant to the many
diseases prevalent in the Indian countryside.
Diseases ending in death are said to be selective in the sense that they wipe out the
weaker elements, but they cannot be said to
improve the quality of those who narrowly
escape death. If Indian morbidity statistics
are interpreted in this manner, the resulting
picture is too grim to need any comment.

Not only malaria, but cholera, kala-azar,
smallpox, beri-beri, dysentery, tuberculosis,
hookworm disease, filariasis, guineaworm
and venereal diseases are ever-present and
take their toll. Then there are leprosy,
blindness and partial-sightedness, mental
disorders and mental deficiency, and a score
of other infirmities. All these are curable or,
what is more important, in some measure
preventable, but the lack of comprehensive
and organized medical services manned by
an adequate number of competent personnel
makes the problem very formidable. Curative medicine will only half solve it. As long
as vitality and resistance to disease are low,
as they must be in the presence of so much
poverty, malnutrition and ignorance, and as
long as the imsanitary and unhygienic
environment of the towns and villages persists, any medical approach to this problem
can be only fragmentary.

Despite the inadequacy of the returns on
the specific causes of mortality, a rough idea
74 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

can be obtained for a representative pre-war
year from Table 2, which summarizes the
death rates for 1939. The general death rate
of 22:2 for 1939 was distributed as shown in
the table. It is highly probable that where
deaths have been unattended by doctors, as
considerable numbers are, the returns usually
list “‘ fever ’’ as the cause of death. This lack
of precise information nullifies the efforts of
the public health department because the
authorities, who are anxious to control the
death rate, do not know what exact causes
contribute to the high death rate.

cent of the girls married in India are below
the age of fifteen. Though child marriage
as such has largely disappeared, most girls
between 15 and 20 are already married. The
girls in rural areas marry as soon as they
reach puberty, begin bearing children early
and reduce the period of lactation, thereby
possibly shortening the intervals between
childbirths and increasing the number of
premature deaths.

The second factor is the universality of
marriage. Everyone sooner or later gets
married. It is a quasi-religious duty. As

TABLE 2
DEATH RATES IN INDIAN SUBCONTINENT IN 1939

     
   

Cholera | Smallpox

  
 

Deaths per 1,000 of population
Percentage of total deaths ...

Social Factors

The demographic situation of any region
is largely the product of its peculiar social
characteristics, which in their turn affect
births, deaths and migration. The population problem in India might conceivably
have been very different if the social institutions of early marriage, universality of
marriage, the ban on widow remarriage and
the joint Hindu family and other institutions and attitudes resulting in an adverse
sex ratio, among others, did not exist. But
as they do, with a socio-religious tradition
and sanction behind them, and as they condition the lives of an overwhelming majority
of the people, the demographic problem has
become what it is to-day.

Early marriage and universality of marriage are dominant features of the social
scene. Indian girls attain puberty between
the ages of twelve and fifteen, and though
often physically immature they are physiologically ready to bear children. And cases
are not wanting where reproduction has
begun at the age of fourteen or fifteen. The
Report of the Age of Consent Committee
and the reports of the All-India Women’s
Conference have estimated that nearly 50 per

Se

Dysentery | Respira- All
Fevers and tory Injuries Other
Diarrhoea | Diseases Causes

Orr 13°0 0°9 1°8 5°8

rr a ERD | pS

 

economic security is not a prerequisite to
marriage and as there is generally no individual choice in obtaining a partner, there is
no economic deterrent to marriage. For a
representative census year like 1931 we find
that 467 males and 492 females out of every
thousand were married. That is, taking into
consideration all widows, some widowers, and
ascetics and mendicants, almost everyone
of marriageable age was actually married.
When factors favourable to the postponement of marriage—e.g. prolonged education,
lucrative employment, eagerness for personal and social advancement, free choice in
securing life’s partners, and other considerations that operate in a normal Western
society—will come to operate in India and
Pakistan, it is difficult to say. But the sooner
such considerations come to operate, the
nearer the Indian peoples will be to the
solution of some of their social problems.

A third striking characteristic of the
Indian social scene is the scarcity of females.
There has been a deficiency of women in the
population throughout the Indian census
history. In 1941 there were only 934 females
for every 1,000 males. In 1931 and 1921 the
ratio was 940:1,000. The sex ratio in
THE POPULATION PROBLEMS OF INDIA AND PAKISTAN 75

England and Wales in 1940 was 1,000 : 940,
revealing a contrasting deficiency of males.
The steady fall in the proportion of females
to males has been going on in India since
Igor, and the 1951 census is not expected to
reveal any significant change.

Several explanations have been offered for
this phenomenon. Some explain it as the
result of relative under-enumeration of
women. This is possible, but during the last
fifty years the efficiency of the Indian census
organization has consistently improved, yet
the adverse sex ratio has increased rather
than decreased. Some argue that excessive
masculinity is an index of “‘ racial ’”’ decadence. But the sex ratio is more unfavourable
in the north and north-west—parts of
present Pakistan region—where the so-called
“ martial races ’’ live. We have little knowledge of what constitutes “racial decadence,” and still less scientific evidence of its
causes and symptoms. If there is any truth
in this explanation the virile people of the
north-west must be most decadent. As we
cannot have it both ways there seems to be
little truth in this explanation.

Some others have offered a biological
explanation. According to the Census Com‘missioner for Bombay (1921) ‘the Indian
caste system with its exogamous gotra
(sept) and endogamous caste is a perfect
method of preserving what is called in
genetics ‘pure line.’ The endogamy prevents external hybridization, while the
exogamy prevents the possibility of a fresh
pure line arising within the old one by the
isolation of any character not common to the
whole line.’”” The Census Commissioner for
India (1931), accepting this view, comments
‘“‘ whether this proposition be entirely acceptable or not, it may be conceded that if once

a caste, whether as a result of inbreeding or |

some totally different factor, has acquired
the natural condition of having an excess of
males, this condition is likely to be perpetuated as long as inbreeding is maintained.”
This explanation is at best plausible, but we
have very little knowledge about the presence of a genetic factor, if any, in the Hindu
caste system. While there may be some truth
in this explanation in the sense that excessive

inbreeding is generally harmful, it does not
explain the sex ratio at birth.

The available statistics tell a different
story. Actually, between the ages of one and
five, India has an excess of girls, and only at
the next age group the sex ratio is reversed
in favour of males. A more rational explanation for the paucity of females is that
though the female infant is definitely better
equipped by nature for survival than the
male the advantages she has at birth are
probably neutralized in infancy by comparative neglect, and in adolescence by the strain
of bearing children too early and too often.
As Hindu parents put a greater premium on
male children, they are apt to treat female
children with relative neglect, especially
when they are assailed by infantile ailments.
This, coupled with early marriage and a high
birth rate, results in more and earlier deaths
among women.

We have some comparable evidence in
China that supports this view. Dr. Ta Chen,
discussing the sex ratio in the Kumming Lake
region, observes: “‘It seems clear that in
China relatively more female infants are
born, but as they grow up the male babies
gradually catch up with them in numbers,
evidently indicating a proportionately higher
mortality among female children. This may
be due to the fact that in the Far East generally and in China particularly parents usually
put higher value on male children for the
perpetuation of the family line and for the
observance of filial piety. Thus female
children are unconsciously neglected, thereby
leading to the higher death rate among
them.”

The social ban on widow remarriage is yet
another reactionary feature of Indian demography. The demographic situation is closely
interwoven with social problems, for one
undesirable social institution leads to another,
and so on, in an endless chain. This practice
of *‘ socially sterilizing ’’ the widows results
in considerable disparity in age between
husbands and wives. Since most widowers
remarry and since they cannot marry widows,
they have to seek wives among girls much
their juniors. This leads to a still further
increase in the number of widows, for the old
76 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

husband passes away, leaving his young wife
behind. And, of course, she cannot remarry.
The disproportionate sex ratio and the
resulting deficiency of women keeps up the
custom of early marriage for girls. As
bachelors and widowers have to take brides
of any age they can get, the disparity between
partners is increased. This difference in age
increases widowhood. Since widows cannot
remarry, widowhood increases the already
existing shortage of eligible brides—thus
completing a vicious circle.

The two significant facts that have
emerged about the wasteful balance between
births and deaths are the large decennial
increases in the population and the tremendous human cost at which this increase
is being maintained.

Improvement of Agriculture

What is the way out? The problem of
population has to be considered in relation
to the means of sustenance, mainly food
supply. Nearly 70 per cent of the population
is dependent on agriculture for a livelihood.
As the mouths to be fed every year increase,
the area of productive land diminishes. That
there is pressure on the land of both Dominions to-day cannot be denied. Agriculture is characterized by primitive methods of
farming, dependence on the vagaries of the
monsoon, subdivision and fragmentation of
land, consequent on the Hindu and Moslem
laws of inheritance which enjoin the succession of immovable property by all male
heirs, usually in equal proportion, and lead
to uneconomic holdings and to an excessive
dependence by most people on the land for
their livelihood. Moreover, a quasi-medizval
land-tax system has created a large number
of parasitic middlemen who have come to
possess undue rights on land, claiming a considerable share of the income arising from it
which they do nothing to earn. The primitive technique of Indian farming is responsible not only for the low yield per head, even
when compared to countries like Japan and
China, but also for the gradual deterioration
of land with soil erosion and deforestation.

This does not mean, however, that there
is no scope for improving farms and their

yields. According to 1939 official statistics
one-third of the cultivable land in both the
Dominions lies idle—not fallow. The government statistics for the undivided India (which
exclude the Indian States) are set out in
Table 3, which shows that of a cultivable area

TABLE 3
UTILIZATION OF LAND IN INDIAN SUBCONTINENT
IN 1939
Agricultural Area of the Millions
Provinces of Acres
Net area of professional survey --- 667°4
Area under forest... eee wes . 89°5
Area not available for cultivation ... .. 145°O
Cultivable waste other than fallow .. 153°6
Fallow land ... wes ees wee 51°0
Net area sown with crops .. - 229°9

of 432 million acres, only 53 per cent is sown
with crops, 11-8 per cent is fallow, and not
less than 35:8 per cent is cultivable but left
waste. Then there is land “ not available for
cultivation.”” About this land the Royal
Agricultural Commission (India, 1926) said :
“It is difficult to believe that the whole of
the vast area now classed as not available
for cultivation, amounting as it does to
150 million acres, or 22:5 per cent of the
total area of British India (provinces), is
either not available for cultivation or not
suitable for cultivation.”

The Dominions, therefore, have not exhausted their supply of cultivable land, and
what is cultivated appears to be eroded and
exhausted because of the primitive technique
of farming. With scientific agricultural
methods of erosion prevention and _ soil
reclamation the cultivated land can be made
to double its present yield and bring much of
the so-called uncultivable waste under profitable cultivation. But such an improvement,
however welcome, would touch only a fringe
of the problem.

While increased yield and greater acreage
of cultivation are possible with the aid of
science, they cannot by themselves afford a
better standard of living, or completely solve
the population problem, unless and until a
substantial number of people now dependent
on land are transferred to some other productive employment, such as industry.

Industrialization
Industrialization is often offered as a
THE POPULATION PROBLEMS OF INDIA AND PAKISTAN 77

remedy for Indian population problems. A
discussion of the possibilities of rapid and
large-scale industrialization of the subcontinent is beyond the scope of this paper,
but it must be pointed out that the basic
prerequisites for industrialization—namely,
raw materials, capital resources, skilled
labour, a market and technological knowledge—are already available in some measure.
The industrialization that has taken place
during the last thirty years, however, has not
helped to ease population pressure, because it
has been piecemeal and unplanned, and the
percentage of population gainfully employed
in modern industry has been less than 1 per
cent of the total. This haphazard industrialization has also led to the decay of cottage
industries, causing further unemployment.
Only planned large-scale and rapid industrialization and the development of cottage
industries—for there need be no conflict
between the two—can keep pace with the
growing population and siphon off the surplus population from the overcrowded land
to factories.

Industrialization in both India and Pakistan is important in the solution of their
population problems for two reasons. It will
increase the productivity of labour and
create an abundance of badly needed commodities and services and transform the
present economy of scarcity into an economy
of abundance. Secondly, and this is probably
more important in these areas, industrialization will encourage the development of new
urban patterns of living which lead to the
control of the high birth rate. The “ why ”’
of this process need not be discussed here,
but this has been the experience in the
United Kingdom, the United States and the
West generally, and in Japan. There is no
reason why India and Pakistan should not
conform to this experience of other countries
where industrialization has been accompanied by declining fertility.

Migration

What about migration asa solution to these
population problems? As far as external or
internal emigration is concerned there seems
to be no opening, because all the available

land in the world is either colonized or
under the control of some country or other.
Whether or not some of these countries, like
Australia, Brazil and Canada, are thinly
populated with empty spaces, it is out of the
question, because these countries will not
have millions of Indians as immigrants.
World conditions are not yet ripe for the
adoption of an international migration policy
based on the just needs and available resources of various countries and peoples.
And once we grant, as we must, that every
country must have the right to determine the
composition of her population, we cannot
object to the unwillingness of certain countries, however thinly populated they may
appear to be, to receive large numbers of
immigrants from India and Pakistan. Nor
do these Dominions wish to create unhappy
minority problems as in the Union of South
Africa. The total number of Indians settled
overseas aS permanent immigrants to-day
amounts to about four and a half million,
but the annual increase of population in the
subcontinent is about five million. Even
were emigration outlets available it is unreasonable to expect a major portion of this
annual increase to leave their homeland. For
India and Pakistan such relief may not even
be a temporary solution. All the available
evidence regarding the world’s great migrations shows that the immediate effect of
large-scale emigration is to reduce the population of the sending country, but that this
effect has always been short-lived because
the vacuum created is soon filled up.

As for the possibility of internal migration
as a method of relieving the population
pressure, there 1s not much scope either,
because there are no empty spaces within the
geographical confines of India and Pakistan.
There are, of course, certain provinces and
regions where the crude density per square
mile is relatively low, as in Assam in India
and in Baluchistan in Pakistan. During the
last fifteen years, half a million immigrants
went to Assam from other provinces, particularly Bengal. The provision of some
admittedly inferior land for half a million
people during a decade and a half, when the
country’s population increased by more than
78 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

fifty million people, is only a drop of relief
in an ocean of increase.

Certain patterns of inter-provincial migration established in India during the last
thirty years show that such migration has
been going on constantly. The Assam
plantations, for instance, get their labour
supply chiefly from distant Chota Nagpur.
The nearby Bengal peasants are not attracted
by these plantations, nor are they absorbed
by the Bengal jute mills, but they move in
to occupy the land in the Assam valleys.
The coal mines in Chota Nagpur do not
attract the people nearby, and so labourers
have to be recruited from the United Provinces and Bihar. Then there is the continuous
rural exodus during times of agricultural distress. All these show that the excess population is moving out into some neighbouring
province. We have no reliable figures, but
these population movements are more of a
seasonal migration and do not have any
permanent effects. And then, when one
group of people has moved out of a certain
province, another group of people seems to
be moving in. So the net result of such
inter- and intra-provincial movements does
not seem to constitute any relief to the
pressure on the land.

If migratory movements between different
regions are to be explained as a response to
the ‘‘ pull’ of prosperity from less crowded
areas, rather than the ‘“‘ push”’ of poverty
from overcrowded areas, there are no regions
in the subcontinent where the standard of
living of the masses is markedly higher than
in the rest. The variations in the different
levels of living in different provinces and
agricultural regions are not significant enough
to encourage inter-provincial or interregional migration. After all, migration
occurs from a region where the level of living
is low to one where it is high. There are no
conditions so absolutely unfavourable as to
push people outside their regions if they have
nowhere else to go. Thus, whatever internal
migration that has taken place in the last
thirty years has been in response to rigorous
famines or to the construction of new irrigation projects and canals which have rendered the cultivation of more land possible.

As severe famines or prosperity-promoting
irrigation projects are not annual occurrences, the impetus to migrate has not always
been present. Then there are other factors
that constantly nullify the urge to migrate.
Conditions of climate, language, diet, manners, customs and caste restrictions are not
uniform all over the subcontinent, and
people moving from one part of the country
to another may find themselves in a strange
land, although they are among fellow
Indians. Forsaking traditional homes and
farms in favour of distant places is fraught
with psychological difficulties, even though
the new homes promise relative affluence.

In these circumstances internal migration
offers no substantial relief from population
pressure. And the partition of the country
which has already forced communal migrations upon both the Dominions renders the
prospects of further inter-provincial migration dim.

Birth Control

The last and the most important solution
is birth control. We need not discuss the
question in general terms—science has long
since given its verdict in favour of contraception—but may consider the vital part it has
to play in Indian population policy, along
with the modernization of agriculture and
the industrialization of the national economy.

Apart from the general rural conservatism
of the masses that offers resistance to every
reform there is no organized resistance either
by the Government or the Church as in some
countries. Nor are the Indian religions
opposed to planned parenthood. It will not
be a hard task, therefore, to enlighten the
public mind as to the benefits of birth control. Once the public health authorities begin
to emphasise its importance it will spread
even to the traditionally forgotten villages.
Once mothers are educated in the belief that
there is a scientific device to meet their
desperate, albeit latent demands, birth control will make rapid headway. There are, of
course, certain special difficulties which
should be taken into account before planning
a network of birth-control clinics. It should
be recognized that both in India and in
THE POPULATION PROBLEMS OF INDIA AND PAKISTAN 79

Pakistan a majority of the people live under
backward conditions. Matters like bathrooms, running water, privacy, the cheapness, reliability and availability of contraceptives, and the illiteracy of women need
attention. No matter what the obstacles,
this reform must be carried through.

Fortunately the question has not been
completely ignored. The authoritative
Health Survey and Development Committee
appointed by the Government of India
observe, in their report (1946): “ All of us
are agreed that when childbearing is likely
to result in injury to mother or infant there
is every justification for the practice of contraception. In such cases it should be the
responsibility of Governments to provide
instruction regarding contraception in maternity and child welfare centres, dispensaries,
hospitals and any other public institutions
which administer medical aid to women. We
also consider that the supply of contraceptive
requisites should be made free of cost by the
State to necessitous women when the practice is advocated for reasons of health.
There is also unanimity among us in respect
of State action in two other directions,
namely: (r) control over the manufacture
and sale of contraceptives, as in the case of
food and drugs; and (2) assistance from
public funds towards research for the
production of a safe and effective contraceptive.”’

But the most important need is to provide
contraceptive advice on economic grounds.
Even this authoritative committee could not
shake off a traditional obscurantism and
include poverty and the low standard of
living as pressing reasons for adopting contraception and limiting the size of the
family.

The Indian National Congress, however,
set up a National Planning Commission
during the war, under the chairmanship of
the present Prime Minister, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru. One of the committee’s resolutions recommends: “In the interest of
social economy, family happiness and
national planning, family planning and a
limitation of children are essential, and the
State should adopt a policy to encourage

these. It is desirable to lay stress as well as
to spread knowledge on cheap and safe
methods of birth control. Birth-control
clinics should be established and other
necessary measures taken in this behalf and
to prevent the use or advertisement of harmful methods.” The resolution is significant
enough, but it goes on to add: “ An eugenic
programme should include the sterilization
of persons suffering from transmissible
diseases of a serious nature such as insanity
or epilepsy.”” This resolution was adopted
by the National Planning Commission when
India was not free and when it had no
governmental authority. Now that the
chairman of the committee is the Prime
Minister of India it is to be hoped that the
resolution will not remain a pious sentiment
on paper, but will be translated into action.
The population problems of India and
Pakistan are distressing enough already, and
any delay could only make them worse.

Human Conservation

In brief, despite the unprecedented scientific advances in the world during the last
thirty or forty years, there is an enormous
human loss in India and in Pakistan from
birth to old age. With all the available
resources of scientific knowledge, skill and
facilities for protecting people’s health, and
curing or alleviating the many ills and
disabilities to which they are exposed,
thousands of lives continue to be wasted.

Living to-day has become complex and
difficult compared to conditions a century
ago.« The majority live in overcrowded villages which have changed their faces but are
still without any sanitary or medical facilities, and those who live in towns and cities
find themselves in crowded conditions where
earning a living, rearing children and running
a home have become formidable problems.
Despite our belief in the intrinsic value of
human life as a central value of our culture,
we have offered resistance to certain reforms
that encourage healthy and _ purposeful
living. Human wastage and loss, therefore,
persist long after they have become unnecessary because of certain traditional ideas
and beliefs that still linger from the past
80 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

when we were largely helpless against the
diseases and dangers of life, and more or less
ignorant of human needs and possibilities.
To-day, to some extent, much human waste
is tolerated because of a fundamentally
defeatist belief in man’s helplessness against
superhuman and mysterious social and
natural forces that are supposed to control
our social life and make such loss inevitable.
Perhaps not a little of the tragic waste of life
is due to a conviction that human ills and
misery are well-merited punishments for our
misdeeds and guilt. Many a marvel of
medical advance has been more or less
opposed as interfering with divine purpose
which had ordained human suffering. While
belief in “‘fate’’ as a controlling factor is
slowly tending to disappear, it has not
disappeared completely. These fatalistic
beliefs persist in every society, but much
more in the Indian subcontinent than elsewhere, long after they have been rendered
obsolete by scientific knowledge which is
powerless to displace them. The way out is
to cease clinging to ideas and practices that
are archaic and incompatible with a democratic affirmation of human values. The
sooner we do this the better and easier will

be our approach to human problems of life,
longevity and death.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Chand, Gyan (1939), India’s Teeming Millions, London,
Allen & Unwin.

Chandrasekhar, S. (1946), India’s Population : Fact and
Policy, New York, John Day.

Chandrasekhar, S. (1948), Census and Statistics in
India, Annamalai University, India.

Gangulee, B. (1938), Trends of Agriculture and Population tn the Ganges Valley, London, Methuen.

Ghate, B. G. (1940), Changes in the Occupational
Distribution of the Population, Office of the
Economic Adviser, New Delhi.

Ghosh, D. (1946), Pressure of Population and Economic
Efficiency in India, Bombay, Oxford University
Press.

Karve, D. G. (1936), Poverty and Population in India.
Bombay, Oxford University Press.

Mukerjee, Radhakamal (1938), Food Planning for 400
Millions, London, Macmillan.

Narain, Brij (1929), The Population of India, Lahore.

Population National Planning Cofnmittee (1947),
Bombay, Vora Co.

Ranadive, B. T. (1936), The Population Problem in
India, Bombay, Longmans.

Report of the Health Survey and Development Committee (1946), New Delhi, Government of India,
4 volumes.

Singh, Baljit (1947), Population and Food Planning in
India, Bombay, Hind Kitabs.

Sovani, N. (1942), The Population Problem in India—
A Regional Approach, Poona.

Wattal, P. K. (1934), The Population Problem in India,
Bombay, Benett Coleman.

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION

“For the promotion of knowledge of the course of legislation In different countries, more particularly in the several
parts of His Majesty’s Dominions, and in the United States.”
President: The Rt. Hon. Lord MACMILLAN, G.C.V.O.

Chairman of the Executive Committee: The Rt. Hon. Lord DU PARCQ

Editors: Sir ARNOLD McNAIR, K.C. Sir CECIL CARR, K.C.B., K.C.,
assisted by
Professor H. C. GUTTERIDGE, K.C., and F. H. LAWSON, Esq., D.C.L.
Honorary Secretary: C. E. A. BEDWELL, Esq.

ONE GUINEA

Annual Subscription = = 
Address: THE ROYAL EMPIRE SOCIETY, NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, LONDON, W.C.2

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLI, No. 2
