370 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Reports,

FEEBLE-MINDED IN ONTARIO. FOURTEENTH REPORT FOR THE YEAR ENDING
OcTOBER 31ST, 1919.

Tus report, as usual, is of a general and discursive nature, and contains much
readable matter. It is evident in spite of the widespread scientific interest in the
diagnosis , cause and treatment of mental deficiency, resulting in the establishment
of many psychiatric clinics, that the actual institutional accommodation for
defectives in Canada falls far short of what has already been provided in England.

A Royal Commission on the care and control of mentally defective and feebleminded persons sat in 1918-1919, and the final report by the Commissioner, Mr.
Justice Hodgins, was presented on October 18th, 1919. This report contains a
specially interesting section dealing with the work of the Division of Neuropsychiatry in the United States Army and the American Expeditionary Force.

In discussing the prevention of mental defect a significant quotation is given
from Dr. Helen Y. Campbell, Chief Medical Officer of the Infants Department,
Bradford , England, as follows :—‘*We are also confronted with the problem of the
actually mentally deficient, of the more or less feeble-minded, and of the deranged ,
‘epileptic, or chronically alcoholic or otherwise mentally abnormal mother. The
bad ‘mothering’ of these cases is quite unimproveable at an infant welfare centre,
and a very definite if not relatively very large percentage of our infants are suffering
severely as a result of dependence upon such ‘mothering’.’’

It may be incidentally remarked that if infant welfare centres succeed in
checking the high mortality which now exists amongst the offspring of such parents,
they will be doing a serious disservice to the rest of the community, for such
children almost invariably grow up a menace to the state even when not actually
certifiable as mentally defective.

A good deal of study has been given in Canada and America to the association
of immorality, mental defect and venereal disease. The Director of Social Hygiene
Work in Michigan reports that 75 per cent. of the prostitute class is infected with
some form of venereal disease, and that 75 per cent. of the infected are not normal
mentally. That the provision for these is quite inadequate she instances the fact
that ‘‘we have 37 totally feeble-minded venereal prostitutes , some of them imbecile,
who cannot be interned in Lapeer, and consequently will have to be returned to
society.’’ Refuges for women report the numbers of girls from 14-21 years of age
who seek their shelter, who, although superficially normal are either defective or
‘entirely lacking in moral sense. This unstable border-line class presents one of
our most difficult problems in England.

A large amount of mental survey work has been done in the various provinces,
and the extent of the defect discovered may be gathered from the figures from
Indiana, where it has been estimated that there are 56,718 defectives, classified
as follows :—

In the community, not in need of institution care .. ws .. 21,604.
In the community, in need of institutional care - - .. 18,362.
Having care in school for Feeble-minded youth a“ as .. 1,409.
Having care in other public institutions (poor asylums. » orphan

homes, prisons) .. : .. 2,909.

Dr. Helen MacMurchy is to be congratulated BoE Sher Ww ide survey and upon
the interesting manner in which she presents it.

Annual Reports of the Committee of the Manchester and Salford Sanitary
Association of the Ladies’ Public Health Society for 1918 and 1919.

THis report is evidence of the very enlightened and practical sense of citizenship
which exists in Manchester and Salford. At the Annual Meeting on July 2nd,
1920, an address was delivered by Major Darwin on ‘‘EKugenics—the Science of
improving the racial qualities of future generations,’’ and an original address,
with lantern views, by Professor J. B. Cohen, of Leeds University, on the ‘‘Prevention of air pollution.’’ Both of these lectures are reproduced in the appendix
“of the report.
E.I.C.
RECENT AND PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 371

‘Proceedings of the International Conference of Women Physicians. Vol.
1. Conservation of Health of Women in Marriage. The Woman’s
Press, 600, Lexington Avenue, New York. Pp. 183.

‘Tuts sixth volume of the Proceedings of the International Conference of Women
Physicians contains the reports of the speeches and papers of some sixteen women
physicians and of the discussions founded thereon. It is of importance to the
members of the Eugenics Society because all these papers and addresses relate to
the conservation of the health of women in marriage. Naturally the speeches and
papers are of unequal value, but they all deserve to be read because they furnish
us with facts and with opinions founded on the laws, social customs, problems,
and the attemps at answering the problems of Eugenics in may different countries.
Among these countries are Holland, Norway, France, Sweden, Italy, South
America, the United States, Scotland and England.

The first paper reported is one by Dr. Ada Potter, entitled ‘‘Voluntary Parenthood in Holland.’’ This little country has warmly taken up the idea that no
child should be born unless its existence is sincerely desired by both parents.
Hence, of course, follows the belief that voluntary limitation of the size of a family
is desirable, although Dr. Potter tells us that criminal abortion is not approved of
and that no physician has a right to interfere with the life of the child when it is
once conceived. Probably all Christian nations are agreed that infanticide and
criminal abortion are illegal and sinful, but there is no agreement on the question
of the desirability of preventive conception.

Other members of the Congress deal with the protection of healthy marriage
by the exchange of certificates of health as proposed in Norway and already existing
in some of the States of America.

Dr. Anna Moutet discussed illegitimacy in France and Dr. Dagny Bang deals
with the same trouble as it presents itself in Norway.

The prevention of the venereal diseases by means of the ‘‘packet system ”’
and by immediate self disinfection is discussed by Dr. EK. H. Hooker, Dr. Mary
Gordon, Dr. Giboulot, and others. In this group the most valuable paper is that
contributed by Dr. Mary Gordon: it is throughout of a high moral tone, and she
justly points out that neither prophylaxis nor self disinfection can secure freedom
from venereal disease, also that the education of the public and the raising of the
moral and spiritual tone of the nation are the only efficient safeguards of healthy
marriage and the only guarantee that this, and all succeeding generations shall be
eugenic in the best sense of the word.

M.S.

*‘THe STATE AND SExUAL Morauity,’’ being the Report of the Committee of
Inquiry into Sexual Morality George Allen & Unwin, Ltd., 1920.
Price 1s.6d.net. Pp.77.

Tus Report embodies the findings of twenty-six men and women on Venereal
Diseases, Protection of Minors, Age of Consent, Youthful Offenders, Industrial and
Reformatory Schools, Crimes of Violence or Fraud, Public Indecency, Solicitation,
etc., with a statement of the laws framed to regulate these various matters, and the
views of the Members of the Committee of Enquiry on the laws as they at present
exist.

The book is clearly expressed , up-to-date, and shows a real anxiety to improve
public morality and public health without the introduction of unjust and onesided legislation, and without resorting to doubtful methods of preventing venereal
‘disease.

An excellent index makes this little work really useful as a book of reference.

H.A.M.

American Journal of Physical Anthropology, Vo. III., No. 3.

‘Stupy oF ANCIENT EGyprTian TEETH, by Sir Armand Ruffer. Studies of the
incidence of disease in ancient times are of necessity rare though this has not prevented many authors from asserting that many familiar troubles, particularly
those connected with the teeth, are very largly modern phenomena. It is thus of
peculiar interest to find that the late Sir Armand Ruffer, whose death was so great a
Joss both to England and to Egypt, had completed a study of the incidence of
372 EUGENICS REVIEW.

dental disease in Ancient Egypt before he fell a victim to an enemy submarine
in the Mediterranean. Briefly summarising his conclusions, he found that :—

(1) anomalies in the position, structure and number of teeth were rare and.
did not seem to become more common as modern times were approached ;

(2) attrition was very marked and probably played a considerable part
in favouring the entrance of the micro-organisms of suppuration ;

(3) dental caries occurred at all periods of Egyptian history, but seem to
have been less frequent in predynastic times ;

(4). alveolar and perialveolar abscesses were common at all times ;

(5) chronic suppurative periodontitis was a common disease in ancient
Egypt;

(6) no syphilitic or rachitic teeth have been found ;

(7) there is no evidence of the use of the toothbrush ;

(8) dentists did not interfere operatively in many if in any cases.

A.M.C.S.
Eugénique, Vol. II. No. 6.

This number contains among other items of interest the report of an address.
by M. Popillault on the inheritance of moral characteristics. The address was
followed by a discussion in which M.M. March, Houssay and others took part. The
lecturer based his remarks on the work of the late Dr. Goring and, while recognising
the great value of his memoir, offered certain criticisms as to his method of classify ing psychological characters, which criticism met with approval from most of the
subsequent speakers.

Attention is also drawn to a paper by Merzbacher, which was published in
1909 and which has apparently escaped the notice which it should have received.
Details of several family histories were given by Merzbacher in which various
defects re-appeared generation after generation, in particular a certain form of
nervous disease which was correlated with atrophy of the white matter of the brain,
and a form of muscular atrophy. These and other defects were almost confined
to the male members of the families in question, thus suggesting some form of
sex-linked inheritance.

A.M.C-S.

Hindus Message 11. xi. 1920.

SoctaL RECONSTRUCTION IN INDIA. We continue to receive a weekly copy of the
Ilindu Message, but regret that our Review, which is presumably sent in exchange,
should have so far exercised no apparent educating influence upon the editor!
In this leading article he contrasts the descent of Hindus from the body and limbs
of Purusha (God), with that of the so-called civilised western peoples ‘‘from one
or more tribe of savage or semi-savage ancestors and even to the anthropoid apes
of the Catarrhine period, if we are to believe in the theories of Darwin and other
biologists.’ The Darwinian theory he sums up as foollws :—‘*Marry, multiply,
let the strongest live and the weakest die—that is Darwin’s enunciation of the
gospel of evolution—of the struggle amongst the nations for mutual exploitation
and destruction. This blood-thirsty, fanatical, and irrational and intolerant
creed of race ascendancy can never bring peace or joy upon this planet to the races.
of mankind.’’ The widespread ignorance and deliberate misrepresentation existing in the world to-day must make eugenicists despair.
E.I.C.

Parents’ Review, December, 1920.

Herepity, by Ethel Somers (pp. 916-919). We welcome a little general introductory article on this subject in the Parents’ Review, which deals as a rule with
educational and environmental topics. Every parent has a natural interest
in the likenesses and differences between parents and children, and the study of
heredity should inevitably lead to the appreciation of the eugenic ideal, the aims
and end of the study being, according to the writer, ‘‘the making and maintaining
of the largest possible number of the finest possible people.’’
E.I.C.

Revue de l'Institut de Sociologie, Vol. Il., Jan., 1921.

Lr MECANISME DE L’HEREDITE, by L. Verlaine. In this article the author
criticises the manner in which the problem of inheritance is generally approached
by biologists. Many of his criticisms are suggestive and worthy of attention
RECENT AND PERIODICAL LITERATURE. 373

though a fairly conclusive reply could be made to the points to which he appears
to attach most importance, and in particular to his criticisms of the distinction
drawn between variations re-appearing in successive generations under the same
stimulus and those which re-appear without any such stimulus. The article is to
be followed by one dealing with the application of the study of inheritance to
sociology, which should be of interest to eugenists. aC

° A.M.C-S.

Science Progress, Vol. 59, Jan., 1921.

Tue INHERITANCE OF ACQUIRED CHARACTERS, by Professor &. W. MacBride.
Reference was made in the last number of this Review to the recent experiments
of Messrs. Guyer and Smith. Professor MacBride describes their experiments
and also at rather greater length the famous experiments of Kammerer. It
will be remembered that Kammerer’s work has been severely criticised, notably by
Mr. Bateson. Kammerer has, however, lately made a further contribution to the
problem, and this in Professor MacBride’s view considerably strenpthens his
case. Professor MacBride in fact concludes by saying that °‘ a very strong prima
facie case for the inheritability of acquired characters has been made out, and that
no serious efforts have yet been made to combat the evidence.’’

A.M.C-S.
