C. P. BLACKER
Population, Religion and Birth Control

Conference held in Zurich of the Marriage Guidance Commission of
the International Union of Family Organizations, June 17th tooth, 1959

O DEATH CONTROL WITHOUT BIRTH
Neortxee This lapidary statement
appears in a chapter-heading of Dr. Colin
Bertram’s recent book which was appreciatively
reviewed in our October number. The chapter is
appropriately entitled ‘““Hopes and Possibilities’’.
The chief significance of the above-mentioned
conference held during June in Zurich may later
be discerned in an attempt to bring this elementary truth home to certain circles. Resistances
in this field are familiar: they are compounded
of sentiments which are in varying degrees
religious, “demographic” and political. The
political component contributed nothing in
Zurich where Marxist doctrines were not heard;
its place was taken by religious and “demographic” resistances.

Background
The background of the Zurich meeting was provided by a much larger conference of the
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF FAMILY ORGANISATIONS
(the I.U.F.O.: the Union produces a journal
Familles dans le Monde) during June 1958 in
Paris. An account of this conference appeared
in the October 1958 number of this REVIEW. But
it may be helpful to recall the salient features.

The I.U.F.O. was founded in 1947 through
French initiative. As implied by its title and by
that of its journal, the Union’s objective is to
promote the welfare of families throughout the
world. But in the course of the deliberations of
the last ten years, wherein the Eugenics Society
has participated as an Associate Member of the
Union, little attention had been paid to the
effects on families (mainly those in underdeveloped countries) of population pressure
and of the associated scourges of undernourishment, squalor and premature death.

Together with three other British voluntary

organisations, the Eugenics Society therefore
took the initiative in drawing attention at last
year’s conference to this aspect of the problem
of uncontrolled fertility. Our jointly produced
statement had a stormy reception and the
attempt would have wholly failed had it not
been for the initiative and resourcefulness of
Mr. Joseph Brayshaw who, the day after,
gathered round himself the movers of several
inconclusive amendments and persuaded them
to agree on a recommendation which was later
unanimously approved by the Union’s Commission of Marriage Guidance and still later by
its Conseil Général or Governing Body.

It was suggested above that demographic
considerations could impede recognition of the
principle: no death control without birth control. Such considerations weighed heavily with
the French members of the Union, for France
had suffered during the first war and in the interwar years from an excess of deaths over births.
Hence French demographers were frightened of
birth control. Indeed several had proclaimed
that birth control, freely practised, will necessarily
cause depopulation. It was therefore in no way
surprising that, in the discussion of the small
group convened by Mr. Brayshaw, demographic
issues were in the forefront. They were reflected
in the resolution which was finally approved.

This was as follows:

The fifth section fof the I.U.F.O.], having
heard the proposal of Dr. Blacker and without
prejudging in any way the fundamentals of the
problems, recommends to the General Council
of the I.U.F.O. that the different causes of
population pressure and all the possible solutions should be studied and that to this end the
task should be entrusted to the Marriage
Guidance Commission.

In the above recommendation the main
concern is with population pressure and its

217

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1960, 51, 4.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

solutions rather than with events within the
family.* The solicitude was, so to speak, transferred from the intimacies of hearth and home
to the more rarified plane on which are discussed the diagnosis, causes and cures of
population pressure.

The Union's Commission on Marriage
Guidance (it has three other Commissions) met
in Zurich to give effect to the decisions of the
Conseil Général.

Groundless Misgivings
The programme for the Zurich conference,
drawn up by the Union’s secretariat, generated
certain misgivings which, in the event, proved
groundless. The essential issue might, it seemed,
be side-tracked. The Marriage Guidance Commission was, as a body, scarcely competent to
discuss economic and demographic conundrums.
There exists in all countries a circle of people of
high academic standing who contend that there
is really no population - resources problem.
These declare that the possibilities of increasing
food production throughout the world could
easily match foreseeable increases in the world’s
population. The outcome of Zurich, it seemed,
could depend on what “experts” were invited.
A discussion which should be concerned with
family problems could get lost in speculations
about hydroponics and algae. The conclusion
could emerge that, in the general uncertainty,
the wisest course of the Union was to do nothing.
Misgivings were further aroused when it was
noted that, though a session had been allocated
to a consideration of India’s problems, the
under-developed countries whose spokesmen
had been most articulate about the problems of
population pressure were scarcely represented.
The secretariat in Paris wanted to invite
demographers. It was reassuring that they

* Events within the family had been stressed in our
joint memorandum which had stated that ‘Population
Pressure depresses the standard of living, causing poverty
from which women and children mainly suffer’? and that
the spokesmen for underdeveloped countries were aware
of “the need to prevent increasing resort to criminal
abortion’. In the course of a speech by which I had
introduced the memorandum, I had also used the
following words: ‘“‘From a world standpoint (though not
from a European and still less from a French standpoint)
population pressure could almost be regarded as the most
important factor in family welfare’.

218

wished to include a demographer from the
United Kingdom, and they named Professor
D. V. Glass and Mr. Norman Carrier as being
specially acceptable. Mr. Carrier was able to
accept and he played a valuable part in the
conference.

Themes and Chairmanship of the Conference

The conference lasted three days. Some of the
themes (here quoted verbatim) were elaborately
stated. For example, the theme for the first day
was “‘Various causes of population growth and
the tentative solutions to be applied to this
problem: the notion of demographic pressure:
main factors and scientific fields, demographic,
economic, sociological and psychological”. The
specially invited demographers here made their
contributions. The theme of the morning of the
second day was “The religious position on
population growth or demographic pressure and
family planning, with special reference to
Protestant, Jewish and Roman Catholic positions’. In the afternoon of the second day the
applications to India of the issues raised in the
morning were discussed. The third day was
devoted to “The task of the Marriage Guidance
Counsellor and the organisation of a Family
Guidance Bureau’.

At all sessions Professor David Mace presided
with his customary skill, tact and courtesy. At
the outset, he stressed the need for tolerance;
he reminded us that the room contained people
who held widely different and sometimes opposed
convictions and that some of us would have to
listen to arguments which we might hold to be
not only misguided but pernicious. In the event,
Dr. Mace must have been satisfied with the
manner in which his guiding principle was
followed. A remarkable spirit of tolerance was
displayed by all; at no point was acrimony
shown; and the delegates finally dispersed with
an enhanced respect for each other.

Impressions of the Conference

From the standpoint of the Eugenics Society
the discussion on the second day was of principal
interest. There was no avoidance of the topic
of family planning; but the contributed papers
were perhaps weighted from the medical angle
in favour of the Roman Catholic standpoint.
POPULATION, RELIGION AND BIRTH CONTROL

(For this the Secretariat was in no way responsible.) One was submitted by a doctor representing
the (British) CATHOLIC MARRIAGE ADVISORY
COUNCIL, and a long communication was also
distributed by a medical representative of
Washington’s GUILD OF CATHOLIC PSYCHIATRISTS.
But the standpoint of the British FAMILY
PLANNING ASSOCIATION was effectively though
briefly presented by Mrs. Jean Medawar. After
the Conference a Swiss participant told me that
the manner in which Mrs. Medawar’s contribution had been delivered and received had
provided for him a memorable example of how
people could be brought to recognize basic
differences in their convictions and yet hold
each other in enhanced respect. Each side had
perceived that the other was well-intentioned
and sincere; suspicions of duplicity and malignity had been dissipated. A similar impression
of basic goodwill and sincerity was received
from Pére Stanislas de Lestapis, S.J., by nonCatholics.

What Mr. Maurice Veillard (a past president
of the Union) had called “the Anglo-Saxon
standpoint” had been strengthened by the
appearance on the second afternoon of Dr.
Abraham Stone who had flown in the morning
from Poland. Though Dr. Stone had submitted
no prepared paper he made two short but
effective contributions to discussions. Few
indeed of his many friends in the I.U.F.O. could
have suspected that they would never see him
again. A concise paper entitled ““The Church of
England and Birth Control’ was forcefully but
temperately delivered by the Rev. G. R. Dunstan;
and on the last morning Mr. Reginald Pestell,
the Field Secretary of the (British) NATIONAL
MARRIAGE GUIDANCE COUNCIL gave a _ lucid
summary of the selection methods and other
activities of his Council.

The discussion about India was introduced
by Mrs. Hansa Mehta, once Vice-Chancellor of
Baroda University. The substance of her address
contained little that was new; but the manner in
which she delivered it could not have been
better attuned to her audience. She quietly
dissipated what turned out to be a widely-held
misconception which had been expressed in one
of the previously circulated papers in the following terms: “The anxiety to see contraception

introduced stems not so much from the people
of the East themselves but from the West’.

This prevailing idea—that the “West” was

forcing birth control down the throats of guileless Indians—Mrs. Mehta gently refuted. The
movement, she asserted, was on the contrary
genuinely spontaneous and “authochthonous’”’;
it could never have reached its present dimensions
if the British had not left India in 1947. Another
member of the audience asked her what Indian
religions were opposed to family planning. To
this Mrs. Mehta replied: ‘None. There is only
one religion in India which is opposed—the
Roman Catholic.”’ Another delegate made an
emotional appeal to the idealism of the nations
of the ‘““West’’; these, he said, should buy world
surpluses of food and ship them to India as
gifts. Mrs. Mehta briefly replied that India could
not be expected to live on charity for ever. The
accelerating growth of India’s population was
worsening her predicament. Indians could not
continue indefinitely to double their population
every forty years. The problem was for India
and not for other nations, however welldisposed, to solve.

The themes (above-quoted) which were discussed during the three days gave little scope for
considering the effects of population pressure
on the well-being of mothers and children. This
aspect could have been more effectively elucidated
by social workers and health visitors than by
demographers; I did my best to draw attention
to it in a speech which was perforce short, for
translations into both French and German were
required throughout. As I spoke I had in my
mind’s eye the image of a diminutive Indian
mother aged nineteen whom I had seen six
years before at a Welfare Centre in Bombay.
She was depriving herself of food in order to
feed four sickly looking children. I was assured
that there were tens of thousands like her in
India. .

Professor Mace wisely decided that no
resolution or even recommendation to the
Conseil Général was called for. Throughout the
conference M. Xavier Ryckmans, the Union’s
respected President, had attentively listened to
the proceedings and was therefore perfectly
informed of what had transpired. So also were
M. Jean Delaporte, the Union’s Secretary

219
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

General, and M. Robert Boudet, its Director of _member-associations who were present may well
Services.
The door is now open for further action if Asian were more effectively communicated and
this be deemed appropriate in view of the general understood at Zurich than at any previous conaims and internal interests of the Union. ference sponsored by the Union. For this they have
The representatives of most of the British again to thank the President and the Secretariat.

220

feel that both the “Anglo-Saxon view” and the

POPULATION STUDIES

A Journal of Demography

Edited by D. V. GLASS and E. GREBENIK

Vol XIII No. 1.

W. D. Borrire

R. K. KELSALL and
SHEILA MITCHELL

RAYMOND T. SMITH
GALINA V. SELEGEN
J. G. C. BLACKER

D. F. ROBERTS and
R. E. S. TANNER

E. P. HUTCHINSON
R. P. DorE
Book Reviews

CONTENTS July 1959

The Growth of the Australian Population with Particular Reference
to the Period Since 1947.

Married Women and Employment in England and Wales.

Some Social Characteristics of Indian Immigrants to British Guiana.
Changing Features in the Soviet Population Census Programme.
Fertility Trends of the Asian Population of Tanganyika.

A Demographic Study in an Area of Low Fertility in North-east Tanganyika.

Swedish Population Thought in the Eighteenth Century.

Japan: Country of Accelerated Transition (Review article).

Subscription price per volume of 3 parts 42s. net, post free (or American currency $6.75).
Single paris £1 each plus postage (American $3.25, post free).

Published by the PoPULATION INVESTIGATION CoMMITTEE, at the LONDON SCHOOL OF
ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE, 15 HOUGHTON STREET, LONDON, W.C.2.

 
