POPULATION INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE

First Annual Report
(January 1st, 1937—-December 31st, 1937)

ORIGINS OF COMMITTEE

HE Committee had its origin in the
: Annual Galton Lecture _ entitled

‘“Eugenics in the Light of Population
Trends ”’ given on February 16th, 1935, to
the Eugenics Soctety by Professor A. M.
Carr-Saunders. Acting upon a suggestion
contained in this lecture, the Council of the
Eugenics Society took the initiative in calling
the Population Investigation Committee
together. |

The Committee, while made up of representatives of various organizations, and of
certain individuals elected in a private
capacity, is an autonomous body. It is in no
way subordinate to any of the organizations
represented upon it. The Committee has
power to add to its numbers as it thinks fit.

AIMS OF COMMITTEE

The Committee has been formed to
examine the trends of population in Great
Britain and the Colonies and to investigate
the causes of these trends, with special
reference to the fall of the birth-rate. It is
not a propagandist Committee and is not
concerned with advocating any social
measures with the object of influencing the
movement of populations. It will be impossible to adopt social measures without
fuller information than we possess at present,
and it can be taken as certain that any policy
which, at a later date, the Government may
see fit to adopt, will be influenced by the
findings of the new inquiries of the General

Register Office, and by the findings of the
Committee.

FINANCE
The Committee receives no subsidies from
Government sources. It depends entirely
upon donations from interested individuals
and organizations.
A. statement of its financial needs and an
income and expenditure account will be

found at the end of this report. From the
former it will be seen that the Committee has
schemes for research which require the services of six research workers and would cost
approximately £4,000 a year. At present,
the Committee has two research workers and
its expenses come to approximately £1,000
a year. It has, at the moment, a balance of
only £762 12s. 2d. |

The Committee has its headquarters at the
offices of the Eugenics Society, which has
placed its staff at the Committee’s disposal.
The Committee, therefore, has practically
no overhead expenses and all its available
funds are devoted to the direct furtherance
of its aims.

The Committee wishes to express its
indebtedness to the organizations and persons
named at the end of this report, for generous
contributions ; also to Miss Marion Crichton
for much valuable assistance.

THE First YEAR

In the autumn of 1936 three books*
published by members of the Committee
attracted widespread interest. With remarkable suddenness, the press of the country
took notice of the fact that, if recent trends
in fertility continued, a decline of the population of Great Britain would, without
immigration, be inevitable. Two articles
under the general heading ‘‘ The Dwindling
Family ” appeared in The Times of September 28th and 2oth, 1936, the last being
supported by a leading article. These were
widely quoted, and from this moment the
population problem became alive. Little
notice, however, was taken of the Committee until Mr. Ronald Cartland, Member
for Birmingham, King’s Norton, introduced
into the House of Commons, on February

 

* World Population. By A. M. Carr-Saunders ;
Population Movements. By R. R. Kuczynski; The
Struggle for Population. By D. V. Glass. All published
by the Oxford University Press.

239
240

roth, 1937, a motion to the effect that the
threatened decline of the population might
constitute a danger and asking for an
inquiry and report by the Government.
There took place on this occasion an instructive and well-informed debate which occupies
fifty-five columns of Hansard (Vol. 320, No.
52). Mr. Cartland made an appreciative
reference to the Committee’s work, and it
was noteworthy that not one of the eleven
speakers who followed Mr. Cartland disputed his plea that the subject was important
and required further investigation. In replying for the Government, Mr. R. 5. Hudson
said that it was not proposed to set on foot
a new and independent inquiry; it was
intended rather to intensify the inquiries
which were continuously carried out by the
Registrar-General. The matter, he said, was
primarily one for the Government, but outside assistance would be welcomed.

Shortly after this debate the Committee
received a request from the Minister of
Health to get into touch with the General
Register Office. This communication was in
response to an earlier request from the
Chairman of the Committee for the cooperation of the Minister and the General
Register Office. The Muinister’s request was
immediately acted upon and three conferences have been held (on March 3rd, April
23rd and October 13th, 1937), at Somerset
House, between the Registrar-General and
representatives of the Committee. At the
second of these conferences, a memorandum
was submitted by the Committee outlining
two groups of researches which it regarded
as desirable. The first group could be carried
out on the data already available; the
second and more important group could only
be undertaken if the existing system of
obtaining vital statistics were amplified by
the addition of certain new questions. The
most essential of these related to the age of
the mother at the birth of each child, the
birth order of each child, and the duration
of marriage at each birth. The Committee
was prompted to suggest these changes by
the fact that the scope of the Registration
Statistics in England and Wales is rather
more limited than in most European coun
THE EUGENICS REVIEW >

tries. Indeed, on the existing system it js
impossible to calculate fertility rates ;. these
have to be surmised by rather unsafe
analogies from other countries.

The Registrar - General, Sir Sylvanus
Vivian, accorded to the Committee’s sugges.
tions a very friendly reception and pointed
out that as long ago as IgII, and in more
recent discussions with the Eugenics Soctety,
his Department had been concerned with
problems of fertility. On June 18th, 1937,
the Minister of Health, Sir Kingsley Wood,
announced in the House of Commons
(Hansard, Vol. 325, No. 126, page 794) that
he was giving consideration to the means by
which additional questions could be asked in
the process of birth registration while, at the
same time, respecting the confidential nature
of the information there furnished. The
recently debated Population (Statistics) Bill
will enable the desired information to be
obtained. The Government’s amendment to
this Bill embodies nearly all the additional
questions which the Committee regards as
important.

The Committee has also established satisfactory contact with the Registrar-General
of Scotland.

A Royal Commission

During the first few months of 1937, a
lively controversy was held in the columns
of the press as to the desirability of a Royal
Commission being appointed. It was urged
that the problem was too big and too important for a voluntary committee with limited
funds. But the proposal was finally abandoned. The following passage is quoted
from a leading article which appeared in
The Times on April 17th:

“It is only too clear that eccentricity,
irrelevance, and party fanaticism are ready
to dangle their red herrings before any public
body which will receive them. This alone
would be an excellent reason for disputing
the claim that a Royal Commission is the
proper body to investigate the population
problem at this stage. But it may be urged
in addition that a Commission is more fitted
to discuss policy and hear evidence than to
conduct research. Professor Carr-Saunders
_ POPULATION INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE

and his colleagues are not satisfied that there
is yet sufficient information on which to base
future policy. When that information has
been collected and studied, then it will be
timely to raise the question of appointing a
Royal Commission. If research should precede action, then the Population Investigation Committee, with its expert personnel,
seems well fitted for the task. Its fate lies
now in the hands of the public, and there
should be no lack of support for a venture of
such importance.”’

Demographic Problems in the Crown Colonies
and Dominions

The Committee is desirous of promoting a
special investigation of these problems, and
last July three of its representatives discussed the matter with officials of the
Colonial Office. The Committee would like
to prepare a demographic handbook of the
Colonial Empire. This would throw much
light on the conditions prevailing in a large
area of the world ; and it might extend our
knowledge of the historical problems of
population. The handbook might also lead
towards an improvement in the methods of
census-taking and of collecting vital statistics. The Committee would also like to make
an analysis of Colonial figures where these
exist in sufficient detail and accuracy. The
most profitable region for this purpose is the
West Indies, for which there are reliable
records of very mixed populations dating
from more than a century ago. These
records may well present favourable opportunities for comparing the history of diverse
social and cultural stocks and for the
investigation of other important problems.
But the Committee regards the handbook as
the most urgent need.

The Committee’s proposals were received
in a friendly spirit by the representatives of
the Colonial Office. Facilities were offered
to the Committee in the Colonial Office
Library and support has been given for
an application to the, Carnegie Corporation
for a grant to be devoted to this special
purpose. ry

The Committee does not regard it as part
of its function to initiate research into the

241

population problems of the Dominions, which
are self-governing nations. But it proposes
to make contact with the census and registration authorities of the Dominions.

Research Secretary

The Committee is fortunate in having as
its Research Secretary, Mr. D. V. Glass,
B.Sc. Mr. Glass is well equipped for this
office by the fact that, in the years 1935 and
1936, he conducted a survey of the measures
taken by certain Continental countries with
a view to raising fertility. His findings were
published in the book, The S trugegle for
Population, which has already been referred
to

In the autumn of this year Mr. Glass made,
on behalf of the Committee, a second and
more extensive continental tour which
included the Scandinavian countries. In all
the countries he visited he received valuable
help and was provided with useful information. In the course of next year, his findings
will be published in a second and much more
comprehensive edition of his book. Mr. Glass
has also prepared two papers entitled
‘* Marriage Frequency and Economic Fluctuations’ and “ Changes in Fertility in
England and Wales, 1851-1931,” which will
be published in the near future in a volume
which is to be produced under the auspices
of the Department of Social Biology of the
London School of Economics. The latter
paper is a preliminary report on an investigation of fertility changes in this country which
Mr. Glass is undertaking. The completed

study will appear as part of the new edition
of his book.

Educational Problems

The Committee has appointed Miss Grace
Leybourne, M.A., B.Sc., Ph.D., as a fulltime associate research worker. Miss Leybourne is carrying out an investigation of the
cost of education in this country with special
reference to the problems of the family,
She is well qualified to Carry out this intricate
inquiry by her previous experience in the
United States, where, as the holder of a
Commonwealth Fund Fellowship, she engaged in various population studies.
242

Commuttee’s Pamphlet

In April of this year, the Committee published under the title The Future of Our
Population P a short pamphlet explaining its
aims and needs. This has met with a favourable reception, and approximately 1,700
copies have been sold. A second edition is
now being prepared.

Questionnaire

The Committee is confronted with a large
group of problems which may be called
medical. It is not known, for example, what
proportion of married couples are childless
through no wish of their own, nor what
proportion limit the size of their families on
account of the health of the wife and for
other medical reasons. Very little is known
about the extent and the consequences of
the practice of abortion. Much the same may
be said of birth-control practices. The Committee is well represented on the medical
side and a strong medical sub-committee has
been formed which has drawn up a questionnaire. This will throw light on many of these
problems. But the Committee would have
to subsidize research workers to help in the
collection of the data, and also to analyse
the material when collected.

Financial Needs of the Committee

The Committee has comprehensive plans
for further research which it would like to
put into operation if the necessary funds
were available. A brief outline will be given
of these plans.

The most extensive field of investigation
may be called social. For the purpose of
carrying out research under this head use
can often be made of existing material, but
it would be necessary in many cases to collect
a large amount of additional information.
The Committee has prepared a scheme of
social research which may be summarized
as follows :

(a) The approach to marriage. Here come
such matters as the length and cost of the
training required to take up particular kinds
of work, the extent to which women are
obliged to give up gainful employment when

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

they marry, the existence of obstacles to
marriage in particular occupations such as _
the fighting services, and the extent to which
marriage is postponed by those who have
advancement in view.

(6) Child-bearing. This demands an inquiry into the position of an employed
woman who is pregnant in regard to leave of
absence, of the relation of the medical and
midwifery fees to income, and of the extent
of the provision for child-bearing made
through the public social services.

(c) Child-rearing. Here come a large number of very important questions. We may
first take housing. To what extent does the
proportion of income going in rent rise with
an increase in the size of the family ? What
provision is made in subsidized housing
schemes for large families? How do the
overcrowding provisions in the Housing Act
of 1934 bear upon the size of family, e.g. if
the Act were applied to the houses built
since the war, could the inhabitants of: those
houses have enough children to replace themselves? Do flats discourage large families ?
Next there is education. In regard to
education up to the university stage there
are such questions as the influence upon
family size of the maximum income at which
it is permissible to take up free places, and
the rise in the cost of education, as a proportion of total expenditure, with increasing
size of family. As to professional and
university education, there is the question
of cost and of scholarships and the length of
time before earnings can be assured.

(4) Taxation. A study is required of the
incidence of taxation, direct and indirect,
upon families of different sizes.

(e) State Assistance. A converse study is
required of the assistance given by the State
to families of different sizes in different social
classes.

The above are only illustrations of the
numerous important problems which urgently
await investigation. The procedure which
the Committee wishes to adopt is as follows.
It desires to obtain the services of qualified
research workers. These workers would,
with the permission of the authorities concerned, carry out their investigations in
sevens << POPULATION INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE

universities or other similar institutions.
The Committee does not propose to acquire
any building or to spend money upon any
staff other than these research workers.
The salary of a research worker would vary
with qualifications and experience, but
would not be less than £300 a year. The
Committee would like to have immediately
at its disposal at least six such persons, one
for statistical investigations, one for medical
inquiries and four ' for social inquiries,
though it could well employ more. This
would require at least {2,000 a year. There
would also be the cost of obtaining the
information in connection with certain
investigations. This is less easy to estimate.

243

But in one instance, that of the Committee’s medical questionnaire, it can be
estimated fairly closely. It has been found
that the doctors, nurses and midwives who

are asked to fill up each of the elaborate
forms must be paid for doing so. In order to

get enough forms filled up a sum of £1,000
will have to be found. Therefore, since some
of the social investigations will also depend
upon the collection of material especially
for the purpose, it seems that £2,000 a year
will be necessary for collecting data, or a
sum of £4,000 a year in all. The Committee
is therefore in urgent need of financial
assistance. Indeed, it cannot adequately
perform its necessary tasks unless this is
forthcoming on a larger scale than hitherto_

INCOME AND EXPENDITURE ACCOUNT (Summarised)

1937- | | £ s.d.
an. 1st: Balance from 1936 ... - 336 0 9
Grant from Eugenics Society - 500 0 Oo
Anonymous oes vee - 100 0 Oo
Mr. J. Berington vee vee _ Io Oo
Mr. E. Berthoud wee sas -- 10 0 O
Mr. C. J. Bond ... ens sas -- 5 0 O
Mr. R. P. Byers... a wes . 5 Oo
Mr. L. J. Cadbury (for 2 years) - 200 O Oo
Mr. Calderara ... oes wes eee 10 oO
Lord Camrose... = Ss aoa .. IO IO Oo
Mr. Holroyd Chambers I ro
Mr. T. R. Cubitt I I oO
Mr. St. John Ervine 3 3.0
Dr. J. L. Gilks ... mas 5 Oo
Hon. Mrs. Grant Duff ... Io Oo
Mr. P. H. Gregory a. 5 oO
Mr. W. E. Hedley-Dent ass wee 5 Oo
Mr. W. Kirtland Hinton ves wes Io Oo
Imperial Chemical Industries ... .» 50 0 O
Mr. T. R. Innes... ves wes - 3 0 0
Lt.-Col. R. H. Johnson ses .-» © Io
Mr. G. D. A. MacDougall wes . I ITO
Mr. David McKail i ad Io 6
Mr. D. McLachlan ave _ Io 6
Mr. T. Maxwell ... wee wee .. I0 0 O
Mr. R. Meikle... wes oes . © I Oo
Mr. E. R. P. Moon wee wee . Ir 0 O
Mr. S. Vere Pearson - wee wes Io Oo
Mr. R. Pilkington wes a .. © 0 O
Mr. Seebohm Rowntree wee .» 50 O O
Sir Ernest Simon . eee - 100 0 Oo
Mr. G. R. S. Snow oes ws. = 2 0 O
Mrs. Snow wes wee wae .- 60 0 O
R.-W. Sturgeon aes oes . I IO
Sale of pamphlets eee wee .- 28 0 5
£1,479 10 2

 

from January ist, 1937, to December 31st, 1937

1937. £ s.d.
Salaries of Research Workers ... --> 553 16 6
Expenses of Research Workers © --+ 97 4 10
Books, Reprints, etc. ... wes + IT 711
Stationery wee _ 217 9
First Year’s Work wes see -- 4418 Oo
Pamphlets, Printing, etc. _ -- 26 0 0
Questionnaire and Instructions --- 2013 0
Balance ... ‘ . 762 12 2

£1,479 I0 2

wad.

 
