-C. D. DARLINGTON,
_M.A., Ph.D., D.Sc., F.R.S., Sherardian Professor of Botany, University of Oxford

Cousin Marriage and Population

Structure

E HAVE ALL heard from our early

youth about the dangers of cousin

marriage. Most of us have probably

associated it with the prohibitions of primitive

society or perhaps of the Christian Churches.

You may not all know how erratic, how various,
these prohibitions are.

Historical Background

In the eleventh century when the Catholic
Church reached the peak of its power it set out to
prohibit cousin marriage between any kin
nearer than what was called the seventh degree
of kinship. Furthermore this seventh degree was
taken to mean that there must be no common
ancestor within seven generations. It was on this
ground that William the Conqueror erred when
he married Matilda, his fourth or fifth cousin,
and that he and she, in order to expiate their sin,
built the Abbaye aux Hommes and the Abbaye
aux Dames at Caen. Similarly the Conqueror’s
son, Henry I, was forbidden to marry one of his
bastard daughters to the Earl of Surrey on the
ground that they were sixth cousins.

The Nineteenth Century .

From these remote and ill-founded rules we can
come to recent times and consider what the
attitude of scientists has been to this problem.
Charles Darwin was interested in it, quite apart
from his general ideas, owing to the fact that he
had married a first cousin himself. But the crisis
of his interest came when he was studying the
mechanisms of cross-fertilization in flowers,
those mechanisms which we now understand in

* A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics
Society on May 24th, 1961.

such great detail. He wanted to know why these
mechanisms were so widespread. The conclusion.
he came to was that the progeny of cross breeding were more vigorous than the progeny of inbreeding, and this property had favoured the
development of cross-breeding mechanisms in
the course of evolution.

This view can no longer be sustained. It could
not be sustained by his own son, George Darwin,
who inquired about the results of cousin marriage in our own population. He tried to find out
whether the progeny of cousin marriages were
less numerous or less viable, and he failed to get
any decisive evidence of a difference between the
two. It was then, in 1876, that Darwin persuaded
Lubbock to try to introduce an inquiry into the
census as to whether marriages were between
first cousins or not, but the House of Commons
rejected the proposal.

Garrod’s Study of Alkaptonuria

The next step in the study of cousin marriage
brings us into our own century; it is the study
by Garrod in 1902, of the disease alkaptonuria,
which occurs in about one in a million of our own
population. Garrod was led to inquire into this
disease by the early work of Bateson on
Mendelism. The inheritance of this condition
suggested a Mendelian recessive situation.
Now cousin marriages, as we know, occur in the
population in about | per cent and non-cousin
marriages in 99 per cent. But Garrod found that
from these cousin marriages came 33 per cent
of all the alkaptonurics; only 67 per cent came
from all the non-cousin marriages. About.
thirty-three times as many came from the cousin
marriages as should do. How was this to be
explained?

139

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1961, 53, 3,
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

If one in a million people showed this disease
it would mean one in a thousand of the chromosomes responsible for the disease were determining that recessive character. If the
alkaptonuria condition is that of the pure
recessive aa it will arise in the population from
crossing two heterozygotes. If a is present in the
relevant chromosome pairs of the population to
the extent of one in a thousand, heterozygotes
will be present in one in five hundred individuals.
But cousins should have on the average oneeighth of their chromosomes and genes in
common. So if you are a heterozygote the
probability is that your spouse, who is your first
cousin, instead of having a one in five hundred
chance of being hetero-alkaptonuric will have
one-eighth of a chance. Instead of being one in
two hundred and fifty thousand the chance will
be one in four thousand. This was the explanation Garrod gave for the very high frequency of
alkaptonuria amongst the progeny of cousin
marriages.

This principle has been widely used, and in a
preliminary and provisional sense well used, for
the study of Mendelian recessive conditions in
our population. But in an ultimate sense there are
objections to that use. These I am now going to
consider because they have a great deal to do
with the study of cousin marriage. What
assumptions have been made in talking about the
one in five hundred or the one in eight? We
have assumed that our population is composed
of individuals who are mating at random, and
that this is the difference between the noncousin marriage where the mating is at random
and the cousin marriage where the mating is not
random. The fact that cousin marriages occurred
fifty years ago in 1 per cent of the population
shows that that assumption is not exactly right.

Social Groups and Inbreeding

In fact, of course, our population is composed of
groups. If you like, for convenience, you can say
these are groups within which mating is at
random. But these groups are of all sizes, small
and large. If you have a very large group it
might be equivalent to having random mating
amongst the whole population. But if it is a
small group of only half a dozen families all
marriages are first cousin marriages, and the

140

distinction between non-cousin marriage and
cousin marriage has disappeared. So the situation is vastly more complicated than Garrod’s
classical assumption would lead us to suppose.

If, in fact, we have groups within which mating
is at random, but there are small groups in which
there is close inbreeding and large groups in
which there is little inbreeding, we must find out
a good deal about the structure of our society
before we investigate cousin marriage. We must
find out not only whether the marriage is between
first cousins, but also whether the parents or
grandparents of the cousin marriage were themselves likely to be closely related or unrelated.

Let us now consider a contrast of method. In
Mendel’s experiments, he began with pure lines
which had been inbred. The Mendelian system
was one in which there was inbreeding for an
indefinite number of generations, and this was
followed by his critical act of outbreeding, to
give the F1; this was followed again by inbreeding for an indefinite number of generations. In
the cousin marriage which classical genetics
considers, there is outbreeding for an indefinite
number of generations, followed by a critical
act of inbreeding, the cousin marriage; this
again is followed by an indefinite number of
generations of outbreeding. In other words,
you are dealing with a reversal of the Mendelian
experimental situation, a reversal provided for
us by the customs of our society. But we have to
be quite sure that it is indeed a reversal and how
much of a reversal.

You might say that is an absurdly difficult task
to set ourselves, we simply have not the records
with which to doit. I am attempting to show that,
in fact, we can construct our situation; we can
obtain our records. Look at the question from
another point of view. Garrod, and those who
studied Mendelian inheritance, were not dealing
for the most part with the fundamental properties that interest us. They were not dealing
with the fundamental properties of viability,
fertility or intelligence. Those are not for the most
part subject to the simple Mendelian inheritance
which is capable of being investigated on their
lines. They are not necessarily due to genes
which operate in the same way. They are often
governed by gene arrangements in which the
interaction between different genes is as importCOUSIN MARRIAGE AND POPULATION STRUCTURE

ant as the interaction between the forms of the
same genes. All these systems in human breeding are undefined, unexamined, unanalyzed, and
so far beyond our correct analysis.

Galton and Hereditary Fertility

Now there was one man who did think of
inheritance in this integrated and non-analytical
sense, and who did approach this problem of
fertility which escapes Mendelian analysis. That
was Galton. His method he describes in a casual
way in his Hereditary Genius. The question arises
in relation to the fertility of heiresses and the
extinction of peerages.

I mention one historical fact which does not
seem to be realized. It was that his grandfather,
Erasmus Darwin, had asked the same question
and had given the same answer that he, Galton
gave. Erasmus Darwin asked why heiresses were
so often infertile and peerages became extinct.
He suggested that the mothers of heiresses,
having no sons and fertility being hereditary,
the peeresses who were heiresses would have
fewer children than the average population;
and that is how peerages became extinct. I am
sure Galton was unaware of what his grandfather had done. He says, ““This does not seem
to have occurred to anybody before.”

The actual records Galton used show one odd
point. Working from Burke’s Peerage he said
100 heiresses had 208 sons and 206 daughters,
and 100 non-heiresses had 336 sons and 284
daughters. I cannot understand where those fifty
or so daughters of non-heiresses got lost. He
does not say anything about it himself and I
think our statisticians, disciples of Galton, should
do something to explain how he overlooked this
irregularity. Between heiresses and non-heiresses,
however, we see a great difference. The nonheiresses are much the more fertile. In fact,
too much. There should not be, in my opinion,
quite that enormous difference. The reason for
it I shall try to explain later.

_ This kind of study was repeated later by Karl
Pearson, and his results have been re-examined
by Fisher. They show a regular difference between
the women according to the size of the family
from which they come. I might give a short
résumé and examples, taking the numbers of

progeny in Pearson and Lee’s results of 1899.
Where the mother came from a family of one,
the average number of children was 2:97; from a
family of four, average number of children 3-41;
from a family of eight, 4-07; where it was in the
group from twelve to fifteen the number of
progeny was 6-44.

This not merely shows that fertility in men or
women is hereditary; it also shows something
which many people nowadays would strongly
repudiate. They would say the number of children
people have is a matter of their own free will;

it must be something outside genetical control.

The assumption Galton and Pearson made was
that there was a strong genetic component in
the resultant fertility. We do not need to ask
whether it was due to physical sterility or lack of
desire for children or incapacity to have them,
the result shows the action of a genetic component popularly called heredity.

Methods used for Present Investigation
It is on the assumption that this principle
operates that I have been conducting my own
investigations. One word about the methods I
used. In the first place, I asked the academic
world of Oxford, through the Oxford Magazine,
for information about the fertility of the
progenies of cousin marriages: not the number
of children produced by cousin marriages but
the number of children produced by the children,
and the grandchildren. On the basis of the small
results of this inquiry I was able, through the
Observer in London, to appeal to a much larger
public and get much larger samples of the
population of grandchildren of cousin marriages.
Armed with this information I was able to make
the inquiry wider still. Through a Swiss multilingual publication, Triangle, I was able to appeal
to people all over the world for data on cousin
marriages, giving more rigorous requirements.
The results of all three inquiries are combined
in what I will tell you now. The observations
came from scattered parts of the world—Sweden,
Holland, Austria, Australia, United States,
Canada, and so on. From this I got a representative notion of what happens in our population.
I found there were families in which cousin
marriage occurred generation after generation,
or sometimes in alternate generations going back

141]
BR—C
‘THE EUGENICS REVIEW

dozen generations to the beginning of the
Seventeenth certtury. There were other families
in which there was-no evidence of any cousin
‘marriage: previously and then suddenly a cousin
marriage occurred. Again it was necessary to

make a distinction between different religious or
social groups. In dealing with a family of white
‘Bermudians, the white population of Bermuda
being exceedingly small, that population is
likely to be inbred; the same applies in a small
religious community like the Irish Quakers.

Dealing with a Jewish population in Hohenzollern we know it is inbred. We know 15 per
cent of the population marry first cousins and
the probability is they have done so for many
generations. On the other hand, with Church of
England people, middle class, well educated,
who have no knowledge of any cousin marriage
in the family, the probability is that we are dealing with an outbred population. This can be
confirmed by exhaustive information of ancestry.
Studying the matter in that way I got a general
indication as to the way in which populations
breed.

Inbred Communities

For example, with the Mennonites, a group of
Anabaptists, observance of the delicate minutiae
of - baptismal regulation has given us the
strictest of inbreeding systems. The Mennonites
were founded in 1528 in Germany. Being
pacifists, they. have found their position increasingly uncomfortable in all parts of the
world. When a war comes and there is conscription the Mennonites are pushed out. They
are an agricultural community who live in small
settlements, and marriage occurs within those
settlements, usually of less than a hundred
families. Almost everybody has to marry a first
or second cousin. As the group grows it splits up
into smaller groups which migrate into new
territories, thus continually forming new inbred
communities.

I was able to get a pedigree from Vienna of
the descendants of Moses Géring, who married
in 1785. I have only the descendants in the male
line. The female line, not carrying the name, is
a matter of general indifference to people who
maintain pedigrees. Moses Goring in the male
line had four sons, nine grandsons, twenty-nine

142

great-grandsons—these all surviving to maturity
—and ninety great-great-grandsons. Assuming
that the female line was equally fertile, we have
to multiply those figures by 2, 4, 8 and 16,
giving a total of 1,440 great-great-grandchildren.
An average of six children per marriage reach

‘maturity.

According to studies made in South Dakota,

‘the number of Mennonite immigrants which

moved there in 1874 was 300. In 1950 there were
9,000 descendants of those 300. They occasionally lose a member who cannot face the rigors
of the system and deserts to the outer world;
but they never marry outside and never gain
from outside. Eaton and Mayer, who studied
this population, found in these families at the
present day an average of 10-9 children per
marriage, reaching maturity. So far as I can make
out, every child who reaches maturity gets
married, and the number. of children per
marriage has slightly increased during the last
three generations from 10-2 to 10:9. That I
attribute to the fact that this is a communized
or socialized system in which nobody needs to
worry about the children being cared for if
anything happens to the parents. The selective
situation is biased in favour of the highest
fertility; conséquently the highest fertility is
gradually being approached.

Here is a system giving perfect conditions for
selection for fertility. Fertility is obviously
hereditary and very high and is maintained with
a system of close inbreeding in which cousin
marriage does not reduce the fertility at all.
On the contrary, sterility can arise only by
genetic recombination and without outbreeding
there is no recombination. That is the situation
with the Mennonites, and I imagine it would be
true with other stable inbreeding societies.
Above all, it would be true of stable primitive
tribal societies.

Cousin Marriage in an Outbred Society

Contrast this situation with the results of a
cousin marriage in our own outbred society, in
a family in which there had been very little
previous inbreeding, the family of Charles
Darwin. It was this family that first called my
attention to the peculiar possibilities of the
problem. Their dates are important owing to the
COUSIN MARRIAGE AND POPULATION STRUCTURE

introduction of birth control and other social
changes. Darwin was born in 1809. He married,
in 1839, his first cousin, a year or two older than
himself; and he died in 1882. The total number
of children was ten; the number that survived
to maturity seven; the number that married was
six. The number of those marriages that had
issue was three. This is a very different result
from that found in the Mennonite community.
But it is typical of our own outbreeding community, with the difference that the proportion
that are with issue is smaller than average.

Take the grandchildren: the total is nine. Of
these there were married eight, with issue seven.
At this stage there begins a recovery: the
proportion of marriages with issue is higher. The
total number of great-grandchildren born is
twenty-eight. Thus there is also a higher average
frequency of children per marriage with issue
than there was. Although the birth rate in the
community has decreased, in that particular
lineage it has increased. This single family is
not in itself significant. But it was this family
that put me on to considering the situation in
families at large. It is an example of a cousin
marriage with inbreeding occurring after outbreeding, and followed again by outbreeding. |

Taking my results in general, I have separated
the community, so far as I could, very roughly
and arbitrarily and provisionally, in order to
get some guidance, into inbred and outbred
stocks. I give the summarized data: the cousin
marriages in outbred families are contrasted
with the cousin marriages in inbred families
belonging to small religious groups and in
families with previous cousin marriages authenticated. I give the children, the grandchildren and
the great-grandchildren.

COUSIN G. GG.

MARRIAGES CHILDREN CHILDREN CHILDREN INCREASE
Outbred 39 234 342 499 x21
Inbred 9 57 146 257 x45

In other words, the descendants have multiplied
in the two generations by 2:1 and 4-5. This
seemed to me a prima facie case for concluding
the effect of cousin marriages was to depreciate
the fertility of the progeny in families where
there had been previous outbreeding. At the
same time there was no evidence of such depreci
ation in the inbred families. The change in the
breeding system had produced the depreciation.

Now I realized that the grounds on which one
distinguishes between outbred and inbred families
might be open to dispute, and it was desirable
to get a more rigorous test of the differences
between these two types of breeding system. The
method of doing it was suggested to me by a
grandson of the third Lord Henley who sent me
the pedigree of his family giving the example of
the kind of marriage that would provide the
critical test. This I published in THE EUGENICS
REVIEW.* His grandfather had married twice;
one wife was a first cousin and one was unrelated. He had families by each, and those
families could be traced for the second and third
generations.

It was possible to show from the two previous
generations that there had been no inbreeding
in the families concerned. There were two greatgrandchildren from the cousin marriage, twentythree from the other marriage, a continuation of
the outbreeding system. Armed with this
information I appealed for other examples
throughout the world, and got sixteen different
families in which the same kind of test could be
applied, and it is part of these results I now
want to summarize. I am giving the total
number of children, grandchildren and greatgrandchildren.

COUSIN UNRELATED
MARRIAGES MARRIAGES INCREASE
gc. ggc. c. gc. ggc.
Outbred families
5 marriages 17 7 § 12 20 45 0-3/3-7
Intermediate
families
3 marriages 7 10 13 8 8 16 = 1:9/2°0
Inbred families
4 marriages 15 27 61 12 13 22 4-1/1°8

The unrelated marriage in the outbred family is
the continuation of the normal system of breeding, which gives the 3-7 increase we expect
under normal circumstances. The inbred system,
the cousin marriage continuing the inbred habit
of mating, gives the increase of 4-1. On the other
hand the two systems which represent the break
with the past also break the fertility.

Now there seems evidence of something I

 

* 1958. 50, 177.
143
THB EBUGENICS REVIEW

had not dared to consider, because it touches .a
problem which has baffled people for a very long
time, evidence of infertility following wide
crosses in man. When.I say “wide crosses” I
mean race crosses. This is the first evidence I
know (and I should like to know of any other)
of a depreciation of fertility following outbreeding in an inbred stock.

Assortative Mating and Fertility

I regard these results as substantiating my
expectation, but they do much more than
substantiate it. I expected, and any reasonable
Mendelian might expect, that there might well
be a depreciation of fertility in the first generation, but why, he might ask, should it continue
in the second generation? It is overpowering in
the outbred families who had cousin marriages.
Why should that be?

The explanation is not at all abstruse. It is
the result of. assortative mating—individuals
with low fertility marry spouses with low fertility.
Galton’s heiresses of low fertility married peers
of low fertility. The peers who married heiresses
were not so interested in the things which go to
make fertility as the peers who did not marry
heiresses. Thus it is assortative mating which can,
and I think often does, lead to near extinction
and sometimes actual extinction in later generations. |

The effect of fertility is cumulative and the
effect of infertility is cumulative. You see what an
enormous scope there is for selection operating
in favour of fertility in our society. People often
talk as though natural selection had ceased to
operate. I should call extinction by infertility
a form of natural selection, and one of the most
potent we have in determining the direction of

144

evolution of our society and of all its innumerable little sub-societies.

One word about the big evolutionary implications of the inheritance of fertility and of its
relation to the breeding system. Anthropologists
have been puzzled, have argued incessantly and
inconclusively ever since Darwin’s time, as to the
reason why human beings have outbreeding
systems resting upon incest taboos. I say that the
evidence we have of this tremendous pressure of
selection in favour of fertility is enough to
account for human races having developed by
instinct a repugnance for incest. Only this could
guarantee the habit of outbreeding recombination.

Thus man, to whom family life has restored
the sedentary conditions of a plant, has been
compelled to make use of a genetic system
parallel to that of the incompatibility so well
known in plants.

Conclusion

That is my argument. It is in line with the
assumptions Darwin made but was never able
to carry to a conclusion. His suggestion was
that moral feelings rested upon instincts which
had been derived, encouraged and developed
by processes of natural selection. To me it
seems that this generalisation can be taken
seriously. And it can be used to put the whole
problem of the evolution of society on a new
footing.

REFERENCES

Darlington, C. D. 1960. Cousin marriage and the. evolution of the breeding system in man. Heredity. 14,
297-332.

Darlington, C. D. 1961. Introduction to Galton’s
Hereditary Genius. Collins (Fontana).
