THE EUGENICS REVIEW

VOL. XXXV, No. 2 JULY 1943

CONTENTS Notes of the Quarter - - - . - - 3)

The Significance of Recent Birth-Rate Figures -— - 36
RICHARD M. TITMUSS

Incentives to Parenthood - - . -— - 39
MARY GOWING

Notes and Memoranda - . . . - 42

Reviews of Books 43
BIRTH CONTROL

Periodicals oe - “ . . a - 45

Correspondence . - . < . - 47

es serene EShPPere
The Eugenics Society is not responsible for statements made or opinions expressed by authors of
articles, reviews and letters.

The EUGENICS REVIEW is regularly indexed in the International Index to Periodical Literature,

 

Published Quarterly.
London, England: Macmillan & Co. Ltd., St. Martin’s Street, W.C.2.
New York: The Macmillan Co.
Price: Three Shillings per issue and Twelve Shillings per annum, post free.
| Issued free to Fellows and Members.
™~

Character and Personality

March 1943. Vol. 11, No. 3.—Two articles of some
interest to students of personality are: Handwriting Pressure : Its Measurement and Significance,
by G. R. Pascal, and Level of Aspiration as a
Method of Studying Personality, by J. B. Rotter.—
In the former the author obtains considerable
correlations between objective measurements of
pressure on the pen and such traits as energeticness,
expressiveness and impulsiveness. Rotter shows
that aspiration level, as measured by self-estimates
of performance at a simple motor test, tends to be
lower in groups liable to strong inferiority feelings,
such as students with deformities and certain types
of criminals, than in normally adjusted persons.
Kurt Goldstein discusses Lewin’s conception of
rigidity of mental structure, disagreeing with his
views as to its réle in mental deficiency.
P. E. V.

Human Fertility

October 1942. Vol. 7, No. 5.—The relation between
metabolism and motility of human spermatozoa.
By John MacLeod, Ph.D.—In this stimulating
paper Dr. MacLeod reviews recent work, much of
it done by himself and his fellow-workers at the
medical college of Cornell University, on the
physiology of human sperms—more particularly
their metabolic behaviour in relation to their
motility. As he points out, “‘ until evidence is
produced to the contrary we must assume that
the motile activity of these cells is closely linked
with their ability to reach and fertilise the ovum ”’
and “it is therefore pertinent to investigate the
source of the energy necessary for motility and to
determine the chemical mechanism in the cells
which make this energy available.’’ Before 1939
there. had been very little quantitative investigation of the metabolism of human sperms and the
results of much of what had been done were
vitiated by the fact that the authors had ignored
bacterial growth and its metabolic products in the
semen during the period of the experiment—
stating merely that it was negligible. In 1939 Dr.
MacLeod initiated investigations into the metabolism of human sperms and the enzyme systems
responsible for maintaining their motile activity,
using the manometric method worked out by Otto
Warbug in 1928, by which it is possible to measure
with great accuracy the metabolic activity of minute
amounts of living tissue. After careful consideration Dr. MacLeod decided that manometric
measurements of sperm metabolism in either
seminal fluid or blood serum might be misleading
and that for various reasons the most satisfactory
medium in which to suspend the sperm would be
Ringer’s solution. Preliminary trials showed that
“the centrifugation necessary to get the sperm

PERIODICALS

out of the seminal fluid and their transfer to
Ringer’s solution did not appreciably affect their
motility or damage them in any other obvious way,”
and that their motility was well maintained in this
medium at 38 deg. C., under certain gas phase
conditions, up to periods of twelve hours.

The first series of experiments was designed to
study the oxygen consumption of sperms and this,
rather to the author’s astonishment, was found to
be negligible over a three-hour period although the
sperms remained fully active throughout this time.
These results were at variance with those obtained
by Shettles, who measured the respiratory quotient
of sperms in seminal fluid and reported figures for
respiration seven times greater than those found
by the author with sperms suspended in Ringer’s.
Dr. MacLeod therefore examined the oxygen consumption of seminal fluid devoid of sperms and
found that this was appreciable and of a nature
still unexplained.

He then proceeded to examine the mechanism of
glycolysis—the other main metabolic pathway
open to sperms—which he insists should be strictly
defined “‘ as in the splitting of a sugar into lactic
acid.”” His preliminary experiments established.
the facts that sperms in the presence of glucose
produce lactic acid in large amounts, and that
while their motility is well maintained under
anaerobic conditions it may be adversely affected
if oxygen or air is present. He next designed experiments to determine whether glycolysis was
the main source of energy for motility and upon

‘what substrates spermatozoa might depend for

45

their energy. It was found that when sperms were
suspended in glucose-free Ringer’s at 38 deg. C.
they produced little lactic acid and that within
three hours both glycolysis and motility had
ceased. Under anaerobic conditions, if glucose was
added at the end of the first, second and third
hour, glycolysis and motility recommenced and
proceeded almost at the same rate as in the control.
If a similar series of experiments are carried out
under aerobic conditions (95 per cent. oxygen),
glycolysis and motility cannot be restored after
the first hour—thus indicating that sperms cannot
long be deprived of glucose when oxygen is present.
Dr. MacLeod then used similar experiments to
determine what foodstuffs, other than glucose,
could be utilised by human sperms as the essential
source of energy for motility. He tested a number
of carbohydrates and found that fructose, mannose,
maltose and glycogen were all able to restore
glycolysis and motility ; while galactose, sucrose
and lactose failed. As the author says, “ the
ability of spermatozoa to use glycogen as a source
of energy for motility is of considerable interest
when viewed in the light of substrate availability
in the female genital tract.’’ Substrates other than
carbohydrates were tried (e.g. various amino and
46 THE EUGENICS REVIEW —

fatty acids) but none were found effective in maintaining the motile activity of human sperms.

In another series of experiments the author
determined : (1) How long motility is maintained
at a body temperature in the absence of sugar,
and (2) at what stage recovery of motility can be
induced by the addition of sugar (a) under
anaerobic and (b) under aerobic conditions. The
ability of spermatozoa to recover motility is considerably longer lived under anaerobic (up to six
hours) than under aerobic conditions (between two
and three hours). He also established the fact that
substances such as cyanide and carbon monoxide,
which inhibit cellular respiration, have no depressing effect on sperm motility, whereas glycolysis
inhibitors such as iodoacetic acid and sodium
fluoride gradually reduce motility to nil within
about two hours; this still further supports the
theory that glycolysis is the metabolic pathway by
“which human sperm derive energy for motility.

The author then discusses the rédle of oxygen
in the metabolism and motility of sperm. From
the evidence already quoted, which demonstrates
an absence of respiration, and from the fact that
‘Spectroscopic examination of masses of sperms
(treated with hyposulphite to bring any cytochrome
present into the reduced state) has failed to show
the presence of cytochrome, it might easily be
assumed that sperms cannot respire. However, if
succinic acid is supplied to sperms instead of
glucose a vigorous and progressive oxygen con‘sumption occurs. Furthermore, the addition of
sodium malonate (a known succinic dehydrogenase
inhibitor) inhibits succinate oxidation by spermatozoa—and, since succinate dehydrogenase has so
far never been chemically isolated from the cytochrome complex, it appears that human sperms
most contain this complex and be capable of
oxidation in the presence of suitable substrates.
The energy resulting from the oxidation of suc-cinate is, however, incapable of supporting motility,
and the activity of sperm in the presence of suc-cinate fails rapidly if glucose is not also supplied.
To account for the loss of motility which takes
place in high oxygen tensions the author suggests
that, in the presence of oxygen, sperms (like certain
facultative anaerobic bacteria) convert such oxygen
as they absorb into hydrogen peroxide through the
‘agency of a “ yellow enzyme,” and that it is the
hydrogen peroxide so produced that has a toxic
and immobilising effect on the sperms. If this is
so it means that sperms are lacking in catalase, or
similar enzyme, to protect them against their own
‘products of metabolism in the presence of oxygen.
The author quotes various experiments in support
-of this theory but states that there is no conclusive
evidence that hydrogen peroxide is formed during
the course of sperm metabolism since it has not
been isolated chemically. However, the small
amounts necessary to depress motility are likely
to be broken up and lost rapidly in the presence of
so much cellular material.

Finally, the author discusses the relationship
between metabolism, degree of motility’ and
fertilising capacity of sperm, and gives as _ his
conclusion that so far no correlation has been
demonstrated between the degree of motility and
the glycolytic rate. It seems that there is a minimal
glycolysis below which motility will fail but above
which sperms may form lactic acid very much more
rapidly without showing any increase in motility.
In other words, certain sperms are wasteful of their
source of energy and it is still uncertain whether
such sperms are more or less potentially fertile
than those which are more economical. Incidentally Dr. MacLeod has come across samples of
seminal fluid with a normal sperm count in which
the sperms showed no sign of motility but, in spite
of this, were found to be producing lactic acid at a
high rate, and this glycolysis could not be distinguished from that of normal motile cells. ‘‘ It
seems probable that in such cases the link between
the source of energy and the motility mechanism
has been severed,’’ but this abnormality needs
further investigation before it can be understood.

MARGARET C, N. JACKSON.

Mental Health in Later Maturity
(Supplement No.168 to the Public Health Reports).

Measurement of Social Maturity Applied to Older
People.—By Edgar A. Doll.—That the increase in life
expectancy during the last forty years should be
accompanied by the preservation of social effectiveness in elderly people is of the utmost importance
in the problem of an ageing population. Otherwise,
with the burden of work and production falling
upon the dwindling proportion of young and
middle-aged, we are faced with the choice between
national or individual survival.

Dr. Doll’s study is made from two selected
samples, one based on 12 feeble-minded males over
the age of 50 who had been institutionalised for
30 years, the other on a scattered selection of 13
once physically and mentally normal male subjects
between the ages of 65 and 8o.

Previous studies by Dublin, Kaplan and Dayton
have shown that only 7 per cent of idiots and 16 per
cent of imbeciles survive beyond 50 years and that
it is rare for the feeble-minded to live beyond 75
years. Using the Vineland Social Maturity Scale,
Doll found that his 12 feeble-minded subjects
showed no appreciable change after the age of 25,
that there were also no appreciable changes in their
Binet mental ages and that any decline after the age of 50 was in degree rather than level of social
activity. Of the 13 once-normal subjects, the.
findings range from one who showed no loss at 7o
from his social age score at 50 years to one whose
score had dropped from 22 at 50 to 14.1 at 78 years.
The majority of the lower scores were associated
with physical handicaps and it is concluded that
decline in social competence reflects waning vigour.
CORRESPONDENCE

Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly

April 1943, Vol. 21, No. 2.—Life Tables for Social
Classes in England.—-Dr. Christopher Tietze gives
an analysis of the class differences in mortality in
England based on the Registrar-General’s Decennial Supplement, 1931. Particular interest is
attached to these findings in view of the fact that,
as far as is known at present, the next census will
not be taken until 1951. Expectation of life at
birth is approximately 63 years for the professional
group and for agricultural workers ; 60 years for

47

employérs and clerical workers and for skilled
workers; 57 years for the intermediate class
between skilled and unskilled workers, and less
than 56 years for unskilled workers and for coal
miners.

This journal also contains articles on the nutritional status of aircraft workers in Southern California, recent changes in income and food expenditure, and a study of food habits of tuberculous
families in Harlem, and the variation in nursing
service with family income.

K. H.

 

CORRESPONDENCE

Family Allowances
To the Editor, Eugenics Review

Str,—The only State system of children’s
allowances which the Eugenics Society should
support is mine—fourteen or more shillings a week
to married couples for each child of the first two
confinements, with nothing for subsequent offspring. It would raise the marriage rate and birth
rate of the richer two-thirds of the population and
yet help the overburdened parents of the poorest
third about as much as would the Beveridge scheme,
and it would be preferred by a big majority of the
adults under forty.

If anything like the Beveridge scheme becomes
law, the Eugenics Society should urge abortion and
sterilization being made available to any parent
desiring one or both of these.

B. Duntop, M.B.
Binfield, Berks.

The Span of Life

To the Editor, Eugenics Review

Sir,—As bearing on the question of The Span
of Life, which was discussed in Mr. Bramwell’s
interesting article in the April number of the
Eucenics Review, the following may, perhaps,
be worth noting :
MEAN AGE AT DEATH OF HYMN-WRITERS, THE
AGES BEING TAKEN FROM The English Hymnal:

37 writers of the sixteenth and

seventeenth centuries ... 61°7 years

49 writers of the _ eighteenth
century wes wee ... 68-1 years

106 writers of- the nineteenth
century 68-6 years

C. F, ‘ARDEN-CLOSE.
Mayfield, 22 Christchurch Road,
Winchester.

Deterrents to Parenthood
To the Editor, Eugenics Review

S1r,—I feel obliged to comment on some of the
remarks made by one of your correspondents in
the January issue.

First, as to the suggestion that the fall in the
birth rate of intelligent children is due to apathy
on the part of intelligent women. This may in
part be true, but one certainly cannot generalize.
In my experience and that of women friends, the
fault would appear to be rather on the part of the
men than the women. Most men tend to regard women as of inferior intelligence, and it may be
for this reason that they also tend to treat those
intelligent women whom they do meet as if they
had no sex instincts. I wonder how many of these
intelligent but sexless women your correspondent
has met. I have yet to meet one who does not hope
to marry one day and have children.

One possible deterrent to the woman is the lack
of available men. Naturally she wants to marry a

-man of equal intelligence if only to secure a happy

relationship. Unfortunately, however, intelligent
men seem to be elusive and many prefer to marry
women of less intelligence than themselves. This
obviously results in a preponderance of unmarried
women among those of higher intelligence.

As to the intelligent woman being the cause of
unhappy marriages, this is an extraordinary statement to make. Unhappiness occurs in all types of
home, though perhaps there are more separations
and divorces among the intelligent because they
are better judges of their own limitations and have
more opportunity, for economic reasons. I cannot
give first-hand evidence of happy marriages
between equally intelligent people, as none of my
friends have yet been married long enough for me
to judge, but the Curies are a classical example. I
can imagine nothing more conducive to happiness
ae ha

 

FUGENICS SOCIETY.

Past Presidents
Honorary Presidents:

SIR FRANCIS GALTON 1908-11
MajJOR LEONARD DARWIN 1928-43

Sirk JAMES CRICHTON-BROWNE, M.D., D.SC., LL.D., F.R.S.

Mr. MONTAGUE CRACKANTHORPE, K.C. IQOQ-I1QII
MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN, Sc.D. IQII-1928
SiR BERNARD MALLET, K.C.B. 1929-1932
SIR HUMPHRY ROLLESTON, BT., G.C.V.O., K.C.B., M.D., D.S¢., LL.D. 1933-1935
President:
*THE LORD HORDER, G.C.V.O., M.D., F.R.C.P.
Chairman of Council:
*B.S. BRAMWELL, M.A., F.R.S.E.
Vice-Presidents:
Sir CHARLES G. DARWIN, K.B.E., M.C., THE LORD NEYNES, C.B., M.A.
M.A., Sc.D., F.R.S. PROF. R. RUGGLES GATES, M.A., Pu.D., D.Sc.,
*Mrs. E. M. HUBBACK, M.A. LL.D., F.R.S.
JULIAN HUXLEY, M.A., D.Sc., F.R.S.
Honorary Treasurer: Honorary Librarian:
*C. F. CHANCE, M.A. *\Miss E. Corry.
Honorary Secretary :
*C. P. BLACKER, M.c., M.A., M.D., F.R.C.P.
MEMBERS OF COUNCIL.
*CECIL BINNEY, B.A. D. CARADOG JONES, M.A.
L. J. CADBURY, O.B.E. R. LANGDON-DowN, M.B.
A.M.) CARR-SAUNDERS, M.A. *\UBREY J. LEWIS, M.D., F.R.C.P.
DR. STELLA CHURCHILL, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., E. M. H. Lioyp, B.A.
THE Lapy DENMAN, D.B.E. [D.P.H. *R. MARTIN.
Ik. AUSTIN FREEMAN, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P. Mies. FE. Ek. Pcttron.
ID. GRAHAM HUTTON. Hon. JOHN STRUTT.
*Hon. Mrs. GRANT DUFF. *R. M. TITMuss.

#\WW. T. J. GUN, F.R.HIST.S., F.S.G.

* Members of the Emergency Committee.

I1gO8-1gog

 

 
