THE INHERITANCE OF ACQUIRED
CHARACTERS*

By A. F. DUFTON, Ma., D1.

“ The fathers have eaten a sour grape and the
children’s teeth are set on edge.’’—Jer. xxxi, 29.

AST summer, during a Sunday evening
walk, I chanced to remark to my wife
how noteworthy it was that so many
eminent men were begotten by fathers of
ripe age, citing in particular John Herschel
and Robert Boyle (Table I), and ventured to
express the opinion that capability is in no
small degree an acquired character and that
the older the father the greater the chance
of it being acquired. Thereupon I was
roundly taxed with heresy and, being put
upon my defence, boldly wagered that the
paternal ages of the persons noticed in the
Encyclopedia Britannica would be found to
be abnormally high.

TABLE I. AGE OF FATHER

JOHN HUNTER .. a8 .. 65
ROBERT BOYLE . “61
JOHN HERSCHEL ‘4 -. 54
CHARLES PARSONS... .. 54
SAMUEL JOHNSON .. .. 53
FRANCIS BACON + .. 52
WILLIAM PITT .. . .. S5I

JOHN MILTON ..

Reference to the Encyclopedia yielded the
names of one thousand persons (exclusive of
those mentioned on account of inherited
titles) for whom the date of the father’s
birth is given: the difficulty was to determine the paternal age for a normal population. Now in the thirteenth census of Scotland (Vol. IV, 1924) there is published a
table giving some information which was not
obtained in previous enumerations, namely
the number of dependent children of married
men, of each age, for each age of parent. For

* Read before the British Association, Section H, on
September 8th, 1933.

the purpose of our wager it was decided to
adopt as a standard of comparison the
population comprising the one hundred
thousand children under one year recorded
in this table. Scottish statistics were preferred to English as the English tables are
not for each age of parent but only for age
groups—and they cost 30s. 6d. instead of 4s.

As the comparison was primarily for the
edification of my wife, it would have been
futile to express it in the cryptic manner of
the orthodox statistician and I decided to
compare the paternal ages graphically by
plotting the frequency distribution both for
the eminent thousand and for the normal

Fic. 1

PERMILLE

 

245

Cc
246
population. The ogive curve,

proposed by
Francis Galton, might perhaps be thought

suitable for such a _ representation but
actually it is not well adapted for the purpose
as it is flat in the middle and excessively
steep at the extremities.

A similar type of curve, however, can
advantageously be drawn upon special coordinate paper—the permille paper® which
I put forward in 1930 and which Mr. Hazen
had used some years before for the determination of probabilities.t| The comparison
of paternal ages is shown in Fig. 1 and you
will see that I won my wager handsomely.
The difference between the two curves in
the figure is manifest and exceeded my
expectations—I confess that I was surprised

Fic. 2
—
7 en
7 re
; yl
ad [+ | — 4A
a a fl ;
a

rd
TTF Te
3 | // es
so 0
tog __| [47 | TTT te
| ¢ A ee
ee e/a

Hf A ~
a pp | ft [| #8
pf ee
a | A a [4%
” @ r @ » &

*A. F. Dufton: ‘Graphic Statistics: Permille
Paper.” Phil. Mag., 1930, 10, 566.

PA. Hazen : ‘‘ Storage to be provided in impoundi
reservoirs for municipal supply.’ Trans. Am. Soc. Civst
Engineers, 1914, 77, 1539.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to find that for the eminent population the
proportion with paternal age more than
forty-five years is twice the normal, more
than sixty years ten times, and more than
seventy years fifty times the normal.

THE QUESTION AT ISSUE

This by way of prologue! Now what is all
this pother about the inheritance of acquired
characters? The occurrence of progressive
adaptation by transmission of the effects of
use had seemed so natural to the early |
evolutionists that no proof of the phsyiological reality of the phenomenon was thought
necessary. The Comte de Buffon, Dr. Erasmus Darwin and the Chevalier de Lamarck
all firmly believed in it. Furthermore, in the
Origin of Spectes Mr. Charles Darwin did not
hesitate to write, “ I think there can be little
doubt that use in our domestic animals
strengthens and enlarges certain parts, and
disuse diminishes them; and that such
modifications are inherited.”’

All the trouble seems to have been caused
by Professor Weismann, who asked for
definite proof and insisted that the evidence
available was slender. Further evidence has
since been proffered which seems to me to be
cogent but which has not been sufficient to
turn the scales. Can the explanation be
found, I wonder, in Professor Bateson’s
remark that ‘‘ Weismann’s_ contribution,
though negative, has greatly simplified the
practical investigation of genetic problems ’’?*

The reception of Mendel’s hypothesis has,
of course, revolutionised things. And 2
propos of Mendelian inheritance and the
simplicity of modern genetics, I cannot
refrain from digressing mildly to refer to a
recent paper by Dr. Hurst on A Genetical
Formula for the Inheritance of Intelligence in
Man.{ After adverting to the fact that the
data of Galton and Woods show that general
intelligence in adults grades continuously
from high to low, he postulates ten discrete
grades of intelligence and from these develops

*W. Bateson: Mendel’s Principles of Heredity.
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1909, p. 5.
¢ C. C. Hurst: A Genetical Formula for the Inheri
tance of Intelligence in Man. Proc. Roy. Soc., B, 1932,
112, 80.
THE INHERITANCE OF ACQUIRED CHARACTERS

a hexagenic basic genetical formula. That
such a hypothesis can be seriously received
suggests to me that the apparent simplicity
of modern genetics may be a snare and a
delusion.

The problem “ Are Acquired Characters
Inherited ? ’’ seems to be now merely one of
academic interest and I regard this as singularly unfortunate for, however trivial the
problem may appear in the case of plants and

i , 1 am convinced that so far as Man
is concerned it is one of paramount importance. I shall return to this point later.

SOURCES OF EVIDENCE

Now with reference to the evidence which
I have to place before you, it may well be
asked how it comes about that an attempt
to show the inheritance of a development of
the brain (for that is what it amounts to),
should succeed when attempts to show the
inheritance of the well-developed arm of a
blacksmith, for example, have failed. I
think the reason was well expressed by
Charles Darwin,* when he wrote :

** When a part has been developed in an extraordi manner in any one species, compared
with the other species of the same genus, we may
conclude that this part has undergone an extraordinary amount of modification since the period
when the species branched off from the common
progenitor of the genus. This period will seldom
be remote in any extreme degree, as species very
rarely endure for more than one geological period
... as the variability of the extraordinarily
developed part or organ has been so great and long
continued within a period not excessively remote,
we might, as a general rule, expect to find more
variability in such parts than in other parts of the
organization which have remained for a much
longer period nearly constant. And this, I am
convinced, is the case.”

It can scarcely be denied, I think, that the
development of the human brain has been
comparatively recent and not only extraordinarily great but phenomenal.

The problem before me was how to obtain
further statistics, statistics which would be
less defective than those culled from the
Encyclopedia Britannica. The simplest
method seemed to be to write to eminent men
and ask them for details of their parentage.

*C. Darwin: Origin of Spectes.

 

247

I decided upon this course and, not without
considerable misgiving, sent out a circular
letter and questionnaire to all the Fellows
of the Royal Society. Wishing to have some
comparative data, I sent out a similar
inquiry to all the Members of the House of
Commons and, later, at the suggestion of my
father, to the exceedingly select population
comprising the headmistresses of English
Public Secondary Schools for Girls (recognized as efficient by the Board of Education).
It is of interest to record that the required
information was supplied by 75 per cent. of
the Fellows of the Royal Society, by 40 per
cent. of the Members of Parliament and by
58 per cent. of the Headmistresses.

SIGNIFICANCE OF PATERNAL AGE

Table 2 shows for the various populations
the proportion with paternal age exceeding
certain limits. It is clear that a larger proportion of the more eminent populations
were begotten by fathers of ripe age. In
arranging the populations in the order
indicated by paternal age, I am tempted to
inquire whether this order may not be
regarded in some measure as one of ability.
The relative position of M.P.s and F.R.S.s is
perhaps unexpected. When I told one Fellow
of the Royal Society of my intention to
circularize these two groups of eminent men,
he was inclined to sniff at the M.P.s but, after
a little thought, conceded that they might
be eminent in their own way. Another Fellow
of the Royal Society, who disdained to fill up
my questionnaire, wrote anonymously to
inform me that it was a most idle schedule,
remarking that ‘‘ The F.R.S. standard is a
very low one; many are the dullest men I
know and are far inferior to their brothers
who may be successful business or professional men, whom the masses might rate
lower, but would be in error.”

The information shown in Table 2 confirms
in no uncertain manner my original comparison between the persons noticed in the
Encyclopedia and the data from the Scottish

census.
Professor Fisher has pointed out* that,

*R. A. Fisher: Nature, 1932, 130, 579.
TABLE 2
Paternal Age: Proportion permille over
Population
13 | 50 | 55 | 6 [63 | |
Eminent : men

tioned in Encyclopadia Britannica | 168 | 103| 47 | 26) 13 | 7 | 4
Members of the
House of Com

mons... ---1144| 62] 29} 16] 4 | —|—
Fellows of the Royal

Society ... 14328] 56/24} 6 | — | — |] —
H i oO

Secondary Sch’ls [118] 51/ 9 3/—/—j—
Normal : us O

Scotland... -.-| 85] 26| 8 |2-2 |0°74I0-1510-02

before drawing the inference that the
superior ability of the children is due to the
increased wisdom acquired by their parents
during their ience of life, we must
remember that the upper and middle classes
marry on the average some few years later
than the general population and that, if the
eminent persons came disproportionately
from these classes, this alone would

the greater age of paternity. In my immediate reply to this criticism I pointed out* that
on this hypothesis the frequency curve
would surely be displaced so as to be substantially parallel to the normal curve, but
that this is not the observed fact. The significance of this is clearly seen in Fig. 2
which shows, in addition to the normal and
eminent curves, the curve for the children
of professional workers,t a curve which is
substantially parallel to the normal one.

THE ENVIRONMENTAL FACTOR

To the suggestion that the difference may
be due to environmental modifications, my
reply is that a father seventy years of age is
not likely either to survive to influence his
child during the critical years of adolescence
or to provide a substantially better environment than a father fifty years of age.

I think that this argument derives material
support from a further study of the paternal

* A. F. Dufton: Nature, 1932, 130, 813.
t Census of England and Wales, 1921.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ages of the headmistresses. Here the environ.
mental factor cannot be ignored as the neces.
sary university training is not easily obtained

a woman unless her father survives,
Table 3, which shows, for the various populations considered, the proportions with paternal ages between 20 and 30 and between 40
and 50, enables this factor to be discounted.
It is clear that the tentative order of ability
was misleading so far as the headmistresses
are concerned. When the environmental
factor is allowed for, they assume the leading
place as the most highly selected population.
That mistresses are selected from a wider
field than masters and are, in general, of a |
higher order of ability is apparently well —

known to the inspectorate of the Board of |
Education.

TABLE 3

   
     
   
 

Proportion permille with

paternal age
Population
between between
20 and 30 40 and 50
eadmistresses of Secondary Schools... 236
Eminent: mentioned in
Encyclopadia Britan"ICA ll 214
Members of House o
Comm wr 210
Fellows of the Royal
Normal: Census of Scotland 344 181
Normal: Census of England and Wales 358 165

EUGENIC IMPLICATIONS

As I have pointed out in Nature,* if my
thesis is true it is important eugenically. I
think that the possibility now emerges of
materially improving a stock in one generation. In this connection the tradition that
Isaac was born when Abraham was an
hundred years old and Sarah ninety is
interesting, seeing that from him sprang the
whole of the Jewish race. The story in
Genesis is very circumstantial and emphasizes

* Loc. cit.
THE INHERITANCE OF ACQUIRED CHARACTERS

that both parents were old and well stricken
in age. And Isaac might well have said, in
the words which Mr. Shaw has put into the
mouth of Bentley Summerhays,* ‘‘ By the
time I was born the old couple knew someing. So I came out all brains... .”
Summerhays_ differentiated himself from
“the regular thing that you always get in
the first batch from young parents : quite
pleasant, ordinary, do-th 1e-regular- -thing sort
all body and no brains.”’

The general idea that good children ought
to be generated of persons in their prime is,
of course, by no means new. That wise old
eugenist, Plato, for example, who held that
a man was in his prime both of body and
mind between the ages of thirty and fiftyfive, maintained that a man should not beget

* G. B. Shaw: Misalliance, 1910.

ERA Ad

249

children until he had reached the age of
thirty* and his pupil Aristotle thought that
it was fitting that a man should marry at
thirty-seven.t Is it realized, I wonder, that
in this country 75 per cent. of the children
are begotten by fathers who have not reached
the mature age of thirty-seven? . Or
that Plato would have stigmatized 40 per
cent. aS perd 8vis dxpareias yeyovds, born of a
dreadful intemperance ?

It was not only the Greeks who held these
views. That shrewd philosopher Montaigne}
commended Aristotle’s opinion and observed
that in a certain country of the Spanish
Indies the men were not allowed to marry
until after they were forty.

* Plato: The republic, Bk. V. 7
Aristotle :

Montaigne :

olstics.
Poeseays, Of the A ffection of Fathers for
thety Children. i

 

Bugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 4.
