REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 67

have not yet learned the ways of judging intelligence.” Possibly we have
not; but the observations of Spearman, Burt, Meumann, Muensterberg,
and numerous other people whose papers have for years been appearing
in the German, English, and American journals of psychology and education have got much further in this direction than has Dr. Montessori, and
had she the slightest acquaintance with this literature she could scarcely
have avoided making some reference to it.

We have the same feeling of disappointment when we read the chapter
on Mendelism and heredity. <A brief but lucid description of Mendel’s
positions is given, but no reference whatever is made to the fact which in
respect of heredity is of paramount interest to the educator, namely, that
as the results of education are largely acquired characteristics, it seems
at first sight reasonable to assume that they will not directly affect
posterity. Indeed, modern biologists almost without exception are at
pains to maintain that “education cannot affect the development of the
race.” The statement is one that the educationist cannot possibly accept.
There are arguments by which it can be invalidated, and to make these
good must be the first business of writers on education who deal with
heredity. But from Dr. Montessori we get nothing but the unproven statement, “ popular education means the betterment of the race ” (p. 245).

_ It is regrettable that Dr. Montessori, both here and in her other
publications, should show herself ignorant of what is being done and
thought in matters of education outside Italy, since the condition ot
schools and scholars in that country is notoriously bad. The book in
question resembles some of the works on “ educational psychology ” which
were current as recently as ten years ago, in which to a summary ot
current psychological doctrine was tacked on some aphorisms about the
education of the young. So, too, Dr. Montessori sprinkles her statements
about anthropometry with remarks and aspirations which always are
flowery and sometimes are nonsense. A few examples must suffice :—

“In this way (2.e., by collecting anthropometrical data) we may rise
from the arid and fatiguing gathering of analytical data towards conceptions of noble grandeur, toward a positive philosophy of life, and unveil
certain secrets of existence that will teach us the moral norms of life”
(p. 27).
“The teacher prepares for greater utilisation the physiological and
intellectual forces of the new man, like a Greek deity scattering broadcast
his prolific riches. But above all he prepares the souls for the sublime
sentiment which awaits the humanity of the future, glorying in the attainment of peace, and then indeed he becomes almost a redeemer of mankind ” (p. 360).

“The germinal potentialities that contain beauty and strength seem
predestined to that predominance which will achieve the triumph of life
in the individual. To learn the laws of the union in one individual and
definitive unity of the infinite dominant and recessive potentialities that
must encounter one another in the mysterious labyrinth in which life is
prepared—therein lies the greatest problem of the present day. It is that
which should constitute our guiding purpose ” (p. 67).

Educational theory is slowly emerging from the phase in which
phraseology of this kind was considered to help matters forward. It is to
be regretted that Dr. Montessori, who seems to have caught the ear of a
certain section of the public, should not realise that high-sounding phrases
are not argument, and will discredit whatever element of good her work
may contain. M. W. KEATINGE.

Hartley, C. GASQUOINE (Mrs. Walter H. Gallichan). The Truth about

Women. London. Eveleigh Nash; 1913; price 7s. 6d.; pp. 396.
THE title of this book has not been well chosen; in the first place it
suggests a dogmatic tone that is not to be found in the book; in the
second place it is the kind of title that might attract the reader with
68 EUGENICS REVIEW.

pornographic tastes and repel those who are in search of serious discussion of the sex problem. There are few things more to be desired
at the present day than an unbiassed treatise concerning the characters
of and relations between the sexes. Such a book would require wide
knowledge and an impartial scientific treatment. The work before us
sets out to accomplish this task, and we are glad to emphasise the obvious
fairness of mind and desire for truth which is shown throughout the book.
But successfully to accomplish this task demands a more thorough
acquaintance with the vast field of knowledge over which the subject
ranges, and in particular a greater power of orderly and logical arrangement of matter and argument than are at the disposal of the author.

The first chapter states that the chief problem is to discover what are
the exact differences between the sexes and what share we should respectively attribute to inheritance and environment in producing those
differences. The rest of the book is divided into three sections, of which
the first is biological, the second historical, whilst the third deals with
present-day questions. Many of the problems relating to the origin of
sex among primitive organisms and similar matters are somewhat out
of place in a work of this kind, and are not of any help in our search
after a solution of the sex problem of to-day. The historical section is
more valuable. In our opinion, however, the author lays too much stress
upon the tracing of descent through the mother as a proof of the exalted
position of women at an early period. An important study of all the
iterature concerning the Australians has recently been published by
Malinowski; he shows that the most trustworthy evidence represents the
Australian women as occupying a very inferior position and leading
laborious lives as compared with the men. The third section deals with
modern problems such as labour, divorce, and prostitution. The author's
views are sane and interesting; with regard to modern tendencies as a
whole she is decidedly optimistic.

One feature of the book cannot be passed over in silence. The carelessness of the proof reading is almost incredible. A long list of “ errata ”
has only corrected a small fraction of the mistakes. Let us confine our
examples to proper names that are spelt rightly in one place and wrongly
in another. We have Espinas and Epinas, Howitt and Howit, Haddon
and Haddow, Hatschepsut and Hatshepsut, Schoolcraft and Schoolcroft.
Weinniger has two variations, Weinneger and Wienniger; whilst most
absurdly of all, de Vries is spelt de Veries, which is corrected in the
“errata” list to de Vreis. A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS.

Dibdin, Sir Lewis, B.C.L. ; Chadwyek Healey, Sir CHartes E. H., K.C.B.,
K.C. English Church Law and Divorce. Part I.: Notes on
the Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum, by Sir Lewis Dibdin,
D.C.L., Dean of the Arches. Part II.: Notes on the Divorce
and Re-marriage of Sir John Stawell, by Sir Charles E. H.
Chadwyck Healey K.C.B., K.C., Chancellor of the Diocese of
Exeter. With appendices.‘ London. John Murray; 1912; price
58.; pp. 180.

IT is reasonable to assume that if Sir Lewis Dibdin, K.C., had the con
duct of a contraverted matter in the High Court, and desired to procure

a judgment or get a verdict, he would open all the facts of his case so

that the judge would understand them, he would then present his evidence

and his points of law, and close with an argument to prove that his contention was right. Such a procedure in the arrangement of a book upon
so controversial a subject as the “ English Church and Divorce,” would
appear to present no difficulty. Unfortunately the learned authors, who
are both eminent lawyers, have not seen fit to follow it. The first part
of the book is written by Sir Lewis Dibdin. More than one-fourth of it
is devoted to the history of the Reformatio Legum, and barely two pages
to its relation to divorce. The rest of this part of the book is mainly
