DOGS AND EUGENICS
By HANS GRUNEBERG, M.D., Ph.D.

(Department of Biometry, University College, London)

HE untimely death, in 1939, of Dr.

| Charles Stockard has cut short an
undertaking seemingly too vast for a
single man, and almost too ambitious for a
whole department. In 1926, the Rockefeller
Foundation generously provided the means
for the establishment of a dog farm at Shrub
Oak, near Peekskill, N.Y., to enable Dr.
Stockard and his team to study the relationships between inherited constitution and
endocrines in various pure breeds of dogs
and their hybrids. There was scarcely any
groundwork laid when this scheme was
initiated, and the difficulties were enormous.
Consider only the task of breeding and maintaining in good health dogs on a really large
scale; of studying the gross anatomy of
skeleton, dentition, skin, endocrines in
numerous breeds in their relation to age and
sex; of developing a set of craniometric
measurements and indices appropriate to the
dog skull; of studying the microscopic
structure of all the endocrines from puppy-hood to old age, in health and disease ; and
of developing and applying intricate tests

for dog psychology and behaviour, to mention’

only a small selection of the obstacles to be
overcome. The immensity of the undertaking would no doubt have deterred many a
good investigator, and we have to be grateful
for the vision and energy which have enabled
Dr. Stockard to accumulate a great and
valuable material ; nor can we be surprised
that a span of thirteen years has proved too
short for Dr. Stockard and his team to
accomplish all they set out to do. For the
work has remained a torso, and the monumental memoir* now published is largely

 

* Stockard, Charles R., collaborators, and Anderson,
O. D., and James, W. T.: The genetic and endocrinic
basis for differences in form and behavior, as elucidated
by studies of contrasted pure-line dog breeds and their
hybrids. The American Anatomical Memoirs, No. 19.
Philadelphia, 1941. Wistar Press. Pp. xx+775; 128
text-figures and 113 plates. Price $7.50.

based on manuscripts of Dr. Stockard which,
it seems probable, had not yet been cast in
their final form. This unfortunate circumstance is no doubt partly responsible for
some shortcomings of this publication.

It might seem ungrateful to pick holes into
a work of this magnitude ; for it is a work of
great merits and the material accumulated
is of very considerable value. But the whole
investigation has an eminently eugenic
background, and numerous remarks in the
text show that Dr. Stockard was fully alive
to these implications. It thus requires no
particular prophetic gifts to foresee that the
authority of this volume will often be quoted
in eugenical discussions of the future. For
this reason it seems important to question .
certain conclusions which, if unchallenged,
might become harmful in the hands of uncritical or unscrupulous people.

Before proceeding to this discussion, a few
words should be said about the general way
of presentation of the data in Dr. Stockard’s
work. In the first place, high praise is due
to the excellent, not to say lavish, illustration of the volume with 113 beautiful
photographic plates. On the other hand the
text 1s very verbose and contains extensive
repetitions which make its study somewhat
tedious. It could easily, and with great
advantage, have been condensed to one-half
its present length without omitting a single
relevant fact. Works of this kind are often
called ‘‘ mines of information.” This figure
of speech could appropriately be applied
here, not only because of the wealth of
information the book contains, but also
because of the amount of mining activities
required to separate solid facts from redundant verbiage. Many questions are treated
by verbal argument, where quantitative
data would have been both shorter and more
convincing. In numerous instances the
author states that “about ’’ a quarter of a

62
DOGS AND EUGENICS

generation. showed a given character, and
the remainder its contrasted counterpart. It
is a pity that we are not given the original
data, which would have enabled us to judge
critically how well the observations fit the
theory. Perhaps the author had intended to
fill in the precise figures from his records at
a later date ; as published, we often have to
be content with demonstrations of a principle
from selected litters, where numerical proof
from the whole experiment would have been
necessary or at least desirable.

The breeds of dogs studied included the
following :

. St. Bernard.

. German shepherd (Alsatian).

. Saluki (a large North African greyhound-like animal).

Great Dane.

. Bassethound.

. Foxhound.

. Dachshund.

. English bulldog.

. French bulldog.

10. Boston terrier.

11. Brussels griffon.

12. Pekinese.

Of these widely differing breeds the Alsatian
is rightly regarded as the most normal type,
lacking obviously pathological stigmata and
being closest to the wolf-like ancestors of our
dog breeds. Comparatively harmonic in
general shape are also the Great Dane, the
Saluki, and the foxhound. The giant St.
Bernards have signs of acromegaly ; Bassethound and dachshund show marked achondroplasia of the legs, but not of skull or tail ;
the two bulldogs, the Boston terrier and the
Brussels griffon have extremely shortened
muzzles, but normally shaped legs, while the
Pekinese is highly achondroplasic both as
regards skull and appendicular skeleton.
We cannot describe in detail the numerous
crosses carried out between these various
breeds ; they led to the discovery of many
interesting genetic facts. For instance, the
achondroplasic leg skeleton of dachshund
and Bassethound is conditioned by a single
gene. On the other hand, the wide difference
in skull shape which differentiates the short
CO OIAMNAR WHNH

63

muzzled breeds (8-12) from those normally
muzzled is complexly conditioned ; there are
a few single gene differences which can be
isolated ; for instance, the concave surface
of the condylar process of the mandible
peculiar to the dachshund differs by a single
gene substitution from the convex surface
as found in most other dog breeds. But the
bulk of the differences is conditioned by
numerous genes not analyzable in detail,
which segregate independently of each other.
As a consequence many exceedingly inharmonic types are produced in F, and
backcross generations. Some of these are
simply grotesque and mirth-provoking, like.
an Alsatian on dachshund legs; others are
more seriously pathological; jaws may be
so much undershot or overshot as to prevent
the animal from feeding ; other orthodontic
anomalies, from the slightest to the severest
grades, are found in abundance (the work
should be of great interest for dental surgeons
and orthodontists), and other dysharmonic
and often semi-lethal types occur commonly ;
indeed some of the plates depicting F,
animals look like a bad nightmare following
a visit to a dog show. If the body has regulative powers, which tend to harmonize its
various organs, such powers have certainly
sadly failed to correct the pandemonium let
loose by the reshuffling of dog genes.
Is it surprising that the startled author
of this nightmare dog show should utter
warning after warning against ‘‘ mongrelization’”’ of human races? And yet, most of
these monstrosities would have been predictable from the ingredients contributed by the
parent breeds. These divergences are vastly
greater than anything that could possibly
occur in human race crosses. And if you
cross breeds of dogs which are not predictably incompatible, like a bulldog and a
dachshund, or a Saluki and a Pekingese,
quite alluring animals may be produced. For
instance, the hybrid between Great Dane
and Alsatian is a strong and distinctly handsome dog, and a similar type could no doubt
be made homozygous in a later generation.
But a good deal of the highly pathological,
and unpredictable, monstrosities probably
owe their origin not to the race cross per se.
64 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Dr. Stockard naturally started his experiments with good specimens of pedigreed
dogs of his various breeds. Now, in many
domesticated animals, the standard set up
by the breeders does not represent a homozygous type; the “ideal” type for a given
character is often a heterozygote. As a
consequence, breeds of domesticated animals
are usually very heterogeneous genetically.
This is very much the case in dogs, and the
designation ‘ pure-line ’’ dogs used by Dr.
Stockard is grossly misleading. Indeed, close
inbreeding is anathema to the dog breeder,
because he knows by experience that numerous “ undesirables ’’ segregate out even in
the “ pure” breeds. I have studied (jointly
with A. J. Lea*) a jaw anomaly in a “ pure”
breed (long-haired dachshunds), which was
due to a single recessive gene and in. its
effects comparable to certain types recovered
in F, by Dr. Stockard ; heterozygotes for this
gene were common in the breed, but owing
to an avoidance of close inbreeding it segregated out fairly rarely ; the undesirables are
usually destroyed as puppies, and the
breeders certainly do not advertise their
occurrence in their kennels; this is by no
means an exceptional case, and there is
every reason to believe that all breeds of
dogs are soaked with harmful recessives ; in
an outbred population these remain largely
under the surface, but inbreeding makes
them homozygous. Now Dr. Stockard’s
experiments involved not only race crosses,
but also much closer inbreeding than is
customary within breeds; for technical
reasons most experiments started with a few
specimens of the “pure” breed, and the
production of an F, or backcross generation
involved close inbreeding. Hence the patho
* Journal of Genetics. 1940. 39, 285-96.

logical types recovered owe their appearance
to a double reason ; one is the reshuffling of
genes, the other is the segregation of pathological recessives which were hidden in
heterozygous form in the “ pure” breeds:
The latter source of monstrosities has not
been recognized by Dr. Stockard, and for
this reason his argument about the undesirability of human race crosses is considerably:
weakened. Critical evidence on the question
would require experiments in which these
two sources of pathological types can be
separated ; experiments satisfying this requirement can easily be designed.

Just to show that the argument advanced
above is not a purely theoretical consideration, one example from a different field may
be given. If you study the large monographs
on the genetics of Drosophila published by
the Carnegie Institution in 1923 and 1929,
you will see that the majority of autosomal
recessives were discovered in the course of
linkage experiments. Of course nobody ever
suggested that linkage experiments per se
are dysgenic; but linkage experiments, as
usually carried out, involve close inbreeding
and hence tend to make hidden recessives
homozygous.

We have dealt critically with the eugenical
aspect of Dr. Stockard’s dog breeding programme ; this seems justifiable in a journal
devoted primarily to the study of eugenics.
But it would be entirely misleading to
generalize this critical attitude. The book
is of high importance and full of interesting
information. Just for this reason, and
because we are convinced that it should, and
will, be studied widely throughout the world
of eugenics has it seemed necessary to point
out where the author’s inferences should be
treated with caution.
