AMERICAN EUGENICS SOCIETY

Statement of the

By the Special Committee

HE AMERICAN EUGENICS SOCIETY

is composed largely of scientists from a

number of different disciplines. Their
common interest is to promote the advancement,
discussion and dissemination of scientific knowledge of human genetics, as it relates to the welfare and improvement of individuals and
populations.

The Present State of Knowledge
Recent advances in the field of genetics make
the times particularly appropriate for the
activities of such a society. In the past decade
or two, human genetics has made notable
advances as a field of study. It has contributed
new insights into the past and present evolution
of man. Great strides have been made in analyzing the causes and inheritance of constitutional
diseases. We have come to realize that genes
which cause defects are not limited to the
afflicted families, but that many such genes are
spread widely throughout the population. We
have learned that the genetic consequences of
artificial radiation, of life-saving influences in
medicine, and of new migration and marriage
patterns are reflected in an accumulation of
deleterious genes over and above the subtle
equilibrium previously established by natural
forces. Methods are being devised to detect the
individuals who are carriers of genes that
cause defects as well as to treat some of the
defects at an early age. Increasing medical
knowledge and increasing public interest have
led to the establishment of heredity counselling
centres, and to a new recognition of the importance of heredity in human affairs.

The genetic mechanisms related to intelligence
and personality are as yet little understood.

* Gordon Allen, Dudley Kirk, J. P. Scott, Harry L.
Shapiro, Bruce Wallace. Reprinted from Eugenics
Quarterly, December 1961. 8, 4.

Eugenic Position

of the Board of Directors*

It seems certain that there are many genes
involved, but the number and the method of
transmission are not known. Much further
research is needed to find out in what way and to
what extent differences in intelligence and
personality are determined by variations in
genetic factors. Their outward (phenotypic)
manifestation is the combined result of the
interaction of a specific heredity with a specific
environment. |
Studies over the past thirty-five years have
contributed convincing evidence that variations
in genetic factors do have a part in determining
individual variations in intelligence and personality. Studies have been made on identical twins
reared at home or reared apart, on siblings, on
adopted children reared in homes and in institutions, and on random pairs. When the environment is closely similar, there are still large
individual differences, which are best explained
by heredity. On the other hand, when heredity
is held constant and the environment varied,
there are still large differences, which must be
accounted for by differences in the environments. Psychological and sociological studies
hold an important place in advancing knowledge
of the part played by genetic factors, of the
distribution of these factors in the population,
of the regularity of their expression in diverse
environments, and of their significance to human
societies. .

The Role of the American Eugenics Society

The function of the American Eugenics Society
is to contribute to the advancement and dissemination of knowledge about human genetics
particularly in relation to similar scientific
knowledge from the social and_ biological
sciences, including knowledge of the social and
psychological factors which determine size of
family among different kinds of couples. The

79 
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1962, 54, 2.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Society’s function is therefore to a great extent
interdisciplinary.

The Society has a special part to play in
enlarging the interests of various professional
groups, especially in fields where there is an
awakening scientific interest. When, after the
Second World War, the medical profession
began to be interested in genetics, the Eugenics
Society’s most successful work was in that field.
The Eugenics Quarterly provided opportunities
for publication of articles dealing with human
populations in the broadest sense, at a time when
other journals were not looking for papers of
this sort. The Society’s five fellowships in
medical genetics were among the first to result in
assignments to full-time teaching and research
in genetics at major medical schools. Several
conferences on medical genetic subjects and on
the teaching of medical genetics were directly
sponsored or primarily stimulated by the Society.
The Society’s publications and conferences on
heredity counselling have received extensive
notice in both professional and lay circles.
The importance of medical genetics is now widely
recognized and is getting support from the medical schools, from foundations, and from the
government through the National Institutes of
Health. The Society feels satisfaction in having
played some part in this important advance in
the field of eugenics.

Psychologists, sociologists and demographers
are now showing interest in the study of the
economic, social, institutional and psychological
factors which, in the United States, influence
size of family. Such studies are essential to
finding out how social conditions might be
modified, not only to bring about voluntary
changes in the general birth rate, but also to
bring about discriminating differentials in
births as between individual couples of different
genetic constitutions. It should be the function of
the Eugenics Society to stimulate work in this
field by holding conferences, by publication,
and by such other means as may be at its disposal. Such studies, together with psychological
studies on the part played by genetic variations,
and on the means of measuring psychological
traits, constitute probably the most important
fields to which the Society should now give its
attention. |

80

Matters of eugenic policy will be increasingly
discussed as more knowledge is developed in
these fields. It will be the function of the Society
to provide opportunities for such discussion
through publication and conferences. Sound
eugenic policies will not develop in a vacuum.
They must grow out of existing knowledge
applied to the conditions and mores in particular
countries.

Changing Social Patterns and Eugenic Policies
Habits, culture patterns and institutions which
affect reproduction and survival are changing
rapidly in the United States. Eugenic policies, if
they are to be effective, must anticipate and
recognize these changes.

The most basic change is the reduction of
deaths prior to the age of reproduction. In the
United States over 95 per cent of all children
born alive now survive to their thirtieth year.
Early death is no longer so great a factor in
reducing the survival of the physically or
mentally unfit. Eugenic policies will try to find an
acceptable substitute for death selection.

Accompanying the reduction in deaths,
there is an equally marked trend towards
limiting size of family. A study made in 1955
indicates that over 90 per cent of all fecund
American couples use some form of family
limitation at some period of their married lives.
If, as may soon be expected, simpler, cheaper
and more acceptable means of family limitation
become available, we may approach a society in
which all children are quite specifically ““wanted”’
children. This would not of itself make for
eugenic trends in births, but it would at least
make possible policies for eugenic birth selection
based on voluntary controls.

In the United States to-day there is a trend
towards equalizing educational opportunities;
there is also a trend towards fitting education
to the abilities of the individual. There are trends
towards an increased social mobility, greater job
mobility, and the elimination of fixed hereditary
classes. These are all changes which would make
it more likely for each individual to find the kind
and level of work most appropriate to his genetic
potential.

The trend towards more employment of
women outside the home offers alternatives
STATEMENT OF THE EUGENIC POSITION

to childbearing which eugenics programmes
will have to take into account.

The circle within which one can choose one’s
mate is constantly widening in the United States
to-day, with a greater possibility of assortative
mating. Assortative mating can increase the
number of people with particular qualities by
changing the distribution of genes. In association with selection it can rapidly change gene
frequencies.

With such changes going on, one course
open to eugenics is to find, and to further, those
institutional arrangements, those social, economic and psychological pressures, which would
result in a tendency for individuals to have
more or fewer children in proportion to their
success or achievement in their particular
environment. Eugenic policies of this sort
would reach into each social, economic and
occupational group, and improve the quality of
each. The result would be, not a segregation
into superior and inferior classes, but a genetic
diversification in the process of adapting to the
diverse elements of our society. One could then
expect a greater variety of talents, and, hopefully, a constantly higher level in those qualities
which have a common tendency towards success
in all environments.

Much further research is needed to determine
the potential effectiveness of such a selective
process, or of alternative eugenic programmes
consistent with our laws and institutions. It can
probably be assumed that couples with a better
than average genetic inheritance, will, more
often than not, provide a better than average
home environment, by whatever criteria quality
is to be judged. If this is indeed the case, eugenic.
policies would work hand in hand with an
improved environment to raise the level of
human qualities. There is no conflict between
those desiring to raise the level of our genetic
inheritance and those desiring to raise the level
of our social inheritance.

Conclusion

The Eugenics Society has a definite and important role to play in the development of population policies within the United States. Where
information is lacking, the Society will exert its
influence to gain knowledge. Where dissemination of information is poor, the Society will
sponsor conferences and encourage publication.
And where there is failure to utilize available
information, the Society will seek to promote
a better understanding of what might be accomplished by the application of existing knowledge.

81
