PREVENTIVE MEDICINE

And the role of Genetics in its Future Development

By C. P. BLACKER, M.A., M.D., M.R.C.P.

Address to Section J of the Centenary Meeting (1931) of the British Association.

of genetics within the limited sphere of

the future of preventive medicine, it is
first necessary that we should form an idea
of its applicability to human beings in
their widest possible context. The question
is a particularly difficult one by reason of
the formidable prejudices which it excites.
Whereas everyone ‘ believes in heredity’
where the breeding of animals and plants
is concerned, many apparently think that
this process has little bearing on man. ‘The
question of how necessary it may be to
resort to genetic methods for improving the
human strain immediately raises the further question of how far the same end is
attainable by improving human environment.

Our belief in the relative powers of
heredity and environment to modify human
type is subject to a number of sentimental
preconceptions of which we should strive to
purge our minds if we truly desire to attain
an objective outlook. I will briefly refer
to three such preconceptions, which may be
denoted as familial, political, and philosophical.

I—FAMILIAL. In the case of certain
persons born in successful and able families, belief in the potency of heredity may
be the expression of a sort of family pride.
When your ancestors and relatives have
distinguished themselves in a variety of
socially useful ways, it is agreeable to think
that the superior endowments which have
raised them above the general average also
inhere in yourself and load the dice in your
favour. Considerations of this sort may
have influenced the thoughts of certain
eugenic enthusiasts.

2—Po.iticaL. ‘Those who adhere to the

E order to determine the possible role

precept that all men have equal rights, even
when it is not confused with the belief that
they have equal abilities and aptitudes,
have often been repelled by the idea of
eugenics. It is an unfortunate fact that,
through the emphasis laid by some writers
upon the relation between heredity and
social position, eugenics has appeared to
many as a system of camouflaged classprejudice masquerading in the guise of a
pseudo-science.

Thus to the Tory ‘ diehard’ the belief
comes easily that slums are made by lowgrade human beings; but to the Labour
reformer it is far more credible that the
low-grade human beings are made by the
slums, the truth being an inevitable reaction
between these two sets of forces. In the
past, it was thought that kings were born
to be kings by Divine Right, and many
to-day think that the ruling classes govern
by a sort of hereditary right over those who
are unfit for anything else than to be
benevolently ruled. Others believe that
there are no intrinsic differences between
human beings and that all the visible differences are the products of education and
cultural upbringing. In these contrasting
standpoints are clearly reflected political
prejudices.

3—PHILOSOPHICAL. Lastly, philosophical
preconceptions, less easily detected, also
shape our attitude towards the role of
heredity. The two possible points of view
find, I think, their clearest expression in
the antithesis between the beliefs in predestination and free-will. The determinist
feels himself to be a puppet at the mercy of
psychological forces of fluctuating magnitudes with which he is endowed at birth and
which he is powerless to alter. The forces

319
320

which are the most powerful at each
moment win the day and successively determine his various actions.

The libertarian, on the other hand, feels
that he can voluntarily regulate and adjust
the dynamic forces of his affective life; and
it is natural for him to think that what he
can do for himself, can also be done for
humanity as a whole. ‘The libertarian will
especially believe in the cultural value of
precept and example, and he may well
regard these as our chief instruments of
racial improvement. ‘This seems to be the
general position taken up by the Roman
Catholic Church.

I have had a good opportunity of observing the importance of these and other preconceived notions in relation to the Bill to
legalize eugenic sterilization which Major
Church recently introduced under the tenminutes rule on behalf of the Eugenics
Society (which I am representing to-day).
I learned how deep-rooted is the conviction
held by many that human genetic processes
should not be tampered with by man and
that the evils for which some would advocate genetic remedies are really only curable
by quite other means.

How can the prejudices which give rise
to these conflicting views be overcome? It
is the purpose of my paper to suggest two
possible courses which must be pursued
simultaneously, namely the education of the
general public and of the medical profession.

EDUCATING THE GENERAL PUBLIC

First in regard to the general public:
Sir Francis Galton urged that every intelligent person should study his family pedigree. This study should be embarked upon,
not with the object of tracing descent from
William the Conqueror, nor of establishing
kinship with some distinguished or wellborn personage, nor even of making out a
glowing record for one’s family. It should
be undertaken with the sole aim of drawing
up an impartial and objective record of the
physical and psychological traits of the
various persons included in the pedigree.

This is by no means an easy thing to do

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

by reason of the very strong temptation to
make selective omissions of events which
are commonly regarded as discreditable.
No one much likes putting down in black
and white, for the information of descendants, those dark secrets which exist in every
family and which all the constituent members are at pains to suppress. Nobody likes
dispassionately to rattle the bones of the
skeleton that lies concealed in every family
cupboard. For obvious reasons, the pious
precept de mortuis nil nisi bonum will
not be lightly violated, even in the interests
of science, when the dead person in question
happens to be an ancestor or a near relative.

For such reasons of discretion, most of
the family pedigrees which one reads have
a sanctimonious air. They appear flat and
soulless. They depict shadowy and anzemic
figures whose very virtues are pale. They
represent only one side of the medal and
tell only one aspect of the story. They have
the atmosphere of epitaphs on tombstones.
In the records the compilation of which we
are now advocating, every effort should be
made to achieve the kind of detachment to
which an interested and unrelated biographer, writing some fifty or hundred years
hence, would aspire. How many of us
to-day have records of this kind of our antecedents and collateral relatives for four
generations back? And how grateful we
would most of us be to have such information !

THE SOCIETY’S ‘FAMILY SCHEDULE’

In order to facilitate the keeping of such
family records, the Eugenics Society has
just completed a schedule which can be
obtained by anyone on application. All its
parts are detachable, and can be added to
indefinitely at will. The separate sheets of
which it is composed are reinforced at the
attached margins, so that they will not tear
out (the tearing out of sheets being one of
the major shortcomings of many such
schedules) and are made of paper guaranteed to last at least one hundred years. They
contain full instructions, and a specimen
pedigree and family record. Their
apparently high cost of ros. is accounted for
GENETICS AND PREVENTIVE MEDICINE

by the large amount of hand labour involved
in their preparation.

If such pedigrees are filled in by our contemporaries as fully as existing information
will allow, and if they are kept up to date
from generation to generation, there will be
made available information that will be of
the deepest interest not only to our descendants, but to the doctor, the schoolmaster,
the genealogist, the anthropologist, and to
many other inquirers of the future. It is
never too late to begin the recording of a
pedigree. , Information that is common
knowledge to us is often lost at our death
and is irrecoverable by our children. This
fact will be quickly realized by anyone who
tries to write a record of his parental and
grand-parental sibships.

I now return to the medical profession.
It is certain that in the future, medical men
will be increasingly consulted upon questions of eugenic prognosis, and that
knowledge of the elementary principles of
genetics in their application to man will
play an increasingly important part in the
medical man’s equipment. ‘The interest at
present taken in such matters by the
majority of doctors is small,’ and the
knowledge possessed by them is in most
cases insufficient to enable them to form an
adequate opinion upon the majority of
genetic problems about which they are consulted. This is in no sense surprising when
it is remembered how recent is the growth
of accurate knowledge about heredity, and
how fragmentary, even to-day, is its application to the bulk of commoner human
diseases.

EDUCATING THE MEDICAL STUDENT

In the preliminary biological training
given at several medical schools, the teaching of genetics plays a small part. ‘The
medical student is expected to have a
knowledge of the morphology and embryology of certain representative animal types,
together with a rather more special
knowledge of those forms which enter into
the province of medicine, such as the liverfluke, the tape-worm, the plasmodium of
malaria, and the mouth parts of the mos
321

quito. Most of this knowledge has but a
distant bearing on ordinary clinical medicine, and is largely forgotten soon after it
is learnt. I would like respectfully to suggest to those medical schools which, in the
future, may have occasion to revise the
schedules of their biological preliminary
examinations, that an elementary knowledge of the principles of human genetics
may well prove to have a considerably
greater usefulness than much that is now
taught. .

The medical man of the next generation
may frequently be called upon to scrutinize
pedigrees with a view to giving a eugenic
prognosis. It will therefore be useful to
him to have a sufficient acquaintance with
Mendelian principles to enable him to
recognize those hereditary factors that
are dominant, recessive, and sex-linked.
Equipped with such knowledge, he will be
sympathetically disposed towards all who
consult him as to how to fill in the medical
details of their own or their relatives’ family
records. In this way, he will play a vital
part, not only directly in advising as to
parenthood, but indirectly in helping to
accumulate the data on which alone such
advice can properly be based.

BOOK ON EUGENIC PROGNOSIS

Under the guidance of an advisory medical committee, I am now editing a book
intended primarily for the general practitioner, which will consist of some sixteen
sections written by a corresponding number
of medical specialists in the different categories of diseases and defects which have
definitely been recognized as hereditary. In
this book, space will be allocated to diseases
by taking into consideration not so much
what is known about their inheritance, as
the frequency with which the general practitioner is likely to be consulted about them.
It so happens that most of the diseases
about the transmission of which we have
most accurate knowledge are rare diseases
which the general practitioner might never
come across in a lifetime, and which, if he
did encounter, he would probably not be
able to diagnose. This holds, for instance,
322

of many of the diseases and defects of the
special senses, especially of the eye.

A SCHEDULE FOR THE PRACTITIONER

At an early stage of the preparation of
this book, I was asked by one of the contributors if I could supply him with a
simple schedule for the recording of pathological pedigrees which would save him the
trouble of explaining to his patients the
details of how they should make the
necessary records so as best to bring into
relief the pathological heredity about which
they were consulting him.

The Eugenics Society has prepared such
a schedule which a doctor can give to a
patient who asks for advice as to the advisability of parenthood, at the same time telling the patient to follow the instructions
provided and to send back to him his pedigree entered as fully as possible on the
blank chart provided with the schedule. The
symbolism which the patient is instructed
to employ in preparing his pedigree is a
modification of that recommended for adoption at the Conference of the International
Federation of Eugenic Organizations held
in Paris in 1928. ‘These schedules can be
filled in by anyone of average intelligence
and educational attainments. They would
be of little use for mentally defective persons or for members of the assemblage
christened ‘‘ The Social Problem Group ”’
by the recent Mental Deficiency Committee.
In order to trace the pedigrees of such as
these, it is necessary to enlist the help of a
trained social worker.

The aim of the schedule last described is
purely medical, and is therefore much more
restricted than that of the schedule alluded
to earlier, which is designed to enable the
layman to record his family pedigree for the
benefit of his descendants. Both these
schedules will have many points of usefulness of which I will now only mention one.
There is in this country a movement in
favour of requiring the production of compulsory statements as to health before
marriage. In July a strong plea for this
was made by Dr. Stella Churchill at a
meeting of the Royal Sanitary Institute in

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Glasgow. Of such a procedure, if it is ever
adopted, the compilation of a family pedigree along lines roughly similar to those I
have described, will form an absolutely
essential part. It is impossible to advise a
person that he is fit for marriage unless
that person’s pedigree has first been
scrutinized.

I will make one further tentative suggestion for interesting the medical profession in
the problems of human heredity. This is
that a section of the Royal Society of
Medicine might usefully be formed whose
subject would be human genetics. By such
a course, the enormous influence of this
powerful society could be applied in a direction the utility of which surely few would
deny.

POSSIBLE FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS

If then a genuine interest can be aroused
in these problems throughout the medical
profession and the general public, it is
probable that, in two or three generations,
we shall have at our disposal, a body of
knowledge which would enable us to answer
with a considerable measure of precision
the question of how far we can prevent
human disease, defect, and disability by
genetic means. We may perhaps allow ourselves to envisage a time when accurate
records will be available of the heredities
of all permanent residents in the United
Kingdom ; when advisory centres analogous
to the German ‘‘Marriage Advice Bureaux’’
will exist throughout the country under the
jurisdiction of local authorities, at which a
well-grounded genetic opinion will be
obtainable, either free or at a small charge,
by all applicants; when the inculcation of
a eugenic conscience will form part of a
system of State education; and when there
will exist a eugenics department of the
Ministry of Health, or else a Central
Institute of Human Genetics, with a staff of
medical men, geneticists, and statisticians
and a liberal equipment of social workers
trained in the making of genetic investigations.

When such a time is reached, it will be
possible for private societies such as the
GENETICS AND PREVENTIVE MEDICINE 323

Eugenics Society voluntarily to dissolve
themselves, their task achieved. Not before
then will the principles of preventive medicine be applied in the most intelligent and

rational of all ways—namely that of preventing the birth of all who have not a good
chance of possessing normal healthy bodies
and healthy minds. “

 

Science Outruns the Maker of Books—

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY

a quarterly devoted to recording
current researches

Physiological Zoology was established by the Department of Zoology at the

University of Chicago in 1928 to fill the need of biologists for authentic, current

data of zoological investigation. ‘The journal has by this time become firmly

established as an indispensable part of laboratory and library equipment for zoo
logists in American and foreign colleges; to laymen interested in the progress of the
science it has become no less a valuable periodical.

Yearly rate, including postage: 35s. 2d.

| Published by
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS

English Agents: CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
Fetter Lane London, E.C.4

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 4.
