THE ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION

The Demographic Position
By Sir CHARLES ARDEN-CLOSE, K.B.E., C.B., F.R.S.

consisting of Lord Simon as chairman

and fifteen members, was appointed
on March 3rd, 1944. One member resigned
in 1946, and Lord Simon resigned the chairmanship in May 1946, his place being taken
by Sir Hubert Henderson. The Refort
was signed on March 18th, 1949, so that
the Commission was in being for five years.
The Report is published by the Stationery
Office in a handy little volume of 260
pages.

This review is an attempt to estimate the
value of the Report from a demographic point
of view, leaving the eugenic and economic
aspects to be dealt with by expert authorities. The Statistics Committee, with whose
work we are now chiefly concerned, was presided over by Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders.
Certain special investigations were undertaken by the Commission, notably the
family census of 1946, which was carried out
“to discover what were the numbers and
distribution of families of different size in
Great Britain ’’ and to trace the changes that
had taken place in the trend of the size of
families.

It is noted in the introduction to the
Report that it is by no means safe to predict,
from past statistics, what may be the likely
course of events in the future. This difficulty is illustrated by the unexpected variations in the birth-rate between 1920 and
1948. Thus, the number of births in 1948
was 25 per cent higher than the average
during the years 1935-8, and so on. We
may be permitted to remark that many
painstaking tables of prediction of the future
totals of our population, which were published some years ago and contributed to the
creation of a general feeling of anxiety as toa
possible “‘ catastrophic ”’ fall in our numbers,
were entirely falsified by events. It was
chiefly this unjustified public anxiety which

| con Royal Commission on Population,

led to the appointment of the Royal Commission, so that some good came of it after
all, for the Report of the Commission is a
valuable and authoritative addition to our
demographic literature.

After the introduction we have eight
chapters under the general heading “ The
Trend of Population,’’ commencing with an
account of the past growth of numbers in
this country and in the world at large. Great
Britain, in spite of its small size, has the
eighth largest population among the fifty
countries of the world, including those giant
areas the United States, China and Russia.
About the year 1700 our population was
about one-seventh of what it is now. “ The
growth of population in Great Britain was
...an essential condition not only of the
development of Britain itself as a great and
rich nation, but also of the growth of the new
overseas countries inhabited mainly or
largely by people of British descent.”” In
fact, British emigration in the nineteenth
century not only relieved pressure at home
but increased British influence in the world at
large. But an eventual decline in the rate of
increase at home was, of course, inevitable,
and the obvious fact is pointed out that a
continuous increase of the nineteenth-century
pattern would have resulted in such enormous numbers that it would have been impossible to support them, and that “ the
growth of population in Great Britain would
ultimately have been slowed down by the
Malthusian forces of famine and disease.’’

As to age distribution, we may consider
the group of the “ over 60’s,” and we shall
find that whereas in 1891 they amounted to
7 per cent of the total population, in 1947
they accounted for no less than 15 per cent.
The character of the change in the age
structure is shown clearly by the age pyramids which are drawn for those two years,
the latter being similar to that given in this

117
118

REvIEw for October 1948.* It is stated that
the average age of our population has risen
from 27 years in 1891 to 35 years in 1947.
Oldish people must take a larger share in the
work of the country. The remark may be
hazarded that there is some reason to think
that, nowadays, the middle-aged and old
work more conscientiously than the young.

The chief factors which determine the
trend of population are, of course, migration,
deaths and births. The migration figures
from 1871 are analysed, and it is shown that,
during the forty years to Ig11, the net
emigration amounted to nearly 2 million,
or about one-ninth of the national increase,
and this did not greatly slow down the
growth of population. But, owing to the
greater number of male emigrants, there
resulted a considerable surplus of women at
all adult ages, and this, in its turn, affected
the marriage statistics.

Passing from the census of 1911 to the
difficult years of the first world war, with
their loss of hundreds of thousands of young
men, we come to the troublesome post-war
period and the depression of the ’thirties ;
we find that between 1931 and 1941 there
was a net inward migration of 650,000, the
majority being Britons impelled to return
by the world depression. It is suggested,
however, in this Report, that the effective
cause of variations in migration is not only
the trade cycle but that some more permanent cause is also at work.

Only a few of us emigrate, and not everybody marries, but all of us die, so that the
study of mortality rates is of interest to all
of us. Several tables are given to illustrate
the effect of this factor, notably a table of
survivors of females to various ages, from
birth to over 85, and a comparison is made
between a life-table of 1838-54 with one of
1942-4. It appears that ‘“‘ under the mortality of a century ago only about two-thirds
of the female population reached the age at
which they would begin to marry,’ whereas,
at present, 90 per cent survive to that age.
There has been much improvement in the
survival rates at young and middle ages ; it

 

* P, 139.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

now remains to improve substantially the
expectations of the “ over 65’s.”’ |

We now come to the question of births,
the question which was the cause of the
appointment of the Commission. The first
table given is that of the proportion of persons, of ages 45-54, who were or had been
married. This proportion is shown to be
very constant for the period given (18711947), and amounts, on an average, to about
87 per cent, with but slight variations. But,
though the total proportion is stable, the age
at which people marry “can vary a great
deal.”” And an important fact is that the
numbers of those marrying in the age group
20-4 has risen in recent years. It is stated
that “ people in the higher social classes
marry later than those in the lower.”

The most important investigation undertaken by the Commission is that connected
with the size of the family. The Commission
did good service by carrying out a sample
census of families, of which the full result
will be published in a special report. Tables
are given to show the steady decrease in the
number of children in the average family
during the past hundred years. That decrease
was beginning to show itself even in the
"forties and ’sixties, the main source of information about the size of Victorian families
being the fertility census of 1911. There was
little information after this census until the
investigation known as the sample census
above mentioned.

The facts are straightforward ; the average number of live births per completed
family decreased from about 5 in midVictorian times to 2:2 now. Another expression of the same fact is that, in modern
times, large families are exceedingly rare ;
families from o to 3 account for 80 per cent
of the total, the largest numbers consisting
of x or 2 children.

A table is given of the present estimated
size of the completed family under two
headings, manual workers and non-manual
workers. It appears that the size of the
average family of manual workers is now
nearly half as large again as that of the nonmanual workers ; in figures, about 2} to rf.
There are, as might be expected, differences
THE ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION

in occupational groups, and in geographical
regions, and also, though to no great extent,
amongst religious denominations. But the
broad picture remains, that the non-intellectual workers breed more than the intellectual, if we may so class the non-manual
workers.

The report includes an interesting discussion of the extent and causes of family
limitation, going back even to the customs of
our very remote ancestors of the palzolithic
period !

A rather intricate chapter deals with “ The
Recent Increase in Births,” and, to begin
with, a table is given showing the average
annual births and deaths, in three-yearly
periods, from 1922 to 1948. The first thing
that would strike the reader is that, excepting
the years 1940-2, the average number of
deaths each year was unexpectedly constant
at about 550,000. But, in those three years,
1940-2, the average number of deaths rose to
602,000, and this increase is put down to
air-raid casualties. The average annual
excess of births over deaths, for the years
1922-48, was 212,000, but, owing to the great
variations in the birth-rates, the annual
excess varied very greatly. The significant
feature, however, is that, whereas this excess
diminished steadily from 1922-42, during the
next six years there was a remarkable
increase, due to the great increase in the
number of births, of which the average
annual number for 1946-8 rose to no less
than 934,000.

The Report states that ‘‘ the increase in the
married population has been sufficient to
account statistically ...for a considerable
growth in the number of annual births.” It
is shown that striking increases have taken
place in marriages at early ages. Thus, in
the age group 20-4 there was an increase
from 19-7 per cent in 1931 to 32°5 per cent
in 1947. Some paragraphs deal with the
effects on marriage of the second world war ;
the separations, the hurrying up of marriages,
the earlier ages, and the slightly increased
fertility.

It is stated that it appears likely that the
reduction in age of marriage will tend towards the increase of the average size of the

11g

family, and that a rise in the number of
births has also occurred in other countries of
North-West Europe, and that in these
countries, as in our own, one of the most
obvious influences in the encouragement of
larger families has been the condition of full
employment.

There is a short ably-written chapter on
“ The Question of Replacement,” which all
interested in our demographic position may
be advised to read. It is pointed out that the
notion that our numbers, though continuing
to increase, were heading for a decrease, and
that the number of births was well below
eventual replacement level, led more than
anything else to the appointment of the
Royal Commission. The net, and the effective, reproduction rates, until the advent of
larger birth-rates, painted much the same
picture. But now we have to deal with the
“remarkable increase of births which has
taken place in recent years,” a result chiefly
of the lowering of the average age at which
people marry. This will not have a lasting
effect on the replacement situation unless the
size of the average family increases. The
Commission is doubtful if this is likely to
occur, for the available indications are that
the recent unexpectedly high birth-rates will
not continue.

It is observed that “ the crucial factor in
determining the number of births in the long
run is the size of the family,” and the Commission is to be congratulated upon settling
upon this simple expression which the public
at large can understand. But, like all such
expressions, it needs care in its application.
It is stated in the Report that, ‘‘ Our calculation that the present average size of the
family in Great Britain is about 6 per cent
below replacement level implies ... no prediction, however tentative, that total numbers are likely to decline at this rate ’’ during
any reasonably predictable period. We can
bear in mind the fact that previous predictions of heavy falls in our numbers proved
very erroneous. Meanwhile, we may accept
the statistical fact that the present average
size of the family is probably slightly below
replacement level, without necessarily
lamenting the fact.
-I20

Two chapters deal with “‘ The Future of
the Population ” under various sub-heads,
such as mortality, marriage, family size,
future numbers and migration. A chart is
given of the actual age distribution in 1947,
compared with a life-table distribution of
the same total size, and this shows clearly the
differences between our present distribution
and what the Commission calls a ‘‘ normal ”’
one. In the discussion of future numbers it
is assumed that the fall in death-rates will
continue, and it is to be noted that it is
thought that even at old ages the death-rates
may diminish. Improvement in mortality
rates may cause a marked increase in the
total numbers, particularly on account of
the larger proportion of old people.

As to the age at which people marry it is
remarked that the tendency to marry earlier
was to be noted during the period 1911-32,
and this tendency increased after the latter
date, and it ‘may reflect the growing
acceptance of family limitation by means of
birth control’’; and this acceptance must
be regarded as an influence making for a slow
fall in the average size of the family. But “ it
is clearly impossible to predict confidently
the future trend of average family size,”
though certain alternative assumptions were
made use of in the calculations of the
Commission.

A table is given of the average annual
births, ‘‘ projected on the assumption that
average family size is constant at the same
level as among couples married 1927-38,”
that mortality continues to fall and that
there is no net migration. Perhaps the most
useful, and simple, figure to be derived is
that 700,000 births a year might be looked
upon as a kind of limiting number, “ the
maintenance of such an annual flow of
births would sustain a population about
equal in total numbers to that of the present
time.’’ The table carries us as far in the
future as A.D. 2047, and we need not take
the calculation too seriously as regards the
distant years. If we limit our outlook to
1977 we shall find that the Commission gives
a. projected number of annual births of
689,000, about the same as in 1933-7. But
the figure does, of course, depend upon the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

assumptions made. It is clearly stated that
it is the size of the family that will be the
decisive factor.

Figures are given of the projected size of
the total population on three different
assumptions of the size of the average completed family. If we content ourselves with
the year 1977, the three different figures are,
in millions, 50:7, 51-8 and 48-6. The actual
figure for 1947 was 48-2. It may be added
that it is shown that the population of the
working ages, 15 to 65, will remain remarkably constant until 1977, on any of the
chosen assumptions, at about 33 million.
So there is not much to make a song about !

The use of the size of the average completed family in the method adopted for
measuring reproductivity is dealt with, at
some length, in an appendix written by the
assistant secretary to the Commission. This
appendix will repay study by those interested
in population “ projections.”’ It is first
noted that, at present, fertility clearly much
more than balances mortality, but having
regard to age structure, may be an unreliable
guide to future growth.

Then, glancing at a “life-table ’’ population, in which the number of births each
year is equal to the number of deaths, if we
take this figure as 697,000 (the average
annual number of births in Great Britain in
1935-8), and we multiply this figure by the
average expectation of life at birth, in years,
which is now 65-08 years, we obtain a “‘ life
table’ population of 45-4 million. It may
be noted that in 1942 the Registrars-General
used the figure 700,000 as a kind of standard
figure. But it is shown that the average
actual population for that period was 45-9
million. An interesting comparison, but no
more. ,

The calculation of replacement used to be
carried out by means of the net reproduction
rate of the late Dr. R. R. Kuczynski, and we
were all of us accustomed to this method, or
the slightly modified one of the RegistrarGeneral entitled the effective reproduction
rate. This rate “ defines the trend of numbers per generation that would ultimately
result from the indefinite continuance in
force of the age-specific fertility and morTHE ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION

tality rates ’’ adopted. It is pointed out that
“the index of replacement of the parental
age group (15-49), as a whole, is a sufficiently
accurate approximation ”’ and is easier to
calculate.

But the ups and downs of the birth-rates
make the above methods unsatisfactory
guides, We have had ample evidence of this.
The defect of the method is that “it defines
the demographic habits of the population in
terms of age-specific fertility and mortality
rates of a particular year or series of years.”
Then we have the following important pronouncement, ‘‘ If there is any fundamental
element in the fertility habits of married
couples, common sense suggests that it lies
in the average size of their completed
families ; and the statistics show that this is a
quantity which, even in disturbed times, has
not fluctuated irregularly.”

We then come to the calculation of replacement from a consideration of the size of

completed families. The calculation is more
complex than that of the net reproduction
rate to which we were accustomed, but the
steps can be followed in the appendix men
tioned. It might be a good thing if, eventu- .

ally, a complete numerical example, in all its
steps, were given. Meanwhile the character
of the method can be ascertained from the
appendix.

A warning is given that the method has
difficulties and defects of its own. But the
public is sure to like the fixing of the szze of
the family as the criterion, and will understand that, as judged by this investigation,
the average size, viz. 2-2, is slightly, though
only slightly, below eventual replacement
level. But this does not mean that the
population is likely to diminish for a long
time.

The following is the “‘ Summary of Conclusions ” arrived at by the Commission :

If there is no substantial net migration, the
following developments may be confidently pre
dicted, even allowing for a considerable degree of
uncertainty about future births :

(i) Total numbers will continue to grow in the
near future, perhaps even for another
generation. ‘The growth will not be rapid,
and the further addition to the population
which can be expected is not large.

I2I

(ii) The population of working age will remain
at about its present size for at least the next
thirty years, though it will come to form a
somewhat smaller proportion of the total.
The population of young adults (15-39) will
show a fall of about 1-4 million in the next
fifteen years.

The number of old people (over 65) will grow
steadily over the next thirty years, the
increase amounting to at least 2-3 million
and very probably much more. The proportion of old people to the total will increase
considerably.

(iit)

(iv)

It is not for an old person to object to the
last prediction.

In the above Summary it is stated that the
forecast takes no account of substantial net
migration. But the Commission has some
important remarks to make upon this matter.
Three possibilities are considered, namely :
no net migration ; a net emigration of 50,000
a year; and a net emigration of 100,000 a
year. Taking the middle assumption, the
projected total population in 1977 works out
at 48-8 million, i.e. rather larger than at
present. The migration would, of course,
affect the age structure, and the 15 to 65
group would be slightly, but not very materially, reduced. Then there is some discussion
on the effect of considerable and continuous
immigration ; but we may hope that this is
not in store for us! ©

It is thought by the Commission “ necessary to accept the fact that, assuming Great
Britain’s economic position does not deteriorate, the flow of emigrants from Great Britain

. is unlikely to be more than about a third
of the number of immigrants which the other
Commonwealth countries would need... .””
This problem, of the supply of emigrants to
the other British countries, involves. other
considerations beside that of our numbers at
home, but our numbers and the population
trend have a marked bearing on _ interCommonwealth policies. The maintenance of
the British element is a matter of vital con-.
cern to the whole Commonwealth, and it is
urged by the Commission that this grave
problem should be studied jointly by the
governments concerned. An admirable suggestion ! .

We may end by quoting a paragraph on
122
page 126 which is at least as important as
any other pronouncement of the Commission :

The general considerations which the Com
mittee on Empire Migration had in mind seem to
us to be at least as cogent now as they were in

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

1932, and Weighing the advantages and disadvantages of emigration, we have no doubt that
it is in the long-run interests of Great Britain
and the Commonwealth as a whole to maintain
the flow of emigrants from Great Britain to the
other parts of the Commonwealth at as high a
level as‘ possible.

ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION AND
THE SOCIETY’S AIMS
By C. P. BLACKER

N April 13th, 1945, oral evidence was
(_) sien on behalf of the Soczety to the

Royal Commission by Dr. J. A.
Fraser Roberts, Professor A. J. Lewis and
myself. Previously, a memorandum prepared at the request of the Royal Commission had been submitted, and it was mainly
about the contents of this document that we
were questioned. The memorandum was
published in the October 1945 issue of the
EUGENICS REVIEW.

Now that the Royal Commission’s report
has been published we may profitably turn
back to our memorandum, to-day more than
four years old, and ask ourselves how far our
points have been met.

We have many grounds for satisfaction.
Indeed, the report of the Royal Commission
compares well with the Brock Committee’s
report as a document almost completely
vindicating the Society’s policy as presented
to these two bodies. Let us compare our
written evidence with the relevant recommendations of the Commission.

Our memorandum consisted -of eleven
sections. It begins by quoting Galton, whose
conception of what eugenics is, and what it
aims at, has been partially lost sight of in the
controversies of later years. Galton contended

that the inborn qualities of future generations

should resemble the better rather than the worse
moiety of the nation to-day ; and that our im
w

perial and world responsibilities impose on us a
special obligation to foster the valuable inborn
qualities of our people.

Much attention has been paid by eugenists
in the past to the question of differential fertility ; and a chart, specially prepared from
the report of the 1911 census, of the standardized fertility of each of the eight social classes
into which the population of the country was
then divided, was included in our memorandum. Less attention, we said, was paid
to-day than formerly to differences between
classes, and more to those between intelligence. Perversions of eugenicS such as the
doctrines of race superiority had somewhat
spoiled the word eugenics, which stands in
need of rehabilitation. We compared the
liberal and authoritarian conception of
eugenics, the essential difference lying in the
use made of the expert. In the authoritarian
system the expert is vested with powers
whereas, in the liberal, his function is never
more than advisory.

The word eugenics contayns a challenge—
to define the particle ‘ ’ Each person is
entitled to his own views ‘which will reflect
his private system of values. We advanced
five standards :

(a) Sound physical and mental health and

geod physique ;

(b) Intelligence ;

(c) Social usefulness ;

(d) Freedom from genetic taints ;
