WARNINGS FROM NATURE
Or Seven Red Flags from Biology

(The Galton Lecture, 1931.)

By PROFESSOR SIR J. ARTHUR THOMSON, M.A.,
LL.D. (Edin.; McGill; et Calif.)

ALTON has told us that his domi
nant impression on reading The

Origin of Species was a feeling of
freedom. This liberation, acting like a
ferment on his own genius, led him to think
of applying evolutionist principles to human
evolution—and this became the ruling idea
of his many-sided life. If man can breed
stock, he said, why should he not learn to
breed himself? Why, with all his knowledge should he not breed better, and why
should he not cease mixing good seed with
bad? Galton was a pioneer in the application of the idea, still only dawning, that one
of the surest lines of progress is to apply
science in general, and biology in particular,
to the practical problems of human life.

On a different path, but imbued with the
same idea, was Pasteur, who had the vision
of Homo sapiens not only as an evolved, but
as an evolving species, whose health could
be improved, whose kingdom could be
extended by the application of biology—
more biology. Galton and Pasteur were to
Darwin as works to faith.

A fine outcome of a distinguished lineage,
Francis Galton naturally thought much of
heredity ; and, as everyone knows, he was
one of the first to realize the potency of
statistics as an organon in studying the
racial mass-changes in man, thus laying
one of the foundation-stones not only of
genetics, but of sociology. It is also to be
remembered that independently of Weismann, Galton enunciated the idea of the
continuity of the germplasm, which explains
why like begets like, and proclaimed scepticism as to the transmission of acquired
characters or modifications. We should
remember Galton’s natural and acquired

preoccupation with heredity, for thus we
understand better why he laid so much
emphasis on one side of the biological
prism—the inborn qualities of the organism—and relatively little on the influence of
environment or on the modifications due to
functioning. He was, of course, far too
shrewd not to recognize that Place and Work
are potent factors in life, as well as the
Inheritance of the Folk, to shift from biological to sociological terms ; but he was persuaded that what counted for most in the
long run, was what was inbred in the bone
and imbued in the blood. Thus in his ideal
for mankind what stood out most prominently was an improved breed—eugenics—
and thus the application of biology that he
most believed in was based on a study of
human heredity.

In a fine passage in the third volume of
the great Life, for the completion of which
the biographer deserves our hearty congratulations, Karl Pearson speaks of the
way in which Galton’s thought and work
were unified and inspired from 1864 to 1911
by the aim of studying human heredity so
as to control the evolution of racial qualities ;
and he sums up Galton’s hope for man in
the graphic sentence: ‘‘ to tame by science
the nescient waywardness that lays waste
his stock,”’

There will be general agreement, especially in an audience and on an occasion
such as this, that Galton’s lifework was
of high importance in the history of science,
and that it will be appraised more and more
highly as its significance for civilization is
even more actively appreciated ; but it is a
mistaken homage to speak as if this pioneer
was able to take a perfectly balanced and
8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

perfectly synoptic view of the problems of
human evolution. ‘Thus we deem it no disloyalty to express our judgment that Galton
did not adequately take account of the influences of environmental and functional
nurture, both biological and psychological ;
that he looked for guidance too exclusively
to the study of human heredity ; that he did
not sufficiently appreciate the ethical factor,
which he deliberately ruled out of court ; and
that he did not allow enough for society and
the science thereof.

A BROAD BASIS FOR EUGENICS

The years pass and the scientific survey
becomes more and more all round or synoptic.
Thus, if eugenics means the application of
biological certainties to the control of man’s
hereditary qualities, we are bound to ask
how many of these biological certainties are
being given the consideration they deserve.
Heredity is most important, because most
relevant ; but it is only for the analytic purposes of investigation that it can be considered by itself. Environment and function
are potent factors in development and to
some extent in evolution. Selection is a
subtler evolution-factor than even Galton
knew, as Dr. Fisher has recently been showing. The psychological and sociological
aspects have a eugenic importance not yet
sufficiently appreciated. And how can we
leave ethical qualities out of consideration
because they are so relative, when even the
cattle-breeders are careful to take account of
the moral qualities of their cows!

But my purpose here and now is to show
that the tactics of eugenics are gratuitously
weakened if the suggestiveness of Animate
Nature is ignored. Man has been on the
stage for perhaps half a million years—what
a short Jehovan day compared with the five
hundred million years or more since the
Drama of Life began! Man is at present
the climax of evolution, head and shoulders
above the creation with which he is solidary,
an emergent mutation with a distinctively
new note that made all things new; but has
he not something to learn from the gamut
of Organic Life—from the lilies and the
grasses (even from their meaningful evolu
tionary contrast as floral and vegetative),
from the foxes and birds (even from their
eugamics)? For hundreds of millions of
vears there have been experiments with life,
novelties far more original and daring than
any ingenuity of the eugenics laboratories—
all honour to these none the less. Would
you then argue from mice to men, we are
asked ; and we answer that it may be more
fallacious to leave out animals altogether.
Man, so often maimed in the struggle for
existence, so often the worse as well as the
better of his society, has he nothing to learn
from the exuberant positive health characteristic of animals, from their almost universal beauty, from their courage and affection
and joie de vivre?

Galton seldom referred to animals as of
any significance in eugenics; and yet in
addition to their practical suggestiveness,
we have even as students of heredity to recognize pre-human strands, for good and ill, that
enter into the fabric of human life, for Man
cannot be thought of as a mental and moral—
still less protoplasmic—Melchisedec ‘‘ without descent.”’

So in our tribute to the founder of eugenics, we venture in this address to turn our
face to the animal kingdom, and since he
included in the scope of his study the
agencies that impair our racial qualities, we
are restricting our attention to the warnings
—the red flags—that we find here and there
in the varied field of animal life. Eugenics
means biology applied towards a particular
end ; we have not nearly finished our biology
yet ; and we cannot finish even the relevant
parts of it if we confine our attention to our
own species.

EXTREME DIVISION OF LABOUR

1.—From among the red flags for eugenists I shall select seven, and first of all the
risk of carrying division of labour too far. In
the underground nests of the Honey-ants
(Myrmecocystus), frequenting the Garden
of the Gods in Colorado, there is a specialization of workers to become animated
honey-pots-——not so animated either, for they
haug motionless by their clenched claws to
the rough rafters, month after month; and
WARNINGS FROM NATURE 9

if they tumble off they cannot get up again.
They look a little like white currants with
their swollen crops, and there may be three
hundred on the roof of one nest. They are
technically called ‘ rotunds’ or ‘ repletes,’
and Professor W. M. Wheeler has succeeded
in making them by feeding callow workers
with maple sugar. Some details are very
interesting. The repletes begin as normal
young workers and they have to begin
young; they are fed by their sisters, who
collect a sweet exudation from certain oakgalls ; the store of food is not utilized by the
honey-pots themselves, for it does not go
past the crop; there are many different kinds
and the habit jis an adaptation to dry countries where long periods of scarcity have to
be faced. The living bags regurgitate their
sweetness to all applicants who are fellowmembers of the community. They have
been called ‘‘ reservoirs of temperamental as
well as liquid sweetness,’’ but nothing is
known of their psychological aspects, except
that they behave amiably. They are red
flags telling the eugenist that no degree of
good breeding will counteract extremes of
division of labour. It is perhaps better to
be a plebeian than a replete.

SOCIETY OFTEN A DANGEROUS SHIELD

2.—The second red flag is the danger of
the society shield in permitting exaggerations which would be impracticable in more
individualistic conditions—an idea familiar
to readers of Dr. Trotter’s Instincts of the
Herd. There are many new departures or
variations of a desirable type which have
more chance to survive under the egis of
a society—artists and poets and mathematicians, for instance—but on the other hand
the social shelter may work detrimentally
by securing not only the survival, but the
multiplication of biologically undesirable
types. This danger is familiar to the naturalist, and the red flags recall the notice
often seen on the modernly moralized highway: ‘‘ You have been warned.”’

Under the xgis of a society many exaggerations flourish. “Think of the short life
of the summer bee, almost maniacally industrious, wearing out its brain with unre
cuperated fatigue, as has been proved up to
the hilt. ‘The worker-bee’s cerebral nervecells go steadily out of gear, and in six weeks
or so it is usually all over with the busy
bee. What socially-sheltered exaggeration
one sees in the big-jawed soldier termites,
who are very effective in warfare, yet have
to be spoon-fed by the workers! They have
very small brains and their compound eyes
are vestigial. There is also the caste of
small-jawed nasuti, who eject from the front
of their heads a colourless liquid which
entangles the feelers and limbs of their
enemies, and sometimes paralyzes them like
poison-gas. Neither big-jawed nor smalljawed soldiers can forage or even chew their
food ; neither could live for a week outside
society. Nor could the members of a masterspecies of ants who have to be mouth-fed
by their slaves. Exaggerations these, viable
only under the zgis of a society. How the
red flags wave!

STRANGLING THE INDIVIDUAL

3.—One of Galton’s great services is condensed in his contrast of phrase between
man’s ‘* natural inheritance,’’ carried in the
germplasm, and the ‘‘ social heritage ”’ enregistered in the society’s institutions and
laws, traditions and customs, literature and
art. Part of the importance of the contrast
is that it puts its finger on one of the
differentiating features of the sociological as
transcending the biological. But the social
heritage, without which man is unthinkable,
is not wholly on the plus side. It is taxed,
often heavily, as we have just illustrated by
referring to the exaggerations which it may
tolerate. But another tax is that the social
heritage may enmesh the individual, so that
his personal development is hindered. The
traditions, the institutions, the organization
continuing from the past, may handicap,
even shackle, the individual’s progress. In
short, the hand of the past, so steadying
and beneficent, is sometimes strangling.

We ourselves are partly in the net of the
feudal svstem, still more in that of the
palzotechnic or early industrial age, and
there are many other nets. But we cannot
say that we have not been warned, for in
IO

animal societies the red flags are sometimes
conspicuous, as in a few species of ants
that have become dependent on slaves or
auxiliaries, often in a huge majority. In
unpropitious weather, when food is scarce,
the slaves may be much troubled by their
master’s demands for regurgitation and by
other taxes on their temper. The impulse
to revolt must be strong, yet in most cases
the social conventions under which they have
grown up are too powerful for them; and
though they could easily break their chains,
they rarely try. No doubt there are records
of occasional revolts—Forel gives a fine
description of one—but they seem to be very
rare. ‘The social organization is too strong
for the individual—too strong for his good.

THE RED FLAGS OF THE HIVE

The bee-hive, like the ant-hill, is a suggestive climax of social organization on instinctive lines, from which man has something to learn; but it is spotted with red
flags. There is exemplary, though probably entirely non-ethical, self-subordination ;
there is admirable maternal care on the part
of workers who are not usually mothers;
apart from a few diseases, probably due to
man’s interference, there is a high standard
of health, though a very short life; and the
honeycomb is one of the most beautiful
forms of wealth in the world. ‘The bee-hive
is a marvel that angels might desire to look
into !

Yet from a human point of view—
admittedly irrelevant for the bees—how
repellent is the seamy side. In the first
place, there is the specialization of a reproductive queen, whose tongue is too short to
reach almost any floral nectary, who has no
pollen baskets or wax-glands, but who can
lay 3,000 eggs in a day. In the second place
there is the reproductive caste of non-productive, though not idle, drones, wastefully
numerous, usually futile even in their
masculinity, who are cold-shouldered or
worse when the pinch of autumn begins to
be felt. Thirdly, the whole economy of the
hive rests on the vast multitude of arrested
females, usually non-reproductive. How
unthinkable in a human society! The

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

workers have better brains than the queen,
but these brains die away from over-fatigue,
and the attractive ‘‘ Robots ’’ pass off the
stage. Behold the busy bee, certainly not
improved by every shining hour. We shudder when non-biological social reformers
refer to the human hive. Heaven help us
from going to the bees or to the ants!

SEX—AND HYPER-MATERNITY

4.—It is characteristic of the animal world
that there is very little pathology of sex—
except where man has disturbed the natural
regime by domestication, as in the case of
dogs. In many cases the sex urge is severely
periodic; in many cases the love-making is
artistic; in higher forms, like birds, there
is, as Julian Huxley has well shown, a development of psychical attractions so that
physical fondness is raised to the level of
affection, occasionally monogamous. Yet we
cannot deny the occasional presence of red
flags, especially of the nature of exaggerations.

Thus the queen of a termitary, the mother
of the whole community, is an extraordinary
martyr to maternity. After her winged
youth is over, she settles down to be an egglaying machine—not much more. In some
species she is four inches long, with a
volume 20,000 times that of a worker. She
has lost her wings and become bloated by
the enormous exaggeration of ovaries and
fatty body ; and she is marked by that rare
ugliness which is the stigma of disturbed
bodily harmony. She may lay an egg every
second for hours on end, perhaps 30,000 in
a day, and ten millions in a year. She may
live for ten years, the most fecund of all
terrestrial animals. Far be it from us to
criticize her, or the process of evolution of
which she is a tangential product; she adds
to the success of the termite race, but she is
a red flag of hyper-maternity.

—AND PARASITIC MALES

5.—A fifth red flag, of an almost deeper
dye, marks the occurrence of parasitic males.
‘The extremest case is that of the worm
Bonellia, not uncommon in the Mediterranean and occasionally occurring in the
WARNINGS FROM NATURE

North Sea. The female is like a green plum,
but with a long food-catching proboscis ; the
male is difficult to find, for he may be only
one-sixteenth of an inch in length, and hides
about the mouth, or eventually in the reproductive duct, of the female. The male is not
only a pygmy, he is an over-sexed degenerate; even his food-canal is closed. ‘The
creature starts as a free-swimming larva, like
the female; but if it settles down on an
adult female it seems to be poisoned and
arrested in development—except as regards
Sex.

Very striking is Dr. Tate Regan’s description of the pygmy parasitic males found
in a few Angler-Fishes from the thinlypeopled mid-waters of the Ocean. The
female fish may carry her mate like a little
tassel on the front of her head, ‘ wellin eye’
so to speak, or in other species on the under
surface of the body, or again under her armpit—if fishes have an armpit! ‘The extraordinary fact is that the male is entirely
dependent for sustenance on the female, for
his mouth becomes fixed on some slight projection, and the two sets of tissues and bloodvessels coalesce. The two become of one
flesh, and no divorce is possible. Dwarf
males occur among many animals, and in
this case the pygmy becomes a parasite—
indispensable, however, for the fertilization
of the eggs. As we look at this rather ugly
red flag, how thankful we are that man,
made a little lower than the angels, knows
nothing of male parasitism !

RISKS OF AUTOMATIZATION

6.—The sixth red flag waves more airily ;
it is concerned with the risks of automatization. Throughout vast stretches of the
animal kingdom there is a prevalence of instinctive behaviour, the unlearned outcome
of an inborn racial enregistration of neuromuscular linkages, in many cases probably
suffused with dim awareness and backed by
endeavour. As man has very little of this
instinctive behaviour in the zoological sense,
there is little red flag for him in the fact
that children of instinct, like ants, bees, and
wasps, often illustrate the tyranny of this
engrained routine. Some slight change in

IT

circumstances, and the creature, so effective
in ninety-nine case out of a hundred, is nonplussed, it may be fatally. When the schoolboy moves the Indian file of Procession
Caterpillars so that the head of A touches
the tail of Z, the march continues for hours
of futile circumambulation until something,
certainly not intelligence, breaks the spell.

But let us select an instance of automatization from among the higher animals where
intelligent behaviour, implying perceptual
inference, has in the main replaced instinct.
The California Woodpecker has developed
the ploy of fixing acorns by the hundred in
holes which have been bored in the stems of
trees. One sees rows of these acorns, each
well-fitted in its hole, and the neat method
of storage for hard times seems to be very
profitable for the particular species that
practises it. But the habit grows on the
birds; more acorns are stored than are
needed ; pebbles and pieces of fat are stored
as well as acorns; and hundreds of acorns
are dropped through bored holes into places
from which there is no chance of recovering
them. The ploy is often so automatic that
it has become a sort of obsession. How
thankful man should be that ‘‘ noble in reason, infinite in faculty, in apprehension how
like a god,’’ he is safe from all risks of
automatization !

VICTIMS OF HOSPITALITY

7.—The seventh red flag has a particularly repellent colour; it is the label of a
remarkable condition called ‘ physogastry ’
—an ugly word for an ugly thing. The
worst illustrations are found among the
insect-guests of certain termites, but there
are approaches to it among some forms of
termites themselves, and among true ants as
well. But let us keep to the physogastry
of guests. It is one of the few instances
of a pathological or diseased state among
animals living in natural conditions, and
apart from parasitism.

What is the phenomenon? Certain
beetles or two-winged flies or other insects
have become accustomed to live in the hills
of certain termites, and some of them
deserve to be called guests because they
IZ

make themselves pleasant. ‘They exude a
secretion which their hosts greatly appreciate. Others that have no secretion are
simply tolerated. ‘They are hospitably fed
and sheltered by their hosts, and they suffer
for it. The posterior body becomes bloated,
mainly because of the great increase of the
fat-body. ‘There is a decrease in the size of
the head and thorax, and a reduction or
actual loss of the eyes and wings. The guest
insects become very sluggish and very ugly.
According to Professor W. M. Wheeler,
these changes are modifications due to the
darkness, the stuffiness, the lack of exercise
in the narrow galleries, and to the overabundant supplies of carbohydrate food.
The physogastric guests are victims of the
‘“too-kindness’ of their hosts; and it is
very significant that the one that is best
known starts in life as an ordinary little
beetle. Our point is simply that there is not
much use in having a eugenic insect pedigree, 1f the end is a physogaster. Happily,
however, man does not know anything
about physogastry !

IN CONCLUSION

There are three considerations that we
wish to submit in conclusion. Galton’s work
leaves in one’s mind an impression of singular perfection, so far as it goes, an impression confirmed by the great Life, Labours
and Letters. But perfection along particular
lines is not the same as completeness, and
we have ventured to suggest some need of
supplementing.

(1) It seems unwise to base eugenics on
the study of heredity exclusively, since
* place ’ and ‘ work ’ must be considered as
weil as the hereditarily determined ‘ folk’;
biology is not nearly finished yet, and its
suggestions must be garnered from the whole
field of the animate, especially from the
drama of animal life which shows a diversity
even greater than that of the human drama.

(2) It must be recognized that the exaggerations, extravagances, and excrescences
which we have illustrated, are not so startling
or even repulsive in the realm of organisms
as their analogues would be in the kingdom

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of man, for animals have no ideals nor more
than adumbrations of a social heritage.
When a man deliberately becomes a parasite,
he signs his own damnation; but when an
animal enters the open door, it is in most
cases merely discovering a comfortable and
sheltered home, where food is abundant and
the struggle for existence lenient, where it
can enjoy complete material well-being and
get more than something for nothing.
There is more than this in cases where one
species of ants becomes parasitic on another,
but even here there is, of course, no ethical
note. Our proposition is simply that certain
ways of living among animals turn out to be
very detrimental, and their consequences
may have a suggestive value to man, if, in
his endless experimenting, he should adopt
ways of living which are more or less analogous. When organisms give up the
struggle for existence, including the endeavour after well-being, the drifting life is
certain to have retrogressive consequences,
whether the organisms are mites or men.

No one will even for a moment suppose
that the Red Flags were evolved as warnings to man; that would be a terribly anthropomorphic teleology. ‘They are tangential departures from the main spiral of progressive evolution, which arose in certain
conditions of momentum and circumstance,
illustrating perhaps the tax that evolution
has had from time to time to pay for keeping open the door of freedom—including
freedom to err. Galton seems to have
thought of a recondite purpose working,
sometimes against difficulties, in animate
evolution, working towards ever-heightened
vigour of body and mind. If man is an
instalment of the realization of that purpose, he may look on the Red Flags with a
twinge of gratitude.

(3) By means of seven illustrations we
have tried to suggest that Organic Nature
has some useful warnings for man. But the
collection of these is apt to give an erroneous
impression—as if Animate Nature was
dotted all over with red flags. That this is
the very reverse of the truth is our concluding remark, for Nature is much more of an
inspiration than a warning.
WARNINGS FROM NATURE 13

Apart from parasites, most of which
establish a live-and-let-live modus vivendi
with their hosts, and apart from human
interferences, there is hardly any environmental, functional, or constitutional disease
in Nature. ‘The general statement is safe
that Nature is all for health—positive health.
Natural selection, except for parasites,
works persistently in that direction. Apart
from parasites and a few exceptions like
domesticated animals and physogasters,
Nature is all for beauty—which is often the
outcome of orderly growth, harmonious living, and strenuous eurhythmic endeavours.
Even if we keep to birds and mammals, we
see that there has been persistent selection
of nimble wits and of such primary virtues

as courage and affection. In many cases
there is enough sex selection to secure
eugamics, and enough of natural selection to
secure more than an elementary eugenics.
The better families survive. In this vein we
might long continue; we find patterns and
inspiration in Animate Nature.

Galton was one of the pioneers of the
dawning biological era, when there will be
more deliberate and widespread appeal to
biology for man’s guidance in regard to
many of the practical problems of life; and
we honour him no less when we seek to
broaden the biology and bio-psychology and
bio-sociology which have to be applied if our
evolution is to become more all-roundly
progressive.

 
