THE EUGENICS REVIEW.

Some Birth Rate Problems.
By Magsor Leonarp Darwin, Sc.D.

1. Is there a growing correlation between efficiency and infertility ?

The war has turned the attention of many to questions connected
with population, and although the essential problems remain unaltered, this seems in consequence to be a suitable occasion for considering what should be the attitude of eugenists towards certain birth
rate problems. Even if the necessity for reducing the birth rate of
the less fit, and for increasing the fertility of the more fit, be accepted
as the basis of the eugenic creed, it will be difficult for several reasons
to include within the compass of one address even an outline of all the
points which ought to be considered before sound judgments can be
formed on the questions to be discussed. In the first place many of
the topics necessarily touched on are of a highly controversial character, and in regard to a few of them I fear I may not hold opinions
identical with those entertained by some of my colleagues on whose
judgments I place great reliance. Then, again, there are certain less
obvious influences at work, tending very slowly to affect the population
of civilised countries both as regards quality and quantity, which
must not be overlooked. Lastly, in any such discussion it is necessary to include topics outside the scope of pure eugenics; because we
are often faced with the difficult task of weighing in the balance the
immediate social and economic benefits arising from certain causes
against the probability of deterioration in the racial qualities of the
nation slowly taking place as the result of the same causes. In fact
my address must be regarded rather as being intended to initiate
a discussion than as an indication of finally settled opinions.

One of the more complex and disputable slowly arising effects of
modern conditions, which has to be considered, is that held to be due
to the fact that in any social system, where competition is not wholly
excluded, it must always be easier to attend to the interests of the
members of a small family than to those of a larger one.* As compared
with the children belonging to large families, those belonging to small
families will be likely to receive a better education and in many other
ways to get a better start in life, with the result that they will onthe
average rise higher in the scale of society as graded by the incomes

*Many will hold that it is advantageous to belong to a large family. See
Problems of Population and Parenthood, Chapman & Hall, 1920, pp. 395-396.
But the problem of the relative advantages to children whilst remaining in the same
social grade as their parents is not the same as the problem of the probability of
their moving out of it one way or the other.
148 EUGENICS REVIEW.

earned. But the size of the family depends, amongst other things, on
the inborn qualities of the parents, that is on the qualities which obey
the laws of natural inheritance. The children belonging to small
families thus sorted out into the better paid ranks will, therefore, in a
measure inherit certain natural qualities which will tend to promote
the appearance of small families amongst their descendants; qualities
which include both physiological infertility and those temperaments
which favour either late marriage or voluntary limitation after
marriage. In fact, the possession of heritable qualities resulting
in a low rate of multiplication and the receipt of high pay or wages
may be expected to become slowly more and more closely correlated.
At the same time, but without any reference to the size of the family,
it has been suggested that the more efficient members§of society will be
continually winning their way to the front; and as their greater efficiency must be due in some degree to certain heritable natural qualities,
it follows that these natural qualities will in like manner be passed
on to some extent to their descendants. Hence the conclusion arrived
at is that greater natural efficiency will also come to be associated in
some measure with higher pay or wages. This latter association, it
may be remarked, is likely to be reinforced by the greater power of
selection in marriage possessed by the well-to-do as compared with
the poor.* Now as most marriages take place within the same economic social grade, it follows from these premises that the well-paid
and naturally efficient will continually keep mating with the wellpaid and naturally infertile; and that, by the mingling of these two
streams, natural efficiency will as the generations succeed each other
come to be slowly but increasingly correlated with natural infertility .t

If a theoretical study of the causes now at work in our midst leads
us, as above suggested, to believe in the existence now or in future of
this disastrous correlation between natural efficiency and natural infertility, it behoves us to enquire whether facts conform with or refute
this belief. In any such enquiry as to existing conditions, many difficulties have to be faced, too numerous here to be considered. Unquestionably the well-to-do now have smaller families than the poor;
but in my opinion this is certainly in a measure due to their greater
wealth placing within their reach more of the pleasures and interests
which compete with marriage and parenthood in attractiveness, and
which, therefore, tend to reduce the size of families by promoting
both late marriages and voluntary birth limitation after marriage.&It
is, however, impossible to prove that the relative infertility of the
better paid is entirely due to this or any other environmental effect ;
and facts do not forbid us to believe it is in part due to their being
endowed to a greater extent with those hereditary qualities mentioned above as favouring the appearance of small families.

ir

*In times gone by the death rate was higher all round; and this higher death
rate, by having more effectively weeded out the same inferior types among the poor
than among the rich, may have reversed this effect, and have thus tended to
correlate poverty and natural efficiency. The more rigid the barrier between
elasses the more probable would have been this result.

{See article by J. A. Cobb in ‘‘The Eugenics Review,’’ January, 1918, Vol,
IV., No. 4, p. 879, —
SOME BIRTH RATE PROBLEMS. 149

When it is remembered that any increase in the facilities for interchange
between the classes, however desirable it may be, must tend to increase
those selective effects which are due to the advantages possessed by
small families, it must be admitted that, even without the support of
existing facts, students of heredity are justified in having grave fears
that efficiency and infertility will come to be correlated in the

future .*

2. Complete equality of opportunity cannot be advocated as
a remedy.

Those who do entertain any such fears will be led to consider the
advisability of devising some means of preventing this undesirable
correlation from arising or increasing; and as the origin of the trouble
would be due to the advantages now possessed by small families,
obviously a cure could be found by putting all young people on an
equal footing in regard to such advantages. There is, moreover,
another eugenic argument in favour of such an even start in life for
all, and that is that if all the differences in environment were to be
removed, differences in success in life would obviously then entirely
depend on differences in inborn qualities. Under these conditions
there would be far less difficulty in recognising the racial advantages
which would result from measures tending either to check the multiplication of those whose careers had proved them to be undesirable as
citizens or to increase the multiplication of the stocks proved by
attainments to be innately superior It will be seen, however, on
examination that to attempt to introduce any such absolute equality of
opportunity would be a policy to be condemned, not only on racial
yrounds, but also because of its more immediate social effects.

Dealing with these non-eugenic considerations in the first place,
the policy of an even start in life would involve all children being
removed at birth from their homes; for parental care is of immense
value, and the fewer the children in a family, the more time could the
parents devote to each one of them. In spite of Plato’s advocacy of
this proposal, it must be dismissed, both as being utterly repugnant to
mankind, and as being likely to produce disastrous social consequences.
For practical purposes it is more important to note that to give all
children an even start in life in every respect would involve all being
placed on an equality in regard to financial conditions. But if no parents
were to be permitted to spend more on any one child than is expended
by the parents of the largest and poorest families on any one of their
children, then the State would have to step in and to cover practically the whole cost of maintenance of every child, including house
rent beyond that paid by the childless. In fact, every economic
check on an increase in the population would have to be removed.
Now it is certain that economic conditions do affect the birth rate toa
considerable extent ; but how great would be the effect in existing cir
 

*Dr. Stevenson’s paper in the Journal of the Royal Statistical Society for
May, 1920, should be studied in connection with this subject; for he there gives
reason for believing that even as late as about 1830 there was comparatively littl,
differences in fertility between the classes,
150 EUGENICS REVIEW.

cumstances of the removal of every financial brake on over-population
it is impossible to foretell.

In considering the effects of any growth of the population, it is
important to realise that even a moderate continuous increase of numbers would in all probability lead to a lowering of the standards of
life, as I have endeavoured to prove elsewhere.* This conclusion is
based on the fact that the state of our civilisation depends in a measure
on the ease with which the necessaries of life can be produced; a fact
most easily realized by imagining what would occur if all our energies
had to be expended on the production of food, and by noting that we
should then of necessity have to lapse back to a state of naked savagery.
The things needed for self-improvement and a higher life nearly all
require time both for their creation and for their utilization, and the
greater the amount of time set free for such needs, the nearer could
human beings attain to their ideals. It follows that as soon as the
production of food reaches the stage known as that of diminishing
returns, that is as soon as any additional workers employed on the land
would find it harder than the existing population to win the necessaries of life, then any further increase in the population would tend to
lower the civilization of the nation as a whole. This deteriorating
tendency might no doubt be overcome for a time by the impetus of an
existing movement towards higher things, but such a counteracting
influence could not for ever stop the commencement of a downward
movement. And as most authorities agree that, taking the world as
a whole, agriculture has now reached or is nearly approaching the
condition of diminishing returns, does it not follow that any continuous
increase in the population would sooner or later result in a lowering of
the standards of life ?

Though we cannot exactly foretell the consequences of a further
adoption of the policy of an even start in life, it seems to me certain
that if fully adopted it would produce very harmful social results
through over-population. As there always has been and always will
be a widespread and praiseworthy desire to help all young children,
this will ever lead to a demand for the removal of all those financial
strains falling on parents which result from a proper care of the
children. These demands will generally be made without it being
perceived that these financial burdens on parents constitute the most
effective existing check on fertility, and in ignorance of the harmful
consequences which their removal would probably produce by
increasing the distress due to over-population. If a personal
opinion on a matter not eugenic may be permitted, no material
advance in the civilisation of the masses in India will be possible as
long as their numbers continue to increase at the present rate; the
troubles of Ireland have been in no small measure due to the
difficulty of finding work for additional hands; and in the past the
desire for expansion because of an increasing population has been
one of the main underlying causes of war.

It is, therefore, of the highest importance that statesmen should
realise not only the dangers likely to result from the lessening of

 

urnal of Royal Statistical Society, January, 1919.
SOME BIRTH RATE PROBLEMS. 15!

these or other safeguards against over-population, but also that their
continued maintenance should be regarded by all who care for the
future welfare of their nation as being amongst the most important of
all social problems, and as likely to become more important with every
growth of democratic sentiment.

8. Birth limitation as a check on population has had serious
dysgenic effects.

As to the possible checks on over-population, our attention is
naturally first directed to voluntary birth limitation. In discussing
this subject I do not propose on this occasion to consider the methods
used, except to’say that abstinence in marriage must be inc'uded
amongst them.* Nor doI intend to deal with the moral questions
involved, though they are of the highest importance, for time
makes it necessary for me to limit myself to a consideration of
the racial effects of these practices. As these anticipated effects
would result from changes produced in the birth rate, it many be as
well first to note that a knowledge of the possibility of birth limitation
might make some persons more willing to marry by lessening the fear
of all the many troubles connected with the bringing up of a large
family. Any increase in the practise of birth limitation might,
therefore, result in an increase in the marriage rate of persons who are
capable of taking thought for the future and who prefer a small family
to either no family or a large one; and in this way it might increase
the birth rate of a part of the population endowed with good natural
qualities. The resulting additional births would, however, we may
be sure, be more than counterbalanced by the decrease in the number
of births resulting from this assumed spread of the knowledge of the
methods of birth limitation; for birth limitation seems always to have
reduced the tota] birth rate in the past. All that can be said is that we
here find a cause tending somewhat to lessen the dysgenic effects of
birth limitation about to be considered.

The enquiry which we have to make with regard to birth limitation is not only whether it would place an adequate check on fertility,
but also whether that check would be in other respects beneficial or
harmful. As to the first of these questions, the low birth rate in
France appears to indicate that birth limitation can under modern
conditions prevent any increase whatever in the population, and if
numbers only are to be held in view, its adequacy as a brake on overpopulation might often be sufficient. But there is much evidence to
prove that during the last half century or so the inferior types,
especially those inferior in moral and mental qualities, have been
multiplying more quickly than, for example, the skilled mechanic and
the hard-working professional man. Many considerations point to the
conclusion, moreover, that the more widespread adoption of the practice
of birth limitation amongst those more highly remunerated has been the
main cause of the greater decline in their birth rate. It follows that if
certain hereditary qualities do give any assistance whatever to men

*Though medical questions are not here dealt with, due weight must of course
be attached to any risks of immediate injury to health,
152 ' EUGENICS REVIEW.

in winning higher wages or salaries—which can hardly be denied—
and if these qualities are held to be on the whole beneficial to mankind, then birth limitation, by having relatively lessened the multiplication of the stocks possessing these good qualities, must have had
a dysgenic influence; and the students of Galton’s works, who realize
how great is the influence of inborn characters, will hold that its
influence may have been thus far highly dysgenic.

Looking to the future we have, therefore, to consider whether
these harmful effects of birth limitation can be in any way obviated.
It has often been suggested that it is merely ignorance of the methods
which makes some classes of the community practise Jimitation less
than others, and that all that is needed is a wider extension of this
knowledge. It would, no doubt, be possible to lessen the difference
between the birth rate of the more and that of the less fit by inducing
the inferior types to adopt birth limitation to a greater extent than at
present, and consequently to make these practices less dysgenic than
they are now. But the well paid limit their families more than do
the ill paid because certain pleasures and aspirations rendered possible
by wealth are more open to them, and because many of these attractions do act as rivals to parenthood. And as no propaganda in favour of birth limitation could directly affect the distribution of wea!th,
no such propaganda could prevent differences in birth limitation and,
consequently, in the birth rate. Granted that there is a correlation
between the rate of remuneration and natural efficiency, it follows that
a general campaign in favour of birth limitation could not put an end
to the dysgenic influence of the differential birth rate in so far as it
was due to differences in wealth. It will, moreover, be seen in the
next section that a natural aptitude for taking thought for the future,
as;well as certain other on the whole desirable natural qualities, do
promote the practice of birth limitation; and here again, as no general
advocacy of birth limitation could immediately affect these natural
qualities, no such all round propaganda could affect the differences
in the birth rate of different sections of the community in so far as due
to differences in natural qualities. In fact as long as differences in
certain natural qualities and in wealth exist between the different
classes of the community, so long will the practice of birth limitation
‘be in danger of having a dysgenic influence.

4. If birth limitation cannot be abolished, should it be
utilized to lessen the fertility of the less fit P

If birth limitation is certain always to exercise a dysgenic influence, ought not we, therefore, to try to wholly abolish these practices ?
‘There are certain forms of birth limitation, including abstinence after
marriage, to which no one raises any objections on moral grounds;
‘but as they require great self control, and are, therefore, for that
reason, likely to be practised more by the fit than by the unfit, they
are especially dysgenic in their effects on posterity. To prevent all
the harmful racial effects of birth limitation by their abandonment,
every method must be abandoned. Then, again, when we remember
all the solid arguments in favour of birth limitation, based on the
widespread poverty and misery now so often seen in large families,
SOME BIRTH RATE PROBLEMS. 153

which could thus be greatly mitigated; and that these practices have
always existed to some extent; we must, I think, conclude that it
would be vain to look forward to a time when they could be wholly
abolished or even greatly lessened. This may be no argument in
their favour, but it is a conclusion which must not be entirely overlooked.

Another consideration which has to be taken into account is that
there are some reasons to believe that birth limitation has lately been
spreading downwards, and that consequently it has in recent years
been relatively more practised by the less fit than was the case some
thirty or forty years ago. If this be true, it would follow that if a
campaign against these practises were to have the effect of reversing
the history of the last half century, its first effects would be dysgenic.
Such a campaign would have to get beyond this first stage, and the
present excess of the practice of birth limitation by the more fit over
and above the practice by the less fit would have to be actually reduced, before this propaganda could begin to have eugenic effects.
Thus, whilst an attempt to shut the door against all limitation would
certainly fail, an unsuccessful attempt in that direction might at first
do more harm than good as regards racial effects.

It is, as has already been remarked, impossible to estimate the
effect of an entire abolition of the practice of birth limitation on the
rate of multiplication of the people; for we cannot judge what changes
would thus be produced in the birth rate, the death rate, the marriage rate, or the age at marriage. Though birth limitation was doubtless to some extent practised in 1875, the birth rate of that year was
11.8 per 1000 greater than that of 1913, and this fact alone is perhaps
sufficient to indicate that a great decrease in voluntary birth limitation—probably the chief cause of this diminution in fertility—if
combined with a further relaxation of the financial checks on fertility*
would greatly increase the birth rate, and would as an inevitable
result bring with it a great but incalculable increase in the death
rate, especially amongst the less fit. Simultaneous reforms in both
these directions would, therefore, in the end tend to defeat their own
aims by bringing the struggle for existence into full play; no doubt
with the possible result that after some centuries of poverty, famine,
pestilence and war, the race would be greatly purified by the process .{
To tolerate such an idea is to abandon all the rational aims of
eugenists, who desire to substitute some humane method of selection
for the crue] methods obtaining in nature. Remembering that birth
Jimitation cannot be wholly abolished, and that the first attempts in
that direction might be dysgenic, we ought very carefully to estimate
the effects, both moral and physical, of as far as possible, endeavouring
to secure racial progress by a wider adoption of the birth limitation
amongst the less fit, and by at the same time trying to lessen its use
amongst the more fit. Would it be right to institute a simultaneous

*No doubt the more birth limitation were to be abandoned, the less effect
would financial pressure have in keeping down the birth rate.

+If wars are frequent they must become far less dysgenic than at present for
even this hope to be entertained.
154 EUGENICS REVIEW.

dual propaganda for and against these practices ? It is in any case
very desirable that the question of the advisability of voluntary birth
limitation should soon be decided; for, until some general agreement
is arrived at, neither this policy nor any other substitute for it can be
effectively advocated. .

5. Will the practice of birth limitation™to-day tend to check
birth limitation in the future?

Here, again, there are certain slowly growing racial effects which
have to be taken into account before final conclusions can be safely
reached .* These effects depend on the fact that the differences in
the extent to which birth limitation is practised by different individuals must depend to some unknown extent on the differences between
their natural qualities or innate proclivities. As all these innate
differences are subject to the laws of natural inheritance, it follows
that the natural tendencies either to practise or to shun birth limitation
may, like all other natural qualities, be slowly modified by selection
es the generations succeed each other. These selectiv: influences can
best be realized by imagining mankind to be‘divided into two groups
or classes of equal size, namely (a) those possessing the qualities inimical
to the practise of birth limitation to a degree below the average, and
(b) those possessing them to a degree above the average. Assuminga
eondition of absolute ignorance with regard to the possibility of birth
limitation to exist, then any uniform spread of a knowledge of these
methods would obviously result in the practice of birth limitation
being introduced to a greater extent amongst group (a) that is amongst
those having natural qualities giving rise to a stronger desire for it or
less objection to it, than in the other half of mankind. As the result
of this greater adoption of birth limitation, the birth rate of this group
would, therefore, fall as compared with the national average; their
descendants would become relatively fewer and fewer in numbers ;
and their distinctive qualities, namely, those leading to a tolerance
of or a desire for birth limitation, would tend to be slowly eliminated
from the nation. Thus we see that a spread of a knowledge of the
methods of birth limitation must tend to eliminate the natural qualities favouring these practices, and that the more they are used to-day,
the higher is likely to rise a natural barrier standing in the way of
their employment in the distant future.§

What then are these natural qualities which promote the practice of birth limitation and which will, by that practice, tend to be
slowly eliminated? Amongst the qualities producing this effect which
generally produce results in other respects desirable are:—the power
of taking thought for the future (making the anticipated advantages
of keeping down the numbers of the family tell with greater effect: ;
the desire for self improvement, (against which aim family life often
opposes obstacles); and temperance (for drunkenness banishes forethought’. Amongst the undesirable qualities promoting birth limita
prt ii ic
*I am largely indebted to Mr. R.A. Fisher in regard to the ideas contained in
this paragraph, though our conclusions based on them may be different,

§ See note in small type at the end of this address.
SOME BIRTH RATE PROBLEMS. 155

tion are ambition (or forethought wrongly directed); dislike of children; and, amongst women, excessive pains of childbirth, excessive
fear of such pains, and unhealthiness in so far as it increases the dread
of childbirth.* As to highly developed sexual passions, it is doubtful
whether they should be included in this list or not; for though they
promote all methods of birth limitation, except abstinence, by making that abstinence difficult, yet, on the other hand they stand in the
way of such practices by temporarily obliterating all thoughts of the
future.t Lastly, as to any intuitive dislike of birth limitation not
based on reason, such a quality will be held to be bad or good as we
regard birth limitation as bad or good Putting aside tnis last
mentioned quality, we may, I think, conclude that the qualities
leading to birth limitation are on balance desirable, and that their
elimination by its slow selective effects would be harmful. If it
should be decided that in order to prevent over-population, birth
limitation must be tolerated, it follows that some means other than
the abandonment of these practices must be adopted for preventing
the growth of those of the above mentioned natural qualities which
are held to be undesirable. Eugenic reform must be pressed forward
in these directions by other methods.

6. Segregation, even if combined with sterilization, could not
alone supply the needed racial safeguards.

Before passing on to consider the practical reforms which the foregoing considerations indicate as being desirable, it may be well to
briefly recapitulate the results thus far arrived at, together with the
universally admitted demands of eugenists. The necessary conditions for complete success in eugenic reform, if it is also to be beneficial in regard to its more immediate effects, seem to be as follows :—

1. That some adequate check on an increase in the population should remain in operation, this being needed on grounds
other than racial.

2. That the more fit should multiply as rapidly or more
rapidly than the less fit.

3. That small families should not come to the front more
readily than large ones.

4, And if it be held that birth limitation should be regarded
as a permitted practice, that it should not be the most practised
by those most naturally inclined to it.

The last two of these conditions apply to the less obvious slowly arising
selective effects. Bearing all these considerations in mind, together
with the impossibility of altogether doing away with birth limitation,
the enquiry here suggested for consideration is as to how it is possible
to build up a sound social policy on these exceedingly complex and
almost contradictory conditions, and in what way those who regard

*These qualities, together with physiological or involuntary infertility, are
those which, it has been seen, are likely to become in a measure correlated with
efficiency. See p. 148. .

fIt seems like the irony of fate that abstinence in marriage is not only likely,
but more likely than any other method of birth limitation, to increase the power of
the sexual passions in the coming generations,
156 EUGENICS REVIEW.

birth limitation as being justifiable should urge its employment in
order both to prevent its evil results and to secure racial progress as
well as certain more immediate benefits.

It will be generally admitted that we cannot either intentionally

increase the death rate or directly interfere with selection in marriage ;
and from this it follows that practical cugenic reform must operate
through the birth rate. Two questions therefore, obviously arise
when we are considering what measures can practically be taken either
to reduce the rate of multiplication of the less fit, or to increase that
of the more fit; and these are in regard for example to the less fit,
how to select them and how to diminish their fertility.
_ As to the method of selecting the less fit, what would be desirable
would be that the choice should depend on the defects of each individual
judged separately. If the proceedings were similar in broad outline to
those adopted in regard to the mentally defective or to criminals, public
support for the action taken would best be secured, and class prejudice
best avoided. But here a difficulty at once arises; for what is needed
for racial purposes is a decision in regard to inborn qualities, and not
as to the qualities which are visible on the surface, so to speak. Unfortunately we can never be quite certain how far bad environment is
responsible for the defects seen in any individual, even in the case of
such a certainly hereditary defect as feeblemindedness. All we can
say is that every mental and bodily quality is on the average in
some measure passed on to succeeding generations; and this is so universal a law that it cannot be entirely due to the similarity in the
action of the environmental influences affecting parent and offspring.
But from this consideration it does follow that we are forced in a
measure to rely on the average results of experiences gained in the past
in framing our eugenic policy; though, as regards each individual,
the judgment can only rest on his personal qualities, whatever part
environment may have played in moulding them.

Having selected the less fit by any such approved methods, how
could we diminish their fertility ? As to convicted criminals, imprisonment has this effect to a limited extent. As to the feeble-in-mind,
the law now permits segregation, or detention in comfort; and it is to
be hoped that this method will be more widely used in the future in
the case of all other persons proved to be biologically defective in a high
degree. Then as to sterilization, that method has also been advocated,
on the ground that it interferes less with liberty than does segregation.
But even those who are willing or anxious to adopt sterilization as a
means of checking fertility must agree that it could only be compulsorily
utilized as the result of the qualities displayed by the individual in
cases where those qualities were grossly defective; whilst, as a volun‘
tary method, it would not touch many of the cases where it was most
needed. No doubt to prevent parenthood in the case of a markedly
defective person is more advantageous than in the case of one only
moderately defective ; but there are reasons, too complicated to be stated
in few words, why the relative advantage of dealing with the grossly
unfit is not nearly so great as our common sense would lead us to believe *

*See article in the ‘‘Eugenics Review’’ for October, 1918, Vol. X., No. 3,
‘*The Need for Widespread Eugenic Reform.’’
SOME BIRTH RATE PROBLEMS. 157

Bearing this in mind he would indeed be a bold man who would advocate
the use of segregation and sterilization on a sufficiently extensive scale,
not only to prevent parenthood in the case of the grossly unfit, but also
to deal adequately with the less fit; for it must always be remembered
that as long as an increase in numbers amongst those below the average
in racial values outweighs any increase that may be taking place amongst
those above the average, so long will the racial qualities of the nation
be deteriorating. Under no circumstances could segregation, with or
without sterilization, be relied on as the sole means of diminishing
fertility where that is desirable; and the grossly unfit ought not to be
regarded as the only class to be considered.

Nore.—lIn my address I have discussed the racial effects of a spread of a knowledge of the methods of birth limitation, but not the selective effects of
an advocacy of their use or disuse, which is a distinct and difficult question.
As an advocacy of anything is meaningless in the absence of a knowledge
of the thing in question, let it first be assumed that, before the advocacy
about to be considered began, there existed a complete knowledge of the
methods of birth limitation, and that the natural qualities of the people
were consequently producing their full effects in promoting or hindering
these practices. We are at first inclined to assume that in these circumstance an advocacy of the moral rectitude of birth limitation, for example,
would. increase these practices more amongst that half of mankind most
naturally inclined or tempted to them, as compared with the effect on the
other half consisting of those less naturally prompted in that direction. If
so, such an advocacy would tend to increase the ultimate selective effects which ,
it has been seen, a spread of knowledge of the methods of birth limitation
would be likely to produce. But further consideration may well throw doubts
on this conclusion: for when complete knowledge was making the natural
qualities produce their full effects, we could not be sure on which half of mankind an advocacy would produce most additional results. We can at all events
see that where childlessness had already been produced by birth limitation,
its advocacy could produce no further effects: whilst it would be with those
naturally averse from birth control, and, therefore, producing large families,
that a propaganda in its favour might possibly, at all events, produce most
effect. And if we cannot tell on which half of mankind a moral propaganda
in favour of—or against—birth limitation would produce most effect , complete
knowledge being assumed, we cannot forecast the ultimate racial consequences
of such an advocacy as distinct from a mere spread of knowledge in regard to
the qualities thus affected.

The foregoing argument only relates to those natural qualities which make
individuals more or less likely to practice birth timitation, not to those qualities
which tend to make any propaganda more or less effective. For example,
a@ campaign in favour of all birth limitation being held to be wrong would be
more effective amongst those either (1) more easily influenced, or (2) more
under the influences of their consciences. Those thus influenced would produce more progeny in consequence of the propaganda, and it would thus tend
to develop natural docility (or readiness to obey authority) and natural
conscientiousness (or desire to do right) in the coming generations.
