DEMOGRAPHIC DEVELOPMENTS IN GREAT
BRITAIN SINCE THE ROYAL COMMISSION
ON. POPULATION"

‘By PETER R. COX, F.ILA., F.S.S.

circumstances, there may be a boom in
births. Publications seem to be subject
to similar influences, and during the five
years between the issue of the Royal Commission Report and the holding of the Rome
Conference a wealth of books and papers on
demographic matters has been poured out.
The period 1949-54 has thus been eventful
enough to provide material for discussion if
we include not only the recorded population
movements of the quinquennium but also
the new facts brought forward about earlier
times and the fresh ideas that have recently
been advanced on certain subjects. Indeed,
it will hardly be possible to touch upon everything within a reasonable space. A special
interest attaches to the latest facts and ideas
in that they throw some light on the more
controversial aspects of the monumental
work of the Royal Commission. |
To give some examples of the topics that
can fruitfully be considered, we have, first,
the numbers of births, which provide a
commentary on the Commission’s estimates
of the future size of the population of Great
Britain and on its statement about the
extent by which we are replacing ourselves;
secondly, the changing balance of the sexes,
which has altered their respective marriage
prospects, and thirdly the rapid post-war
reduction in deaths at the younger ages and
the steadily increasing proportion of old
people.
sometimes termed the purer form of demography, in which consideration is restricted
to the numbers of people recorded at cen_suses and registered at birth, marriage and

A FTER a war, or in specially stimulating

* A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugentcs
Society on December 15th, 1954.

These examples belong to what is

21

death, and the various indexes that can be
derived from them. Such matters provide
the essential background of fact which
theorists can ignore only at their peril. As
we are unable to make direct scientific
experiments on our fellows we have to wait
and patiently observe what happens to them.
In doing so we may sometimes be no more
than news reporters, but there may occasionally be opportunities for the use of subtler
arts which imagination and inspiration may
call into play. |

Among other examples of possible topics
are qualitative factors, for instance social
class differences, which are of particular
interest to members of the Soctety, and
questions of cause and effect. In general.
it is best to get the facts out of the way first,
then to recount some of the big debates and
the subjects of recent researches, and finally
to see to what extent it is possible to summarize—although it is hardly satisfactory to
try to give a very condensed statement of all
that has happened in the last few crowded.
years.

Actual Population and Projected Populations

The population projections of the Royal
Commission, prepared under the supervision
of the Statistics Committee, were published
in full in 1950; they were sixteen in number
and. included fairly wide ranges of assumptions. In the Commission’s Report of 1949
reference had already been made to three of
these projections, a group somewhat narrower in range. In comparing the expectations of five years ago with subsequent events:
it seems reasonable to have regard not only
to the Commission’s short selection but also
to the Committee’s complete series of alternatives. In order to illustrate them two
22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

kinds of. chart have been prepared, one
showing total population and the other
giving the numbers of births. According to
the American medical statistician Joseph
Garland ‘‘ the mathematics of research has
expressed itself in a multiplicity of graphs,
charts and tables with the aid of which the
average reader at a quick glance can often
learn next to nothing.” In spite of this
denunciation, it seems that we can find some
use for a few diagrams if they are suitably
accompanied by textual explanation.

POPULATION CHART §f
60 LUIN MILLIONS

 
  
 

GREAT BRITAIN

 
 

“$000

1850 1900

YEAR

Chart 1 shows the size of the population of
Great Britain during the hundred years
from 1850 onwards and the Committee’s
selection of possibilities for the next fifty
years; these possibilities include everything
from growth only a little less rapidly than
in recent years to a steady decline commencing immediately. This may seem so
conflicting a series of alternatives as to be
confusing, and of limited value, Nevertheless, the British population prospect is
generally regarded as one of the least controversial in the world today, and in international comparisons is usually dismissed
quickly in favour of a discussion of more
exciting problems elsewhere.

In order to show details more clearly,
Chart 2 gives the same information on an
enlarged scale for the upper right hand part
of the diagram in Chart 1. The extremes are
indicated by the dotted lines, and the results

flowing from the range of five alternative
fertility assumptions are indicated by the
shaded area, which occupies nearly all the

POPULATION CHART 2
60 IN MILLIONS

GREAT BRITAIN

 

(951
YEAR

ISU 2001

space between the extremes. Variations
outside the shaded area come about as the
result of alternative assumptions about ages
at marriage or about emigration. The three
projections selected by the Royal Commission for mention in their Report are represented by the heavily emphasized lines. We
may draw two conclusions—first, that the
future size of the population depends very
largely upon the fertility assumption chosen
and secondly that the Commission’s choice
of illustrative projections was rather less
optimistic than that of the Statistics Committee.

Comparisons with more recent projections
need to be made on an’even larger scale, as
in Chart 3. The shaded area shows the range
of the Royal Commission’s five fertility
assumptions, and the thicker lines on the

right show the results of two recent single

projections of the British population. The
upper one is based on the latest forecast
shown in the Registrar General’s quarterly
returns and other recent official reports,!. ?
and the lower is based on a projection made
for England and Wales in 1953 by the French
demographer M. Bourgeois-Pichat® as part
DEMOGRAPHIC DEVELOPMENTS IN GREAT BRITAIN 23

of a series of international comparisons. The
official view here seems to be that a period
of stability in fertility in the neighbourhood
of present levels may be expected over the

POPULATION (11)
IN MILLIONS

2 ot; (RG.

| Me

CHART Ss

2

@

4g
GREAT BRITAIN Oy (48?)
48 (10)
19411951 1961 = 1971198
YEAR

years immediately ahead. Precision is difficult because the full details are not available
and because the Commission used a definition
of population different from that currently
employed by the Registrars-General. It
would appear, however, that the actual
numbers of people in 1954 on a basis comparable with that used by the Royal Commission were about 49.8 millions, or about
+ million more than expected.

As may have been inferred from Chart 2,
the numbers of births in future are much
more significant than the numbers of deaths
or of migrants in determining the general
shape of the population trend. To analyse the
estimated prospects further, for the moment
reference need be made, therefore, only to
fertility. The actual and projected numbers
of annual births in Great Britain are given in

Chart 4. On the left of the Chart the history

of the last forty years is delineated—one can
see the sharp fall in births during the war of
1914-18, the boom of 1920, the inter-war
decline and the big recovery during and
after the war of 1939-45. All the five
Statistics Committee projections start at a
point well below the million mark, thus

assuming that there would be a sharp fall ©
immediately after 1947; thereafter they fan
out at different levels, some higher than that
obtaining before the Second World War and
some lower. |

NUMBER OF BIRTHS CHART &
PER ANNUM (THOUSANDS)

1000

(it)
800 »
oenl on a)
600 : — (8)
(7)
400 (10)
2007 = GREAT BRITAIN
i9n 1931 1951. ~~«0971 i991 2011
YEAR

In the event, the numbers of births
actually occurring, indicated by dots in the
above chart, fell immediately after 1947
much as predicted, and in 1951 Sir Hubert
Henderson was able to say that the number
during 1950 (then thought to be 785,000)
was very close to the Commission’s expectation. The actual number of occurrences in |
1950 finally proved to be 790,000, and since
then birth rates have fallen but little during 1951-54. In his Civil Text Volume for.
1946-50 the Registrar General for England
and Wales pointed out that during the

period January 1949 to June 1952, the

annual average had been 794,000, or 34 per.
cent above the Commission’s expectation of
767,000 (based on projection No. 8). Up to
now, therefore, developments have been not
unfavourable, and the latest official pro- —
jection, reflecting these, follows broadly
along the lines of projection number 9 of
the Statistics Committee. Bourgeois-Pichat,
however, by following number 10 appears
to have adopted a less hopeful long-term
24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

view, and to have discounted recent tendencies somewhat too heavily.

It is useful when discussing the events
of the last five years to have the Royal
Commission’s projections available as a yardstick, and it is right to apply the wellestablished actuarial technique, to which
attention was again drawn by Myers® at the
Rome Conference, of comparing past expectations with actual developments. It is not
intended to convey, however, an atmosphere
of criticism of the Commission, the Statistics
Committee or their staff in this matter, or a
sense of being wise after the event. There is
no need for criticism. The more philosophically-minded among demographers have interested themselves in the question whether or
not success in prediction is the true criterion
of the merit of a population projection, and
some hold that intelligent work based on the
best available methods is more worthy of
respect than an unimaginative mechanical
exercise even if it turns out in the end to have
been the less successful of the two in portraying the actual trend of the population. If this
view is correct, the comparisons made here
do not constitute an adverse judgment upon
the Royal Commission’s projections, except
in the limited sense that with the passage of
time they may need a little adjustment to
be of use today.

Marriages

Having ascertained the current situation
regarding births the next thing to do is to
look at the numbers and ages of married
couples and the composition of their families,
and so analyse the birth data into their
component parts. Here we come to a subject
of keen debate recently. Perks® has emphasized that marriage is a selective force that
tends to divide young adults into two classes
with different potentialities for fertility; the
married—mainly those capable of having
children and probably also those wanting to
have them—and the unmarried, who include
a greater proportion of those who are
disabled in various ways from having children
and probably also of those who do not want
them. A variation in the intensity of marriage will cause the passage of a marginal

group from one class to the other and may
well bring about an alteration in average
fertility within marriage without there
having been any change in individual abilities
or desires with regard to procreation. Owing
to concurrent fluctuations in fertility arising
from other causes, such as wars and variations in national prosperity, the extent of
this alteration is difficult to measure. Clear
evidence has however been found of the
effect of a change in the intensity of marriage
upon the relative mortality rates of married
and unmarried women. For instance, in
1931, in England and Wales, when the proportion of women unmarried at ages 25-29
was 41 per cent, the ratio of spinsters’
mortality to that of all women in this agegroup was 1.04, but in 1951 when the proportion of spinsters had fallen to 22 per cent the
ratio had risen to 1.48. It thus appears that
with the rise in marriage rates only the
healthier girls had married, and the unhealthier girls had remained single. 
If an equally big influence were exerted on
fertility by changes in the proportion marrying, it would obviously be wrong to measure
marital fertility at all, but in fact the extent
of the importance of marriage selection on
fertility is probably not so great as to preclude such measurement entirely. The
inquiry into marriages and family size may
be made; one should, however, bear in mind
that the results obtained from such analyses
cannot be entirely conclusive.

In the population projections of the
Statistics Committee the expected numbers
of marriages of spinsters under age 45 in
Great Britain averaged between 277,000 and
337,000 a year during 1947-52, but we now
know that in fact they did not fall below
340,000 during that time and indeed averaged as many as 355,000, or five per cent
above the highest expectation, over these
years. The Committee’s projections for
1952-57 ranged from 273,000 to 301,000 per
year, but in 1953 the number recorded was
about 330,000 and there will probably have
been as many in 1954. These surpluses in
the numbers of marriages are strong candidates for our choice in explaining the relatively favourable position concerning births
DEMOGRAPHIC DEVELOPMENTS IN GREAT BRITAIN 25

to which attention was drawn a little
earlier.

The numbers of marriages, although higher
‘than the Commission expected, have fallen
since 1947. Such a development was almost
inevitable, not because of a decline in the pro
portions of spinsters marrying but because |

of a reduction in the numbers of young women
available for marriage. Not only did the
numbers of births fall from year to year
twenty-five years before but also, as Hocking * § has shown, the numbers of marriages
in recent years have been materially higher
than the annual supply of girls reaching
marriageable age for the first time. The
number of women left unmarried thus
diminishes. As a result the age at marriage
tends to fall, for, as relatively fewer unmarried women are left available year by year
at the normal ages for marriage, men turn
to younger brides. In England and Wales
the proportions of spinsters marrying were
little different in 1952, age for age, from
those in 1947 but the age-distribution of
first marriages of women had become younger
and the number of first marriages had
become smaller.

One reason why marriage has remained at
high pressure for women is that the numbers
of men available for marriage have increased
relatively to those of women. The reasons

for this change are well known and can

readily be explained. Every year nowadays
"about six per cent more boys than girls are
born in this country. In the past the corresponding male surplus was converted into a
deficit because infant mortality, emigration
and war losses were all greater for boys than
for girls. These influences have been much
reduced in scale for some time now, however,
and recently have not been of sufficient
strength to prevent the emergence of an
appreciable excess of young men over young
‘women in number at ages under twenty.
Very broadly, between 1922 (when the
shortage of men was particularly acute
owing to deaths in the first World War) and
1947 the supply of potential husbands for
women aged between twenty and twentyfour improved by one-third, and correspondingly the supply of potential wives for men

aged twenty-five to twenty-nine declined by
one-third. It is interesting to note that during
this twenty-five-year period the marriage
rates of both sexes of these ages rose but,
as might be expected, the rate for women
increased a great deal more than that for men
—by 80 per cent as against 15 percent. Thus
the balance of the sexes had an important
effect on marriage rates, but it was not the
only influence; there was in addition a substantial general increase in marriage in the
course of time.

The enhanced supply of-men has had an
effect in improving the marriage chances not
only of girls but also of widows and older
spinsters. Although young women are
marrying younger, the accompanying increase in the number of older marriages has
meant that the average age at marriage of
women as a whole has not changed much.

Marriages and Fertility .
In a paper® published in 1951 the proportions of first, second and third children born
by 1946 to women who had attained the age
of sixteen in each year from 1935 to 1942
were compared. In general, the later the year
in which age sixteen was attained the greater
the number of children per woman at any
specified age; the average rate of improvement from year to year was something like 4
per cent. The improving prospects of marriage during the period probably accounted
for about 24 per cent, leaving 14 per cent as
being due to improved fertility within
marriage. A corresponding analysis of the
fertility of married women according to year
of marriage over the period 1935 to 1945
brought out an average annual rate of
increase of roughly one per cent, thus broadly
confirming this net figure of 14 per cent.
More recently, the Registrar General for
England and Wales has given, in his Review
for 1946-50, a comprehensive survey. of
fertility or, as he calls it, ‘‘ reproductive
capacity replacement ”’ over the last hundred years according to year of birth of
woman. He prepared a most interesting.
chart, which was printed in the EUGENICS.
REVIEW recently.* For generations of women.
* 46, 75.
26 7 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

who have reached the age of forty-five it
showed a steady decline as time advances in
the total number of children born, but for all
generations who have not reached the age
of forty-five it showed a recovery in the most
recent period. Much of the recovery is due to
the increase in marriage frequency. In

another analysis the Registrar General has

shown that the woman’s effective reproduction rate grew from 0.829 in 1938 to I.017 in
1950. Of this increase of 0.188 he attributed
no less than 0.147 to higher marriage rates;
he found that -another 0.056 arose from
improvements in mortality and _ stillbirth
rates. The contribution of fertility within
marriage was actually negative—it fell by
about 0.04. In view of the impossibility of
exact analysis these figures must not be
taken too literally but they do illustrate the
importance of the enhanced prospects of
marriage in connection with recent increases
in births.

Reproductivity

As the word “reproduction’”’ has been
mentioned, something should perhaps be
added about the latest developments in
connection with its measurement. Before
the Royal Commission was appointed, the
function known as “ net reproduction rate ”’
had come into general use in statistically
more developed countries because it was
considered to be the best available single
measure of the long-term trend of population
where the data were plentiful enough to
enable it to be calculated. It did not, however, survive five years of expert investigation. by the Statistics Committee and staff
of the Commission or the critical analysis of
Whelpton" in the U.S.A. It was shown to be
misleading, and as a result one hardly heard
the word “ reproduction ’’ mentioned at the
Rome Conference last year; certainly the
subject was given no prominence. As a
consequence, the proportion of time devoted
by the Conference to the theory and mathematics of population was relatively small,
and, practical work was prominent
instead.

Without an index of the kind of the net

reproduction rate there is undeniably something of a vacuum in demography, because
the trend of population is not defined.
Efforts to fill the gap by making population
projections are not very satisfactory. Realizing this, the Commission’s staff developed
a substitute in what has been called a
“replacement ’’ index and is much more
complex in construction than the net reproduction rate. The Commission used this in
their Report and went so far as to assert
categorically that there was a deficiency in
current family size in comparison with the
requirement for replacement purposes and to
mention a figure of 6 per cent for the extent
of the shortfall. In fact, however, Hajnal!?
had obtained corresponding results varying
from o to 19 per cent (that is, replacement
rates of from 1.00 to 0.81) and had admitted
that “the variety of reproduction rates is
only a reflection of the limits of knowledge
about the demographic prospects.’ ‘The
criticisms that have subsequently been
directed at the Commission’s assertion have
had a discouraging effect on dogmatism on
the subject of replacement and reproduction
and probably account in part for the
reticence on the subject in Rome.

In an effort to break the deadlock some
alternative statistical models of self-reproducing populations have recently been constructed! so as to represent the current
demographic situation im Great Britain as
closely as possible in all respects other than”
family size. The aim was to compare the
numbers of children actually born to married
couples at the end of specified periods of
married life with the number they should
have had if there was to be exact replacement.
The results obtained broadly supported the
Commission’s statement and in addition
analysed recent variations in replacement in
this country from year to year and from
couple to couple according to date of
marriage. Nevertheless they did not escape
the criticism that can always be directed
against studies of incomplete families—
namely that future developments within
those families may vitiate the conclusions
reached—and the prospect of progress in this
direction is forthis reason rather discouraging.
DEMOGRAPHIC DEVELOPMENTS IN GREAT BRITAIN yi

Family Size

If reproduction was not mentioned in
Rome, fertility certainly was, and many
alternative ways of measuring it were
mentioned; one author referred to no less
than fourteen methods. There is no agreement at the moment as to which of the many
possible approaches is the best. An aspect
that deserves particular attention here is
the question of family size—not merely
average family size but rather the respective
proportions of married couples who have had
no children, one child, two children, three
children and so on. The Royal Commission
found that the average family size in this
country had remained fairly constant for
some years, and demographers naturally
attach great value to anything having the

appearance of stability in the notoriously 
unstable field of population. It has been
pointed out, however, that uniformity of
average family size has really been the result
of two important changes which have been
going on in opposite directions and have
roughly counterbalanced one another. On
the one hand there has been a continuation
of the long-term decline in the proportion
of very large families (of six children or
more) and on the other hand there has been
some increase in the numbers of children
born to couples who have small families.

cHart §

° ( NUMBER OF CHILOREN)

 
 

(10 on more)

   

(5109)

 
  

(3 104)

  
   
  

GREAT BRITAIN

  

(i102)

   

(0)

i905

  

1875 1885 1695

1925
YEAR OF MARRIAGE

1915 1935 1945

These changes are illustrated in Chart 5,
which has been derived from the statistics
of the Family Census of 1946,% the full
Report on which has recently been published. The percentages in the ‘various
categories of completed family size (no
children, one child or two children; three or
four children; five to nine children; ten or
more children) are shown by the thickness of
the bands between the dividing lines. The
dotted lines give not unreasonable forecasts
for families that will be completed in the
near future. The year of marriage of the
parents is shown along the bottom of the
Chart. In.comparison with the big alterations of the past half-century the change
expected in the next two decades is small.

AVERAGE

6 4 Fame SIZE CHART 6

5
4

3 (a)

(b)

2 metre, gat’

GREAT BRITAIN

1875 1885 1695 1905 1915 1925 1935 1945
YEAR

The average family size corresponding to
the distributions in Chart 5 is given by the
heavy line and dotted line in Chart 6. The
small upward kink on the extreme right
represents the extent of the improvement
due to the war-time and post-war developments. While encouraging, it is of no very
great significance; it may well be accounted
for in substantial part by the lengthening, by
the younger marriages of recent years, of
cl

28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the period of time during which wives are at
risk of having children. In this connection
it is of interest to note that in spite of the
fall in average family size in the first quarter
of the twentieth century the relationship
between age of wife at marriage and relative
family size has altered but little. Women
who marry before the age of twenty still have
nearly twice as many children as those who
marry between the ages of twenty-five and
twenty-nine, and these in their turn have
more than twice as many as those who marry
between the ages of thirty-five and thirtynine. This relativity has remained nearly the
same although the absolute family size has
fallen all round.

The other two curves in Chart 6 show
respectively, on different scales so arranged

that the graphs are closely juxtaposed (a) the 
course of the crude birth rate, and (b) the
course of the legitimate fertility rate per
thousand married women aged fifteen to
forty-five in the period of five to ten years
following the marriage. While the shapes of
the three curves are generally similar, both
the birth rate and the fertility rate show
trends that are a little more hopeful than that
of the completed family size. The margin
between the crude birth rate and the legitimate fertility rate indicates an increasing
proportion in the total population of women
who are aged fifteen to forty-five and are
married. Although this margin may be
eliminated if we wish to refine the data so

as to measure fertility more appropriately,

it provides in fact a useful addition to the
total potentiality of the population to
reproduce. The further margin between
the legitimate fertility rate and the average
family size is a more subtle difference; it
arises from the timing of births. The general
superiority of the legitimate fertility curve
to the curve of family size for the past sixty
years has probably arisen from married
couples having had their children earlier in
life as time has passed.

By making comparisons such as these we
can see that the post-war baby-boom is due
largely, but perhaps not entirely, to earlier
marriage and the temporary speeding up of
family building.

Social Class Differences in Fertility

An important aspect of recent developments is the continuance of differences in
fertility between the various strata of our
society. What are these strata? As members
of the Society will know, they can be defined
in various ways—according, for instance, to
earned income or educational standard—but
having regard to what can accurately be
measured at the census and at birth registration we have to think of them mainly as the
different geographical and administrative
areas and more particularly the various
groups of occupations. Social prestige is
closely related in the public mind to occupation, and there is a fair amount of agreement
as to which occupations deserve high esteem
and which are less worthy of respect. A
recent work edited by a member of the
Society, Professor Glass,1* has dealt with the
differences between the occupational statuses
of sons and those of their fathers in the first
half of the twentieth century in Great
Britain, and has thus measured a form of
“social mobility’’. Special inquiries showed
that, if occupations were. assembled into
seven broad groups of ‘‘social classes’’, there
was a two-thirds chance that the son would
achieve a class different from that of his
father and, apart from the top group, a twofifths chance of the son improving on his
father’s performance. These figures indicate
that there has been considerable movement
between the classes in the last few decades.
Further, the sizes and compositions of the
classes have also varied materially.

Having regard to all this movement and
variation, it is interesting and perhaps rather
surprising that the proportionate difference
in fertility between the classes has changed
relatively little since 1911. Information on
this subject has become available, during the
last year or two, from three separate sources
and they all give the same general picture.
According, for instance, to the results of the
Family Census of 1946 the average family
size of couples married in 1920-24 expressed
as a ratio of the average family size of couples
married in I900-1909 was 75 per cent for
professional men and 75 per cent for labourers. For wage-earners, manual and
DEMOGRAPHIC DEVELOPMENTS IN GREAT BRITAIN 29

non-manual alike, it was 68 per cent. For
employers and salaried employees alike it
was 70 per cent. Thus there has been a
smaller reduction for the “ highest’”’ and
“lowest ”’ social groups than for the intervening strata, but the differences are rather
narrow.

The other two sources of information
referred to are the results of the Censuses of
193I and 1951. Taken in conjunction with
the two preceding Censuses these provide no
less than three different ways of comparing
the trend of social class effects in fertility
during a period of forty years. All confirm
the thesis that the proportionate differences
between the social classes have remained
broadly the same over the period IgII-1951,
with the one possible exception that Social
Class I (Professional and Managerial) appears
to have moved back a little nearer to the
general average.

The 1951 Census One-per-cent Sample
tabulations, which are at present the only
published source of information concerning
the results of the special fertility inquiries
that were made four years ago, show for
different areas and classes the number of
children per married woman according to the
length of the period of marriage. It may be
inquired whether a comparison of the relative family sizes of the various social classes
and groups at successively decreasing marriage durations will indicate the extent of
changes in differential fertility that have
occurred more recently than those shown by
the Family Census data of completed families
quoted above. Thus whereas for Social
Class I the percentage (standardized for age
of mother) to the national average family
size is eighty-six for durations of fifteen to
twenty-four years, it is ninety-four for
durations of ten to fourteen years and 100
for durations of five to nine years. The
corresponding figures for Social Class V
(Unskilled labour) are 127, 120 and II5.
These appear to denote some recent contraction in the disparity between classes.
Nevertheless they must be regarded with
considerable suspicion because the figures,
although relating to different periods of
time, relate also to different durations of

marriage. Generally speaking, the more one

_goes down the social scale, the larger the

family and the longer it takes to complete;
hence the more lowly the Class the lower the
proportion of the completed family that is
already in being at the early marriage
durations and the more the tendency of this
proportion to rise with advancing marriage
duration. For this and other reasons it is
unsafe to attempt to draw firm conclusions
about recent changes in differential fertility
from the 195r1 Census data of partially
completed families.

Mortality and Other Matters

The uniformity of the relative positions
of the social classes in fertility is matched by
a similar uniformity in mortality, again with
the possible exception that Social Class I,
now a much enlarged group, differs less than
it used to do from the general average, for
both men and their wives. In infantile
mortality, the relative levels of the classes
have remained the same in spite of big
reductions in the risk of death and an
improvement in the monetary rewards of
some occupations—miners for instance—
relatively to those of others such as clerks.

The last five years have seen sharp falls in
mortality at all ages up to middle life, to
which almost every child recently born can
now be expected to survive, but there are far
fewer signs of improvement at older ages.
Nevertheless, the proportion of older persons
in the population continues to grow steadily.
It is desirable to touch on this question of
ageing, even though there are other interesting subjects—which also deserve attention
but for which there is insufficient space in
this brief account—such as the increased
incidence of divorce, which now brings no less
than 7 per cent of marriages to a premature
end, the post-war resumption of emigration,
the inward flow from the Colonies and the
large internal population movements of
recent years.

Ageing of the Population

Every year the addition of births, and the
deduction of deaths mainly among the aged,
are factors tending to reduce the average age
30 . THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of a population, but meanwhile all living persons are becoming older. To see whether, on
balance, ageing or becoming younger predominates in the population as a whole,
we have to measure from time to time the
proportions of people in various age-groups.
Such measurements show that the population
of this country is ageing at the present
moment. One of the two main reasons is

that the annual numbers of births fifty to.

seventy years ago were both high and
increasing yearly, whereas later they declined. The other main reason has been
diminishing mortality in early and middle
life. The first of these factors is a known
quantity and the effect of the second is not
difficult to forecast, so the numbers and proportions of persons aged over sixty or
sixty-five have generally been estimated with
comparative accuracy in population projections. Thus the proportion of persons aged
over sixty-five in England and Wales in
I95I was II per cent almost exactly, whereas
pre-war forecasts, made while it was only
about 8 per cent, had ranged from 10.6 per
cent to 11.6 per cent. Starting from 10.4 per
cent in 1947, the Royal Commission arrived
at 11.1 per cent for the proportion in 1952
in almost all its alternative projections for
Great Britain. Looking further ahead, it
expected that by 1992 the percentage of
persons aged sixty-five and over would lie
somewhere between 154 per cent and 183 per
cent.

Because of this steady increase apprehensions are felt lest Great Britain should
experience a decline in the standard of
living, a lowering of efficiency, mobility and
adaptability in the economic system and a
growing sense of frustration among young
men and women. These apprehensions have
been given point since the War of 1939-45 by
an enormous growth of pension schemes of
all kinds. One result of the public interest
aroused was the setting up of the Phillips
Committee on the Economic and Financial
Problems of the Provision for Old Age; its
Report was published towards the end of
1954. A Study by a small Research Group of
the Institute of Actuaries and the Faculty
of Actuaries, entitled The Growth of Pension

Rights and their Impact on the National
Economy, has also been published. So far

‘as population trends are concerned, the con
clusions of the Group were that the present
proportion of old people is, in a sense, unduly ©
low and that its probable rise by half as
much again during the next twenty-five
years represents no more than an approach
to a normal stable situation having regard
to the reduced mortality risks of today. The
Phillips Committee pointed out further that
the future increases to be expected in the
proportion of old persons are at no greater
a rate than has already been experienced
for some years. |

The burden of the aged is likely to be
partially offset by a reduction in the burden
of child dependency. In r1go1 there were
over eleven million children under age fourteen in Great Britain, or 70 per cent of the
number. of gainfully occupied persons of
working age. The corresponding percentage
in I95I was 49, and if the Royal Commission’s projection No. 7 should prove to be
representative this would fall by 1977 to 41.
The corresponding percentages for persons of
pension age (men sixty-five, women sixty)
and over are 14, 30 and 44, giving totals of
84, 79 and 86. If non-gainfully occupied
women of working age are added they
become 130, 120, and 126. One possible
prospect for the future at least is thus
within the range of variation during the
first half of the century. As the Phillips
Committee observed, “to anyone viewing
the matter exclusively in terms of the balance
between producers and consumers. . . there
might seem little cause for uneasiness.”’ It
went on to discuss, however, certain serious
financial problems which are beyond the
scope of the present survey.

Conclusion | :
The population of Great Britain today still
exhibits the same general features as were so
well delineated by the Royal Commission,
that is to say, a moderately satisfactory level
of births, declining mortality, a prospect of
steady total numbers for some time to come
and a prospect of an increase in the proportion of the aged. If this survey of the last
DEMOGRAPHIC DEVELOPMENTS IN GREAT BRITAIN

five years has not revealed any startling
developments it at least has drawn attention
to some unsolved problems, such as the
measurement of reproductivity; some interesting technical points, such as the effects
of the change in the balance of the sexes;
some odd features, such as the persistence of
social class differences when a trend towards
greater uniformity might perhaps have been
expected; and, generally, the need for constantly observing developments and extending the range of research. |

. An indication as to the nature of the
research needed was given by Professor
Bradford Hill in 1953 in his Cutter Lecture
at the Harvard School of Public Health,?¢
when he said: “‘ One must go seek more facts,
paying less attention to technics of handling
the data and far more to the development
and perfection of methods of obtaining
them.’”’ Although his remarks related to
research in medical statistics they have
considerable relevance also for population
studies.

REFERENCES
1. Report of the Committee on:the Economic and
Financial Problems of the Provision for Old Age
(1954). Cmd. 9333.

2.

3.

Io.

“It.

13.
4.
15.
16.

. Myers, R. J. (1954).

. Hocking, W. S.

3t

Report by the Government Actuary. on the First
Quinquennial Review of National Insurance (1954).
Bourgeois-Pichat, J. (1953). Les problémes de
population Européenne. Population, 8, 21.

. Henderson, Hubert (1950). Contribution to a dis
cussion on the Reports. of the Royal Commission
on Population. J.R.S.S. 114, 38.

Comparisons of population
projections with actual data. (Paper submitted to
the Rome Conference.)

. Perks, W. (1951). As quoted in reference (9) below.
. Hocking, W. S. (1950). The decline in spinsterhood.

Journal of the Institute of Actuaries’ Students’
Society (J.S.S.), 10, 24.

(1953). The decline in spinsterhood (continued). /.S.S. 12, 119.

. Cox, P. R. (1951). Studies in the recent marriage

and fertility data of England and Wales. Population Studies, 5, 132.
Registrar General for England and Wales; Annual
Statistical Review for the Years 1946-50. Text
Volume (Civil).

Whelpton, P. K. (1946). Reproduction rates
adjusted for age, parity, fecundity and marriage.
J.A.S.A.A4l, 501.

. Hajnal, J. (1950). Reports and Selected Papers of

the Statistics Committee of the Royal Commission
on Population, pp. 303-422. H-.M.S.O.

Cox, P. R. (1953). Reproductivity in Great Britain:

a new standard of assessment. /].J.A. 79, 239.
Glass, D. V. and Grebenik, E. (1955). The Trend
and Pattern of Fertility in Great Britain. H.M.S.O.
Glass, D. V. (1954). Social Mobility in Great
Britain. Routledge. |
Hill, A. Bradford (1953). Cutter Lecture at the
Harvard School of Public Health. New England
Journal of Medicine, 248, 995-1001.
