28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

detention for a term of not less than two and not
more than four years on persons over the age of
thirty, if by reason of the offender’s criminal antecedents and mode of life such a sentence is expedient for the protection of the public. For certain
types of offenders with records of repeated crime it
was proposed by a provision to Clause 34 that such
sentences may exceed four but shall not exceed
ten years. Unfortunately the outbreak of war
last year prevented further consideration of the
Bill.

In the same issue of the Journal, Max Huhner,
Fellow of the New York Academy of Medicine,
states in a paper entitled Crime Does Pay that there
are no data concerning the 85 per cent. of those who

commit crime in America and who have never been
arrested or suspected, and that absolutely nothing
is known of those criminals who have been content
with a modest fortune or have accumulated substantial fortunes in their respective communities.
He points out that many men are brought up with
the idea that certain really criminal actions are
nothing more than good business practices and
that they are never troubled by conscience for
having defrauded stockholders. He believes that
the power of religion is the one great deterrent of
crime. The author does not state upon what
authority his figures are based, but they seem to
be unrelated to the position here.
W. Norwoop East.

CORRESPONDENCE

Psychological Research in War time

To the Editor, Eugenics Review

Sir,—Your comments on the desirability of
anthropometric research during war time impel me
to suggest that large-scale psychological research
is fully as urgently needed. Intelligence tests were
applied to all recruits in the American army by
trained psychologists twenty-two years ago. No
British psychologist, so far as I know, is officially
engaged on comparable work for the British army
to-day, although a large number are qualified to
do it, and have submitted their names under the
Central Register system. The data obtained from
such testing would be of extraordinary interest to
eugenists.

In many other ways psychologists feel that the
contributions which they are anxious to make to
the national cause are being ignored. For instance,
schemes which were put forward locally for conducting surveys of public morale, and for giving
emotional and educational guidance to evacuated
children, were killed by lack of official encouragement. Again, there is a widespread drive towards
longer hours in factories engaged on war work,
which violates all the principles established by the
investigations of industrial psychologists.

Social scientists would be the first to admit that
their achievements so far are meagre in comparison with the achievements of physical and
biological scientists. Yet surely it is clear that the
only way in which the problems of mankind can be
solved is by promoting the further scientific study
of man, and by making full use of such knowledge
as we do already possess.

P. E. VERNON.

Department of Psychology,

University of Glasgow.

Eugenics and Mongrelization
To the Editor, Eugenics Review

S1r,—In order that the eugenics movement shall
advance successfully, the eugenics organizations
must dissociate their endeavours from the widespread propaganda for race amalgamation and
mongrelization. There is little wisdom in breeding
selectively among individuals if the results are to
be nullified by indiscriminate mixing of the races.

Nearly all the arguments against the existence
of different races are coming from spokesmen for
races that desire admixture to, and absorption by
the white race, or Aryan race, using the name in
the newer adapted sense. The arguments have
utterly failed to change the truth that there are
at least three great races—the whites, or Aryans ;
the Mongolians ; and the Negroes. The Jews may
be regarded as a sub-race that in some degree, or
at least in some countries, may be absorbed by
other races.

There has been vastly less race mixture in the
northern hemisphere than the amalgamation
exponents contend. The United States is not a
nation of mixed races, as some writers allege.
There has been a small admixture of American
Indian and Mexican in some of the western states,
and a small admixture of Jews in some of the
cities. There are about twelve million Negroes,
who have a small fraction of widely diffused white
blood, due mainly to miscegnation on the southern
plantations before the Civil War. But there is
practically no Negro blood in the one hundred and
ten million whites, who are almost purely of
European descent and have absolutely no intention
of amalgamating with the Negroes.

The white race is unquestionably uniquely
beautiful and is in many respects of superior
