EUGENICS AND THE POOR LAW

THE Majority REPORT
By C. S. Locu

I SHALL endeavour to show briefly what I think is the main difference of the Reports of the Royal Commission on the Poor Law and
what is their bearing on Eugenics. The paramount difference between the two reports, I think, is this. The Majority is primarily a
report on the reform of administration. The Minority is primarily
a memoir on the reorganisation of society on a state-supported
basis. In the former the responsibility of maintenance depends
on the individual. In the latter it is transferred to the state.
This at bottom and in ultimate issue appears to me the difference.

There is in the former case the recognition that public relief
should be available only for the necessitous. The world of
society is to be a self-supporting world. The necessitous—the
exceptional—only should apply and be aided or maintained at
the public expense. In the latter case this distinction is
eliminated. All words, such as necessitous or destitute, that
imply that dependence should be the exception, and should be so
considered and provided for, are ruled out of court. Dependence
or maintenance is accepted and advocated as a permanent condition of a large part of the population. If it were not so, some
limitative policy would be outlined. But the policy proposed is
relief practically without limitation.

The care of the feeble-minded—the point where eugenics is
touched—was not dealt with by the reports, which accepted the
views of the Royal Commission on that subject. I am a supporter of the view that the feeble-minded should be dealt with
by a separate authority which should have in its charge the
administration of the mentally defective as a whole. It is
230 C. S. Loch:

alleged, however, that the Poor Law has failed to care for them,
because the Poor Law cares only for the destitute. This is
hardly the chief or the only ground. We know that under the
present régime in sickness (and in lunacy cases) there is no line of
destitution, in the sense implied by the argument, that is, there
is no refusal of all cases except those in which there is such want
of the material necessaries of life as is causing starvation.
Hence in these cases the doctrine of destitution has not been the
cause of difficulty, except in so far as in the course of administration the word, as a general term, has, like other words, been
misconceived and misapplied—a question not of principle but of
administration, and to be so dealt with. What has been amiss
has been unsuitable and unspecialised provision and administration
and a lack of power to segregate.

The question of the methods of promoting Eugenics and that
of the prevention of distress and dependence by a good administration of public assistance appear to me, though related, to be
different and to depend on different arguments. A creature
eugenically introduced into the world need not be a success in
the world. At the threshold of life bad inclinations and in their
degree bad social conditions may seduce him from his independence, and he may become little better than a dependent serf,
To prevent such results we have to rely on the efficacy of home
education and control and the many educational means at our
disposal—schools, bands of hope, clubs, etc., etc., and ‘‘ good
surroundings.” We have also to rely on an administration of
assistance guided by principles that lead to self-reliance and
self-support.

Eugenics, on the other hand, deals with the problem of
breed. Of course it may be said that everything that tends to
fitness of condition may tend to goodness of breed. And considering the question physically one might even say that men
and women treated as animals and kept as animals would physically excel as such. But if one sets aside proposals for the
state management of the breeding and birth of individuals like
those in Plato’s Laws, either as likely to cripple the intelligent
spontaneity and thus the effective vitality of the race, or as
practically impossible from the administrative point of view,
EUGENICS AND THE POOR LAW 232

there remain to us but (1) prevention in marked and definable
cases, in which the public interest in the refusal to allow
marriage is explicit, and (2) the introduction of marriage customs
or of a customary thought in regard to marriage, that may raise
selection to a higher standard. Neither the Majority nor the
Minority Report, it seems to me, throws any light upon this
question. They show that there is much purposeless, ill-supervised and injurious outdoor relief, which affects children badly.
This and some other administrative shortcomings they point out,
which do not give to children dependent on a public authority
the physical start in life to which they areentitled. And further,
in certain cases, of shiftless and unsettled dependence, in which
adults utilise for their own purposes and pleasures the provision
for assistance which is made by the state, the Majority suggest
that power to enforce a temporary or even a comparatively long
and continuous detention under special conditions should be
conferred on the authorities, subject to the approval of the
magistracy in the individual case. This proposal, though it has
been suggested from the point of view of preventing destitution
and, in so far as it may be, promoting reformation, has no doubt
some bearing on Eugenics. Jt may segregate the unfit to some
extent. But it is obvious that this would be but an incidental
result of the proposals of the Majority, if the policy of longer
detention in these cases were adopted. If the problem were
considered on the ground of Eugenics alone quite other evidence,
or much additional and different evidence, would be required to
enforce and justify the segregation of the individual. What this
evidence should be I need not here examine. All I would urge
is that on this point the utmost that can be said is that the
investigations of the Royal Commission may be suggestive, but
that dealing with other issues, they cannot be regarded as really
apposite and certainly not as conclusive. For the moment, so
far as public documents go, we have not got beyond the report
of the Royal Commission on the Feeble-minded and the evidence
they were able to collect.

For such reasons as I have mentioned, when I spoke at the
Eugenics Education Society on the Majority report, the only
evidence to which I could refer was that which bore on general
232 C. S. Loch:

conditions that seemed to point to a low standard of physical
development in some classes of persons habitually dependent on
relief. The reports of Dr. Parsons in regard to men in workhouses in England and poor-houses in Scotland and of Dr. Ethel
Williams in regard to the condition of women and children in
receipt of outdoor relief, alike indicated this. But, strictly
speaking, they throw no light on Eugenics.
