THE VALUE OF UNHAPPINESS
By SIR CHARLES DARWIN, K.BE., Sc.D., F.R.S.

dence in The Times Educational

Supplement entitled “The Value of
Unhappiness.”’ It was started on February
8th by Dr. Ralph Lynn of Exeter. University
with the words: “The idea that school
children ought to be happy is comparatively
new, although probably most people nowadays would accept it. However, a great deal
of educational discussion to-day not only
takes this for granted but also rests on a

"sence has recently been a correspon
particular theory of what happiness is. The

theory holds that school children will be
made happy if they are freed from feelings
of tension and anxiety.”

Lynn then goes on to question this
doctrine. Tension and anxiety are bound to
arise sometimes in any competitive system of
schooling, but here and now they arise
especially over the 11-plus examination that
determines which of the children are to go on
into the grammar schools. It is therefore
argued by some people that anxiety, and
therefore unhappiness, should be eliminated
by abolishing this examination, and pushed
to its logical conclusion, this means abolishing
the grammar schools. If then the doctrine is
accepted that happiness in childhood is one
of the main things in life, and if happiness
is only to be attained by eliminating. all
tension, we shall be forced to adopt a flat
uniform type of education, which will in
consequence of necessity be at a _ low
intellectual level.

Lynn points out that the principle that
happiness should be the main thing at school
is quite a new idea. In the eighteenth
century Dr. Johnson attributed his successful
mastery of Latin to the floggings he had
received, which do not seem to have made
him notably unhappy. Though in the
nineteenth century the stick tended to be
replaced by the competitive weekly marklist, it was taken for granted that this
competition was an important part of

77

education. It is only rather recently, under
the influence ‘of psychological theory—as
Lynn maintains, of a false reading of
Freudian doctrine—that it has come to be
held that these anxieties will inevitably
produce frustrations with all the complications of the psychoses so dear to the heart of
the psychiatrist. He reasons that to take
this line is to give up the stimuli which are
beneficial for the great majority, in order to
avoid the possible ill effects they may have
on a few of the weaker members.

There were a considerable number of
letters answering this challenge. Though
each writer naturally took an individual
point of view, they practically all assumed
the fashionable opinion that Lynn was
questioning. To a layman the most curious,
and really rather dangerous, feature of these
letters is that the writers were all interested
to a quite predominating extent in the
mental states of the pupils at the bottom of
the class; there was hardly a reference to the
need for providing stimulus to the pupils
near the top, who after all are much more.
important to the future of the country.

This preoccupation with the weaker members is part of the present menacing trend of
political thought which insists on absolute
equality—not, be it noted, equality of
opportunity, which is almost the exact
opposite and which was fairly well achieved
under the old system. As a cynic once put it,
equality seems to be interpreted as meaning
that no one is to work harder than the
laziest, or to be wiser than the stupidest, or
happier than the most miserable. For
example one letter urged as an argument
against the marks system that in fact the
highest marks tended to go to the ablest boy,
and this was unfair because he often needed
to put much less effort into his work than his
less gifted fellows. The inference would
seem to be that the top boy ought to be
.penalized rather than rewarded, because

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July, 1957. 49, 2.
78 ' THE EUGENICS REVIEW

he could not help doing better than his
fellows.

Other writers, indeed the majority, insisted

that the most important thing in the school
system is never to produce anxiety. Some
attempted a distinction between unhealthy
anxiety and healthy tension, but it is
obviously hard to draw this line, and the
letters give the impression that their writers
are so strongly concerned not to cause the
anxiety in their pupils that they will avoid
the danger of it by reducing the temperature
of the tension almost to zero. The correspondence closed on March 8th with a reply
from Dr. Lynn, which answered some of the
specific points raised, but broadly speaking
repeated his original views unchanged.
_ It is dangerous for one who has had no
practical experience in school-teaching to
express opinions on this subject, but to me
it seems that Dr. Lynn has very much the
best of the argument. It is all too easy to see
a pupil being made unhappy by anxiety, and
to regard the anxiety as a form of torture to
be removed at any cost, but it is surely
sentimentally unrealistic. It must be recognised that children are not always good, so
that punishment is sometimes indispensable,
and the punishment will surely make them
unhappy—is not that its aim? When a boy
is persistently near the bottom of the class,
it may be due either to stupidity or to
laziness. A’ discriminating schoolmaster
will usually be able to distinguish which it
is, and surely he is quite right to inflict
unhappiness on the lazy ones.

My own school experience is now rather a
long time ago, but I doubt if the characteristics of the human boy have changed very
much in the interval. It is true that there
was not the 11-plus examination in those
days, but there was fierce competition for
scholarships, and with the much smaller
endowments of education, the winning of a
scholarship could play just as great a part in
the determination of a whole life’s career. In
my school there were certainly boys who were
persistently near the bottom of the class, but
I cannot recall that it seemed to make them
particularly unhappy. They had never been
much higher and were used to it, just as I

was used to being only rather mediocre at
games and was not made _ particularly
unhappy by that. Indeed this matter of
games makes a good parallel, for it is a
stronger interest for many boys than is
their work, and it may cause a boy just as
much anxiety to know whether he will get
into the eleven, as whether he will pass the
I1-plus examination. Even if it were
desirable to avoid competition among schoolboys, there are so many parts of the school
life in which competition is inevitable, that
no great difference would be made by the
removal of one cause of it, and that one
cause mainly affecting the less important
portions of the school population.

Is not the doctrine of the absolute
importance of happiness at school at least
partly due to confused thinking?. The
purpose of education is surely to fit people
for adult life, and is not the best way of
doing this to submit them by gradual
degrees to the germs of the conditions they will be meeting in later life, which will
certainly often involve tensions and anxieties
and stresses. We want of course to make
people reasonably happy in later life, but it
is quite absurd to think that for this they
can be taught happiness at school in the way
they can be taught arithmetic. Indeed it
might be argued that the effect is sometimes
quite the opposite, for I know certain
schools which give many of their pupils the
feeling that no matter how they fare in later
life they will never have so wonderful a time
as they did at school. Surely it cannot be
regarded as a really good education to give
the belief that no matter what happens the
adult future can never be so great an
experience as the adolescent past.

This is not the place for a_ general
disquisition on what happiness consists in,
and no doubt there would be many different,
even opposing, opinions about it. But for a
good many people it is not so much a
condition as a change of condition; their
happiest times are when they compare the
good present with the bad past, and
conversely their unhappiest times are when
they compare past good fortune with
present misfortune. If that is so, it should
THE VALUE OF UNHAPPINESS | 79

alter the doctrine that the chief duty of a
teacher is to make his charges happy. Their
immediate happiness may be a good in
itself, but it is no more than that, and he
will give a greater contribution to the total
sum of human happiness by attending

chiefly, using whatever stimulus is needed,
whether it is pleasant or the reverse, to
fitting them for success in later life. It is
such considerations as these that have made
me agree warmly with the spirit of Dr.’
Lynn’s letter.
