THE GRAZ STERILIZATION TRIAL

Judgment of the Supreme Court
By FELIX TIETZE, Lt.D., M.D. (Vienna)

1934 (p. 259), I discussed the verdict of

acquittal pronounced by the Graz Provincial Court (Landesgericht fiir Strafsachen),
on July 4th, 1933, in what has become known
as the “ Graz Sterilization Trial.”” I mentioned that the decision of the court was not
final, an appeal having been lodged in the
Supreme Court; but I expressed the view
that a change seemed very unlikely. On May
8th, 1934, however, the Supreme Court
reversed the judgment of the Provincial
Court, and condemned most of the defendants
to varying periods of imprisonment, one of
the heaviest sentences (fourteen months)
falling on the author, who had advocated
sterilization in his lectures and writings.

The main arguments of the Supreme Court
were as follows :

The Provincial Court was wrong in holding
that the “hostile intention,’’ mentioned in
section 152 of the Austrian Criminal Law, is
an intention coloured by hostility against the
injured person. As shown in the historical
analysis of the changes in the law concerning
bodily damage, hostile intention is every
intention directed against the physical integrity, every intention to commit physical
harm on the attacked individual, even an
assault. Hostile intention, therefore, is the
intention of injuring or assault.

It is wrong to think that the intention to
assault is absent if the injury happens to aim
at an effect desired by the injured individual
himself, and is done with his consent. The
first court interpreted ‘‘ assault ’’ as an influence on the body of the attacked individual, which he did not desire, and in fact
regarded as an evil. According to this interpretation, an assault would be possible only
in connection with a hostile feeling against
the attacked individual. The Supreme Court,
however, used the word “ assault ”’ precisely

[= the Eucenics Review of January

213

in the sense of “‘ doing a physical damage.”
The hostile intention is not identical with the
intention to damage, and the dolus in the
crime of severe bodily damage need not be
restricted to a bodily injury, but may also
aim at a bodily evil of any other kind. It is
clear that in this sense an “‘ assault ’’ is every
influence on the other individual’s body
which, while doing no external or internal
damage, produces physical inconvenience
or pain.

Neither, according to the revised judgment, is the first court’s opinion founded in
in the words of the Criminal Law, which it
quoted. The words of section 152, “‘ who has
acted against a person,” do not signify hostility in the sense of hostile feeling, as becomes clear by a comparison of this section
with section 134, where the same words
“against a person”’ are used, but only in
connection with the action done. In section
134, which deals with murder, no dolus,
coloured by a hostile feeling of the perpe-.
trator against the attacked individual, is
needed. The intention to kill is in itself the
strongest indication of hostile intention. In
the opinions of the courts, as well as in the
literature, there is no doubt as to the irrelevance of the victim’s consent to the crime.
This leads inevitably to the conclusion that
such consent is without decisive consequence,
if the criminal has acted with “ other hostile
intention ”’ (§ 152).

The first court had considered as proved
that the defendants had acted with the intention of inflicting severe injuries, but held
the opinion that they were to be acquitted in
view of the fact that a hostile intention, even
intent of assault, was lacking. For the crime
of inflicting severe bodily damage, it would
therefore want evidence of a dolus coloured
by a hostile feeling of the perpetrator against
the injured individual, even if the dolus
214

divectus of committing the action was indubitably present. In such a case, however,
the “ hostile intention ” of section 152 is of
no account, being only a symptom of the
dolus indtrectus.

Further, the first court’s conception of the
dolus necessary for the crime of severe bodily
damage was incompatible with its recognition
of the fact that, in attacks against life or
physical safety, the attacked person’s consent did not exclude the criminality of the
act. This view, in fact the correct one, did
not accord with the decision that the
damaging act, to become punishable, must
be the effect of a hostile feeling against the
attacked individual. For, from the viewpoint
of this latter opinion the consent of the
attacked individual must exclude the dolus
and the criminality.

The Supreme Court concurred with the
opinion of the first court that, with crimes
against life and physical safety, the consent
of the attacked individual did not exclude
criminality, as legal values were concerned
which an individual might abandon, but
which from the legal standpoint were inalienable, their alienation being opposed to
their ethical purpose.

Against the legal conception that “ severe
bodily damage ’’ does not need a dolus
coloured by hostile feeling of the perpetrator
against the injured person and that this person’s consent does not exclude the criminality, it has been suggested that in that case
every medical operation would be a crime.
But this is untrue. For the law acknowledges
the principle that interests of higher value
might be asserted at the expense of those of
less value. The consequence is that medical
operations on certain conditions are absolutely lawful. Operations are lawful if they
are intended to save or sustain life or if
they are diagnostic or prophylactic. For
the legal interest in the preservation of
human life is greater than that in preventing
the pain, wounds, expenditure, and other
inconveniences, connected with surgical
operations.

The same considerations hold if the
damage inflicted by the operation itself
eliminates or prevents a more _ serious

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

damage of the body. Cosmetic operations,
therefore, may only be considered lawful if
the disadvantage caused by the operation is
not greater, in the general opinion, than the
advantage it may be expected to confer.
The weighing of the advantage for the
recipient and the disadvantage for the donor
in a transfusion or transplantation operation,
also determines the decision whether the
operation is legal or not. In scientific experiments the legal interest in the progress of
medicine, and especially in new therapeutic
methods, must be balanced against minor
disadvantages to an individual, who, with
his consent, of course, is operated on for
scientific purposes. But operations done for
purposes not acknowledged as advantageous
by the law are unlawful. Such are operations
destined for the sterilization of men for any
other except therapeutic reasons.

The draft for a new Austrian Criminal Law
of 1927 states (§ 263): ‘‘ Operations and
therapeutic measures are not ‘bodily
damage ’ in the legal sense, if they are in
accordance with the practice of conscientious
physicians.”” The reason is that operations
for therapeutic ends are lawful under the
existing law, and the draft follows the
opinion that they are not included in the idea
of ‘‘ bodily damage.”’

For these reasons the judgment of the first
court was to be reversed.

SUMMARY

Let me summarize briefly the differences
between the two courts.

Both the judgments agree in propounding
the question whether the sterilizing operation
as such brings with it a severe injury.
Further, neither of them doubts that,
generally speaking, the consent of an attacked
individual does not exclude the criminality
of a deed.

Yet they differ in their conception of the
“hostile intention’”’ (feindseliger Absicht)
which, according to the Austrian Criminal
Law (§ 152), is needed to make an injury a
crime of severe bodily damage. While the first
court ruled that such “ hostile intention ”’
must not be considered as present in a case
THE GRAZ STERILIZATION TRIAL

in which the effect of the injury was desired
by the attacked person who had consented
to it, the Supreme Court came to the conclusion that this ‘‘ hostile intention’ was
nothing other than the intention of damaging
the bodily integrity of the attacked indivi
215

dual. Therefore, the consent of the persons
operated on did not, in its view, change
the criminal character of the sterilizing
operations—by contrast with other medical
operations the purposes of which were
acknowledged by law as advantageous.

 

THE WISTAR INSTITUTE BIBLIOGRAPHIC SERVICE

AUTHORS’ ABSTRACTS
insure accuracy, advance information, and a saving of time and costs. Since the beginning of The Wistar Institute Bibliographic
Service in 1917, each contributor to the journals included in this service has supplied an abstract of his own manuscript. This brief
summary is printed and mailed without the delay necessary to the publishing of the complete article. Subscribers to the service thus
receive advance information from those best qualified to give it.

ADVANCE ABSTRACT SHEETS
bearing ten or more abstracts without bibliographic references, are sent for the present to members of the American Association of
Anatomists, to members of the American Society of Zodlogists and to Members of the American Institute of Nutrition, without cost,
and sold to others at $3.00 per annum for all abstract sheets issued. This is a convenient means of selecting such articles as may be
desired in ree form. Prices of reprints are given on each Advance Abstract Sheet.

BIBLIOGRAPHIC SERVICE CARDS
bearing authors’ abstracts with complete bibliographic reference for all articles appearing in The Wistar Institute journals and those
co-operating, $5.00 per year. . .

Abstract cards may be obtained from the beginning of the series, June 1, 1917.
Each abstract cord is issued to subscribers before the complete paper appears in a journal.

ABSTRACTS IN BOOK FORM
Abstracts with authors’ and analytical subject indices are brought together periodically in book form. Volumes 1 to 7 covering the
abstracts issued from June 1, 1917, to December 31, 1933, $5.00 each. Liberal discount to subscribers to the Bibliographic Service

Cards.
The Wistar Institute Bibliographic Service covers the publications listed below :

Journal of Morphology Folio Anatomica Japonica (Tokyo, Japan)
The Journal of Comparative Neurology Biological Bulletin
The American Journal of Anatomy The Australian Journal of i
a gnacoriios ‘at 5 aaitice Scene Aceaiae, South Australia)
ournal Experimental Zodlogy ournal of Parasitology (Urbana,
Physical Anthropology Monographs (Durham, North Carolina)

American Journal of Y
Journal of Cellular and Comparative Physiology Physiological Zodlogy (Chicago, Illinois)
American Anatomical Memoirs Stain Technology (Geneva, New York)
Biological Survey of the Mount Desert Region
EARLY SERIES
In addition to the above, bibliographic reference cards, without abstracts, may be secured for articles wae rere appeared in the
3 les

Journal of Morphology, from vol. 1 (1887) to June 1, 1927

CORO Aer ee EHH SOLE HH DOSED EEE SESE ESE OE OOS OSO®

The Journal of Comparative Neurology, from vol. 1 (1891) to JUME I, L917 .....ceceveeeseeceroeees 450 4,
The American Journal of Anatomy, vol. 1 (1901) to JUME I, IQT7 .....cccccccoccssscssecscsesensveces 344 15
The Anatomical Record, vol. 1 (1906) to JUME 1, 1917 .......ccccececsceceseecccesccvcesesecnsecesesceses 464 55
The Journal of Experimental Zodlogy, vol. 1 (1904) to JUME I, IQT7 ..-.eeeseeccecerereerssseeererees 42353

The American Anatomical Memoirs ...........ccccccssscccccseccccesccssccnccnccessensesssccseseuceuccscccness 9 1» .
These cards, ene full bibliographic references, enable a subscriber to have a complete record of authors and titles with their
subject headings for all articles which have appeared in the above journals from their beginning to current issues.

The price for these Bibliographic Reference Cards is two cents for the first card of each title. Additional cards for each title may
be had at one-half cent per card when ordered at the same time.

THE WISTAR INSTITUTE OF ANATOMY AND BIOLOGY, Philadelphia, Pa., U.S.A.

 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
   

 

  
 
    
  
 
 
  
 
 
 

    

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 8.
