REPORT OF MEETING OF INTERNATIONAL
COMMITTEE ON PLANNED PARENTHOOD
By VERA HOUGHTON

(Secretary, International Committee on Planned Parenthood)

HE International Committee on

Planned Parenthood met in London

on August 29th and 30th. Present
were Mrs. Margaret Sanger, representing the
planned parenthood movement of America ;
Mrs. Elise Ottesen-Jensen, President of the
Swedish National League of Sex Education,
and the British members, Mrs. Pyke and Dr.
Helena Wright, representing the Family
Planning Association. Unfortunately, neither
of the representatives of the Dutch Society
for Sexual Reform were able to attend this
year. Dr. Abraham Stone, Director of the
Margaret Sanger Research Bureau of New
York, was also absent, having had to return
to the United States before the committee
met. Professor Frank Lorimer, who represented the Planned Parenthood Federation
of America at the 1949 and 1950 meetings,
has now resigned from the committee so as
to devote more time to his work with the
International Union for the Scientific Study
of Population, and the P.P.F.A. has been
asked to appoint a successor.

Two representatives from Germany, Dr.
Anne-Marie Durand-Wever, of Berlin, and
Frau Ilse Lederer, of the Kassel Marriage
Guidance Clinic, were invited to London to
report on the present position in Germany,
where the legal restrictions regarding contraception are still very complicated. It is
hoped to reproduce these reports in a later
issue of the REVIEW.

One of the main purposes of this meeting
was to begin definite preparations for a permanent world organization and to consider
proposals for the holding of international
congresses. Particular thought was given to
the organization of an International Congress
on Population and Family Planning in India,
where the recent pronouncements of Prime
Minister Pandit Nehru in favour of family
limitation, and the inclusion in the five-year

plan of the National Planning Commission of
specific recommendations for the control of
population, are being vigorously supported
by the All India Women’s Conference.

New organizations for family planning are
springing up all over India, and every State
and Union is asked to consider how it can
popularize birth control. Contraceptive
advice is now to be given as part of the
health services of the Corporation of Madras,
and of the Municipality of Berhampur,
Orissa. Free municipal clinics have been
operating for some time in Bombay, Poona,
Bangalore, and in Hyderabad State, all of
which now have active family planning
associations.* A special clinic is being
opened for patients attending the Tuberculosis Institute in Madras, where a Family
Planning Association has been set up under
the presidency of Mrs. Raksha Saran. A
similar association has been started in Delhi.

All these various groups are affiliated to
the Bombay Family Planning Association,
which has reconstituted itself as the Family
Planning Association of India. This national
organization is sponsoring an All India
Family Planning Conference in Bombay
from November 30th to December 2nd, at
which Dr. S. Chandrasekhar, founder of the
Indian Institute of Population Studies, is to
preside.

Also of significance to India is the International Conference on Social Work, which
will take place in Madras from December
16th to 22nd, 1952. Several requests have
been made to the organizing committee for a
session on population, which led to the
proposal that an International Congress on
Population and Family Planning should be
held either immediately before or following

the International Conference on Social Work.

*Planned Parenthood in India, Eugenics Review,
Vol. XLIII, No. 1.

141
142

The International Committee on Planned
Parenthood feels that the growth of the
planned parenthood movement in India is
now sufficiently advanced for encouragement
to be given to the Family Planning Association of India to follow its national conference
with the organization of the proposed International Congress on Population and Family
Planning in 1952. The International Committee on Planned Parenthood will gladly
co-operate in sending such delegations from
Western countries as may be needed and
requested by the Indian central committee.

The invitation of the Swedish National
League of Sex Education to hold an international congress in Sweden in 1953, when
the Swedish League will celebrate its twentieth anniversary, was gratefully accepted.

With a view to securing broad regional
representation the International Committee
on Planned Parenthood decided to set up a
liaison committee of representatives from the
many other countries which now have societies and groups for population problems and
control. This liaison committee will, it is
hoped, assist in the formation of a strong
world organization.

In addition to the present meniber-nguntries (America, Britain, Holland and
Sweden) the following countries have active
organizations: Australia, Canada, Finland,
Hong Kong, India, Jamaica, Japan, New
Zealand, Singapore and South Africa.
State or municipal birth-control services
exist in Bermuda, Kuala Lumpur (Malaya)
and Puerto Rico, and the countries of
Austria, Ceylon, Denmark, Germany and
Norway are trying to rebuild their pre-war
organizations. Elsewhere, in Barbados,
Egypt, Israel, Italy, Pakistan, and in the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

South Pacific Islands, educational and
organizational work is just beginning.

The decision taken at last year’s meeting of
the International Committee on Planned
Parenthood to proceed towards the setting
up of a world information bureau in New
York was reconsidered, and a preference
expressed to have only one international
information centre, as at present in London.
It was agreed, however, to ask the Margaret
Sanger Research Bureau of New York, in
consultation with the Planned Parenthood
Federation of America, to appoint a committee to consider the possibility of publishing an international news bulletin which
would disseminate information collected by
the International Committee on Planned
Parenthood and by its liaison committee.

The International Committee on Planned
Parenthood, distiessed to learn of the
prevalence of abortion in Germany and
Japan, and in other countries, passed a
resolution urging the Occupation Forces,
in particular, to stress the importance of
education in contraceptive technique so as
to ensure that recourse to abortion as a
measure of spacing births would no longer
be necessary, thereby improving standards
of health. Such a programme is recognized
to be of primary social and economic
importance throughout the world to-day.

The Committee resolved to continue its
efforts to interest medical research and other
bodies in the universal need for a simple,
effective and cheap contraceptive.

In conclusion, a unanimous vote of thanks
was moved to the Eugenics Society, which has
continued during the past year to make
available, rent free, accommodation to the
International Committee on Planned Parenthood.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLII, No. 3
