DISTRIBUTION OF THE SICKLE CELL GENE*

A NEW LIGHT ON THE ORIGIN OF THE EAST AFRICANS
By HERMANN LEHMANN, M_D., Ph.D., E.R.LC.

Chicago, whose place in medical history

is secure for his work on .coronary
sclerosis, reported in 1910 a curious finding
in a Negro student with chronic anemia.
Whereas normally the red cells of the
blood seen under the microscope have the
appearance of round discs, in this patient
numerous elongated “ sickle ’’ shaped forms
could be seen. These Professor Herrick called
sickle cells. The anzmia associated with
these cells was called sickle cell anzmia.
It was soon found that many other Negroes
harboured these abnormal cells, and that
more often than not there was no association with an anemia. They could be
produced im witro by incubating blood
anerobically and it was found that blood
cells from many Negroes might look perfectly
normal when fresh but would take on the
sickle cell shape on incubation. Individuals
in whom the sickle cells could thus only be
demonstrated by artificial measures in the
laboratory were called sickle cell trait carriers.
It was demonstrated only recently by Professor Linus Pauling in the California Institute of Technology (1950) that sickle cells
contain a hemoglobin which differs in
its physical properties from normal adult
hemoglobin and Pauling and his colleagues
separated the two by electrophoresis.

In 1923 Huck showed in Baltimore that
the sickling phenomenon was inherited as a
Mendelian dominant. Numerous investigations were made in the U.S.A. to define the
incidence and racial distribution of the sickle
cell hemoglobin. About 10 per cent of
American Negroes were found to _ be
“ sickleamic ’’ but other races did not seem
to harbour the gene. Occasionally findings
were made in people of European descent,
but a Negro ancestry could never be ruled
out to everyone’s satisfaction.

* A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the

Eugenics Society on December 16th, 1953.

| Pisce wn JAMES HERRICK of

 

10I

In Africa there were occasional reports of
sicklemia from the Sudan and West Africa
but not until the second world war were large
- scale surveys undertaken. R. W. Evans pub
lished his results in 1944 and 1945 and
reported a 20 per cent incidence of sicklamia
in 561 Africans from Nigeria, the Cameroons,
the Gold Coast and Gambia. G. M. Findley
and his collaborators, also from West Africa,
published in 1946 a survey of several
thousand individuals and found a similar
frequency of the gene; an analysis of their
material according to tribal origin did not
suggest that the trait was of ethnological
significance. H.C. Trowell found sickle cells
in East Africa in 1945 and Altmann reported
in 1945 their absence in South African
Negroes. Beet in 1946 found an incidence of
about 12 per cent in Northern Rhodesia and
he reported that there were less sickle cells in
the Balovale south of the River Zambezi than
in those on its north bank ; he suggested that
this might indicate that the trait had come
from the North and that the river had acted
as a barrier against its spread southwards. _

There were reports that sickle cells had
been found in a number of non-Negro populations and even in certain species of deer.
These were usually shown to be based on
artefacts. The sickling phenomenon was
shown in 1950-51 by M. F. Perutz and his col- ©
leagues to be due to a peculiar physical
property of the sickle cell (S) haemoglobin.
Whereas normal adult (A) hemoglobin is
equally. soluble whether oxygenated or reduced, S hemoglobin is quite insoluble in its
reduced form. WhenS hemoglobin containing
cells is reduced either by incubation without
access of air—when the oxygen is used up by
the leucocytes of the blood—or by addition
of reducing agents, the hemoglobin crystallizes inside the cells and the resulting

. ‘‘tactoids”’ distort the cell and give it the

bizarre shape of the “sickle cell.’’ It is
obvious that other external stresses such as _
I02

the drying of a blood film can produce very
similar distortions and some experience in
the recognition of sickle cells is required to
differentiate between “true ’’ and “ false ”’
sickling (Fig. 1). However the development
of the technique of paper electrophoresis
enables us nowadays to make a clear-cut
definite distinction between normal and $
hemoglobin containing cells (Fig. 2).

Uganda .

The writer investigated the sickle cell trait
in Uganda and Tanganyika together with Mr.
A. H. Milne in 1949. To our surprise we
found a very much higher incidence than had
up to then been reported in East Africa.
Dr. A. B. Raper, working in Kampala,
Uganda, had found it to be 11 per cent,
whereas we found it to be at least twice as
high in Uganda, and in Tanganyika the incidence was 35 per cent. When we compared
our results with those of Raper more closely
it struck us that we had examined different
tribes. Raper’s figures were derived from
hospital post-mortems at Kampala and ours
in Uganda from a survey of local schools.
The post-mortem material in the Kampala
Government hospital deals predominantly
with immigrant labourers who come from
Ruanda Urundi and who are quite different
from the local Baganda, who tend to remove
their relations from hospital before they die
(Fig. 3). The Banyaruanda, though Bantu
speaking, are in appearance much more
Europoid. We therefore decided to examine
Baganda and Banyaruanda separately and
found that there were considerable differences, the percentage of sicklemia in the
Baganda was 1g and in the Banyaruanda 8.
We then decided to make a tribal survey of
sicklemia of Uganda. This country lies at
the point of contact of several ethnological
groups, in particular the Nilotes, Half Hamites and Bantu. Thus widely differing tribes
could be studied within a comparatively
small area. Nearly 5,000 persons belonging
to twenty-four tribes about one in 1,000 of
the population of the Uganda protectorate
were examined (H. Lehmann and A. B.
Raper, 1949). Every possible precaution was
taken to obtain true random samples as it

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

 

 

Fic. 1.

Comparison of ‘“‘ true’’ and ‘“‘ false ’’
sickle cells. Above, true sickle cells in an Ameri
can Negro (Huck, 1923). Below, distorted

cells mimicking the sickling phenomenon seen ina

blood slide from a Yemenite Jew (Dreyfuss ef
_al., 1951) (ftom Dreyfuss et al., 1953).

was realized that the African way of life tends
to create genetic “‘isolates’’ within the.
same tribe. (Lehmann, 1951.)

TABLE 1

8 ‘ ‘ Number Percentage

Nilotic speaking tribes asxATined of sickle = 4
Lango se 5 ... 278 27
Acholi_... waa ws «41 27
Jaluo a ... 130 28
Lugbara ... ‘ ... 120 21
Kakwa ... wn 2 .-  I0OF 25
Alur 14 25
Jonam 109 26
Madi 109 3
DISTRIBUTION OF THE SICKLE CELL GENE

103

Line of origin

Hemoglobin

Sickle Cell

Normal

sroaitiscueies soo eect tecamcinnntinaeen rors painitinnneees eee te ead ALi lia ab cata aC ee

Sickle Cell Trait
Carrier

lic. 2.

 

Anode

Non-Sickler

Separation by filter-paper-electrophoresis of normal and sickle cell

hemoglcbins. In an electric field and in an alkaline buffer hemoglobin will
move towards the pcsitive pole. Sickle cell hamoglobin will move mcre
slewly than normal haemoglobin.

It will be seen that in the Nilotic speaking
group there was a remarkably homogeneous
sicklemia incidence. The exception were the
Madi who are found in the most northerly
corner of Uganda and who extend from there
into the Southern Sudan. Recently Dr. A. C.
Allison has re-examined the Madi and has
told the writer that he has found a much
higher incidence of sicklamia than we discovered in 1948-49. On the other hand Dr.

 

Fic. 3.

H. Foy and his colleagues (1954) have surveyed the Southern Sudanese and found that
the Nilotics fall into two groups, those which
are allied to the Uganda Nilotics showing a
high incidence whereas others like the Dinka,
Nuer and Shilluk do not. These latter
Nilotics resemble in their pastoral and dietetic
habits the Half Hamitic tribes such as the
Masai, Turkhana, Karamajong.

 

A patient from Ruanda Urundi (left) and a local Muganda (right) at Kampala Hospital. The immigrant

Banyaruanda differ from the Baganda by their more Europoid appearance.
I04
TABLE 2
Half Hamitic speaking Number Percentage
tribes examined of sicklemia
Bahima* 166 2°4
Sebei 124 0-8
Suk 128 3°9
Karamajong 156 3:2
Teso 416 17°8

The Half Hamitic speaking tribes are
pastoral and have arrived from the North
together with their famous cattle which
resembles that of old Egypt. They have
settled in the grazing lands of Uganda along
the rift valleys and have kept themselves
fairly separate from their Bantu neighbours.
They differ from them in their Europoid
features (Fig. 4). It will be seen that they
have very few sickle cells. The single exception is the Teso. They however have not the
Caucasian features of the Hamite stock,
they are a largely agricultural group settled
among Nilotic and Bantu speaking tribes.
Agricultural work in Central Africa is mostly
carried out by women and the best way to
recruit labourers is to marry them. The Teso
have thus freely intermingled with their
neighbours and the possession of the sickle
cell trait is an additional physical character
distinguishing them from the Hamitic group
with which they have been classed on a
linguistic basis.

Whereas there was a fairly uniform picture
of high sicklemia incidence among the
Nilotics and low frequency of the gene
among the Half Hamites a wide variation
was seen among the Bantu tribes,

TABLE 3

S. ' Number Percentage

Bantu speaking tribes examined of sicklemia
Bairu 139 2
Banyaruanda 496 8
Banyoro vee eee gI 12

Batoro | 120 12°5

Baganda . .-- 740 19
~ Bakonjo ... wee .. 102 18
Barundi ... 108 19
Bakenyi ... ane as 88 26
-Basoga ... 241 29
Bagishu ... 207 30
Baamba ... 140 45

* Although the Bahima now speak the Bantu language of their subjects,they have—for obvious reasons—
been included by Dr. Raper and myself in this group.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

 

Fic. 4. A member cf the Bahima tribe showing the
Mediterranean features of the Half Hamites (from
Johnston, 1904).

Here the sicklemia appears to be inversely
proportional to the contact the various tribes
have had with their most recent Half Hamitic
invaders. Thus the trait is least common
among the Bairu, who have lived for generations as helots to the ruling class of Half
Hamitic conquerors, the Bahima, on the best
pastoral land in Uganda (Fig. 5). Next
come the Banyaruanda, Banyoro and Batoro,
whose traditions and customs testify to prolonged contact with the Bahima, and whose
aristocracy possesses Hamitic features. The
contact of the Baganda, Bakonjo and
Barundi with the Half Hamitic peoples has
until recent times been less direct and has

_ been by way of their neighbours, the Banyoro,

Batoro and Banyaruanda (Fig. 7).

The Basoga and Bagishu, two closely
related tribes, live remote from the track of
the cattle grazing peoples. The SouthBasoga to whom the table refers live in the
swampy country of the upper Nile, north of
DISTRIBUTION OF THE SICKLE CELL GENE

 

A member of the Bairu
a Bantu tribe showing

Fic. 5.

group,
Europoid features (from Johnston

1904) ‘

Lake Victoria. The Bagishu live on the
western slopes of Mount Elgon.

The Baamba are a secluded pygmoid tribe
in the forests of the Mountains of the Moon.
They claim to be autochthonous and of all
the tribes we investigated these people with
their prominent ridges of the eyebrows, the
broad base of the nose, the wide mouth and
the weak chin are furthest removed from the
Bahima and come nearest to the “arch
type’ of the forest Negro which Sir Harry
Johnston, the first Governor of Uganda,
pictured in 1904 in his book on _ the
Protectorate (Figs. 6 and 12).

A map of Uganda with the invasion route
of the cattle-owning Half Hamites will show
how the sickle cell trait incidence is lowest
among the Bantu living in the path of their
movement and is highest the farther away
they live in the less accessible swamps,
jungles and mountain forests (Fig. 8).

Dr. C. A. Allison (1954) has recently
pointed out that there is an alternative to
this ethnological explanation of differences in
the incidence of sicklemia among the Bantu
of Uganda. The conquerors took for themselves the healthiest and least malarious
areas of the country. If the sickling gene has
a selective advantage and S hemoglobin is
less desirable to the malarial parasite than
A hemoglobin, sickling will be at a higher
frequency the more malarious the surroundings of a tribe.
Half Hamitic tribes all live in the least
malarious areas of Uganda, and that the

There is no doubt that the.

105

 

Fic. 6. A member of the Baamba tribe, playing the

board zither. Note the pygmoid stature, the ridges of

the eyebrows, the broad base of the nose, the wide

mouth and the weak chin (from Trowell and Wachsmann, 1953).

more closely the contact between a Bantu
tribe and the Half Hamites the less malarious
will be their surroundings. This attractive
theory will have to be carefully examined,
but the fact remains that the higher the .
sickling rate the lower will be the admixture
of physical Hamitic features in any one
Bantu tribe.
“106.

 

Sickle cell trait and blood groups as “ markers ’’ for links with Africa
The late Dr. A. C. Haddon of Christ’s
College, Cambridge, often discussed—though
never published—a theory of the invasion
of Africa by an Asiatic population in Neo
lithic times. The East African cattle (unlike

the Egyptian type Bahima cattle) and the
East African poultry are closely allied to
those of India. Some time in the Neolithic
period a profound change took place in the
skeletal type of the East African. Whereas

M* Ruwenzori

M*t
Mfumbiro
°?

&

e

  
 

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

FIG. 7
Two Baganda, Court Musicians
to H.H. the Kabaka of
Buganda. Note the Uganda
harp which shows features
similar to those used in ancient
Egypt.

previously the configuration was elegant and
small, there appeared all at once coarser
and bigger structures. The fact that they
turned up in considerable numbers led Dr.
Haddon to think that the people to whom they
had belonged could not have gradually risen
in Africa, but had arrived there as a group
from elsewhere, possibly from India.

The fact that the sickling trait was more
closely associated with the ‘‘ arch type”’ of
East African Negro made it possible that it
could be used as a marker to trace the

Fic. 8. The route of the migration taken by the cattle-owning
Half Hamites in Uganda. The
pastoral tribes followed the rift
valleys avoiding the swamps of
the Upper Nile and the mountain forests east and west of
Uganda. The Bantu speaking
tribes living along this route
have a lower sickle cell trait
incidence than those who live
farther away.
DISTRIBUTION OF THE SICKLE CELL GENE

origins of the East African. The writer would
like to pay tribute to Dr. J. C. Trevor of
Cambridge University and to Dr. A. E.
Mourant of the Medical Research Council
Blood Group Reference Laboratory for supporting what must have then seemed a wild
scheme of visiting India in search of the
sickle cell trait.

Dr. Mourant did not give his help unreservedly. He made the writer promise to
combine the search for the sickling gene with
the investigation of the blood groups of

any aboriginal Indian tribe he visited. It may |

therefore be appropriate here to describe
briefly the help which can be given to such a
task by a blood group survey. There are a
number of human blood group systems, the
best known is the ABO system. The ABO
chromosome has one locus which is either
A, B.or O. As we have two chromosomes of

“107

each type, one from each parent, every man
has two ABO chromosomes which confer on.
him the blood groups A, B or O respectively...
As O is a recessive, we can have the following

TABLE 4
Eacu BLoop Group SYSTEM REFERS TO A CHROMOSOME .
ABO Aor BorO
chromosome _
MNS MorN Sors

chromosome | |

Rhesus (CDE) Corc Dord Eore Forf
chromosome t | |

phenotypes A (AA or AO), B (BB or BO),
AB and OO. Another system is the MNS
system. Here two loci are known, one can
be occupied either by the M or by the N
gene, the other by S or s. This results in the
following possible combinations for two

RHESUS GENES

@Bo
We

 

R, R
EUROPE AUSTRALASIA

cr

O

AFRICA

C)e
[ |e
V e

Rh. CHROMOSOMES

Fig. 9. The Rhesus
Chromosomes.

According to the theory of Fisher
and Race the Rhesus genes combine to form different chromosomes. The frequency of these
chromosomes differs in different
human populations: 7 is more
frequent in Europe, R, in
Australasia, R, in Africa and the
highest frequencies of R, are
seen in Asia.

 

A

ASIA
108

chromosomes : MMSS, MNSS, NNSS, MMss,
MNss, NNss, MMSs, MNSs and NNSs.

_ These possible blood group combinations
not only help to distinguish between different
individuals—which is most important in
legal cases or in the establishment of paternity—but they are also differently distributed
among the various races of mankind. On the
Asiatic-European land mass B is most frequent in India and becomes rarer the farther
away a population is from that sub-continent;
M is more frequent than N west of the “‘ Birdsell line’’ named after the Californian
anthropologist who showed that N was more
frequent than M east of a line running from
north to south just west of Japan and
Australia. The frequency of blood groups is a
very stable feature and remains with immigrant races for a long time, although like all
genes they cannot be quite neutral in the
evolution of mankind by natural selection.
Thus the Caucasoid Australians have of
course more M than N, and very ancient
aboriginal communities in the heart of India
differ from all other Indians by having a high
A frequency.

The Rhesus system knows of four loci on
the chromosome and an even wider variation of possibilities exists. It is debatable
whether the Rhesus genes are truly at different loci or whether they are all factors
attached to the same locus of the chromosome. In any case the various combinations
are of great anthropological interest. There
are known or assumed C,c, D,d, E,e, F and f.
F and f have only recently been added to our
arsenal and most anthropological studies
have been concerned with the CDE system
(Fig. 9). The combinations are found at
varying frequency in different parts of the
world : cde(r) is rare everywhere except in
Europe where the frequency is highest
among the Basques and is the higher the
more the populations coming into Europe
have intermingled with the type of people of
whom to-day’s Basques are a remnant ;
CDe(R,) is found everywhere, but it. is
highest in Asia where it may have a frequency
of well over 80 per cent in many populations ;
CDE(R,) is very rare everywhere but up to
recently has been found at a frequency of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

several per cent only in people associated
with Australasia ; cDe (R,) is not a frequent
blood group except in Negroes where A. 5S.
Wiener discovered a high incidence in 1946.
Since then it has been found at a very high
frequency all over Africa by many workers,
particularly by Dr. A. E. Mourant who has
been associated with numerous studies in
all parts of that continent. Regardless of
the Negroid group to which the people belong, whether Bantu, Nilotic, Half Hamitic
or Pygmie, no tribe has yet been found south
of the Sahara in whom the R, frequency is
not above 50 per cent. The highest frequency
so far has been seen in the Bushmen of South
Africa where A. Zoutendyk and his colleagues (1953) found it to be above 80 per
cent.

It was thus clear that in the search for
links with Africa among Indian aboriginals
an investigation of blood groups was most
important—particularly one of the Rhesus
system which might show a high R,
frequency.

The Nuffield Foundation generously
financed an expedition to South India in
1952 and I was lucky enough to be joined on
it by Marie Cutbush, an authority in work
on blood groups.

India

India has been invaded by successive
waves of populations, each wave penetrating
less far south than the one before it. Thus
the Aryans are in the North, and the older
Dravidians in the South of India. Still older
aboriginal tribes have either been absorbed
into the modern Indian society as low castes
or have been driven into less accessible
jungles or hills. In the South of India the
Nilgiri hills are populated by a variety of
such old communities widely differing in
culture and appearance.

The upper regions of the Nilgiris, the
“blue mountains,’ are a rolling country
where the Todas graze their buffaloes. Their
men are magnificent-looking bearded individuals of proud bearing. They resemble in
appearance the Eastern Mediterraneans, and
connections have been traced between their
cattle culture and milking ritual and customs
DISTRIBUTION OF THE SICKLE CELL GENE

discovered in ancient Assyria. A rather less
magnificent but otherwise similar looking
tribe are the Kotas who are the craftsmen of
the Nilgiris.

TABLE 5
INCIDENCE OF THE SICKLE CELL TRAIT IN THE NILGIRI
HILis
(All individuals except the Todas are unrelated).
Number of Number of
persons persons with Percentage
Community tested sickle cells incidence
Paniyans ... 61 21 34
Irulas ... . 124 39 31
Kurumbas...._ 16 3 —
Badagas ..» IQI 16 8.4
Todas ... ... 84 3 4
Kotas ... ... 86 o o
Canarese ws Q5 oO oO
Telegus «+. 109 oO oO
Malayalees  ... III o oO
Tamils ... 128 oO oO

The fertile slopes of the mountains are
intensely cultivated by an agricultural community, the Badagas, who are related to the
Dravidian Canarese. In jungles, or employed
as near-slaves on the land by the other tribes

 

109

live the Veddoids; Irula, Kurumba, Paniyans. They belong to some of the most
primitive races of mankind, and up to recently were still food gatherers without any
knowledge of agriculture. We received the
generous hospitality of the Pasteur Institute
and the Nutrition Research Institute at
Coonoor and from there examined the various
populations. The sickle cell trait was soon
discovered and it was seen to be primarily a
feature of the Veddoids.

We were less successful in our search for
the R, blood group. In fact the Veddoids,
who had the sickle cell trait at a frequency
up to then only seen in Africa, failed to produce a single R, individual. Nevertheless
it was the Veddoids who differed . most
markedly from all the other Indians of the
Nilgiris (Fig. 10). The others had in common
the Europoid features of what the anthropologists call the Mediterranean race, while
the Veddoids showed the ridges of the eyebrows, the broad base of the nose, the wide

Fic. 10. The difference between the Veddoids and other Indian aboriginals. Left, a Paniyan woman (Veddoid);
right, a Toda with typically Mediterranean features (from v. Eickstedt, 1935).
IIo

~ mouth and the weak chin we had seen in the
arch type of the forest Negro in East Africa.
‘Unlike their neighbours, the Veddoids
showed more blood group A than B and what
was more surprising still, Miss Cutbush discovered a frequency of R, of 4°4 per cent,
higher than had been seen up to then anywhere outside Australia. The Veddoids had
actually been called Australo-veddoids by
the eminent Indian anthropologist B. S.
Guha (1937) because of similarities in
skull figuration between them and _ the
Australian aborigines. They thus showed a
link with Africa as regards their sickling gene
and with Australia in their Rhesus blood
groups. The fact that some sickle cells were
also found among the Todas and Badagas
may be due to occasional miscegenation.
Professor C. von Fiirer-Heimendorf has
told me that he has recently discovered a
ritual involving exchange of wives between
the Todas and the Kurumbas.

TABLE 6
BLoop GROUP FREQUENCIES IN THE NILGIRIS

Veddoids
Kotas and | Irulas

Dravidians |
Canarese

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

System Telegus Badagas Todas Kurumbas
Tamils Paniyans
ABO |
Number tested ... | 77 168 I
Ay 11°87 12°35 7°00 21°36
A; 3°03 o 127, 4°38
A 14°90 12°35 8-27 | 25°74
B 23°85 15°26 33°17 18-15
Oo 61-23 72°21 58°54 56°11
, MNS
Number tested ... | 67 57 I4i 161
MS 19°61 23°91 23°20 31°29
Ms 40°84 41-00 56°58 42°31
NS 14°60 oO 11°56 o
Ns 24°95 35°09 | 8-65 26°40
Rhesus |
‘Number tested ... | 61 64 152 156
CDe (R,) 60-98 62°27 69°29 66°72
CDue (R",) 6-40 16°63 8°02 _—
CDE (Rz) 0°65 — “a 4°43
cDE (R,) 11-65 14°06 — 15°76
cDe (Ro) — 7:03 3°71 —
cde (r) 20°32 — 18-99 13°09

An interesting observation was that the
Todas and Kotas showed in their blood
groups to an extreme what is considered
typical of the modern Indian generally. The
Indians are noteworthy for a high frequency
of blood group B and a low frequency of
R, (CDE). The Todas and Kotas had no
gene E at all and a very high frequency of B,
in fact the 86 Kotas had not a single A blood

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

group (52 O and 34 B) and the 82 Todas had
the highest B frequency ever found (27 A,
45 B, 10 O). The Badagas and modern South
Indian Dravidians seem to be the result of
a mixture of the two extremes, the TodaKota element, an “‘ arch Indian ”’ prototype
and the Veddoids. I should like to acknowledge my indebtedness to Dr. Ada Kopeé of
the Nuffield Blood Group Centre for calculating the blood group frequencies reported in
this paper. The methods of calculation are
those of Dr. A. E. Mourant (1954).

The absence of R, and the high sicklemia
rate in the Veddoids precludes the theory
that the sickle cell gene can have been
imported from Africa. Not only would such
a movement of African stock into India have
brought with it a higher frequency of Ro, but
also any known contacts of Negroes with
India were with Aryan and Dravidian elements and would scarcely have penetrated
and singled out the isolated groups of
Veddoids. |

It is of course possible for the sickling gene
to have arisen in India independently by
mutation, but there again it is unlikely that
this would have been restricted to the
Veddoid aborigines. Shortly after we made
our observations in South India K. J. Dunlop
and U. K. Mozumdar reported the finding of
sickle cells among some tea plantation coolies
in Assam who were aborigines of Bihar :
Tanti. Miss E. W. Ikin and the writer examined r00 Oraons and 23 Kharias, Bihar
aborigines working as forest labourers in the
Andaman Islands, but we could find no sickle
cells.

If one assumes a connection between the
sickling phenomenon in India and in Africa,
the absence of R, among Indian Veddoids
suggests that the trait was carried from Asia
to Africa, presumably by the same kind of
people from whom the Veddoids of South
India have derived. —_ |

It is noteworthy that Veddoid remains
have been reported in Persia and in South
Arabia; in Arabia they have been largely
studied by C. S. Coon (1943).

—— Following our study of sickle cell distribu
tion in Uganda, which had shown a possible
ethnological significance of this feature, a
DISTRIBUTION OF THE SICKLE CELL GENE

large number of investigations were made all
over the African continent. A _ detailed
account of this work cannot be given here ;
an exhaustive table will be presented in Dr.
A. E. Mourant’s new book The Distribution
of the Human Blood Groups (1954). Unlike
the high R, frequency the sickle cell trait was
found to be only patchily distributed in
Africa. The highest incidences have been
reported from East Africa when they varied
from 30 to 45 per cent in some Bantu tribes.
Considering the highest incidences only, it

was found that they fall towards the West, |

at the coast they are only 20-25 per cent.
They also decline the farther one goes south,
in Rhodesia they are about Io per cent and
they become practically nil in South Africa.

Iit

The Bushmen, who have the highest R, frequency recorded, have no sickle cells at all
(S. B. Griffiths, 1953), similarly the “‘ yellow”
pygmies of Central Africa were found to be
virtually free of sickle cells. Thus the trait
is not a universal African feature and one
might suggest that it entered the continent
well after the African races had established
themselves, and that the present East
African population is a mixture of the high
R, non-sickling Bushmen type with Veddoids bringing R, and sicklemia as their
contribution. The fact that Veddoids are
still found in Persia and in Arabia brings
them to the former land bridge between Asia
and Africa in the region of Aden, the trait
may thus have entered Africa from the North

 

 

4
QJ
= PERSIA
ARABIA nad
AFRICA eS
—— th *;
HH 30 per cent seize we.
=20-30 - - —
ge 1020 * -VEDDIANS
IN ASIA

——-— <| ° a Ree sere care

HIGHEST SICKLE CELL TRAIT INCIDENCES

IN AFRICA.

Fic. 11.

Distribution of the Sickle Cell Trait in Africa in its relation to the Veddoids of Asia.

Veddoids live in Arabia, Persia and South India. Some communities in the interior of the Nicobar islands and
of Malaya also show Veddoid features. It is suggested that Veddoids brought the sickle cell gene to Africa.
entering at the southern end of the Red Sea.
IIz2

East to spread southwards and westwards.
Since then Hamitic and Semitic elements,
Somali and Abyssinians have settled in the
North East of Africa and have interrupted
the continuity between the Veddoids of
Arabia and the East African Negro (Fig. 11).

Dr. P. Brain (1953) has recently pointed
out that this proposed migration of the sickle
cell gene is much like that suggested for the
shorthorn Zebu. This Asian cattle breed is
thought to have entered Africa at the
southern end of the Red Sea and to have
spread from there along two routes: westwards to the West African coast, down the
east coast as far as the Zambezi river which,
it is to be noted, it did not cross. Singer
asks: ‘‘Is it possible that the sickle cell gene
was distributed in Africa by the custodians
of the short-horn Zebu?’’ My own guess is
that the Veddoids preceded the cattle-owning

people, and that the fact that the two dis-_

 

A Paniyan South Indian Veddoid (from Eickstedt,
1935).

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tributed themselves alike only shows the:
typical invasion routes into Africa from.
Asia; both Romans and Normans came
across the Channel but at different times.

Arabia

To test this theory of a connection between
the sicklemia of the Veddoids in India and
of the East Africans an investigation was
made of sickle cell trait incidence in South
Arabia. Once again we were fortunate
enough to secure the financial help of the
Nuffield Foundation, who supported in 1953
an expedition to the Andaman Islands and
the Wenner Gren Foundation enabled us to
combine this scheme with a detour to Aden.
On this occasion the writer was accompanied
by another distinguished expert in the field
of blood group research, Miss Elizabeth W.
Ikin of Dr. Mourant’s laboratory.

FiGsr2: Resemblance
between the sickle cell
trait carriers of India,
Arabia and East Africa.

Veddoid from South
Arabia (from Coon,

1939).

 

 

of East African Forest
Johnston, 1904).

“Arch type ”’ Negro (from
DISTRIBUTION OF THE SICKLE CELL GENE

We examined two groups of people in
Southern Arabia: the Arabs themselves
(1x1), and the Achdam (104) and we found
the sickle cell trait among the latter at a high
frequency. The Achdam are a dark-skinned
people with Veddoid features living near
Zabid in the southern half of Yemen. Dr.
C. S. Coon, who has contributed most to the
knowledge of Veddoids in Southern Arabia,
has, in a personal communication, confirmed
that they very likely represent a Veddoid
survival. The local Arabs think of them as
Negroes because of their dark colour. However their social status is very different from
that of the African slaves of Arabia. These
slaves, or their ancestors, have indeed been
imported from Africa, but their status is
comparable to that of the serfs of feudal
Europe, and although not free, they are
valued, and often beloved, members of the
household in which they have found their
home. Intermarriage, though not encouraged, is practised, and at present a respected
ruler in Southern Arabia is the son of such a
slave woman. On the other hand, the
Achdam are curiously similar in their social
status to the Indian Veddoids, inasmuch as
they have become a caste of untouchable
sweepers. Intermarriage with them is out of
the question for the Arabs. When the
Administration in Aden needed sweepers,
they imported the Achdam from Zabid for
this purpose (Fig. 12).

The Africans who live nearest to Arabia are
the Somali. They are a very proud people
who regard themselves as of Arab origin, and
it is inconceivable that any of them, or their
descendants, should have fallen to the low

113

social level of the Achdam. They have no
sickle cells (we examined fifty of them and
found none) as one would expect from an
African population of the Hamitic type.
Thus the Achdam are unlikely to have
descended either from imported African
slaves or from the Somali. There is a possibility that they are the last remains of preMohammedan Abyssinian camp-followers.
The armies of Abyssinia finally expelled in
the early days of Mohammedan rule, had
with them Sudanese and it is just possible
that some of these might have been left
behind. If the Achdam were derived and had
inherited their sickling gene from such
Sudanese Africans, they might be expected
to resemble the Nilotic speaking tribes with
high sickling frequency. Some such Sudanese
of the Western Nile, the Jonam, have, within
living memory, wandered southward to
Kenya where they are now called Jaluo.
Their blood groups were examined in 1952 by
A. C. Allison, Elizabeth W. Ikin and A. E.
Mourant. Like all other Africans so far
investigated they show a high frequency of
the R, chromosome (82 per cent).

If we compare the Achdam as regards their
sickle cell trait incidence and their blood
groups with the Veddoids of Southern India
and the Jaluos of Africa it will be seen that
they have a high sicklemia incidence similar
to that found in the Veddoids and the Jaluos,
but that the R, chromosome has a frequency
of only 28 per cent.

A link between the Asiatic Veddoids and
the African sickle cell trait carriers would be
expected to show a high incidence of the
sickling gene together with an R, frequency

TABLE 7
SICKLE CELL TRAIT CARRIERS IN INDIA, ARABIA AND EAST AFRICA

BLoop GrRouP FREQUENCIES

Sickdeemia | |

 

 

 

 

 

percentage O | Aa) Ae | B | M/N

South Indian |

Veddoids 30 | 56 | 22 | 4 | 18 | 74 | 26

See Table 6
Zabidis

114 individuals 23 76} 9] 5 9 | 66 | 34
aluos
Tee ound | 28 | 69 | Ir | 4 | 16 | 52 | 38

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ry | R, R, R, r R, R’ or R’”
cD2 | cDre | CDe | cDE | cde CDE | Cde or cdE
Pf

oO oO 67 5 | 13 5 oO

a |
28 | 5 33 13 20 oO oO
82 | 5 oO oO 4 | oO 9

|
 

 

114 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
TABLE 8
COMPARISON BETWEEN YEMENITE JEWS, YEMENITE ARABS AND EAST AFRICANS
BLoop GROUP FREQUENCIES

Sicklaemia | R, | R| R, | RY, | R, | + | Ro or RY

percentage ay] Se] BM cDe | cDve | CDe | CDte| cDE cde | Cde or cdE
ser indviduals ° 67 |.19 | 7| © | 76 | 24 I 20 40 7 22 3 o
Arabs sua 2 |76/10| 6| 7/75/25|/ 15 | 9 | 53 | 9 | 13 | © 0
1
Jaluos sais 28 69 |} Ir | 4 | 16 | 52 | 38 | 82 5 Oo oO 4 Oo 9

 

higher than that found in the Veddoids and
lower than that seen in the Africans, and this
is indeed the case in the Achdam. Had these
Zabidis come by their sickle cells from Africa,
in view of the high incidence found a very
much higher frequency of R, than 28 would
have been expected to accompany the sickle
cell genes. |

An indication as to what extent an inheritance of the sickling gene from Africans is
accompanied by a rise in the R, incidence
can be arrived at by an analysis of the blood
group data we found in the Yemenite Arabs.
The Yemenite Arabs represent a mixture of
pure Semites and Africans. It will be seen
that a comparison with the Yemenite Jews,
who are of the same stock but did not intermarry with Africans for religious reasons,
shows that in the Yemenite Arabs a moderate
rise in sicklemia was accompanied by considerable increase in R, frequency. The data
on the Yemenite Jews are taken from a
survey by F. Dreyfuss, Elizabeth W. Ikin,
H. Lehmann and A. E. Mourant carried out
in 1952.

Australia

The finding of a high R, (CDE) frequency
in the Indian Veddoids which they shared
with the aborigines of Australia but did not
have in common with the sickle cell trait
carrying Veddoids of Arabia made it unlikely that sickle cells would also be a connecting link with ‘‘ Australo-Veddoids ”’ of
India and other populations with a high R,
frequency. Nevertheless it was thought
important to examine a_ representative
group of Australians for the sickle cell trait.

 

J. B. Birdsell (1950) divides the Australian
aborigines into three groups; that in the
Northern territories—the Carpentarians—is
considered to have more Veddoid connections
than the other two which are more intimately
related to Negritos and Europoid Ainus
respectively (Fig. 13). Dr. W. H. Horsfall
sent the writer (1953) bloods from seventytwo Australian aborigines from a part of
Queensland in which, according to Birdsell,
a strong Carpentarian component prevails.
Fifty-seven of these Australians were of
unmixed native ancestry according to their
own accounts and also to their appearance.
No sickling was discovered in any of the
samples.

Andamanese Negritos

Apart from the Veddoids the most important non-Mongoloid group of aborigines in
Asia, and one for which connections with
Africa have most frequently been claimed,
are the Negritos. Impure traces of them:
are to be found in South India itself, in the
Malayan jungle, in the interior of Java and
in the Philippines. The racially purest
survivors are found in the Andaman
Islands (Fig. 14).

It was of interest to see how these people
fitted into the picture of blood group distribution seen in pre-Dravidian, pre-Aryan, and
pre-Mongoloid Asiatics. Their small stature,
steatopygia and peppercorn-like arrangement of hair growth have linked them in the
eyes of many anthropologists either to the
Bushmen of South Africa or the Pygmies of
Central Africa (Figs. 15 and 16).
A ER NE A eR RS a RR RN Ee an ae AES em ET ele RESIS SaaS SR

DISTRIBUTION OF THE SICKLE CELL GENE

With the approval of the Indian Government it was decided to visit the Andaman
Islands. Professor B. S. Guha, the Director
of the Department of Anthropology, Government of India, offered his Department’s full
support in this difficult task. Professor Guha
has established a substation of his Department in Port Blair of which Dr. L. Cipriam
is in charge. Professor Guha’s and Dr.
Cipriani’s invaluable help was essential to
us.
A glance at the map will show that the
Himalayan mountains in their sweep to the
South East are continued in the Arakan hills
of Burma, which end at the sea where the
Irawaddy joins the Bay of Bengal. There
the mountain range continues into the sea

ESTIMATED CARPENTARIAN GENE FREQUENCIES

 

DIVIDING RANGE 4 4 4 4

115

southwards in the direction of Sumatra, but
only occasionally do its tops break the surface of the water to form islands of which the
most important groups are the Cocos, the
Andamans and the Nicobars. It is on the
Andamans, situated about 800 miles south
of Calcutta and 700 miles east of Madras,
that pure Negritos have survived in comparatively large numbers. In the old days,
the islands were raided by Chinese and
Arabs, who carried off the Andamanese as
slaves. This produced fear and hatred with
a will to fight to the death rather than to
allow a stranger to approach. Stranded
crews were invariably murdered and the
reputation of the Andaman Islands became
such that sailors avoided them at all costs.

   

Bf oh

ic. 13. The spread of the ‘‘ Carpentarian "’ (Veddoid) type across the Continent of Australia (from Birdsell, 1950).
116

    
 

0 0. 68

o, @,,
o to ee
tee
of Se
ofie

ee toe

o%,

eee

#3

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

DISTRIBUTION OF NEGRITOS

Fic. 14. The dotted areas show where Negrito influence can be found. Pure
remnants of this ancient race can still be met with in the Andaman Islands.

In the eighteenth century, an attempt by the
East India Company to build a harbour to
safeguard shipping in these parts had to be
abandoned in the face of local hostility
and supervening disease. It was only
after the Indian Mutiny, less than a hundred
years ago, that a serious attempt was
made to occupy the islands, when a penal
community was founded at Port Blair.

The local inhabitants could then be divided
into three groups closely related to each other
in customs and appearance, but living strictly
apart :

I. Jarawa 2. Andamanese 3. Onge.

1. Little is known about the Javawa, who
have retained their original hostility up to
today. Thereisnoman alive who has actually
talked to them in the forests. It is not surprising that attempts to befriend them have
so far failed, for in the past there have been
wholesale shootings of surprised parties and
the carrying-off of the wounded as prisoners
for the purpose of “‘ making contact.’’ What
one knows of the Jarawa is that they are
virile and strong and extremely primitive ;
thus, all the metal they possess is derived

from old nails taken from shipwrecks. Two
captured Jarawa children were brought up in
Port Blair and taken to the Nicobars, where
they are still living now and where Dr. Sneath,
then a pathologist in the R.A.M.C. stationed
at Singapore, examined their blood groups
and found them both to be O and R,R,.

2. The Andamanese were friendly and submitted to religious conversion, to rehousing
and to trade with the newcomers. This they
did at their peril ; there were several thousands of them less than a hundred years ago,
but disease and alcohol have diminished
their number to between twenty and thirty
today. Although the older generation looks

‘much like Negritos; a Burmese influence is

very obvious in the children. They live on
the border between the mid and south
Andamans, and are employed as Bush
Police to warn off the Jarawa from crossing
to the south Andamans, where the Indian
Government is carrying out a settlement plan
for East Bengal refugees. We examined
sixteen of these Andamanese (excluding
children), and found their blood groups to be
as follows :
.DISTRIBUTION OF THE SICKLE CELL GENE

 

An Onge woman from
Note the

FIG. 15.
the Little Andamans.
small stature, the ‘ peppercorn ”
arrangement of hair growth and the

steatopygia. Note also, however,
that though the stature is small,
there is no disproportion in length

 

of legs.
TABLE 9
ABO MNS P RHESUS
O- 75 MMS : 3 P:12 RR, CCDee : 15
Ay :5 MMs : 3 p:4 R,R, CcDEe: 1
B 3:4 MNS :4
A,B:2 MNs :2
NNS :4
NNs :0

There were no sickle cells and these findings already suggested that there was little

117

in common between the African Negroes and
the Negritos of the Andamans. Results
obtained from such a small group have to be
accepted with great caution, as genetic drift
becomes the more important the smaller the
population. However, it was felt that, if the
Onge produced similar values, it would be
a strong indication that our results were
applicable to the Andaman Negritos as a
whole. |

3. On the Little Andamans live the Onge,
variously estimated to number from 100 to
400. They are neither as hostile as the Jarawa, nor have they been as much in contact
with the modern world as their unfortunate
Andamanese brethren (Figs. 17 and 18).
They have been visited from time to time
and a few of their men have braved the sea
to paddle in outrigger canoes as far as Port
Blair. It cannot be said that they are entirely
tame, and the last murder was committed
only in 1949, when they killed a party of shipwrecked Chinese. On the other hand, a Burmese policeman, Pado, fled to this island
during the Japanese occupation, spent
several years there, greatly increasing the
confidence of these people towards strangers,
and taught one or two of them a few words of
Hindustani. This virile and, judging from
the number of children, healthy community
has been living isolated up to now and was
considered a very suitable population to be
examined for its blood groups. Fifty-two of
them were investigated. This number represents an appreciable percentage of the total
population. Children of parents tested were
not included. The results are given i
Table Io.

TABLE 10
ABO MNS P RHESUS
7

O : 7 MMS: 5 P : 42 R,R,, CCDee : 45
A, :37 MMs : 12 p:10 R,R,, CcDEe: 6
B : 4 #=%MNS: 5 R,R,, ccDEE: 1
A,B: 4 MNs : 24

NNS: o

NNs : 6

The two Jarawa examined by Dr. Sneath,
the 16 Andamanese and 52 Onge had a predominant frequency of the Rhesus chromo
some R, (60 of 70 R,R,; 7 of 7o R,R,).
E18 | | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Fic. 16. African Pygmies.

Note the “* peppercorn ”’
arrangement of hair growth and
the steatopygia. Whereas the
Asian Negrito is well proportioned, the African pygmie’s
small stature is made smaller
still by disproportionately short
legs.

 

Fic. 17. A “ Facial’ on the
Andamans.

The face is covered with a
mask of mud and fat and a
pattern is drawn with the
fingers. Note the little son
taking a lively and interfering
interest in his mother’s “ palette.’’ The Onge lead a happy
family life.

 
DISTRIBUTION OF THE SICKLE CELL GENE

 

Neither the Andamanese, nor the Onge
showed the blood group A,, and none had the

Rhesus chromosome R, or R,,.
TABLE 11

GENE FREQUENCIES OF ANDAMANESE NEGRITOS
Sickle ... | A, B oO R,
Ni

R, | M |
54 8 38 92

8. 61 | 39

The African Negro shows a high incidence
of Ro, he has both blood group A, and A,, and
particularly in East, Central and West
Africa the sickle cell trait is found. The
Australian aborigines. show a moderate
incidence of R, which is rare elsewhere
except in the Veddoids. The Veddoids have
sickle cells, blood groups A, and A,. Neither
the African Negro nor the Australians nor
the Veddoids have an incidence of R, higher
than 80 per cent. The Oceanic Negro is the
only aboriginal who, like the Andamanese
Negritos, possesses no R,, no A,, no R,, but
the R, chromosome at an incidence of more
than 80 per cent.

TABLE 12
WHERE DO THE ANDAMANESE NEGRITOS BELONG ?
| Re Rz above '80% Celie Ay M>N
African Negro oF —_ _ + — + T
Veddoids | — | + | — | +) + | +
Australians | — | + |  — | — | — | —~
Oceanic Nero | — | — | +. |? | =) —

Andamanese Pas oe + _ —_ +

119

Fic. 18. The use of glass flints
by the Onge.
The Onge still use flints. They
are made by knocking a shell
against obsidian. Here one
woman shaves another, a new
flint is used after every three
or four strokes.

w
g

I have already mentioned the' famous
Birdsell line, which goes from north to south
somewhere west of Japan. East of this line,
the ratio of blood group Ml is smaller than 1 ;

blood group N
to the west of it, M is more frequent than N.
Thus the African Negro and the Veddoids
have more M than N, and the Australian
aboriginals and the Oceanic Negroes living
east of the Birdsell line have more N than M:
the Onge living west of the Birdsell line have

a ratio of — of 3:2. However, the other

N

findings strongly suggest that the Onge are

more Closely related to the Oceanic Negroes
than to the African Negro and, although they
are often bracketed with the Pygmies of
Africa, this investigation suggests that they should be more properly classified as the
Pygmies of Oceania. It is of interest that the
Onge, like the Papuans, have the custom of
preserving and carrying round their necks,
bones, particularly the jaw bone, of near
relatives who departed this life.

Greece

The sickle cell trait has been known to
exist sporadically in Sicily, Southern Italy
and Greece. This was thought to be due to an
admixture of African blood in Roman times
when liberated slaves married into the families
of their former masters. A. E. Mourant (1951)
IZ0

has pointed out that the R, incidence is.

somewhat higher in the Europeans from the
Mediterranean region than in those from
others parts of Europe. Yet while measurement of R, frequency may be used as a
“tracer” of African ancestry, the sickle cell
trait can obviously not be used for this purpose. Veddoid blood may have found its
way into the Mediterranean peoples: L.
Cipriani (1934) reported Veddoid skull features in the Sardinians of today; small,
possibly Veddoid, people were discovered
among the remains of pre-dynastic Egypt
and Cipriani has pointed out that the piriform opening of the skulls of children found

in the Grimaldi cave in Monaco has Veddoid

features.

Greece is the only European country so far
studied where in small areas the whole
population has a high sickle cell trait incidence. Professor Choremis and his colleagues
reported such a population pocket from the
Lake Kopais area in 1951. The writer has
recently visited Lake Kopais with Professor
Choremis and a sickle cell trait incidence of
17.7 per cent was found ; the true incidence
is probably higher because members of
families with a known sickle cell anemia
patient were not included in this survey.
These people did not differ from other Greeks
in their blood groups (Fig. 19) (L. Choremis,

 

THE EUGENICS REVIEW é

Elizabeth W. Ikin, H. Lehmann, A. E..
Mourant and Leda Zannos, 1953).

The sociological factor in sickling incidence

As the sickle cell gene is potentially
deleterious, causing a specific anzmia, its
continued survival has been the subject of
much speculation. The most notable analysis
of this problem has been made by Professor

T.V. Neel (1953). It has been suggested that

certain races have a very high mutation rate
for this gene, reproducing it with sufficient
frequency to replace losses incurred by the
anzmia. Alternatively it has been suggested
that it confers advantages such as a resistance to malaria which balances its disadvantages in the fight for survival. Allison’s
correlation of high sickle cell incidence and
high malarial infection rate are in support
of this theory of balanced polymorphism.
Some such mechanism must play a part in
explaining the presence of the gene. In addition there is the anthropological factor described in this paper and lastly there must be
a sociological one. The highest sickling rates
were always found in the socially lowest
stratum of a population. In Africa the
Pygmoids of the forest, in India the Veddoids of the Nilgiri who are either living as
serfs or on the lowest possible human level
in the jungle ; in Arabia again the Achdam,

Fic. 19. Children from the
Lake Kopais area in Greece.

Professor Choremis from
Athens University is seen here
with a group of children from
the community among whom
he discovered a high sickle cell
trait incidence. Note that it
would not be possible to point
to any difference between the
features of these children and
any group of children from
other parts of Greece, or, for
that matter, from anywhere in
Europe.
DISTRIBUTION OF THE SICKLE CELL GENE

the lowest social community, were the carriers of the gene. Similarly the Greeks were
slaves of the Turks until recently. These
people are forced to live where they are, they
are unable to travel and they do not intermarry with their more fortunate neighbours.
Inbreeding which usually goes hand in hand
with a slave-like condition in life seems to be
an important factor in producing a high
sickling rate.

Thus three major factors will play a part
in producing a high incidence of the sickle
cell gene:

1. The anthropological derivation of a

population.

2. A genetic regulation such as a high
mutation rate or balanced polymorphism and

3. A. social situation which produces
inbreeding.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I should like to acknowledge gratefully permission to
reproduce:
Fig. 1A: Bulletin of the Johns Hopkins Hospital,
34, 335 (1923).
Fig. 1B: Harefuah, 41, 168 (1951).
Fig. 4, 5, 12C: H. Johnston, The Uganda Protectorate,
London, Hutchinson, 1904.
Fig. 7: M. Trowell and K. Wachsmann, Tribal Crafts
of Uganda, Oxford University Press, 1953.
Figs. 10, 12A: E. von Eickstedt, The Mysore Tribes
and Castes, Mysore University Press, 1935.
-Fig. 12B: C. S. Coon, The Races of Europe, New
York, Macmillan, 1939.
Fig. 13 : Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative
Biology, 15, 259 (1950).
I should also like to thank Mr. N. K. Harrison and
Mr. W. G. Coltham for their help in preparing the
diagrams.

REFERENCES

Allison, A. C. (1954), Brit. Med. J., i, 290.
Allison, A. C., Ikin, Elizabeth W., Mourant, A.-E.
(1952), J. Roy. Anthropol. Inst., 82, 55.

121

Altmann, A. (1945), South Afr. Med. J., 19, 457.

Beet, E. A. (1946), East Afr. Med. J., 23, 75.

Birdsell, J. B. (1950), Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on
Quantitative Biology, 15, 258.

Brain, P. (1953), Man, 233.

Choremis, C., Ikin, Elizabeth W., Lehmann, H.,
Mourant, A. E., Zannos, Leda (1953), Lancet, ii,
gil.

Cipriani, L. (1934), Proc.
Anthrop. Ethn. Sct., 143.

Coon, C. S. (1943), Pap. Peabody Mus., 20, 187.

Dunlop, K. J., Mozumdar, U. K. (1952), Indian Med.
Gaz., 87, 387

Dreyfuss, F., Ikin, Elizabeth W., Lehmann, H., Mourant,
A. E. (1952), Lancet, ii, 1010.

Evans, R. W. (1944), Tr. Roy. Soc. Trop. Med. and Hyg.,
37, 281.

(1945), tbidem, 39, 207.

Findlay, G. M., Robertson, W. M., Zacharias, F. J.
(1946), tbidem, 40, 83 .

Foy, H., Kondi, Athena, Timms, G. L., Brass, W.,
Bushra, F. (1954), Brit. Med. J., i, 294.

Griffith, S. B. (1953), Nature, 171, 577.

Guha, B. S. (1937), An Outline of the Racial Ethnology

rst Internat. Congress

 

 

of India, Calcutta, Indian Science Congress
Association.
Herrick, J. B. (1910), Arch. Inst. Med., 6, 517.

Huck, J. G. (1923), Bull. Johns Hopk. Hosp., 34, 335.

Horsfall, W. R., Lehmann, H. (1953), Nature, 172, 638.

Johnston, H. (1904), The Uganda Protectorate.- London,
Hutchinson.

Lehmann, H. (1954), Nature, 167, 931.

Lehmann, H., Cutbush, Marie (1952), Brit. Med. J., i,
404.

Lehmann, H., Milne, A. H. (1949), East Afr. Med. f.,
26, 247.

Lehmann, H., Raper, A. B. (1949), Nature, 164, 494.

Mourant, A. E. (1951), J. Roy. Anthropol. Inst., 78, 139.

Mourant, A. E. (1954), The Distribution of the Human
Blood Groups. Oxford. Blackwell Scientific
Publications.

Neel, J. V. (1953), Am. J. Human Genetics, 5, 154.

Pauling, L., Itano, H. A., Singer, S. J., Wells, I. Cc.
(1949), Science, 110, 543.

Perutz, M. F., Liquori, A. M., Eirich, F. (1952), Nature,
167, 929.

Perutz, M. R., Mitchison, J. M. (1950), Nature, 166, 677.

Raper, A. B. (1949), East. Afr. Med. J., 26, 1.

Trowell, H. C. (1945), zbtdem, 22, 34.

Wiener, A. S. (1946), Amer. J. Clin. Path., 16, 477.

Zoutendyk, A., Kopeé, Ada, Mourant, A. E. (1953),
Am. J. Physical Anthropol., 11, 361.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLVI, No. 2
