POPULATION POLICIES IN SCANDINAVIA
By D. V. GLASS

O far as the continued maintenance of

their populations is concerned, Norway,

Sweden and Denmark are in a position
similar to that of most other Western
countries. In each of the Scandinavian
countries the net reproduction rate is below
unity, and in each of these countries this is
the momentary end-point of a decline in
fertility which has been proceeding for some
sixty years. Table I gives the position in
the most recent years for which the necessary
basic statistics are available. In addition to
the net reproduction rates, in which mortality
is taken into account, gross reproduction
rates are given, and show that, with the
possible exception of Denmark, no further
reduction in mortality would be sufficient to
compensate for the low level of fertility.
Even in the case of Denmark it is doubtful
if much compensation could be obtained by
reducing mortality. In 1934, a year in which
mortality was relatively low, the wastage of
fertility due to death was about 10-2 per
cent., with the number of years lived by
women in the reproductive period at 31-04
out of the 35 which would obtain if there
were no deaths occurring to females between
birth and the fiftieth birthday. For the net
reproduction rate to have been unity in 1935,

TABLE I

NET REPRODUCTION RATES IN THE
SCANDINAVIAN COUNTRIES*

Gross Reproduction Rates. Net Reproduction Rates.

GROSS AND

Norway. Sweden. Denmark. Norway. Sweden Denmark.
193I 1°036f 0-900 1-064 0-909f 0°785 0-929
1932 0°989 0:879 1-065 0°874 0°775 0:938
1933 0°899 0:821 1-012 0°799 0°733 0°903
1934 0°883 o°815 1-040 ©°797 0°727 0:°934
1935 0°869 — 1°022 0-783 —  0:'902

* Computed from statistics given in Befolkningens
Bevaegelsey for Denmark; Folkemengdens Bevegelse for
Norway, 1921-32, 1933, 1934, and 1931-35; and
Befolkningsrorelsen for Sweden, 1931 to 1934 inclusive.
Female Life Tables were computed separately for each
country and for each year given in the Table above.

{ 1930-1 for Norway, as the appropriate statistics
are not available for the separate years.

89

the wastage due to death would have had to
be only about 2-2 per cent., implying an
expectation of about 33-8 years lived in the
reproductive period, having regard to the
existing age-distribution of fertility; and,
though possible, this would be a difficult
goal to achieve.*

The implications of these rates have not
passed unnoticed in Scandinavia. Long
before population policies were beginning
to take practical shape in any of the three
countries, estimates of future population
had been made, showing the trends in
numbers which might be expected if fertility
and mortality behaved in accordance with
certain sets of assumptions. In 1926 Professor S. D. Wicksell published five such
estimates for Sweden, two of which showed
a future decline of the population.f In 1931,
Dr. Adolph Jensen made three estimates
of the future population of Denmark, one of
which implied an eventually declining and
another an eventually stationary population.t Subsequent estimates include a series
for Norway, published by Professor Wicksell

* At first sight this may seem incorrect. But the coefficient of survival for 1935 (NRR —GRR) was
0-883, with the number of years lived in the reproductive period by the original cohort of the Life Table
(radix) at 30-49. For the GRR of 1-022 to have yielded
a net reproduction rate of 1-0, the coefficient of survival
would have had to be 0-978, and for this to have been
the case the number of years lived in the reproductive
period would have had to be (0978 — 0°883) x 30°49,
or 33°78. The reason for this apparent error is that
fertility is not equally distributed among the different
years in the period 15 to 50 years, but concentrated
largely in the earlier period where mortality is lowest.
It would therefore be incorrect to estimate the number
of children required to yield a net reproduction rate of
unity from the sex ratio at birth and the number of
years lived in the reproductive period. An estimate
produced in this way would give a result, for 1935, of
(35 ~ 30°49) X 2°065, or 2°371. The correct figure
(Total fertility + NRR) is 2-340.

¢S. D. Wicksell, ‘‘ Sveriges framtida befolkning
under olika f6rutsattningar,’’ Ekonomisk Tidsskrsft,
1926.

{A. Jensen, ‘‘ Horoscope of the Population of
Denmark,” Bulletin de Ul'Institut International de
Statistique, vol. xxv, 3me. Livraison, 1931.
go THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in 1934,* and a new series for Sweden given
by Professors Myrdal and Wicksell in their
report to the Swedish Population Commission.f With the possible exception of
the last estimates, about which it is too early
to judge, the lowest fertilities assumed for
the purposes of computation were still
higher than have actually been shown in the
most recent years. It should be emphasized
that these estimates were aimed primarily
at elucidating the effects of certain trends,
rather than at attempting to forecast the
probable populations of the future. Clearly,
however, such computations indicate a real
interest, among the social scientists at least,
in the prospects of the populations of the
three countries. But the interest was not
translated into concrete proposals until very
recently. For one thing, each country had
its own immediate problems with which to
deal, and for another, it takes a considerable
time, as has been shown in England, for
obsolete opinions on population to be
replaced by accurate facts.

The final cause of the change of opinion
may be attributed to a book by Alva and
Gunnar Myrdal, Crisis in the Population
Question, published at the end of 1934.
This book, as a writer in the Anglo-Swedtsh
Review expressed it, dropped a bombshell
among the thinking public of Sweden.§ And
apparently the thinking public of Sweden is
much larger, proportionately, than that in
England, for by the middle of 1937 the book
had sold some 16,000 copies, equivalent to
a sale of over 100,000 here, a figure rarely
reached even by popular novels. The book
explained the significance of recent trends
in fertility, discussed the possible consequences of a fall in population, and examined,

*S. D. Wicksell, ‘‘ Bidrag till den formella befolkningsteorien. Med tillamningar pa Norges befolkning,”’
Statsekonomisk Tidsshrift, 1934, parts 1-2.

+ G. Myrdal and S. Wicksell, ‘‘ Utsikterna i fraga
om den framtida befolkningsutvecklingen i Sverige,’
Betankende + Sexualfrdgan, Appendix 8, BefolkningsKommissionen, Stockholm, 1936.

$} Alva Myrdal och Gunnar Myrdal, “‘ Kris i Befolkningsfragan,’’ Stockholm, 1934. The seventh and
popular edition was being sold in 1937. An English
translation is expected fairly soon. There are also
Norwegian and Danish translations of the book.

§‘‘ The Depopulation Alarm in Sweden,’ AngloSwedish Review, January 1935.

in the light of existing knowledge, the reasons
for and possible cures of the present low
fertility. In particular, it placed the population problem in its social context, and showed
that for the bulk of the population the
existing alternatives were either poverty or
family limitation. The Crists in the Population Question was a political and social study
expressing the views of two distinguished
social democrats, and it provided a factual
basis for discussion of the whole question.
The Riksdag was soon presented with
motions by private members for the establishment of a population commission, and
a Royal Commission was set up in May 1935.
Experts from all the related fields were
co-opted—it is a Swedish tradition that
experts should play a leading part in the
government of the country—and more than
a dozen reports on various aspects of the
question have already been published, including a bulky general introduction to the
whole field of Swedish population problems.*
In the same year, a Royal Commission on
Population was set up in Denmark, but in
Norway there has so far been no attempt to
project a coherent and unified policy concerning population problems.t Up to the
present, Sweden is the only member of the
Scandinavian group in which population
policies have actually been implemented,
and the remainder of this paper will be
concerned largely with the proposals made
and implemented in that country.

Scandinavian Approach to Population Problems
In the first place, it must be emphasized
that the whole approach to the population
problem is different in Scandinavia from
that commonly found in the totalitarian
states. In Germany and Italy—and to a

* Betankende + Sexualfrdgan. A popular summary of
this report has also been published under the title
Familje och Moral, Stockholm, 1937.

¢ Dr. Jahn, Director of the Norwegian Central Bureau
of Statistics, has urged the setting up of a Royal Commission on population. Norwegian publications dealing
with present trends in fertility include Dor v1 Ui,
a pamphlet by Aase Liones and Arne Skaug (these two
authors were also responsible for the Norwegian
adaptation of the Myrdals’ book) and Det Er Liv Eller
Ded Det Gjelder, Oslo, 1937, by O. H. Langeland.
POPULATION POLICIES IN SCANDINAVIA gI

considerable extent in France and Belgium
too—strong elements of repression are evident in the legal structure which has been
created to check declining fertility. These
elements include the tightening-up of the
laws relating to abortion, the legal endeavours
to check birth-control propaganda and the
use of contraceptives,* and the attempts to
drive women back into the home. But in
Scandinavia the initial assumption is that
parenthood shall be voluntary. The mandate
of the Swedish Commission categorically
states that homes which economically are
badly off should not be burdened by too many
children, while the mandate of the Danish
Commission specifically states that no repressive measures shall be considered.

In practice this has a very interesting
result. It means that along with measures
for encouraging fertility, there must also be
other measures which make it easier for
people to obtain reliable birth - control
information. Consequently, the development
of public birth-control clinics is an important
feature of Swedish population policy—though
so far, this element has not been translated
into reality—while in Denmark State birthcontrol clinics in every district are obligatory
under an Act which was to come into force on
April Ist, 1938,f but which has now been
postponed until October Ist, 1939.

The Danish Act was largely the result of
a committee set up to investigate the questions of birth control and abortion, and was
not part of the policy inspired by the Population Commission. But it is interesting that,
in spite of a serious concern for the consequences of a declining population, Denmark should pass an Act which provides that
“clinics shall be established by public
enterprise, wherein persons of both sexes
shall have access to correct and warrantable
instruction in sexual hygiene,” thus repealing
the previous law under which birth-control

* There is as yet no law in Germany against birthcontrol propaganda or contraceptive practice. But the
Penal Law Commission has reported in favour of such
a law, and a measure to this effect will probably be
enacted in the near future.

t Law No. 163, 1937, Regarding Measures Relating
to Pregnancy, Amalienborg, May 18th, 1937. See
EUGENICS REVIEW, May 1938, p. 43,

-plysning i Sverige,”

propaganda was deemed an offence against
public decency, and at the same time to widen
the grounds on which abortion may legally
be procured.

Certainly there is a real need for such
provisions in Denmark, where there are no
birth-control clinics,* and where the giving
of advice on the subject is confined almost
exclusively to panel doctors, and only to a
small percentage of these. In Sweden there
are but five birth-control clinics—one privately organized by the Riksférbundet for
Sexuell-Upplysning, and four run by municipalities—with a total attendance of less than
600 patients in 1935.t The result is that
coitus interruptus still remains the chief
method of birth control and that abortion
is widely practised. The situation in Norway is rather better, for there are twelve
clinics, run by private organizations but
receiving grants from the municipalities
and the National Health Insurance Fund.
However, it is doubtful if these clinics
see as many as twelve thousand patients
per year, and since a large number of
patients attend for advice connected with
maternity and infant welfare, it is unlikely
that modern techniques of contraception
are known to more than a very small proportion of the Norwegian population.}

Both in Sweden and Norway, Royal Commissions which have reported in recent years,
have recommended an extension of the
grounds on which abortion may be obtained
—a Swedish Commission which reported in
1935, and the Norwegian Commission which
issued its report in the same year, actually
urged the legalization of abortion on social
indications. In Norway no legal changes

* With the exception of an ante-natal clinic in the
State hospital in Copenhagen. The Clinic for women’s
diseases also gave birth control information in cases
where it was considered essential.

¢ Torsten GéArdlund, ‘‘ Battre  polikliniker for
fddelsekontroll,””’ Morgonbris, April 1937. See also his
report “‘ Férefintliga radfragningsbyraer for sexualupBetankande $6 Sexualfrdgan,
Appendix 12. The private organization mentioned
above has about 35,000 members, and gives a considerable amount of advice by correspondence.

¢ From a report by the present author on ‘‘ The
Effectiveness of Abortion Laws in Six Foreign Counee, which it is hoped will be published in the near

uture.
g2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

have so far been made, but in Sweden the
Riksdag passed, on May 18th, 1938, an Act
legalizing abortion on humanitarian, eugenic
and medico-social grounds.*

House-furnishing Loans

For the rest, the general policy envisaged
in Sweden—and also, so far as can be judged
from the reports which have been published,
in Denmark—is twofold. First, to encourage
marriage, and secondly, to provide a social
and economic environment in which the
extra costs associated with the bearing and
rearing of children are reduced as much as
possible. The second object is, of course, as
much concerned with the physical condition
of the children, and therefore with the
qualitative aspect of the population question,
as it is with the quantitative aspect.t Under
the first aim are included the Swedish loans
for setting up households. These loans have
been granted since January Ist, 1938,{ the
money being provided by a governmental
loan fund administered by the Central Bank
and its local branches.

Among the regulations in accordance with
which the loans are given the most important
points are the following: The loans are
designed to allow persons who are already
married (in which case the application for a
loan must be made within six months of the
marriage) or who are going to be married (in
which case evidence of the intended marriage
must be produced) to buy the furniture and
other household equipment, the need for
which is occasioned by the marriage which
has been or is going to be contracted. At
their maximum the loans are 1,000 kronor,
and they are given only to persons who are
Swedish citizens or who will be so as a result
of the marriage (in the case of foreign brides) ;

* This year (1938) there is also a Swedish Government
Bill before the Riksdag for licensing the trade in
contraceptives.

¢t Concern for the qualitative aspect is one of the main
reasons for the Swedish policy of giving children’s
allowances in kind rather than family allowances in
cash. Professor Myrdal believes that cash allowances
would have the greatest quantitative effect upon
“undesirable ’’ parents who care least about their
children.

t Nos. 809-10, Kungl. Maj: ts Kungérelse om statliga
bosdtiningslan, September 30th, 1937.

who are in need of the means for buying the
necessary household equipment ; for whom
the grant of the loan is advisable, having
regard to the applicants’ own conditions and
interests ; and who are known to be diligent
and economically prudent, and have shown
the will to save, so far as this has been
possible. The loans are to be repaid, with
interest not less than that paid by the State
for its own obligations, in quarterly instalments of such an amount that the loan shall
be completely refunded within not more than
five years after it has been granted.*

It will be noticed that no racial or physiological demands are made by the regulations.
Nor is the loan in any sense a gift—it is not
interest-free, and there are no cancellations
at the birth of children. In fact the main
idea, according to Professor Myrdal, is to
enable young couples to escape the dangers
of the hire-purchase system, and also, since
their current expenses are lowest at the
beginning of their married life, to have them
repay the loan as quickly as possible.

Finally, unlike the German marriage
loans, there is no attempt to drive women
back into the home. On the contrary, the
Population Commission is very anxious to
safeguard and guarantee the employment of
married women, and to establish their right
to have children and to take the required
absence during pregnancy and childbirth
without being subject to the fear of losing
their jobs. This has already been laid down
under the health insurance system, and has
been extended to women employed by the
central and local government authorities.
A good deal has also been done with the
help of the Professional and Business
Women’s Association by creating public
disapproval of certain banks and insurance
companies which followed the practice of
dismissing women on account of pregnancy
or childbirth.

No income limit has been laid down in the
regulations for administering the homefurnishing loans, but it is clear that they are

* Though this rule may be relaxed if circumstances
make so rapid a repayment difficult. The present rate
of interest is about 3} per cent.

t In a conversation with him in September 1937.
POPULATION POLICIES IN SCANDINAVIA 93

intended only for members of the working
class.* To this extent they leave untouched
a problem created by the Swedish educational system. Primary education in Sweden
is free, and secondary education is inexpensive, particularly because of the large
numbers of bursaries and grants in aid of
fees which are available.t But little assistance is given to students proceeding to the
universities. These students generally borrow
from the banks, and the practice has become
so well established that students’ promissory
notes are regarded as safe assets. Thus at
the end of a degree course, a student often
finds himself with debts of 10,000 kronor,
and such an amount must be a serious
barrier to early marriage.

It is, of course, much too early to speak of
the effects of the home-furnishing loans.
They have only been in operation for six
months, and as the total grant given for the
financial year 1937-8 is only two million
kronor, there will not be more than 2,000 to
3,000 loans. For the financial year 1938-9,
the government has asked for a grant of six
million kronor. Theoretically, however, the
effect of the loans depends upon whether
their net result is merely to speed up marriage
without either increasing the total number
of marriages or the fertility of each marriage.
If this is the case, the result will be to increase
the rate of decline of the population, since
the earlier marriages will mean a shorter
generation, other things being equal.{ It is

* Apparently some idea of a lower income limit is
involved, since it is unlikely that loans will be given to
applicants who are so poor that they could not repay
them.

t In 1934-5, 371,598 kronor were distributed from
the bursary and prize funds, and in 1936 the government set up a public legacy fund of 65,000 kronor for
the same purpose (Soctal Work and Legislation in
Sweden, issued by the Royal Social Board, 2nd edition,
Stockholm, 1938). Dr. Richard Sterner, in a discussion
of this question, suggested that the actual cost of
secondary education was probably only 120 to 140
kronor per year, but that there were many pupils who
paid only half of these fees, and also a considerable
number who paid no fees at all.

{ The question of the influence of marriage on net
reproductivity is a complicated one. Professor Wicksell,
in “‘ Nuptiality, Fertility and Reproduction,’’ Skandinavish Aktuartedtidsskrift, 1931, andin ‘‘ Fruktsamhet
och Foérékning,” Hygienisk Revy, 1936, expresses a
belief in the significant effect of the increase in nuptiality
upon the reproduction rate. But if, for Sweden in

quite possible that the increase in the number
of marriages may be fictitious for another
reason. In Sweden there are many unwedded
unions—in 1934 over 14 per cent. of all live
births occurred to unmarried women—and
it is possible that a large proportion of any
subsequent increase in marriages may be due
to the legalization of these existing unions.
In any case, it is clear that the decline in
fertility over the last sixty years has not
been associated with changes in the amount
of marriage.

Protection of Unmarried Mothers and their
Children

Outside of marriage, Sweden has taken an
important step in improving the situation of
unmarried mothers and their children. A

1932-4, we take the age-specific fertility rates of married
and unmarried women separately, and combine these
with a table which shows the joint effects of the nuptiality and mortality of the period, we have a division
of the net reproduction rate into 0-108 for illegitimate,
and 0-651 for legitimate births, giving a total rate of
0°759. Since, according to the nuptiality of 1932-4, out
of 1,000 single women at 15 years of age only 789-59
marry by their fiftieth birthday, the net reproduction
rate of women who had married at least once by the
latter age is 0-824. If we assume that women who do
eventually marry bear illegitimate children during their
unmarried life at the same rate as those women who do
not marry by their fiftieth birthday, and if we also
assume that 5 per cent. of the illegitimate births are
borne by married women, we should have a nuptial net
reproduction rate of 0-914. Consequently, a point
somewhere between 0°824 and 0-914 would represent
the maximum net reproduction rate which could result
from universal marriage, unless marital fertility itself
were raised. It should be noted that nuptiality has risen
in Sweden in recent years, probably as a result of the
return of relative prosperity. The probability of marrying at least once by the fiftieth birthday was, for
females, 0-7698 in 1932 and 0-7815 in 1933 (R. R.
Kuczynski, ‘‘ The Analysis of Vital Statistics,’ Economica, May 1938). In 1910-12 the probability was
0:7670, and in 1900-02, 0°7896. For Denmark the
official figures are 0°8575 for 1921-5, and 0-8366 for
1926-30 (4égteskaber, Fodte og Dode + Aarene 1926-30).
By comparison the Norwegian probability was 0-7592
in 1929-31 (approx.), the French was 0-9057 in 1930-2,
while for England and Wales in 1936 the probability
was 0°8863. (Unless the sources are specifically mentioned, the nuptiality probabilities have been specially
computed from the appropriate statistics.) It may be
argued that it is inappropriate to apply the nuptiality of
1932-4 to the fertility of the same period, and this is
largely true. But the application of the nuptiality of a
previous period would not cause any fundamental
difference in the result. It should, however, also be
remembered that if women bear children at an earlier
age, the wastage due to mortality will be reduced
slightly.
94

considerable advance on the position in other
countries was made as long ago as 1917, when
the Act relating to children born out of
wedlock instituted a system of specially
appointed legal guardians to act in the
interests of the mothers and their children,
generally until the children reached their
eighteenth birthdays. But it was found that
the maintenance allowance — determined
generally by the court, and amounting to
15 to 20 kronor per month in the rural
districts, and 20 to 30 kronor in the towns—
was often delayed. In 1935, about half the
cases liable for this payment showed either
complete or partial default.* To remedy
this, the Riksdag decided, in 1937, that a
child whose father is liable to support him—
and this applies equally to the children of
separated or divorced parents—may receive
an advance on the payment due to him, such
an advance generally being given for a year
at atime. The payment is then claimed from
the father by the Treasury, and the costs of
giving these advances are shared by the
Treasury (75 per cent.) and by the particular
local district (25 per cent.) from which the
advance is received.t

Economic and Social Conditions in Sweden

Before dealing with the other steps which
have been taken and proposals which have
been made, it is important to know some of
the facts concerning the economic and social
conditions of the Swedish population. Those
who have been impressed by journalistic
eulogies of Sweden will be surprised to learn
that, according to the 1930 census, 76-2 per
cent. of the active population earned not
more than 2,000 kronor per year, and that
51°9 per cent. earned not more than 1,000
kronor per year. Yet the incomes of 2,000
kronor and more per year formed 66-4 per
cent. of the income earned by the employed
population as a whole, and the incomes of
10,000 kronor or more per year, which are
earned by only 1-1 per cent. of the employed
population, form 16-4 per cent. of the total
income of all employed persons. How this

*R. Sterner, ‘‘ Levnadsstandarden i svenska
familjer,’’ Betankande i Sexualfragan, Appendix 7.
¢ Social Work and Legislation in Sweden, pp. 228-9.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

situation affects families of different sizes is
shown by the partial census of 1935-6,
which made a special investigation of
incomes in relation to the family. The main
features are given in Table II.

TABLE II

MEDIAN INCOMES (INCLUDING HUSBAND’S AND WIFE’S
CoMBINED INCOMES) IN MARRIAGES WITH GIVEN
NUMBERS OF CHILDREN*

Marriages with the Median Incomes per year in
following numbers Kronor
of children under Towns Kural Kingdom
16 years of age Districts
oO 3,145 1,362 2,148
I 2,967 1,478 2,072
2 3,023 1,459 1,955
3 2,986 1,449 1,751
4 2,790 1,388 1,612
5 2,650 1,349 1,474
6 2,573 1,314 1,425
7 2,500 1,323 1,410
8 -— 1,200 1,275
9 or more —_ 1,088 1,191
All marriages 3,036 1,421 1,993

To a considerable extent this picture is
overpainted. First, there is a marked
tendency to understate incomes, and,
secondly, it is very difficult in the rural
districts to estimate the monetary value of
income received in kind. The 1936 statistics
of wages paid to workers in industry appear
to be considerably higher than would be expected from the figures givenin Table II. But
it would nevertheless be true to say that there
is an inverse relationship between income
and the number of dependent children, and
this, whether looked at from the point of
view of the standard of living or from that
of the correlation between income and
fertility, still produces the same effect. The
larger families are worse off, economically,
than the small ones.

Further, housing conditions in Sweden
still leave much to be desired, in spite of the
fact that slums, in the English sense, are

* The income statistics cited in the text are from
R. Sterner, ‘“‘ Levnadsstandarden i svenska familjer.”’
The table, which refers only to marriages contracted
since 1900, is from Betankande i Sexualfrdgan, page 26.
In a letter, Mr. R. Sterner stated that in 1936 the average annual earnings of full-time or nearly full-time
male workers were 2,848 kronor in industry, and
between 1,200 and 1,400 kronor in agriculture (including income in kind), with forestry workers at about the
same level as, or a little below, agricultural workers.
POPULATION POLICIES IN SCANDINAVIA 95

very rare. According to the housing census
of 1933, in which a child under 15 years of
age is counted as half an adult unit, and
kitchens, halls, and rooms smaller than
g square metres (about 97 square feet) are
reckoned as halves of a room unit, about
13 per cent. of all dwellings were overcrowded
in the sense of having more than two adult
units per room unit. About 30 per cent. of
children under 15 years of age were living
in these overcrowded conditions, and so
were 47:4 per cent. of the families with three
or more children.

These statistics apply only to urban
districts—excluding Stockholm, where there
had been a housing census in 1930—or to
agglomerations in rural districts, excluding
therefore most of the agricultural workers.*
But in rural districts the problem is certainly
no less important, since, even if the number
of rooms per family is higher, the families
are larger than in the towns and the quality
of accommodation is far worse.t According
to a special housing inquiry made in connection with the census of 1935-6, and
covering a hundred rural communes, about
15 per cent. of the dwellings were dilapidated
and g per cent. were damp. About 33 per
cent. of all dwellings consisted of not more
than one room and a kitchen, as compared
with approximately 50 per cent. in the towns,
and about 11 per cent. of all dwellings were

overcrowded in the sense of having more.

than two adult units per room unit. In
addition, the prevalent “‘ best room ”’ system
further restricted the space used for sleeping,
so that of the population in families with
three or more children under 15 years of age
who were living in small dwellings, nearly
63 per cent. slept in overcrowded conditions
in which there were four or more persons
per room.{

* A further account of urban housing is given by
R. Sterner and G. Lange in ‘* Undersékning rérande
smalagenheternas. beskaffenhet,”’ (Betankende med
Forslag Révande Andringay i Vissa Delay ar Halsovardsstadgan, Appendix 1, Stockholm, 7933.

¢ See Allmanna Bostadsrakningen Ar 1933, Sveriges
Offictella Statistik, Stockholm, 1936 (Résumé) and
R. Sterner.

t Social Work and Legislation in Sweden, loc. cit.
Also, according to the partial census of 1936, dwellings
consisting of not more than two rooms and a kitchen

Housing Improvements

Clearly, then, housing and the standard of
life of the larger families are two problems
which are in urgent need of attention, and
these are the problems with which the
Swedish government is now dealing. Some
improvement of housing has come about in
recent years as part of a general public
works policy for relieving unemployment.
In 1933, the Riksdag appropriated 5 million
kronor for granting loans to builders and
contractors who wished to build new houses
in towns and urban districts, and in 1935
a further grant of 3 million kronor was given,
though the latter was also intended to help
in the repair of existing dwellings. In 1936,
still another grant of 2 million kronor was
made, but the fund is now available for
repairs only.

Similarly, beginning with 1933, grants
were made by the Riksdag for improving and
repairing rural dwellings, provided that the
applicants were in need of financial aid. The
upper limit of the grant is 1,000 kronor per
dwelling, and in practice the average amount
has been about 700 kronor. At the same time,
loans have been made for building new
dwellings in the rural districts, at 4 per cent.
interest and to be repaid within twenty
years, the maximum being 3,000 kronor per
dwelling. Since most rural dwellings are
built of wood, this sum probably represents
the upper limit of about 70 per cent. of the
total cost of construction. By the end of
1936, nearly 39 million kronor had been
granted for rural housing, of which about
7°5 million kronor were used for putting up
new dwellings.* Since, however, much of
the work was intended immediately to reduce
unemployment, control over the quality of
the work was not all that could be desired,

constitute 58-4 per cent. of all dwellings in the rural
communes. Of these small dwellings, 35-4 per cent.
are either dilapidated or overcrowded (having more
than two person units per room unit) or both. 14°8 per
cent. are dilapidated only, 13-3 per cent. are overcrowded only, and the rest both overcrowded and
dilapidated. Of all rural accommodation, including
large dwellings, approximately 23 per cent. are either
overcrowded or dilapidated. (Partiella Folkrakningen 1
Mars 1936. Specialundersékning av Bostadsforhdliandena t 100 Landskommuner. Résumé, p. xvi.)
* Decree of June 30th, 1933.
96 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

with the result, according to Professor
Myrdal, that in some 2 or 3 per cent. of the
repaired houses the repairs were inadequate.*

There is also the question of the rent
charged for various kinds of accommodation.
Since the war, the co-operative building
societies—of which the two most important
examples are the Stockholm Co-operative
Housing Society (S.K.B.), founded in 1915,
and the Tenants’ Savings Fund and Housing
Society (H.S.B.), founded in 1923—have
helped considerably in reducing rents. It is
estimated that in general the rents of cooperative dwellings are 10 to 30 per cent.
below those available in the open market,
while outside Stockholm they are generally
25 to 30 per cent. below the prevailing
market price ; but the co-operative societies
have built only a small proportion of the
houses in the post-war period. Table III
shows the rents for small dwellings in the
period October ist, 1933, to September 30th,
1934. |

TABLE III

AVERAGE ANNUAL RENT IN KRONOR FOR DWELLINGSt

CONSISTING OF :
rroom. 4 \itchen + Kitchen, + kitchen,
611 748 1,124 1,609
277 381 605 898

Reference to Table II (p. 94) shows how
difficult is the position of families with three
or more children. To improve the position
of these families, the government initiated,
and in 1935 the Riksdag agreed to, a project
for rehousing 20,000 families with three or
more dependent children, who are at present
living in overcrowded dwellings in the towns
and urban districts. In 1935, ten million
kronor were granted for this purpose, and a
further fifteen million were given in 1936.
From this fund loans for constructing
dwellings of not less than two rooms and a
kitchen for the accommodation of the large
and relatively poor families are granted to
the communes, or through the communes to
public utility building societies or individual
contractors of the same class as the building
societies—which would seem to indicate

Stockholm...
70 other towns

* In a conversation in September 1937.
¢ Social Work and Legislation in Sweden, p. 289.

the rapid disappearance of the speculative
builder in the near future. Special attention
has to be given to the provision of baths,
communal laundries, access to parks and
playgrounds, and the provision of indoor
play centres and créches if these are thought
to be necessary. The dwellings may range
from single-family houses to blocks of flats.
The loan covers up to 40 per cent. of the
value of the dwellings, the rate of interest
being that paid by the State for its own
borrowing, and the commune concerned
must provide the land free of charge and be
responsible for the payment of interest and
amortisation. It must also provide 5 per
cent. of the capital required for building.
It is estimated that in this way rents will be
about ro to 15 per cent. below those prevailing in the open market. In addition, the
State makes grants to the communes for the
purpose of further reducing the rents charged
to the large families. Thus a family of three
dependent children has the rent reduced by
30 per cent., a four-child family has a 40 per
cent. reduction, and a family of five or more
children is given a 50 per cent. reduction.
To cover these rebates, 500,000 kronor were
allocated by the Riksdag in 1935 and 650,000
kronor in 1936.*

As an illustration of the result of this
policy on rent charges, a flat in Stockholm.
built under this scheme, consisting of two
rooms, kitchen and bathroom, and provided
with central heating and constant hot water,
will be let at 550 kronor per year to a threechild family and 400 kronor per year to a
five-child family. The average rent for a
dwelling of two rooms and a kitchen in
Stockholm in 1933-4 was, as is shown in
Table III, 1,124 kronor per year.

In keeping with the general policy, the
blocks of flats which Stockholm is setting up
for large families are on the outskirts of the
town, near to water and the green belt.t

* W. Goodsell, ‘‘ Housing and the Birth Rate in
Sweden,” American Sociological Review, December 1937.
Also Social Work and Legislation in Sweden.

t Social Work in Stockholm, City of Stockholm
Statistical Office, 1937. Collective créches will be provided in the blocks of flats, so that children may be
looked after while their mothers work or go out. At
one créche in Stockholm which the present writer
POPULATION POLICIES IN SCANDINAVIA | 97

So far, nearly 4,000 new dwellings have been
provided for large families,* which is a
rather slower rate of construction than was
anticipated. This has been due to the fact
that the scheme leaves the initiative to the
communes, and at the beginning many of the
towns and urban districts showed reluctance
to undertake additional duties. But combined propaganda by the government and the
tenants’ associations is helping to arouse
interest in the work. Rural housing is as yet
unaffected by the scheme—though the house
repairing grants have been made to about
60,000 rural families—but this year will see
its extension to the rural population.t It
will take a slightly different form in this
extension. Probably pre-fabricated sections
will be supplied and will be set up largely by
the labour of the future occupiers,{ thus
following the method adopted in the gardencity suburbs of Stockholm since 1926.

Grants for Mothers and Children

For the rest, the Swedish population policy
is still mainly in proposal form, each proposal
being the result of a careful study made by
a committee specially set up for the purpose.
Two more actual measures should be noted,
however, in connection with assistance to
mothers. In 1937, the law relating to
maternity benefit was amended so that a
woman whose taxable income (or the taxable
income of whose husband) is below 3,000
kronor per year may now receive a lump sum
of 75 kronor to help cover the costs of her
confinement. Consequently only 8 per cent.
of all mothers are now excluded from such
benefit, instead of the 26 per cent. under the
previous ruling by which the upper limit of
taxable income was 500 kronor per year.
Apart from this grant, necessitous mothers
may obtain grants of up to 300 kronor for the
birth of each child.

visited, a charge of 60 Gre per day was made for looking
after a child from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. and giving it three
meals in that period. Such créches are generally found
in the H.S.B. blocks of flats.
* 3,750 by April 19th, 1938, according to R. Sterner.
¢ According to a letter from Mr. R. Sterner, May
1938.
t According to Dr. A. Johansson, in a discussion in
September 1937.

B .:

The same year also saw a decree instituting
grants for needy children. Orphans, fatherless children, and the children of certain
classes of disabled persons, may now receive
State allowances. For orphans, these amount
to 300, 360 or 420 kronor per year, dependent
upon the cost of living in the district in which
the child is living. The grants are reduced
if they are being given to more than one child
in the same family, and also if the total
family income is above 600, 800 or 1,000
kronor per year, these limits being related to
the cost of living in the different localities.
Above these incomes the grants are reduced
by 70 per cent. of the difference between the
actual income and the income limit. At the
same time the grants are increased by 60
kronor per year for children under two years
of age. For the other classes of children the
basic grants are 60 kronor per year less than
for orphans. In all cases the allowance
ceases at the child’s sixteenth birthday.*

Measures under Consideration

Among the various proposals which may
be implemented in the near future, is one
relating to State taxation. In its original
form, the Population Commission’s proposal
urged a fairly steep gradation of income tax
with a high exemption limit for families,
and a special tax on bachelors. But the
special Committee on Taxation to which
the proposal was handed has not accepted
the bachelor tax and has reduced the
exemption allowances to families. The
amount of exemption also varies, of course,
with the cost of living of the various localities.
Thus in Stockholm, according to the modified
proposals, there would be an exemption of
760 kronor for a man, 760 kronor for his wife,
620 kronor for each of the first two children,
and 940 kronor for each subsequent child,
while the age limit for children would be
raised from 16 to 18 years.

The Population Commission has also considered the question of free meals for children,
and has recommended that in primary schools
a meal of some cooked food, together with

* Social Work and Legislation in Sweden. According
to Dr. Sterner the cost of children’s allowances will
amount to about 20 million kronor per year.
98 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

bread and butter and milk, should be given,
or, where there are no cooking facilities,
that the children should receive an “‘ Oslo
breakfast ’”’ (which will be referred to in
more detail in the section on Norway). At
first this proposal is intended to apply only
to about 20 per cent. of the children in
primary schools, but it is hoped that in, say,
ten years, it will apply to all the children in
these schools. In addition, the Commission
suggests that doctors at the maternity and
child-welfare centres should be able to order
free supplies of milk, vegetables, fruit and so
forth, for those mothers and children who
show signs of malnutrition. There is also a
suggestion that large families should be
entitled to special reductions in the price of
milk, butter, and other protective foods.

Further, the report on children’s clothing
recommends that poor families should be
given clothing to the value of 65 kronor per
year for children aged seven to fifteen years,
and of 45 kronor per year for children aged
under seven years. The cost of such a scheme
would be in the neighbourhood of 22 million
kronor per year. Family allowances are not
proposed, for the Commission believes it more
satisfactory to use other methods to relieve
parents of the cost of bringing up their
children.*

Danish Measures and Proposals

It has already been noted that few specific
measures relating to population policy have
been promulgated in either Denmark or
Norway. But in both countries a considerable proportion of recent legislation has a
direct bearing on the population question
and thorough studies of the different aspects
of the question are being undertaken both
through the Population Commission in
Denmark, and by means of ad hoc commissions in Norway. As regards Denmark,
the establishment of public birth-control
clinics has been mentioned in an earlier
section of this survey. The Danish Population Commission has also recently issued two

* The information as to the further proposals of the
Population Commission was kindly supplied by Mr.
R. Sterner, who has been responsible for some of the
material produced by the Commission.

reports,* one dealing with help to needy
mothers, in which it is proposed to follow
the Swedish example and give a grant to
help cover the costs of bearing a child, the
other with the question of providing suitable
housing conditions for large families. Here,
again, the proposal is along the Swedish
lines, consisting essentially of rent rebates of
30 per cent. for three children, 40 per cent.
for four and 50 per cent. for five or more
children.

Denmark has, of course, already seen a
considerable amount of State help in providing houses and flats. Up till April rst, 1936,
by which date the relevant Act fell into
abeyance, the State provided loans for up
to thirty-six years and covering as much as
95 per cent. of the total cost of construction,
including land costs, to public utility building
societies, and by 1937 about 20 per cent. of
the population of Copenhagen was living in
dwellings under public or communal control.
Loans for up to 70 per cent. of the costs. of
construction were also given for private
buildings. In both cases the rate of interest
charged was 44 per cent., about I per cent.
below the market rate.f Since 1936, however, such public assistance as is given to
housing must come from the communes
concerned, unless new provisions are made
under recommendations from the Populatio
Commission. ©

Norwegian Measures and Proposals

In Norway less has been done to improve
housing, for the task of giving grants to help
the provision of new dwellings has fallen
entirely to the communes. In Oslo, the
municipal authorities granted loans covering
up to go per cent. of the “‘ normal value,”
which apparently was equivalent to about

*“ Betenkning ... angaaende Moderens Rettigheder i Anledning af Fedsel,’’ Copenhagen, 1938, and
‘‘ Betenkning ... angaaende Laan till Beligbyggeri
og Huslefradrag for Mindrebemidlede, MBornerige
Familier,’’ Copenhagen, 1937. I have to thank Mr.
H. H. Koch, of the Socialministeriet, for informing me
of the progress of the Danish Royal Commission on
Population.

t F. C. Boldsen, ‘“‘ Der Wohnungs und Siedlungsbau
in Danemark, Schweden und Norwegen,’”’ in Vom
Wirtschaftlichen Bauen, 18 Folge, ed. R. Stegemann,
Dresden, 1937.
POPULATION POLICIES IN SCANDINAVIA 99

80 per cent. of the actual value. By 1937,
about 17 per cent. of the population of Oslo
was living in dwellings built under such
grants. But the general housing situation in
Norway is still very unsatisfactory. According to the reports of the Oslo Birth Control
and Maternal Welfare Clinic, 67 per cent. of
the patients who attended in 1933 lived in
dwellings containing not more than one
room and a kitchen, while the percentages
were 58-2 in 1934, 58°5 in 1935, and 59°5 in
1936.* These figures refer, of course, to a
very selected sample of the population. But
according to the 1930 census, there was
marked overcrowding among the general
industrial workers and their families. In
Oslo, 29-8 per cent. of these workers lived in
overcrowded conditions (more than two persons per room), 29-0 per cent. in Bergen,
32-5 per cent. in Trondheim, 27-2 per cent.
in Stavanger, and 21-0 per cent. in Drammen.t It is likely, however, that the near
future will see improvements in housing
conditions, since the present government is
seriously concerned with the problem.

On the other hand, some important steps
have been taken to improve the conditions
of mothers and children. Since 1915, for
example, mothers who are badly off have
been entitled to a subsidy from the communes to help them during pregnancy and
childbirth. During the last six weeks of
pregnancy they are entitled to the payment
of 45 to 110 kronor for the period. For the
first month after childbirth they receive
between 35 and 110 kronor, and for the next
five months their grant is from 30 to 85
kronor per month.}

As regards children, there is the now wellknown system of ‘ Oslo breakfasts,’’ which
were first instituted under the direction of
Professor Carl Schigtz in Oslo in 1931. These
breakfasts, which are generally given half an
hour before morning school begins, consist of
one-third of a litre of full-cream milk, a
“Kneipp cracker’? (made preferably of

* Modrehygienechontoret t Oslo, Bevetning for 1924-34,
1934, 1935 and 1936.

t 1930 Census, Vol. 10, “‘ Boligstatistikk,’’ pp. 26* to
28*, Norges Offistelle Statisttkk, IX, 63. Oslo, 1935.

{Information given by Dr. Frydenberg, of the
Socialdepartmentet, in a discussion in September 1937.

wholemeal wheat flour) served with margarine
and goat’s milk cheese, further wholemeal
bread with margarine and cheese ad lb, and,
finally, half an apple or orange, or a raw
carrot.* Margarine was used for economy
only, and is probably now being replaced by
butter, especially as the government decided
to allow public and municipal institutions to
buy butter at a reduced price. In March
1938 Professor Schistz proposed that half an
orange be given in any case (or briar marmalade, which is very rich in vitamin C), as well
as a raw carrot or half an apple, and that
between September and May a teaspoonful
of cod-liver oil should be given to each child
at breakfast. |

The “‘ Oslo breakfasts ’’ have been adopted
by the elementary schools in Oslo, Bergen,
Trondheim, Troms6 and a number of other
schools in rural districts. The breakfasts are
given free of charge in the towns, but a
charge is made in many of the rural schools,
or else the children bring the standard constituents with them to school. In Oslo about
46 per cent. of the school children receive the
breakfasts. f

Finally, a Committee set up in 1934 to
consider the question of family allowances
has just issued its report. The Committee
was primarily concerned with improving the
conditions of children, and not specifically
directed to a population policy, and its
problem was to decide how far children.
could be helped by public institutions and
how far by direct cash allowances. The
majority report concludes that collective
effort is best for such needs as housing, and
medical attention, but that, for the day-today needs of life in a country in which the
population is scattered and transport slow
and expensive, cash family allowances would
be the most satisfactory solution, particularly
if these allowances were paid to the mothers.

* If an orange is given, it generally begins the meal.

¢ From C. Schigtz, ‘‘ Skolefrokosten,” Tidsskrift for
den Norske Legeforening, 1938, and a special memorandum entitled ‘‘ The Oslo Breakfast,’’ both kindly sent
to me by Professor Schigtz. Parents who wish their
children to have the breakfasts, must state their
reasons—poverty or poor health, or both. But Professor Schigtz says that “‘ it is not considered as a matter of
reproach or shame to get free meals.”’
I00

It recognizes the need for allowances graded
in relation to the cost of living in different
parts of the country, but, because of the
complexity which such a system would
involve, recommends a uniform allowance as
between the different districts, graded so
that the highest amount is given for the first
child, with decreasing amounts for each
subsequent child.

The Committee suggests no specific allowance, being willing to leave this question
until such time as the government decides
to implement the proposal, but in the estimates of costs which were drawn up by Dr.
H. Palmstrgm, who was actuary to the
Committee, the rates chosen as examples
were 100 and 120 kronor per year.* If 120
kronor per year were given for each child
under 15 years of age, the annual cost would
be nearly eighty-two million kronor. On the
other hand, if the allowances were graded so
that the second child received only go kronor,
the third and subsequent children only 50
kronor per year, the cost would amount to
nearly 66 million kronor per year. As for
raising the necessary funds, the majority
report suggests an increase in the turnover
tax, a I per cent. turnover tax now yielding
about 30 million kronor per year.t There is
as yet no suggestion about when these
proposals will be introduced by the government.{

* These amounts appear small, but it should be noted
that, according to the Norwegian census of 1930, over
a third of the employed male population aged 15 years
or more was earning less than 1,000 kronor per year,
and this was the case with over half of the employed
women. In the rural districts the respective proportions were 54 per cent. for the men and 76 per cent.
for the women. See ‘‘ Inntekt og formue efter skatteligningen : 1930-31,” pp. 20", 2 and 3, Folketellingen
1 Norge, 1930, vol. 7.

¢ Cand. gkon. Alfhild Hertzberg, ‘‘ Barnetrygd i
Norge,” Urd, 1938, and “‘ Utkast til Lov om Barnetryd
met Motiver,’’ Socialdepartmentet, Oslo, 1938, both
kindly sent to me by Judge Wiesener, who was Chairman of the Committee.

t But Dr. Arne Skarrg states (in a letter to the
present writer) that it is unlikely that these allowances

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Conclusion

It is clear from the account which has been
given that in the Scandinavian countries
there is a real interest in the various problems
which arise out of the population question.
Whether the proposals and measures introduced in Sweden and Denmark will have any
effect is, of course, impossible to say at the
present time. But of the general proposals
two things may be said. First, that they are
in keeping with the thesis of democratic
government, for they all emphasize the
need for voluntary parenthood. Secondly,
whatever their effect upon fertility, the proposals are in any case all socially desirable.

Here in England we may not, perhaps, be
so concerned with the immediate prospects
of a declining population. We have a
population of nearly forty millions, and we
may perhaps be less afraid of seeing some
decline than Sweden, with a population of
only 6-2 millions, Denmark with only 3-7
millions, or Norway with only 2-9 millions.
Nevertheless, it is a reflection upon us that
with so wealthy a country we should do so
little—and do it so grudgingly—to improve
the conditions of the mass of families, and
that it should be left to countries which we
generally regard as poorer than our own to
show us the way. It is to be hoped that the
Scandinavian example will not be regarded
in this country merely as a theme for discussion by social workers and academic
sociologists.*

will be introduced. Apparently the tendency in Norway, as in Sweden and Denmark, is to give allowances
in kind—food, clothing, etc.—instead of in cash.

* Shortly after this paper was read, the American
Academy of Political and Social Science produced an
issue of the Annals devoted to Sweden (‘‘ Social Problems and Policies in Sweden,’’ May, 1938). This issue
provides authoritative studies by many Swedish experts, and contains an article by Professor Gunnar
Myrdal on ‘‘ Population Problems and Policies,’ which
should be referred to especially for a discussion of the
reasons why Swedish policy is directed to the granting
of subsidies in kind, instead of cash family allowances.

 

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXX, No. 2,
