R. F. J. WITHERS,

A.K.C.,
Department of Biology as Applied to Medicine, Middlesex Hospital Medical School, London

M.Sc.,

Problems in the Genetics of

Human

Introduction

T IS A commonplace of observation that
|= tendency to put on weight runs in

families. This is reinforced when seeing
relatives at hospital obesity clinics. The similarity of body build is apparent. This can be seen
in Figure 1 in which the somatotypes of a group
of obese women and their first degree relatives
and the somatotype of a contrast group of
normal weight women and their relatives can

be compared.
However, between these simple observations

and any more precise genetical statement of the.

situation there are relatively few studies and
many problems.

The main difficulty for the geneticist lies in
deciding what phenotype to study that will (
represent what is regarded as clinical obesity. '
One of the earliest workers, Davenport! in 1923
wrote a monograph in which he attempted to
use an index of body build (height/wt?). Using
this index he divided the population into five
groups (very slender, slender, medium, fleshy and
very fleshy) and classified parents and children on
this basis. Apart from this early study, where an
awareness of the complexity of the classification
of the phenotype was shown, most other workers have assumed that obesity is an all or none
condition. Therefore a knowledge of the inci
Obesity

dence of obesity among the parents of the obese
and a knowledge of the incidence of obesity
among the offspring of certain types of mating
has been the result of these other inquiries.
For instance Bauer? showed that of 1,000 obese
patients, 73 per cent had one or both parents
obese. In Chicago, Rony® found that 173 out of
250 patients had one or both parents obese.
Other similar studies*5.*.7:8 are in the literature. Gurney® showed that 73 per cent of the
offspring of stout <x stout matings were themselves stout. Whereas in a stout X not stout
mating only 41 per cent of the offspring were
stout.

Gurney interpreted this result as showing
that stout individuals carry the genes for slenderness and these can segregate in the gametes
whereas the slender individuals rarely carry
gametes for stoutness and are more likely to be
recessive. Angel!° in a comprehensive study of
obese white women in Philadelphia studied the
ratio of fat: thin among the offspring. His
results are given in Table 1.

He noticed that Fat g/Average 2 and Average/
Average matings produced fewer males among
the offspring and at the same time larger
families. This lead him to the hypothesis that one
of the genes helping to determine obesity is a
sex-linked recessive gene. He commented that

TABLE 1
TYPES OF MATING IN PHILADELPHIA POPULATION OF OBESE WHITE WOMEN
(From Angel.)
TYPE OF MATING OFFSPRING TYPE OF MATING SEX RATIO
% Fat Ave. Boys/100 Family
36g 6 Fat/thin girls size
Fat 3 x Fat 9 25:9 32 51 25 22 Fat 3 x Fat? 70 78-1 4-33
Average ¢ X Fat 2 36°2 33 69 54 54 Average ¢ X Fat 2 -49 16:7 5-00
Fat 3 x Average 2 15-5 13 27 19 11 Fat 5 x Average 9 57 84-2 3-89
Average 3 x Average? 22:2 8 43 37 Average 3 x Average? °37 66:2 4-92

81

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1964, 56, 2.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW
© SCHEMATIC TWO-DIMENSIONAL PROJECTION OF
oN OBESE
ZF
* 2
f als

  

THE THEORETICAL SPATIAL RELATIONSHIPS
AMONG THE KNOWN SOMATOTYPES
ie
t

7
ao
3629

   

352

 

 

A SCHEMATIC TWO-DIMENSIONAL PROJECTION OF
pesoMoRny,
7%

THEORETICAL SPATIAL RELATIONSHIPS
KNOWN SOMATOTYPES

ef”

333

 

 

HIG v

 

envomon?

% be

%
4,

he 712 o12

os e

@ su

sts

#2,

Oe,

OM OO MoKan,

FIGURE 1 COMPARISON OF BODY BUILD OF OBESE POPULATION AND THEIR RELATIVES

82
PROBLEMS IN THE GENETICS OF HUMAN OBESITY

TWO-DIMENSIONAL PROMCTION ‘oF G p
nN AMONG TH KAGUN SOMATOTTOES nomen, CONTRAST GROU
a

 

A SCHEMATIC TWO-DIMENSIONAL PROJECTION OF

 
 
  

THE THEORETICAL SPATIAL RELATIONSHIPS
AMONG THE KNOWN SOMATOTYPES

AND BODY BUILD OF CONTRAST GROUP AND THEIR RELATIVES
83
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the relatively large family size of the two matings
may have a purely psychological or socialbiological and not a genetic determination.

In the study which the author has carried
out he thought it worth while to prepare similar
tables to those of Angel for an obese population
and a control population.

The obese population were selected on the
basis of the obesity of one of the offspring (see
below) and the propositus is left out of the offspring figures in the table. The control population was a population of factory women (see
below). Again the propositus was omitted from
the table.

The consistency of the Fat/thin ratio in Fat x
Fat mating in this British data and the earlier
work in the literature is striking. The sex-ratios
and family size do not show consistency and
are different from Angel’s data. This suggests
that variable social factors underlie these
differences.

Steinberg" in a recent review describes such
approaches as the above as anecdotal. He takes
this position because he sees quite correctly
that obesity is not an all or none clinical condition. He presents a definition of obesity as an
excessive accumulation of fat—beyond 10-20 per
cent of the normal range for a particular age,
height and sex. In presenting this definition
Steinberg is emphasizing that obesity involves a
continuous variable. In his definition this is
represented by fatness which varies continuously
throughout the population. There are other
definitions which regard the obese as those who

are over 20 per cent overweight. Here again a
continuous variable is spoken of. Genetically
such conditions are believed to be due to a series
of genes with additive or multiplicative effect
or both, and are believed to vary with certain
environmental factors. The phenotype that one
studies is a product ofa varying multifactorial genetic situation developing in varying environments.

In animal and plant populations such genetic
situations can be studied by experimental breeding. The influence of genetic factors in milk
yield can be studied by complex breeding and
interbreeding within herds. In human populations such techniques are not available. Therefore special devices have to be sought in place
of experimental breeding.

A number of possible solutions to this problem
were mentioned by Steinberg and they include:

1. Twin Studies: Identical (Monozygous)
twins can be compared with Dizygous twins and
with ordinary siblings. Moreover, if a sample of
identical twins reared apart can be studied
then some idea of the environmental component
can be obtained.

2. Family Correlations: If the continuous
variable can be corrected for height, age and sex
then correlation coefficients could be computed
between relatives so that family correlations
would show genetic resemblances between the
relatives. These would hold on the assumption
of random mating, although it is worth pointing
out at the beginning that psychological factors
respecting body build almost certainly affect the
choice of mate.

TABLE 2
RESULT OF DIFFERENT TYPES OF MATING IN AN OBESE POPULATION
TYPE OF MATING OFFSPRING TYPE OF MATING SEX RATIO
% Fat Ave. Fat{ Boys/100 Family
36 8 36 thin girls size
Fat 3 x Fat? 43 39 24 33 52 Fat d x Fat? “74 87-7 4-2
Average 3 x Fat? 28°5 16 8 21 33 Average 5 x Fat 92 “44 155°5 3-4
Fat 3 x Average 2 13-2 6 0 14 16 Fat 3 x Average ? 2 139-9 3-26
Average 3 x Average ? 15:3 2 5 19 32 Average 3 x Average 2 14 61-9 4
TABLE 3
RESULT OF DIFFERENT TYPES OF MATING IN A CONTROL POPULATION
TYPE OF MATING OFFSPRING TYPE OF MATING SEX RATIO
% Fat Ave. Fat/ Boys/100 Family
36 6 2 thin girls size
Fat d x Fat 2 18 12 15 18 19 Fat 3 x Fat? 73 79°6 3°5
Average 3 x Fat 2 32:5 11 18 62 69 Average 3 x Fat 9 -239 100 453
Fat 3 x Average 2 20 4 10 31 25 Fat 3 x Average ? 25 103-6 5-2
Average 3 x Average 2 29-5 5 16 45 27 Average 3 x Average ? 29 3-66

84

109-8
PROBLEMS IN THE GENETICS OF HUMAN OBESITY

3. Environmental Studies: Apart from the use
of twin studies for examining environmental
factors there is still the problem of the magnitude
of environmental influences on the correlations
between relatives. This could be studied by the
use of parent-child correlations in a parentadoptee population. Here any such correlation
must be due either to bias in the selection of the
child by the adopting parents (which in Britain
is negligible because of our adoption system)
or to environmental factors such as family eating
patterns. I have used this method as will be seen
later. Steinberg is attempting to investigate this
by studying a group called the Hutterites—an
Anabaptist sect which lives in a fairly stable
environment sharing the same food, clothes and
living a communal life. So far he has not reported any findings from this study.

The Phenotype

Given a metric of some sort which can be used
as synonymous with obesity an attempt can be
made to see how much of the variation in this
metric can be associated with genetic factors.
In so far as the metric must be something which
is correctable for height, weight and age, many
of the more natural measurements associated
with obesity cannot at the moment be used
because of a lack of correcting factor. For
example, several suggestions have been made in
the literature for indices of adiposity. Total body
fat could be used, or some anthropometric
measure Of body fat. Unfortunately at the
moment there are no comprehensive tables of
standards for such indices available. This is
why Steinberg’s suggested definition is not
helpful at the present time. On the other hand insurance companies find it worth making those
people who are overweight pay an increased
premium for their obesity. It was therefore
decided to take overweight as the phenotypic
characteristic. When the question is asked
“overweight with respect to what” ? Two answers
ight be given. Firstly, on the basis of table of
life expectancy the insurance companies have
evolved the concept of “ideal weight’. This
concept is related both to life expectancy and the
amount of profit which such companies make in
handling particular mortality risks. It is also
worth noting that ideal weights for heights and

ages over thirty years are very much lower
than the average weight at that height and age.
A person of average weight at forty-five years of
age would be more than 20 per cent overweight
with reference to ideal weight at that age. It was
decided to use average weight based on the table
for the British population drawn up by Kemsley!”
when considering adults and the tables of
Sutcliffe and Canham™ for children. A given
individual would be evaluated against these
tables and a value—the percentage overweight
could be assigned to him or her. It should be
noticed that this percentage can be positive or
negative, and in the latter case the person would
in fact be underweight. However, for mathematical simplicity he would be treated as having
negative overweight.

The Initial Population

Two populations of working class women living
in a south London suburb were studied. The first
population consist of 130 consecutive obese
patients attending a clinic for obesity at their
local hospital. These were compared with 250
women volunteers working at factories in the
neighbourhood. It was felt that such a control
population would be a sample of women from
the population of which the obese group were
drawn. It included women of all types of body
build. The factory doctor was asked to obtain
volunteers for research into what was in the diet
which affects health. This form of invitation
was used in the hope that the sample would not
be unduly biased with respect to weight. The
volunteers represented about half the available
population at each factory.

When each propositus was seen, whether
they were from the obese or control populations
it was explained to them that the author was
interested in the way in which their eating habits
ran through their family and an attempt was
made to obtain their permission for all their
first degree relatives to be contacted and visited.
About fifty of the control population refused
this permission. Further information was lost
through some of the relatives refusing to cooperate when they were contacted, but this
applied only to 23 per cent of the relatives of
either group.

When a person was seen they were investigated

85
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in the following ways and in the following order.
An inquiry was made into their weight at certain
times throughout their life, for example were
they plump as a child? What was their weight at
marriage ? What was their weight at menopause?
An account of their pregnancies was elicited for
we have found, with Angel, that gain in weight
in pregnancy is the commonest given cause of
adult obesity in women. (N.B. this is not to say
that it is the real cause.) A medical history was
taken and this included any account of emotional disturbance to see if there might be any
association between such a disturbance and
gain in weight. Next dietary history was taken.
Their average daily diet was investigated and
inquiries made about any food preferences they
might have. This was done to consider the possibility that the obese and their relatives might
tend to eat more starchy foods than the controls.

Then each person was weighed and somatotyped by Parnell’s'* method. This method was
chosen because of the difficulty of photogrammetric somatotyping in a house to house
survey. The addresses of each first degree
relative was then asked for together with a
description of age and build, marital status and
family size of each relative. This inquiry produced information about deceased relatives and
such things as build was checked against photoe
graphs if any were available. In fact when
these descriptions were compared with the actual
build of those relatives who co-operated and
were subsequently seen there was sufficient
agreement to feel fair confidence in this hearsay
evidence. It is on the basis of this information
that the Tables 2 and 3 above were produced.

Finally each person, over the age of sixteen,
was asked to complete a personality inventory
which has been designed to test for possible
depressive psychogenic factors in the etiology
of obesity. It is worth noting that this questionnaire appeared to be somewhat disturbing,
because we found that some women refused to
attend when they heard about the questionnaire
from their colleagues so the sample of control
women is biased by this factor.

Only a brief account of the results of this
whole survey can be given here. Full details
will be published elsewhere. The inquiry was
carried out in the hope some single factor might

86

be shown to contribute to the family incidence
of obesity, as well as to obtain the data for a
multifactorial analysis of the phenotype.

Multifactorial Analysis of Human Overweight
The first findings of the sample of factory workers and the obese population have been published
elsewhere.’®

The following correlations were found:
Offspring/parent

Regression coefficient b = 0°1453 + 0-0402

Correlation coefficient rpjo=0:127 + 0:0633

Full Sibs
Intra class correlation coefficient rsjs = 0°259 + 0-0408

Heritability = 2b = 0-29

When these figures are substituted in the usual
formulae the partitioning of the variance for
dominance and for environmental factors
become nonsensically high.

From Mather :*
D (Variation due to fixed genetic factors) = 2rp/jo

H _—Unfixable genetic

D Fixable genetic

4 (rpyo — Tpyo)

Ipjo
H =4:157D (Dominance, etc.)

1 — 2rp/o — Hrpyso
E Non-heritable D

D Fixable genetic 4rp/o

0-4293 D (Environmental
factors)

E

In reporting these findings I suggested that the
fault lies in the model used which was designed
for experimental breeding among animals and
plants. In human genetics environmental factors
will lead to what I called social inheritance as
opposed. to genetic inheritance. Family social
patterns such as eating habits or the psychological milieu of the family will contribute to
parent/offspring correlations and full sib correlations. They will tend to make the withinfamily variance less than the between-family
variance, just as does genetic inheritance. Also
in so far as these factors might affect all the
siblings they will present to the geneticist as
dominance.

A way round this difficulty is to measure such
factors by finding the offspring/parent correlations in families which have at least one adopted
PROBLEMS IN THE GENETICS OF HUMAN OBESITY

child. Since there should be no genetic relationship in such families, any correlations found
must measure part of the social inheritance
belonging to the family situation.

The ten major adoption societies in this country were contacted but only one, Dr. Barnado’s,
would co-operate. This Society sent a form to
ail parents who had adopted children who would
be from 8-13 years old. Three hundred forms
were sent out, and 142 were returned to me from
parents who remained anonymous so far as I
was concerned. Forty-two forms were returned
as unknown at the address sent.

The parent/offspring correlation coefficient
were calculated and can be compared with those
obtained for the factory population.

Adoptee population
Father/

natural childrro = 0-592 N = 13 Not Significant*
Mother. ;
natural childrmjo = 0°34 N= 13 Not Significant*
Father/
adoptee Trzjao = 0-113 N = 142

| Not Significant*
Mother/_
adoptee Im/sao= 0-157 N = 142

Factory population
Father/

offspring Ito = 0.42 N = 36 Significant
Mother/ ;
offspring [m/o = 0-162 N= 242 Significant

The significant correlation can be expressed
on arrows as in Figure 2.

Such correlations suggested at the time sexlimitation. However, the population was small

MOTHER FATHER

r= 0-335 r= 0:753
N=99~ N=14

DAUGHTER SON

a = Significant correlation

FIGURE 2

FACTORY POPULATION—PARENT/OFFSPRING
CORRELATIONS

* This means not significantly different from zero.
N =Number in sample.

owing to the shortage of fathers who made
themselves available for interview, and it was
decided to seek a larger sample elsewhere. A
sample of children aged 10-18 from boys’ and
girls’ schools in a London borough, Watford,
was taken. The children were given a form on
which they had to fill in their own height, age
and weight and those of their first degree
relatives. This was presented to them through the
schools with an injunction as to necessary accuracy and the research spirit behind the investigation. This yielded a large population whose
family correlations were calculated.

      

Father/son res = 0-139 N= 338 Not Significant

Father

daughter rea = 0°:2387N = 412 Significant

Mother/son rms = 0-192 N = 333 Significant

Mother/

daughter rma = 0°:1855N = 414 Significant

MOTHER FATHER
WBS
r=0-1855 . =0es ioae"
DAUGHTER SON
——____—» * Significant correlation

FIGURE 3

WATFORD SCHOOLCHILDREN PARENT/OFFSPRING

CORRELATIONS

This pattern of significant correlations suggests that one of the factors is sex-linked. If this
is the case, as Mather and Jinks!’ have shown the
relation fg/s > Tp/p > Ts/p Should hold, assuming
that the effects of the autosomal genes and nonheritable agencies are the same for both sexes.

Theoretical (Mather) rs/s > rv/p > Fa/b
Observed:

Sister/sister rgjs = 0:2204N = 195 Significant
Brother/

brother Ip/p = 02891 N = 146 Significant
Brother/

sister Ip/s = 0-2779N = 319 Significant

This does not confirm the hypothesis of sexlinkage. It was felt that perhaps because many
in this population were children undergoing

87
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

their adolescent growth spurt this might upset
the comparison of their weight with that of
adults. Therefore the correlations were calculated for two sub-group groups.
(a) leaving out those children who were under
15 years of age.
(b) leaving out those children aged from 10-18
years.

TABLE 4

CORRELATIONS FOR TWO AGE GROUPS OF WATFORD
SCHOOLCHILDREN

AGE PARENT/ OFFSPRING CORRELATION

Le/s re/a I'm/s Im/da
(a) Omitting 0-1378NS 0:2583 S 0-1962NS 0-2896 S
15 or less N = 214 N= 239 N=211 N = 238

(b) Omitting 0:0578NS 0-:2868 S 0-183NS 0:1868S
10-18 year olds N= 119 N=112 N=111 N= 122

NS = Not Significantly different from zero. S = Significantly different from zero.

It is interesting that on the restricted sample
the mother/son correlation becomes not significantly different from zero. In fact, however, the
value is only just not significant so that a sample
as large as the total sample might have a significant correlation. It is worth pointing out that
in these children the father/son correlation is not

MOTHER FATHER

 
   

r= 0:2896
N= 412

  

DAUGHTER SON

ee C= Significant

r=0°2583
N=239

significant and is low, so that the original positive correlation based on a very small sample is
possibly fortuitous. This leads us to abandon
the hypothesis of sex limitation.

The lack of support, however, for the sexlinkage hypothesis resulting from the sibling
correlations requires that a closer examination
of the concept of overweight be made. Overweight can be due to a number of factors
associated with body build. From the point of
view of obesity a clinician means that overweight must be due to an excess of fat. Whereas
overweight may be due to an excess of muscle
or bone. In somatotype terminology, the clinician is interested in obesity as in endomorphy,
whereas overweight may be the result of a high
degree of mesomorphy.

The original sample of factory women and
their families had been measured for their
somatotype by Parnell’s method. An attempt was
also made to get some picture of the somatotype
of the schoolchildren and their families by giving
them a choice of types of body build as a description and asking them to use such descriptions
to classify the build of their relatives and them
MOTHER FATHER

 

DAUGHTER

SON

correlation

FIGURE 4. WATFORD SCHOOLCHILDREN PARENT/OFFSPRING CORRELATIONS

88
PROBLEMS IN THE GENETICS OF HUMAN OBESITY

FACTORY __POPULATION

MOTHER FATHER

 

DAUGHTER

ih ow ew wow emccceccocsusecece

Rese rates mreenernncnin

WATFORD SCHOOLCHILDREN

 

MOTHER FATHER
[3
F
I
7
|:
li
|!
DAUGHTER SON
= Endomorphy

— — — — — ge = Mesomorphy

et ot a aera = = Ectomorphy

FIGURE 5. SIGNIFICANT CORRELATION FOR BODY BUILD

selves. These descriptions were intended to be
related to actual numerical somatotypes, so that
these could be calculated. Each component of
the somatotype was then correlated in turn
between the relatives.

TABLE 5
PARENT/OFFSPRING SOMATOTYPE CORRELATIONS
Results
FATHER/SON N = 10
Endomorphy r = —0:196 Significant
Mesomorphy r = 0:914 SIGNIFICANT
Ectomorphy r = —0:0765 Not Significant
FATHER/DAUGHTER N = 14
Endomorphy r = 0-268 Not Significant
Mesomorphy r = 0-4618 Not Significant*
Ectomorphy r = 0-524 Not Significant*
MOTHER/SON N = 50
Endomorphy r = 0-2816 SIGNIFICANT
Mesomorphy r = 0-0523 Not Significant
Ectomorphy r = 0-2409 Not Significant
MOTHER/DAUGHTER N = 51
Endomorphy r = 0-1825 Not Significant*
Mesomorphy r = —0-0384 Not Significant
Ectomorphy r = 0-1871 Not Significant*

* = correlation which with a slightly larger sample
might become significant. They indicate a tendency
towards a significant correlation.

The figures can be seen in a diagram in
Figure 5. The populations have been shown
separately for one has actually been measured,
the schoolchildren are inferred. The latter is
open to serious bias including psychological
bias which has vitiated other work done on
similar lines.

There are differences in these diagrams which
need more accurate and larger samples for their
clarification, but two things stand out:

(1) in neither case does the father contribute
ectomorphy to the son.

(2) the sex cross correlations, i.e. mother/son
and father/daughter are basically different. The
mother contributes at least her endomorphy
to the son, whereas the father is contributing
mesomorphy to the daughter.

From this it can be seen that the cross correlations which we saw for overweight must have
a different basis. They must be based on the
mesomorphy relationship for the father/daughter
correlation, and on the endomorphy relationship
for the mother/son correlation. It looks as

89
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

though what is needed is some evaluation of the
relative contribution of endomorphy and mesomorphy to overweight.

It must be concluded that the use of overweight as a phenotype in the study of the
genetics of obesity is unsatisfactory. It might be
better to use total body fat or some other
measure of endomorphy. However, as was
indicated at the beginning, what is lacking is a
set of standard tables for such a phenotype
which can connect age, sex and height factors,
although standards have been published by
Tanner for children. Meanwhile, it is always
possible that an abnormality of metabolism
may be shown to be the fundamental lesion in
human obesity, and that the quantitative
approach is only forced on the geneticist by
that fact that the expression of obesity is in term
of body build which is genetically extremely
complicated.

Acknowledgements

The author wishes to thank Dr. A. Kahan of
St. James Hospital, Balham for offering valuable
facilities and his interest and encouragement.
Also the directors of the factories in which the
control population was seen for their cooperation. Thanks are also due to Dr. Alcock
and Dr. Gough-Thomas who assisted with the
Watford schoolchildren. Especially does he
wish to thank Mrs. E. V. Leckie who assisted
with visiting, performing many of the calcula
tions of the research and helping in many other
aspects of the work. Finally grateful thanks are
given to the Eugenics Society for their generous
financial help in making this survey possible.

REFERENCES
. Davenport, C. B. 1923. Body-build and its Inheritance.
Publication No. 329. Carnegie Institution Washington.
. Bauer, J. 1945. Constitution and Disease. New York.
. Rony, M. R. 1940. Obesity and Leaness. Philadelphia.
. Fellows, M. M. 1931. Studies of relatively normal
obese individuals during and after dietary restrictions.
Amer. J. med. Sci., 181, 301-12.
. Dunlop, D. M. and Lyon, R. M. 1931. Study of 523
cases of obesity. Edin. med. J., 38, 561-77.
. Ellis; R. W. B. and Tallerman, K. M. 1934. Obesity in
childhood; study of 50 cases. Lancet ii, 615-20.
. Iversen, T. 1953. Psychogenic obesity in children.
Acta paediat. 42, 8-19.
. Mayer, J. 1960. Genetic factors in obesity. Bull. N.Y.
Acad. Med., 36, 323-43.
. Gurney, R. 1936. Hereditary factor in obesity. Arch.
inter. Med. 57, 557-61.
10. Angel, J. L. 1949. Constitution in female obesity.
Amer. J. phys. Anthrop., 7, 433-71.
11. Steinberg, A. G. 1960. Comments on the Genetics of
human obesity. Amer. J. Clin. Nut., 8, 752-59.
12. Kemsley, W. F. F. 1952. Body weight at different ages
and heights. Amer. Eugen., 16, 316.
13. Sutcliffe, A. and Canham, J. W. 1950. The Heights
and Weights of Boys and Girls. London.
14, Parnell, R. W. 1958. Behaviour and Physique. London.
15. Withers, R. F. J. 1961. A genetical study of human
obesity. Proc. 2nd. Int. Congress of Human Genetics.
Rome. 1058-1063.
16. Mather, K. 1949. Biometrical Genetics. London. P. 78
17. Mather, K. and Jinks, J. L. 1963. Correlations
between Relatives arising from Sex-linked Genes.
Nature, 198, 314-15.
18. Tanner, J. M. and Whitehouse, R. M. 1962. Standards for subcutaneous fat in British Children. Brit.
med. J. i, 446-50.

AWN

obo eo NH WA

 

 

9°
