 

Dr. MAURICE NEWFIELD
EUGENICS REVIEW

Editorial Offices: The Eugenics Society, 69 Eccleston Square, London, S.W.1.
(Telephone— Victoria 2091.)
“Euzpenics is the science which deals with all influences that improve the inborn

qualities of a race; also with those that develop them to the utmost advantage."—
Sir Francis Galton, 1904.

MAURICE NEWFIELD

1893—

1949

IT IS WITH DEEP REGRET THAT WE RECORD THE DEATH OF
DR. MAURICE NEWFIELD, EDITOR OF THE EUGENICS REVIEW
SINCE 1933.

AURICE NEWFIELD was born in
M 1893 and educated at the City of

London School. He volunteered for
active service at the outbreak of war in 1914,
joining the Public Schools and Universities
Battalion, and was commissioned in 1915 to
the 3rd Btn. of the Bedfordshire Regiment.
After a year in Mesopotamia, where he
contracted sandfly fever, he was invalided
to India in 1916. Here, after transferring to
the Sappers and Miners, Indian Army, he
acted as Commandant of the Nasirabad
School of Army Signals and was temporary
A.D.C. to Lord Chelmsford during his
Rajputana tour in 1917. He rose to the rank
of major and left India in May r1gr19, though
by remaining another six months he could
have qualified for a disability pension,
having suffered from cholera and malaria
during his service in the East. Eager to start
work, but feeling a misfit in England, he
studied for a short time at the Sorbonne and
at Freiburg before going to King’s College
and Charing Cross Hospital ; having qualified
in record time, he practised in Bloomsbury,
sharing the house of Francis and: Vera Meynell. One of his patients was H. G. Wells,
with whom he spent a winter in Portugal as
his private physician. At the time when his
health first broke down, in 1930, he was

assistant editor of the Britesh Medseal
Journal, and later, from his home in the
country, was for some time medical adviser
on publicity to the Glaxo Laboratories. In
1936 he joined the staff of Butterworths to
assist Sir Humphry Rolleston in editing the
British Encyclopedia of Medical Practice,
and in 1938 inaugurated the new Medical
Department of Hamish Hamilton, which he
built up almost single-handed until it was
taken over by Cassell’s in 1949.

Maurice Newfield never allowed illness or
ill-health to interfere with his work; in
addition to his editorial duties he wrote,
under the pseudonym ‘ Michael Fielding,”
Parenthood, Design or Accident,* the fifth
edition of which appeared in 1946; he also
wrote the Health section in Pears’ Cyclopedia and “‘ First Aid in Divers Crises’ in
the Weekend Book.t

He married in 1929 and his only son was
born in 1930. 
Lorp HORDER writes: One of the first
things I read on returning from the U.S.A.
recently were the paragraphs in the REVIEW
in which Maurice Newfield spoke very
generously of my own participation, as
President of the Society over two periods, in

* Williams and Norgate, 1928, + Nonesuch Press, 1924.

103
104

the work done by the eugenics group in this

country. Alas! Newfield died on the day I
wrote my letter. His résumé of my association with the Soczety, written as it must have
been during hours of great suffering, was
characteristic of the man: lucid, well
phrased, accurate.

Details of Newfield’s life and work will
doubtless appear in the REVIEW over the
name of his devoted friend Blacker, to whom
we owe so much, in that he enabled Newfield,
by his encouragement and patience, to
produce so much fine critical writing over so
long a period. These brief notes of mine are
personal and general.

It may be truly said of most men that “‘ the
blood is the life.’”” Of Newfield it was more
correct to say that the spirit was the life.
For twenty years his work was done not only
under the shadow of illness but whilst illness
was actively upon him. Add to the physical
suffering and disablement the series of
tiresome treatments necessitated by his
disease and most men might have reasonably
excused themselves mental effort. Not so
Newfield ; this long period, showing only
brief remissions, and even so of very indifferent health, saw the production of an
almost continuous series of literary tasks.
Not only was the output large, the quality
was nearly always uniformly good. I believe
it will emerge that, in his editorship of the
REVIEW, Newfield’s critical notes will stand
out as some of his best work. They reveal
the breadth of his conception of eugenics,
the wide scope of his knowledge and the
fineness of his critical faculty.

In Newfield’s death eugenics has lost one
of its stalwarts and those who were his
intimates have lost a most loyal and lovable
friend.

Dr. C. P. BLACKER writes: It was in 1933
that the editorship of the REVIEW passed
from the capable hands of Mr. Eldon Moore
to those of Maurice Newfield. The first
number produced under Maurice’s control
was that of October 1933. Hence in October
last year he completed fifteen years of
editorship.

The years before 1933 had not been un
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

troubled. Differences existed within the
Council upon various topics, among them
birth control. The assumption of editorial
responsibility by someone who at that time
was so closely identified with the birth
control movement was viewed with mixed
feelings by the Council ; its mood was then
such that no appointment would have been
unreservedly welcomed. Aspecially appointed
REVIEW sub-committee was designated to
scrutinise and approve the ‘“ Notes of the
Quarter.”’ But it was not long before a sense
of reassurance was noticeable. The REVIEW
sub-committee gradually came to take its
duties less seriously, and it finally lapsed
altogether, being prepared to leave it to the
discretion of the editor to consult whom he
liked when he was in doubt. Finally
Maurice used to send advance copies of his
“Notes of the Quarter ” to the chairman of
the Council and to me; and it was but
rarely that either of us offered suggestions.
There began for me in October 1933 a
period of happy co-operation which, till its
end in August 1949, was unblemished by the
slightest breath or trace of disharmony.
Indeed our relations, at first somewhat
formal, developed into a warm friendship
compounded, so far as I was concerned, of
deepening affection and admiration. Our
views on the principles of eugenics accorded
as perfectly as did our thoughts on issues of
policy. Before Maurice’s illness confined him
to his home we used to meet at least weekly ;
and from our many talks I derived consistent
profit and, whenever it was needed, help.
After he became disabled I continued to
draw similar comforts from an almost daily
correspondence or telephone conversation
and by occasional visits to Great Bardfield.
Indeed, I came to rely so much on his tact,
his discretion, and his excellent judgment,
that I now look forward to a future without
him with something akin to dismay.
Eugenics is a difficult subject to expound ;
the pitfalls are such that disruptive controversies can only be avoided by a firm
touch and delicate balance. These Maurice
possessed in supreme degree. Among the
qualities which combined to make him such
a rare character and also such a valued
MAURICE NEWFIELD: 1893-1949

friend were his shining vitality and his almost
uncanny awareness of the trends of feeling
around him. His vitality, his gaiety, his
buoyancy, the delectation which he found
in merely being alive, seemed to increase as
his physical illness developed. I can see him
now as I saw him one evening two years ago
at a friend’s house in Gordon Square. He was
recovering from a prolonged bout of sickness
which had prevented his eating any solid
food for several weeks. I found him lying on
a sofa in a condition of extreme emaciation.
He looked so delicate and frail that one
felt he could be picked up like a child. After
he had briefly described his symptoms as
tiresome but interesting tribulations, not
without amusing features, we talked for
about three quarters of an hour about the
Society’s affairs. Despite a degree of weakness which at times rendered his voice
inaudible and which made the slightest
change of position on the sofa an effort, his
conversation sparkled with wit and humour.
There emanated from his wasted figure, from
his taut but smiling face, a vitality of spirit
which seemed somehow luminous, so that
(absurd though it may appear) I seemed to
see him in the waning light surrounded by a
halo. He well knew, I think, that his days
were numbered, and on one occasion said as
much to me in confidence. Yet I never heard
him utter a word of complaint except against
the limitations imposed on his powers of
work. During the last year of his life, he had
responsibilities and cares unconnected with
the Society which weighed on him. He
looked forward to the time when these could
be transferred to other shoulders and he
could devote himself more single-heartedly
to the affairs of the Soczety.

Of his literary abilities, of his editorial tact
and skill, all contributors to the REVIEW
—and indeed all its readers—will know. He
was entirely responsible for writing the
current version of our Aims and Objects.
Appreciation of his outstanding merits as an
editor have reached me from every continent
—from America where, before and during
the war, the REVIEW was widely distributed
to members of the American Eugenics
Society ; from Australia where a similar

105

distribution has been made to the Australian
Eugenics Society ; from South Africa ; from
India ; from several European countries such
as Denmark, Sweden and France. During
the fifteen years of his editorship his touch
was unfaltering : not once did he take a false
step. There was never a complaint, a rebuke,
a recrimination ; never once did a member
of the Council raise objection to a feature of
the Review. Indeed, the only references,
other than those of a business character,
made to it at Council meetings, were expressions of praise and appreciation. If the
winds of opinion, which have been contrary
for many years, are now veering in our
favour, one of the causes of the change is that
eugenics has found as gifted and sensitive an
exponent as Maurice Newfield.

Our sympathy goes to his devoted wife and
son.

THE Hon. Mrs. Grant DuFF writes:
Maurice Newfield is a very great loss to the
Eugenics Society. Of his outstanding qualities as Editor of the REVIEw others are better
qualified to speak, but every contributor
knows how individually helpful he was.
Indeed his appreciation of others was one
of his most endearing characteristics. His
loyalty, his tact, and his unfailing command
of the right word would have been remarkable even if he had been a man of robust
health ; but, in the face of continual physical
weakness, his mental energy and his great
courage were an astounding evidence of the
power of spirit over matter.

Although we knew that he would have
died years ago but for the very exceptional
care and devotion of his wife, his death has
come as a shock. We shall miss him more
than words can say. I personally have lost
a real friend.

Mrs. JANET CHANCE writes: What a
friend Maurice Newfield was—humorous,
kindly, mischievous, entertaining, thoughtprovoking ; and what a counsellor—sane,
sensitive, and widely informed in his special
spheres.

I had reason, in this sex-tortured country,
to value keenly his unheated and humane
106

handling of the problems of sexual experience, when, at the Sex Education Centre,
between 1929-39, I had, at times, to search
for a doctor to whom to send those who
needed medical help, more experienced and
more expert guidance than we could supply.

How often I looked down the list of the
doctors I knew, this one excelling in birthcontrol technique, and that famed for
gynecological skill, and wondered if they
would meet the need for something a little
further off the beaten track, some not so
easily mentioned trouble needing quick
sympathy, expressive understanding and
above all an adult, easy attitude to the
emotional tangles so often met with in that
branch of education.

And how often the search ended with
Maurice, and how often he gave, without
stint, with charm and sympathy, the healing
benefit of his civilized personality, backed
by his expert knowledge.

And as a friend, what fun he was. How
he loved good conversation, and what an
artist he was in handling it. Who, that ever
made an irrelevant remark, could forget his
winning turn of the head, his courteous smile,
and his ‘“‘ Yes, my dear, that is the interesting question of something else,’’ and his
return with zest and concentration to the
argument in hand. Maurice, we shall miss
you.

Dr. ELIOT SLATER writes : I only came to
know Newfield at all well during the last
two years of his life. We then had a number
of meetings, in which he was the publisher
and I the author. This is a relation which is
notoriously difficult, but with Newfield it
was not difficult at all. He took the most
warm and personal interest in the subject
matter and in all the problems of authorship,
and was full of original and penetrating
ideas. It was a pleasure to receive his
criticism, as it was so clearly sensible and
objective, and made with the interests of
the book at heart. He took an enormous
interest in a good bit of book-making, in all
its aspects, from the subject and the style
down to the printing, the paper, the binding
and layout. Enormously well-read on a

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

great number of subjects, there was no discussion into which he did not inject his own
warm and rich individuality. While on the
one hand he was far from uncritical, yet he
had a wide tolerance and a most sincere and
engaging personal humility. In the course
of a single meeting I felt he had made me
his friend.

These last months of his life were darkened
by the shadow of serious illness. For most
people this has a laming effect on the personality, and leads all too easily to a querulous
egocentricity. Under the acid test Newfield’s
character was shown in its true quality.
He was delighted at each little improvement
in his health, without losing his sense of
proportion, and refused to be dismayed by a
set-back or to complain over symptoms
which must often have been distressing.
Visiting him in his delightful home in the
country I would find him sitting up in bed,
surrounded by books and papers, taking an
eager interest in my work and his, and in
all the intellectual interests which a man
in full enjoyment of health and vigour might
find more than enough. I remember particularly his talking about his association with
H. G. Wells, the character of that extraordinary man, and of what Wells might have
become as a writer if he had not felt it his
mission to reform the world. The fresh air
blew through the window, and outside the
sun shone on the walls of the old houses in
the quiet street. Inside there was no sickbed atmosphere, but the same light and
freshness.

Writing of Newfield in his last days, it
would be impossible not to mention the love
and uncomplaining devotion that was given
him by his wife. She had no less than three
full-time jobs to do, those of nurse, secretary
and housekeeper ; and somehow or other she
managed to get the business done, her
husband .cared for and supported, and the
fine old house with its beautiful furniture
kept in perfect condition. Her singleminded
selflessness must have given him all that was
possible of peace and restoration.

Dr. S. VERE PEARSON writes: I have
known a good many clever people in my lifeMAURICE NEWFIELD: 1893-1949

time, but I have always placed Maurice
Newfield as one of the cleverest, though I
have not seen him in recent years. .He was
an extremely versatile person, a good writer
and editor. But when I first met him that
was a minor activity which he only later
developed so widely and so ably in various
quarters.

_ I shall never forget his meeting a young
Cambridge undergraduate who was studying
Moral Science, a subject which had few
students. It was a curious subject in those
days which required the study of difficult
and erudite text books. Now when Maurice
Newfield got into conversation with this
young man I discovered he knew far more
about the subject than the student who had
been studying it for many months and had a
great deal wider vision regarding it than the
writers of the text books which the undergraduate was studying. It was in the years
subsequent to this date that Maurice Newfield developed his brilliant talents as a
journalist, editor and writer. He also
developed the knowledge he had already
acquired on psychology and other then
somewhat out-of-the-way medical subjects.

Mr. ROBERT GRAVES writes: I cannot
claim to have been one of Maurice Newfield’s
oldest friends: only to have been extremely
fond of him, and there was nothing remarkable about that—I never met anyone who
had a bad word to say of him. It is true
that when we first met ten years ago at his
house in Great Bardfield, Essex, his intense
curiosity made me feel a little suspicious of
him ; but I soon satisfied myself that his
search for information was a long-established clinical habit and that he put it only
to the best diagnostic use. Later, he and
his wife Sigrid came to stay with me in
Devonshire in the early, more dangerous
part of the war, for three weeks or so. He
was a sick man then, but did his best to
disguise this and always screwed the last
possible ounce of strength out of himself for
sociability’s sake; I was touched by his
exhilaration after a short, steepish climb up
the slope of Berry Pomeroy Castle, his finest
athletic feat for some years. Conversation

107

in our cottage always went on far into the
night—he and I each trying to extract
information from the other, my curiosity
being, I confess, as deep-seated as _ his.
Once my neighbour Agatha Christie came to
supper and I sat back happily while he put
her through a highly technical cross-examination (from which she emerged with high
marks) on the subject of drugs suitable for
undetected murder.

The only thing that he allowed to worry
him struck me as strangely unrelated to the
immediate perils of 1942, or his own precarious health, namely the slow decline of
the birth-rate in Great Britain. This
developed into a family joke, because I
already had several children, including girls
—and belonged to what he called ‘the
notoriously unfertile group of professional
writers ’’—while he had only one, a boy.
For him girls were far more important (in
theory) than boys because they would continue to breed the race; but he could not
persuade me that it would be a bad thing
for the population to sink to what it had
been in Tudor times. What virtue was there
in mere numbers, I’d protest. There would
not be more than one Maurice Newfield
whether the population were four million,
forty million, or four hundred million. The
argument then got involved and usually
ended by his singing, at my request, his
famous Indian marching song, learned from
the 88th Carnatics, in nasal Indian tones—
“ Cooch parwant, good time coming, Queen
Victoria very good man... .’’ And I wrote
him a satiric poem on miscegenation which
he was noble enough to print in this REVIEW
without editorial comment.

The war ended, the birth-rate recovered,
and my family and I returned here to the
Balearic Islands. Maurice saw us off and
promised to come out when transport improved and he was less busy. This year we
came back for our usual summer holiday,
and hoped to see him as usual, but heard
that he was very ill again and entertaining
no visitors. However, we visited Great
Bardfield and rang up Sigrid who said that, on
the contrary, he was most anxious to see us.
“Perhaps for ten minutes,” she suggested.
108

We tiptoed into his sickroom and found
him in bed surrounded by books. I told
Sigrid: ‘‘ Chuck us out when we’ve been
here long enough.” But she had not the
heart to do that, because Maurice was putting on the most remarkable act of his life.
“T’ve got completely cured of my old
trouble,” he said casually, “but in the
process I’ve had to starve and contracted
the usual deficiency diseases. Now, it’s
merely a question of feeding up.”

‘“‘ That’s fine,” I said, allowing myself to
be deceived. ‘‘ You certainly have a regular
Belsen look at the moment.” He laughed
happily. His skin was tight to his skull and
his wrists were like cabbage-stalks, but his
voice was strong and his mind as clear and
witty as ever. He told us that he was
extremely busy, but this winter he would
perhaps take a real holiday and come out
to us in Majorca ; ‘ By sea, of course ; that
would be half the fun.’”” He wanted to hear
what books I had been working at lately,
and especially questioned me on a historical
novel about the Spanish colonization of the
Solomon Islands in 1595. “I'll give you a
copy in November when it’s published,” I
promised. “No, no,” he protested, “ I’d
like page-proofs. Can’t you persuade your
publishers to send them ? ”

So we agreed to meet in Majorca in the
New Year, and parted gaily enough. It was
only when I returned to the house where we
were staying that it was borne on me that
he wanted the proofs in an even greater
hurry than he said; so I sent him my only
set—because it was Maurice who asked for
them, and because if I had failed to satisfy
his legitimate curiosity about this byway
of history I should always have had a guilty
conscience towards him. He cannot have
got very far with the reading, though,
because on our return here a week later we
saw the obituary announcement in The
Times.

Dr. MARGARET SANGER telegraphs: In
the death of Doctor Maurice Newfield, on
August 13th, 1949, the Eugenics Society and
the birth control movement have lost a distinguished leader and an uncompromising

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and fearless defender of their theories and
objectives. Despite his physical frailty, his
ever-willing spirit never once refused to
respond and those of us who knew him and
loved him looked to him always for guidance
because of his courageous, liberal views.
Maurice Newfield was aman of wisdom,
humanity, tolerance and understanding, and
his entire life was devoted to truth and social
justice. To those of us who knew and loved
him, there remains only the consolation that
Maurice Newfield lived the good life to its
fullest spiritual capacity and the influence of
such a life carries on. I shall miss him, as will
all his many American friends.

PROFESSOR J. M. MACKINTOSH writes:
The dry bones of Maurice Newfield’s life and
public activities have been recorded elsewhere. He himself was a shining personality,
loved by more friends than he could count.
He was young when he died, although his
physical activities had long been cramped
by ill health. Yet it would be wrong to say
that he struggled against sickness: he
adapted himself to it with perfect grace.
This almost disinterested attitude to his own
increasing infliction enabled him to look
outward and to take a constant, lively
interest in men and books. His friends never
felt that there was in him a sense of yearning for a world not realized or that he clung
to them for support. On the contrary, they
came to him to be refreshed by his courage
and gaiety of heart; and they knew the
quick stir of wonder at his wit and insight.
He understood character and was quick to
detect a false note: he could be humanely
malign when the occasion demanded but he
never chilled the heart.

If Maurice Newfield had to be remembered for his personality alone, his memory
would be gratefully cherished ; but he was
much more than that. As an editor he was
highly competent, and his own fine standards
were reflected in a keen literary criticism.
Writing was to him a great art. He would
tolerate no makeshifts of composition even
in the presentation of dry scientific material.
It was his custom to go straight to a point
of criticism, and he disarmed resentment by
MAURICE NEWFIELD: 1893-1949

his clear sincerity rather than by any oblique
methods sometimes mistaken for tact. An
article or a book which came into his hands
as an editor was always purified in the fire
of his understanding.

Dr. EMANUEL MILLER writes: I knew
Maurice Newfield since his school days, when
he stood out in two ways. His physical
frailty was obvious to any observer, but it
was associated with the febrile quality that
so frequently goes with physical frailty and,
as we subsequently knew, the development
of tuberculosis. This febrile quality, combined with extraordinarily high intelligence,
made him one of the most striking and unpredictable boys in the school. At the age
of fifteen he was already widely read, and
his ability to read such works as Ibsen’s
plays, the Golden Bough, and Freud’s recently published Interpretation of Dreams,
was only a part of the equipment which
rendered his conversation a subject of amazement and consternation amongst even the
brightest boys of the sixth form.

After serving in Mesopotamia in the First
World War, he was invalided to India.
Here he transferred to the Indian Army,
and he came home in 1919 with vivid impressions and very definite views on Indian
life. After his return, he embarked on
medical studies and qualified in 1923. He
then settled down in general practice in
Bloomsbury and became widely known for
his interest in population problems, and
published a volume, Parenthood : Design or
Accident, which went into many editions.

He was always interested in psychopathology, and would have taken up
psychiatry had opportunities been favourable, but ill health made general practice,
and a busy practice, beyond his powers,
and he turned very early in his career to
medical literary work. This brought him
into contact with many branches of medicine,
and he carried out his duties as a medical
editor for publishers with great acumen and
with a flair for the right book which was
very striking. His life in the Bloomsbury
district brought him into intimate contact
with the literary coteries of the nineteen
109

twenties, and there were very few people in
the fields of literature and science whom he
did not know personally and with whom he
could not speak on equal terms.

He combined intellectual powers with an
artistic temperament, and conversation with
him was always somewhat in the nature of
a display in which aphorisms and wide knowledge competed with one another. To the
very end of his life his intellectual powers
were undimmed and he may well be remembered as a very striking character.

Mr. MICHAEL HESELTINE writes: To
make a new friend late in life is uncommon. ©
To find him during the long waits of a
Canadian train from Halifax to New York
must be less common still. To feel, when
death takes him away within three years,
that something is broken which cannot be
replaced, means that there was in him a
special and inestimable quality. What was
the essence of Maurice Newfield that made
him precious ?

The small dark man, birdlike in his quickness of glance and movement, like a bird in
the incredible fragility of his body, had only
to open his mouth to break into talk as
enchanting as a song. It began after the
cautious British manner with books that
might have been heavy. Very soon it turned
to other things, or to persons, that might
have been dull. He touched nothing that
he did not lighten, saw through everything
without condemnation, and seemed to know
all there was to know without strain or
display.

On books, if you were disposed to fancy
yourself an expert on a given subject, it was
wiser not to attempt competition with his
learning, for he was the general practitioner
who was also a specialist. In conversation
it was clear that he took the pleasure of a
master. One evening in his company would
have been enough to show that the art was
not dead. He practised it with full respect
for the rule that conversation is the process
of talking with, not at, others, and dominated the talk only because he had so much
more than others to give, and abounded in
the grace of words.
Ito

Nothing but his avoidance of excess in
eating or drinking, which would probably
have been natural to a man so finely balanced
had he been well, was allowed to hint that
he was, and long had been, menaced by an
early death. No layman can judge what it
means for a medical man with full insight
into his own condition to turn his back on
the self-examination, self-pity and absorption in self that sap the invalid’s character
if he lets them.

Newfield would leave his friends warmed
with amusement, stimulated by the vain
endeavour to live up to his wit and wits,
hoping always to see him again, and that
soon,

To this gifted and many-sided man three
especial gifts had been given by nature or
nurture. The gift of laughter which made
an Atlantic crossing with him a daily delight
too soon ended. The gift of charity in all
that he said about people or politics: he
had much that was piercing and penetrating
to say about both ; but never, surely, either
felt or aroused envy or calumny or hate.
And the gift of fortitude by which for years
on end he out-soared pain, and, borne up by
the loving care which sustained him, was
enabled to do much good work in the world,
and to spread delight round him, effortless
as the bird which rises, in the sun, into the
immense skies.

Mr. OLIVER SIMON writes: I had the
pleasure and privilege of knowing Maurice
Newfield thirty years. In endeavouring to
recapture past time, I can now see that the
life of this endearing man kept its pattern
and its purpose to the very end. Eagerness,
intellectual curiosity, a zest for life, sympathy, and kindness were his outstanding
characteristics. These qualities were exemplified in both my first and last meeting
with him. The first time was at a village
cricket match (a game he knew little about).
but he sat on a sunny afternoon on the
boundary and consoled returning disconsolate batsmen (and the nervous who had
yet to go in) with his sparkling talk. The
last time I saw him, shortly before he died,
it was myself who became enlivened by the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

range of his discerning and lively mind. We
talked on psychology, art, politics, travel,
literature, publishing, wine, and friends old
and new—a fair cross-section of his lifelong
interests, or at any rate, those interests
which I was able to share with him. I left
him feeling that his spirit had won a victory
over his long-borne illness.

Dr. ANDREW MORLAND writes: Maurice
Newfield’s working life was to a great extent
conditioned by his illness ; when I first met
him in the middle 1920’s he was already
struggling with the problem of adapting
himself to a future in which he would not
be in active medical practice. Fortunately
his pen proved a ready support and he was
rapidly making his mark in medical journalism on the staff of the B.M.J. when he became seriously ill in 1930; recovery was
a slow and laborious process, because while
one could persuade him to rest his body his
mind remained as scintillating as ever.
My nearest approach to success followed a
serious talk on a Saturday evening; I saw
him at breakfast time the next day and was
greeted with a charmingly malicious smile
and the news that his mind was already
deeply affected by disuse atrophy as he had
finished his breakfast before his Torquemada.

Following this illness, work on a weekly
journal was changed for the greater freedom
of medical publishing but the amount of
work remained formidable and by the
beginning of the war he was again confined to
bed, although still working hard. It was at
this stage that he went through the great
ordeal of the operation of thoracoplasty.
Although by nature averse to major
surgical procedures Newfield had immense
moral courage and when the necessity of
the operation was explained to him in terms
which satisfied his reason his acceptance was
immediate. His endurance unfortunately
brought him only a few more years of freedom, but it included a trip to Sweden which
he much enjoyed. Two years ago the final
relapse set in but he remained actively at
work until the end; visiting him even in
his last months it was still the invalid who
did the entertaining. Although his mind was
MAURICE NEWFIELD: 1893-1949

a rich storehouse of readily available facts
Newfield was no walking encyclopedia—he
was much more concerned with ideas and
one always left him feeling that one had
been stimulated.

PROFESSOR JOSEP TRUETA writes: I am
sure that the passing of Dr. Maurice Newfield is filling his innumerable friends with
deep sorrow. Several times during the last
ten years his health has been a source of
anxiety to many of us, but his unfailing
optimism got the better of the struggle and
again and again we were comforted in seeing
him renew his activities without any deterioration in the quality of his work. That is
one of the reasons why the recent news of
his death has struck us all so forcibly.

My personal relationship with Maurice
Newfield goes back to the early days of my
arrival in England. During the days of the
Spanish Civil War his high ideals and firm
belief in the value of human freedom
brought to Catalonia much-needed medical

supplies which he had collected in England.

He took very much to heart the assisting
of the first European victims of the air
attacks—the Basque children—and his sympathy for the Barcelonians was later extended to me when we first met in London
early in 1939. I owe to him the publication
of my first English book on war surgery, to
the first edition of which he contributed in
adapting it from the original Catalan
language. Later he encouraged me to write
a larger and more comprehensive treatise on
war surgery of the extremities, for the success
of which he was largely responsible.

It was perhaps due to the inconsistency
of his health that he applied the best of his
qualities to medical literature, both as an
author and as an editor, but the range of his
interests was immense. On many occasions
I went to see him to obtain the answer to
a specific medical question and found myself
deeply absorbed listening to his views of the
future not only of medicine but of many
other subjects in which we were mutually
interested. During these long years he
always maintained the hope that if one day
political and international events permitted

III

the re-establishment of a democratic régime
in Spain he would settle in Catalonia until
a complete recovery of his health had been
effected by the sunshine and temperate
breezes which come down from the Pyrenees
to the Mediterranean coast. It is sad that
he has departed without having been able
to put his idealistic view of the healing
properties of my native country to the test.

Those of us who have been acquainted
with Maurice Newfield’s family life realize
the tremendous sense of emptiness which
must be felt by his wife and their only son.
They have been his good companions and it
must be very hard, particularly for his wife
Sigrid, to proceed along the road without
him. We are many who deeply sympathize
with her in her loss.

Mr. RAYMOND SWING writes: I saw
Maurice Newfield for the last time a year
ago. I might have known then that I should
never see him again, for he was not more
than a wisp of his former self. But I was
so sure that I should find him eagerly alive
this year that I did not even put the date
early to be sure of another visit. It was his
very eagerness that deceived me, and which
was, as I now think of him, one essence of
his nature. It was an eagerness not born of
impatience but of understanding life. The
forces at play in the nation and world around
him fascinated him. He saw their interplay
and knew their power for creation and
destruction. He never was in doubt about
the status of the struggle between knowledge
and ignorance, and he never shirked his part
in it.

Of all the men I have known intimately
Maurice Newfield had, I think, the clearest
mind and the clearest expression of it. This
lucidity seems never to have failed him. In
my experience of him he never went off on
confusing tangents and was forced to retreat
to reconquer his clarity. He was always
steadfast and positive in his discernments.
Naturally this was a boon for his associates,
who could rely on him for a reliable analysis
of a complex problem, be it political or
personal. Thus he was of immediate and
sometimes of inestimable aid to his friends
IIzZ

in contributing the insight into their problems they were incapable of providing themselves. Not that he was a formal teacher of
his friends. He never appeared to be teaching.
But if anyone was ready to learn, Maurice
Newfield normally could supply the lesson.

Having benefited from his friendship in
this way I naturally am inclined to rate his
other qualities as secondary to this one of
pellucid intelligence. But ahead of it may
rank the remarkable spiritual vigour by
which he lived. Physical vigour he was
denied in abundance and what little remained in the final years of exhausting illness was pitifully inadequate. But he continued to work so normally and persistently
that one forgot his body even when he was
hardly able to whisper his communications.
Somehow his physical limitations did not
merit the focus of his mental attention, and
it was set primarily on his work. This was
possible, too, through the unfailing devotion
of his wife, from whom he drew much of the
power by which he functioned so usefully
and fully. Whatever the source, it kept in
him a healthy and strong mind up to the
last flicker of the physical flame.

A friend should not omit from an appreciation of Maurice Newfield that he was
great fun, too. The rollicking sessions of
play and banter that have dotted the two
score years of our association with him are
not the least precious memories. Ina way,
his other gifts would not have been so
genuine or acceptable without them.

Dr. ABRAHAM STONE writes: During the
course of a lifetime it is given to us to meet
but a few people who truly impress us with
their culture, their scholarship, their wisdom
and humanity. Maurice Newfield was one
of the few such men whom it has been my
good fortune to know. At our first meeting
some years ago I was immediately struck
by his keen mind and personal warmth, and
since that day my respect, admiration and
affection for him increased with our every
meeting and with every letter received from
him.

Newfield’s contributions to the spread of
knowledge and enlightenment will ever re
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

main as a living monument to his mind and
his spirit. His special interests for many
years have been in the field of human fertility and human genetics. His book Parenthood: Design or Accident, published under
the pseudonym of Michael Fielding, with a
brave and laudatory foreword by H. G.
Wells, was a model of clarity, persuasiveness
and rare judgment. Both in England and
in our country it has directly and indirectly
helped to mould professional and lay opinion
on the subject of planned parenthood.

Under his able editorship the EUGENICS
REVIEW became the most influential and
authoritative journal in the field of human
eugenics and genetics. Throughout the
world the REviEw has come to be looked
upon as a main source of information and
interpretation in the social and biological
aspects of human heredity and race culture.

Newfield’s interests and scholarship extended, however, into many fields. He was
equally at home in art and in science, in
ancient and in modern literature, in the
social and political developments of the day
and in the latest discoveries in medicine.
An avid reader, an eager inquirer, he was
always well informed on the passing scene,
and to listen to his keen observations and
brilliant comments was a stimulating and
unforgettable experience.

Those who knew him were particularly
touched by the warmth and charm of his
personality, by his tolerance, understanding,
and his unswerving devotion to truth and to
social justice. Maurice Newfield was a good
man and a great man. For myself, his
friendship was among the rarest of my
possessions.

Dr. Portia HoLMAN writes: Through all
the years that I knew him, Maurice Newfield
was an invalid and, in the last two, very
seriously ill. Although his body was frail,
in the last few months painfully emaciated,
he did not at any time give the impression
of an ill person. The only reminder one had
of his illness was the strict rationing of the
time one was allowed to spend with him.
However long one had with him, it was all
too short and, when it was cut down to
MAURICE NEWFIELD:

minutes, one went away frustrated and
deprived, but stimulated by the vitality of
his mind and uplifted, if one may use so
priggish a word.

It is impossible to find words for the
special quality of his charm. His personality
was richly stocked in every way and he loved
to share his riches with his visitors. If he
discussed his illness it was in an objective
spirit, for he had the instincts of a clinician,
with never a trace of self-pity. He had no
illusions about the prognosis, but was himself sustained by a conviction of personal
survival and he had a real desire to shield
his friends from distress.

The combination of warmth, humanitarlanism and goodness with learning and
clarity of intellect gave him his special
value to the world of medicine as to his
friends. He was a liberal in every sense of
the word and his one real sorrow was the
growing indifference of the world to liberal
values. Readers of this journal will remember the eloquence of his indignation in
the Lysenko controversy only a few months
ago. Above all things he hated distortion
of truth, though he loved to know what other
people thought, however much their views
might shock him by their barbarity or their
muddle-headedness.

In politics he was a socialist, but because
he saw Socialism as an indispensable technique which could serve the ends of liberalism. Thus the National Health Service
seemed to him essential, but he was a
passionate opponent of its encroachment on
the freedom of doctors.

He had the gifts, and in the right combination, to be a great doctor. Ill health debarred
him from eminence as a clinician and determined for him a life of indirect achievement
through his influence on others. Those who
felt that influence—and, fortunately, they
are many—have had their horizons widened,
their penetration deepened and their sympathies enlarged.

Dr. Newfield died young, but after a happy
life.
mentioning his wife and her contribution to
that happiness. She had strength for two and
to the end triumphed over every difficulty

It would be wrong to conclude without.

1893-1949 113
and discouragement. May memories of that .
rare happiness sustain her. :

Mr. ERNEST RAYMOND writes: I think I
can offer no greater tribute to the quality
of Maurice Newfield as a human being than
to say that when, suspecting nothing, I
opened a letter and read the heavy news of
his death, my immediate feeling was a sudden»
unforeseen heightening of my belief in (or if
belief is too strong a word, my hope of)
human immortality. In what this immortality will consist I cannot even guess; for
me the word just connotes that the essence
of the human spirit is indestructible. I do
not think that this sudden surge of faith,
on reading of Maurice’s death, was a mere
movement of the heart, a facile ‘ wishfulfilment ’” thought. Such an easy emotion
would have been unworthy of Maurice, whose
penetrating vision would have at once discerned, weighed and discounted it. It was
rather that I suddenly felt it intellectually
almost impossible to believe that the splendid
intelligence, the keen and eager vision, and
the large, loving, laughing heart which were
Maurice Newfield could cease to be. To
believe that anything so brilliant, so shining
with a glow that surely came from the very
stuff of Reality, could have suddenly
become nothing seemed analagous, in a small
way, to supposing that the sun is not still
there because night has intervened. And
this access of faith was increased as I recalled Maurice’s astonishing mental superi
‘ority to grave ill health—to years upon

years of ever-increasing physical frustrations and weakness. This superiority was
not just courage in pain; it was exactly
what the word says: superiority to it. He
was somehow above it. Well above it in his
spirit, and so much so that we, his friends,
would all too often completely forget it in
the gaiety and excitement of his presence.
To remember this truly radiant superiority
is to wonder whether it is not now independent of the greatest weakness of all,
which is death.

Mr. A.-L. BACHARACH writes: I first met
Maurice Newfield in the late teens of this
114

century. We came together through political and social common interests, rather
than because he was a doctor and I an
industrial scientist. His periods of illness
meant that sometimes we did not meet for
a considerable period, and his manifold and
intense activities (and my deficiencies as a
letter-writer) meant that we did not correspond very much, yet our friendship was
unbroken and could be resumed at any
moment, after however long a gap, with no
signs of having been interrupted. That was

ecause Maurice was the kind of man with
whom one could have that kind of friendship—and probably no other kind. His
retentive memory and his wide range of
knowledge made it possible for him to
discuss with one anything in which one was
interested, quite apart from whether he had
himself ever been directly concerned with
it. His genuine enjoyment of human company, especially of those who could keep up
with his quick mental processes, must have
been what made him willing to remember
where the last conversation or discussion
had ended, so that one never needed to
“recap ’’ with him.

It is not my purpose here to pay tribute
to Maurice Newfield’s specialist knowledge
and abilities, because others more expert in
the varied fields will no doubt be doing so.
I will content myself with saying that one
never left his company without having been
stimulated not only by his mental acuity
and catholic tastes, which made it illuminating to discuss with him anything from
Medoc to mitosis, but also because of his
intense and vital interest in everything that
was going on. He was not concerned with
men and their acts and ideas simply as
objective phenomena for cold and calculating survey ; he seemed rather to participate in every activity that he discussed with
his conversational colleagues, irrespective of
whether he or they had introduced it.

Of his fortitude during many years of
necessarily handicapping ill health, there
should be no need to write. None but a
gallant individual could in his circumstances
have maintained the interests he did for all
these years.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

There are many people who have been
affected by Maurice Newfield without ever
knowing it. His influence in the fields of
medical and sociological publication, and
even in directly political matters, was perforce exercised through the impact of his
own ideas and concepts on other people
more actively engaged, and not by direct
participation. Those who were unaware that
his influence was at work may not miss it.
But: for those who did know, and more
particularly for those who had the boon of
his personal friendship, he is irreplaceable.

Mrs. DoROTHY MORLAND writes: I first
met Maurice Newfield when I was young and
newly married and we were both suffering
from the same illness. I was impatient and
bored by the sedentary life we were forced
to lead, but Maurice’s patience and lively
interest in everything were an inspiration
and encouragement to me. In spite of his
extremely good and well-stocked brain, and
his wide and varied knowledge, he was
always ready to talk about anything I
wanted: Freud, Plato, D. H. Lawrence—
he didn’t mind what subject I chose. Since
then I have watched him over and over
again battling against disease with his frail
physique and strong spirit. When I visited
him during his illnesses, although I knew
what a delight it was to him to see his
friends, I always came away feeling that I
was the one to have benefited. He possessed
the rare quality of being able to turn his
whole mind and interest on to you—you
felt he appreciated your own particular value
and potentialities, and when you left him
your mind was buzzing with ideas and projects. He understood how to live and how
to extract the very juice out of living—how
we Shall miss him.

Miss K. LANE writes: In October, 1935,
I travelled to Chalfont St. Peter to apply to
a Dr. Newfield for a secretarial post in
London. I was more than half an hour late
for the appointment, having had to walk
from Chalfont St. Giles owing to the bus
conductor’s forgetfulness, and, having formed
a mental picture of a prosperous and unMAURICE NEWFIELD: 1893-1949

approachable consultant at his country
retreat, was in some trepidation and keyed
up for a frosty and formal interview. ©

My first impression was of a pair of bright
eyes, a shock of dark hair, grey flannels and
a windbreaker jacket ; instead of the chilly
interview there was a cheerful and interesting conversation, and before many minutes
had passed I decided that I very much
wanted to work for him. Thus started nearly
fourteen years of a very happy association
in which I received far more than I gave.
During the first months he was infinitely
patient in training me in the REVIEW work
and I soon came to admire his brilliant mind,
to appreciate his considerateness and kindness in times of personal trouble—these can
never be forgotten—and to be warmed by
his intense interest in his fellow men.

No one connected with the Society can
realize as I do the difficulties under which
he edited the REvIEwW during the last few
years, the immense amount of secretarial
work which Mrs. Newfield undertook, the
innumerable letters he wrote from his bed in
his own hand, the long telephone conversations with the Soczety’s office, when, in a
voice sometimes so weak as to be almost
inaudible, he showed his firm grip on every
detail of the REVIEW’s production.

My happiest recollections of Dr. Newfield
are the days I used to spend at Chalfont,
working with him in his little study overlooking the garden, joining the family for
luncheon, and not interrupting work while
we sipped cups of China tea in the afternoon.
Interruptions were provided by a small
Gabriel, who might come in to borrow a
foolscap envelope “‘ for an experiment,” or
to make quite sure he would be allowed to
view the eclipse that night, dancing round
the room saying “clips” until asked to
withdraw, or just come in for nothing in
particular. Last time I saw Dr. Newfield

he remarked that Gabriel was taller than

himself, and added “I’m so pleased—I
always wanted to have a tall son.”

Others are better qualified than I am to
speak of his mental and spiritual gifts; I
shall always remember his vivid personality,
his enthusiasm for the REviIEw which

II5

swamped all sense of time, his kindness and
thoughtfulness for others and his heartwarming appreciation of their efforts.

Mrs. SIGRID NEWFIELD writes: When
George Herbert died, his disconsolate widow,
according to Izaak Walton, lamented bitterly
that she had not treasured up all his sayings
in her heart. When I was told in March
that my husband was not likely to live much
longer, I remembered Jane Herbert’s regrets
and since then have kept his sayings not
only in my heart but in a notebook. Maurice
always hoped, and so did I, that one day
he would have the leisure to give up rewriting other people’s books and write one.
of his own. He wanted to put on record
his faith as a eugenist, the steps by which
he had reached it, and his reasons for believing none other was logical. This process,
he would say, had taken him about fifteen
years and he doubted whether most of us
could spare as much time for meditation as
he had been able to enjoy in bed. Though
for himself he always avoided short cuts in
reasoning, I think he felt that some of us
were so trapped by our illogical habits of
thinking that only by slashing cuts could
we be released from our thickets. For me,
this was certainly true; and I believe, if he
had been able to write it, he might have
influenced a far larger circle of readers than
those of this REview. If he could have had
the leisure to start it I feel sure he would
have found the strength to finish it ; but I
am not at all sure that he would have wished
to publish it unless he had been actively up
and about again. “Stes phthisica, they
might call it,’”’ he once said, “‘ or, worse still,
death-bed repentance! Which would be a
pity,” he added with a wry sort of grin,
“ after the lifetime it has taken me to think
it out.”

I’m sure this would never have entered
the head of anyone who knew Maurice, but
he wanted to reach a wider public and was
well aware that, however careful a publisher
may be, anonymity is a secret hard to keep.
This horror of his of being misunderstood
was bound up with his own personal dislike
of self-pity and self-righteousness in others.
116

Of all human emotions he detested whining
more than any other and he deplored the
growing evidence of it in national and international affairs, in the Press and correspondence columns and in broadcasting.
The only precept he enforced on the upbringing of our son was: Never let him
whine ; and he faithfully tried to follow his
own precept all his days.

When I first met Maurice I had not long
since left my Northern moorland stronghold
where pleasures were simple, and song and
strings our only relaxation. It was terrifying for a shy silent girl to discover that in
Bloomsbury people were prepared to spend
a long evening doing nothing but ¢alk. Then
one evening I heard Maurice talking about
the early work on immunity—Roux, Erlich
and Koch all came to life as he spoke—and
I suddenly thought : I could go on listening
to him for ever. Perhaps that thought
became transmitted (as in the following
twenty years thoughts unquestionably were)
for within a few months we were married
and had gone to Bavaria for the Mozart
Festival in Munich, where we also paid
homage to Koch, on Maurice’s suggestion,
by walking down a long street named after
him—a curious name to have honoured, we
thought, when, a year later, he became a
victim of Koch’s bacillus.

When Dr. Blacker invited me to add my
testimony to these others I felt nothing but
pride that I should have some space in

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Maurice’s editorial pages, for writing his
Notes was the only work in which he found
complete satisfaction, intellectual and
spiritual. I think he could never be entirely
absorbed in any subject unless it concerned
the future as well as the present—which
made mankind his greatest interest. His
other activities gave him pleasure because
of their relation to medicine and, above all,
because they brought him so many happy
friendships. Happiness was the core of our
home life, and in all his nineteen years of ill
health—six of them spent in bed—I have
never seen him dejected or heard him complain about his condition. He maintained up
to the last days of his life that he was the
luckiest man in the world. Three days
before he died it was my birthday. He woke
about 2.30 that morning and called me.
I told him, for he never remembered birthdays, that he might as well give me my
greetings then. After wishing me a happy
birthday he wished me a happier year to
come, adding, ‘‘ And that, I might tell you,
is a selfish wish because a happier year for
you means a happier year for me, too.” If
that was a selfish remark it was the first,
last, and only one I ever heard from him.
“It is not life but a good life that is to be
valued,”’ wrote Sir Thomas More, and I am
very humbly aware of the wealth I still hold
in my keeping through having shared so
much of Maurice’s good life.

 

LEWIS’S

AND ALLIED ~ AND ALLIED SUBJECTS.

UNDER BOARD OF TRADE LICENCE.

___________— ____ HOLD A LARGE STOCK OF BOOKS ON EUGENICS
FOREIGN BOOKS NOT IN STOCK OBTAINED

CATALOGUES ON REQUEST.

PLEASE STATE PARTICULAR INTEREST.

SECOND-HAND BOOKS :

140 Gower Street, London, W.C.1

A constantly changing large stock of Medical and Scientific Literature on view,
_ Classified under subjects.

LONDON :

Telephone: EUSton 4282.

Libraries or small collections purchased.

H. K. LEWIS & Co. Ltd., 136 Gower St., W.C.1

Business hours: 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., Saturdays to 1 p.m.

 
