THE GALTON LECTURE

Fellows and Members of the Eugenics

Society and their guests at Manson
House on February 16th, to hear the Galton
Lecture for 1943, which, under the title
‘“‘Eugenic Aspects of Children’s Allowances,”’
was delivered by Sir William Beveridge,
with Lord Horder, President of the Eugenics
Society, in the chair.

Introducing the lecturer Lord Horder
said: ‘“‘ Knowing how deeply Sir Wilham
Beveridge is immersed in affairs connected
with his Report and how numerous his
speaking commitments must be, it may seem
an act of great courage on the part of the
Council of the Eugenics Society to invite Sir
William here to-day. But the Council did
not underestimate the status of the Galton

Thee was a large gathering of

Lecture and therefore did not hesitate to_

approach him. Its courage has been rewarded.”

He then called upon Sir William to deliver
his lecture, which is published in full elsewhere in this issue.

At its conclusion, Lord Horder reminded
the audience that the Galton Lecture was not
usually followed by speeches, but on this
occasion the Council thought a compromise
might be feasible if they could impose it on
Sir William Beveridge, namely, that members of the audience should be permitted to
ask questions. As a chairman of some experience, he was fully aware that some happy
individuals could ask a question and sit
down again, while others could not. He
begged questioners not to turn a question
into a speech, although a question sometimes
required a statement of the grounds on
which it was asked.

He thought it was his privilege as Chairman and as President of the Soczety to put
Sir William wise on the question of the
Society’s policy on the matter of children’s
allowances and taxation rebate. Whilst
admiring Professor Fisher’s research work
they did not always take his views on
eugenic matters. The EUGENICS REVIEW
was a medium for the expression of views in

general on eugenic topics, but a good many
of those views were not necessarily the views
of the Soczety with respect to its policy. The
editor generally headed his review with a
comment to that effect. ‘‘ In the statement
of the aims and objects of the Society there
occurs this passage :

Many other social measures have been
suggested to reduce or remove the expense
and inconveniences of rearing children.
Amongst them may be considered family
allowances. These might be arranged by
graded equalization of the pools or other
methods which would provide relief for
parents in the higher occupational groups
as well as in the lower. Taxation rebates
for the children might be allowed on a
scale which would influence fertility.

It is obvious, therefore that the Society
endorses Sir William Beveridge’s views on
these points.”

No doubt there would be questions as to
Sir William’s use of the word “ inversion,’
suggesting, aS a major premise, that there
was a top and a bottom in regard to biological human material. Perhaps there would
also be a question on the words “ biological
failure ’”’ as a synonym for infertility. Lord
Horder said finally that he thought they all
agreed with Sir William that eugenic
measures constituted, by their very nature,
a long-term policy. The Eugenics Soctety was
not perhaps as popular as it would be if it
held that the ideals of eugenists could be
achieved in one generation.

Mr. Cecit Binney asked whether Sir
William did not think that in the case of
professional people who had never had to
contribute at all, the possible inducement of
children’s allowances would be greatly offset
by having to find 7s. 6d. a week, plus the
unspecified addition to the income tax.
Would not this diminish rather than encourage fertility ? In the second place, had
he contemplated how these weekly contributions of 7s. 6d. were to be collected from such
people? In view of his remarks about income
124
THE GALTON LECTURE

tax rebates, had he altered his views concerning paragraph 422 of his Report, in
which he said :

‘“‘In so far as it appears that children’s
allowances to all families irrespective of
their means would mean giving money to
prosperous people without. need, this can
be corrected by an adjustment of the
rebates in income tax now allowed for
children.” |

His other question was why, if there had to
be vocational provision, it should be left to
the professions to do it on their own ?

Str WILLIAM BEVERIDGE replied that he
had not got his Report in his hands, but he
thought it would be found that what it stated
was that in Class II, where there was no
employer, the contributions otherwise paid
by the employer and employee would take
the form. of a single security contribution.
Persons in that class would receive pension
on retirement, medical treatment, funeral
expenses, but no disability benefit during the
first thirteen weeks of disability, and no unemployment benefit. Their total contribution was 4s. 3d. He did not know that the
amount was very important. They would
get something for that, namely the benefits
he had just enumerated. He agreed that 8s.
for each child was not going to be much of
an encouragement to professional people.
That was why he wanted in addition occupational allowances. On the income tax question, when he wrote his Report he was not
concerned with eugenics at all. He had to
deal with the argument of some people who
said that children’s allowances should have
an income limit. For a number of reasons,
partly administrative, and partly those of
justice, he saw great objections to any kind
of income limit in this scheme. If it was
thought that one ought not to give money
for the children of the rich, one should make
the adjustment in an income-tax rebate.
But now he had a eugenic reason for giving
more money—as much more as he could—
for children of the more wealthy classes. He
had not changed his opinion since writing
his Report; he had merely changed his
approach to the subject. As for vocational

125

allowances, he did not think that such
schemes were any substitute for the statutory
children’s allowances. They could not cover
the whole population; the first step to
neutralizing the premium on infertility was
by a general scheme covering the whole
population. The children’s allowances set
out in his Report neutralized only up to
subsistence level. Whether vocational
schemes should be compulsory or not was
again a matter on which he had no final
views. If he were in charge of the civil
service he would make them compulsory on
the whole service. If he were in charge of an
educational system he would apply it
throughout the whole system, but it might
be that in some places it could be on
yoluntary lines.

CAPTAIN OLLIVER asked whether Sir
William realized his vast responsibility irf
stressing the need on the part of the people
of the will to work, the need of compulsion
for the work-shy, and the need of inspection
in homes in order to discover whether this
extra money was spent in the right way.
How would he ensure that family allowances
were not spent on cinemas and “ perms ”’ ?

S1R WILLIAM BEVERIDGE replied that he
knew nothing which would save any person
from having married the wrong husband or
the wrong wife or from having chosen the
wrong father or mother. But he was a
sufficient believer in his kind not to agree
to the idea which had been presented to him,
that any assistance of this nature should not
be given in money but in goods because the
people could not be trusted to spend the
money properly. He had no wish to say to
them: “If I give you money for food you
might use it for something else, and therefore I am going to give you a benefaction in
kind.” He did not want that kind of interference. It appeared to him that the questioner was expecting him to talk about social
insurance, and his subject that evening had
been strictly children’s allowances. But so
far as the will to work was concerned, he
believed that the one thing which people
were really anxious about was to have a
certain chance of work after this war. Of
course, there were some people lazy by
126

nature, and most of us could be made lazy
in suitable economic circumstances. But
there was nothing whatever in his scheme to
increase the premium on idleness. In the
first place, most of his scheme had nothing
to do with unemployment at all. It was a
scheme very largely for pensions, sickness,
medical treatment and other benefits. The
unemployment expenditure was only oneeighth of the total, or little more than the
expenditure incurred under this head before
the war. It amounted to {105 millions as
compared with {90 millions just before this
war. He was not proposing any change in
the present rules regarding unemployment
benefit, and he had put in his Report the
obligation of people not merely to accept the
work they wanted but the kind of work which
wanted doing. He had done everything he
could to meet the point of view put forward
by the last questioner, but he did want him
to realize that there was very little in this
Report about unemployment. It dealt
mainly with children, sickness, and old
age.

Mr. Titmuss asked whether it was not a
fact that Professor Fisher’s conclusions on
the differential birth rate were based on the
IQII census report and that since then, under
the impact of two wars, the birth rate of the
skilled, semi-skilled, and unskilled had
probably fallen by at least 50 per cent and
that the relative rates of these classes were
altered ?

StR WILLIAM BEVERIDGE said that he was
afraid he did not know what the latest
figures were. All birth rates had fallen, but
he did not know that there had been a return
to class equality as between the labourer and
the skilled man, or the skilled man and the
professional man. He would be very much
surprised if that change had taken place.

THE Hon. Mrs. Grant Durr asked
whether Sir William and the Eugenics Society
would consider a plan of family allowances

on such a scale as would make a very great 
eugenic difference even in the present generation. She was not content to wait 200 years
before the effect was manifest. She wanted
to see a great improvement throughout the
population at once.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

SIR WILLIAM BEVERIDGE: That is a
question of nurture, not of nature.

Mrs. GRANT DvuFF said that if a child were
starved in its youth it did not grow to full
stature, and it was by such children that the
race was harmed even in one generation.

THE CHAIRMAN asked whether eugenic
differences could arise in one generation.

Mrs. GRANT DvuFrF suggested that they
could, as, for example, by the relief of
starvation and by measures to combat
syphilis.

Dr. COLLIER asked whether children’s
allowances would apply to adopted children,
also whether Sir William supposed that the
rate of allowances suggested would be
sufficient to induce any large number of
people to adopt orphans and so diminish the
tragedy of children without homes.

SIR WILLIAM BEVERIDGE replied that the
children’s allowances which he proposed, 8s.
a week, did apply to every child, whether
adopted or not. Some children had no
natural parents, and he hoped that with this
8s. most of such children would find a home.
But he was not sure that all would do so, and
in so far as they did not there would have to
be some scheme for looking after orphans.
The community must have a public body
which saw that orphans were cared for.

Mr. BRANDER said that many people were
agreed that the scheme would tend to produce
a large crop not only of children of the better
class, but of slum children. Had Sir William
considered what happened under the Speenhamland scheme of 150 years ago, which,
instead of producing more children of the
better class, produced a number of children
of the lower eugenic standard? He men-—
tioned his own city of Glasgow, where one
quarter of the population were Roman
Catholics, and where the spiritual leaders of
that community were urging their faithful
followers to produce as many children as
possible and were quite hostile to family
planning. He had not seen any consideration
of this difficulty in any of the official expositions of the Beveridge scheme.

SIR WILLIAM BEVERIDGE said that he did
not think that historically it was the case
that the Speenhamland experiment had
THE GALTON LECTURE

caused a large number of children to be born
who would not have been. born otherwise.
It did not go on long enough for that purpose.
Under a scheme of universal stepping up of
wages the result would be that the advantage
to everybody would be mz. What he was
proposing was that for every child born there
should be a subsistence allowance. In other
words, that a child should not impoverish
the parents. That did not make it profitable
for parents to have children in any event.
They were no better off than before and they
had all the added trouble of the children. He
did not see how this was going to affect the
number of people who made the slums. It
was only going to appeal to people who might
be thinking: “‘ We should like to have
another child, but we have not enough
income to have another child and do justice
to the child we have already.”

Dr. Camps asked whether Sir William’s
researches had quite convinced him that
equality of opportunity was going to be a
eugenic advantage. Was he quite convinced
that he had given an adequate allowance for
voluntary effort ? Was there not some inconsistency between compulsion at the top and
freedom at the bottom ?

SIR WILLIAM BEVERIDGE said that he did
not understand the second question. As to
the equality of opportunity, his argument
was substantially taken from Professor
Fisher. If there was inequality of opportunity as between the large and the small
family there was social promotion of the
child of the small family, and if infertility
was inheritable this meant that one would
get in the upper social classes a larger proportion of relatively infertile stock. If that
argument was sound—and he did not see
any logical flaw in it—then by equalizing
opportunity between members of large and
of small families one would stop the promotion of infertility. He was not saying anything about equality of opportunity as between rich and poor, but as between large
and small families. Moreover, he was speaking only of economic opportunity. He did
not deny there were certain social values in
belonging to a large family. That was an
additional reason for trying to remove the

127

existing economic disadvantage which mem
‘bership of a large family entailed.

Mrs. WESTBROOK asked whether it was
only for financial reasons that Sir William
did not subsidize the first child.

SIR. WILLIAM BEVERIDGE replied that in
his Report he was concerned with the abolition of want. That was the whole basis of it.
It was difficult to maintain that it was necessary to give anything for the first child of
the family, so long as the responsible parent
was earning, in order to ensure that that
family was not in want. Broadly speaking,
there could be very few people who had not
got enough income, when earning, for themselves, their wife, and one child. Ifthe actual
surveys on poverty in different towns made
between the two wars were studied, it would
be found that practically no cases of poverty
due to the wages being insufficient for man,
wife, and one child were found. Wages
pretty well everywhere were up to that level.
Therefore, if money were given for the first
child of a parent in work, it was given when
it was not necessary for the abolition of
want. A great deal was saved by not giving
anything for the first child, and that money
was available for medical and other services.
Again, he was not thinking of eugenics but
of the relief of want. He thought that the
cost of children ought not to be borne wholly
by the parents or by the State. Some people,
if the amount were gs. per week, would say :
“ Let the State pay 5s. and the parents 4s.”
He did not like that way of sharing. He
preferred to say that the parents should pay
for the first child, and that the charge on the
State should rise with the size of the family.
That was a direct incentive to a larger family.

Dr. C. P. BLACKER asked whether a

‘certain amount of contention might perhaps

be raised by compressing under one head
two kinds of infertility which could be
remedied by family allowances. People
could be fertile or unfertile for either of two
reasons. They could be involuntarily infertile
or deliberately infertile, and it was only
infertility of the second character which
could be removed by economic measures.

StR WILLIAM BEVERIDGE replied that the
whole of his argument was on the other line,
128

that certain people did vary in their degree
of natural physical fertility. If people were
promoted into the upper social class because
they were infertile, they would be likely to
marry into that same class, and thus there
would be a breeding out of ability. This
could be corrected by checking the promotion
of people merely because they were infertile.
There were in this matter temperamental
and moral factors, but in so far as these

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

characteristics were inherited, as no doubt
they were, he did not feel that there was any
real difference between them and the physical
characteristics. It would make no difference
to the eugenic argument.

On the motion of the Chairman, a very
hearty vote of thanks was accorded to Sir
William Beveridge for his lecture and for
his replies to questions.

. ABC
CONSTRUCTIVE BIRTH CONTROL

SociETY AND CLINIC FOUNDED BY Dr. Marie STOPES IN 1921

The oldest Birth Control Clinic, the first to establish Birth Control
Case Sheets and collect scientific data; C.B.C. Clinics are still the
only free clinics: the only birth control clinics dealing from the first
with all aspects of birth control, i.e. prevention of detrimental births,
spacing of healthy births and inducing potentially desirable pregnancy
in sterile women, and general marital help.

THE PIONEERS OF THE CLINIC MOVEMENT
Library, Museum and Clinics open daily, 10-6 (except Sais.)
Books and Racial supplies may be obtained direct.

TECHNICAL DEMONSTRATIONS for MEMBERS of the MEDICAL PROFESSION
_ First Thursday each month

Applications to The Hon. Secretary, Headquarters Clinic,

106 Whitfield Street, W.1

Eugenjcs Review, Vol. XXXIV, No. 4
