EUGENICS AS I SEE IT*
By THE LORD HORDER, K.c.v.0., M.D., ERCP.

I—THE SOCIETY AND ITS WORK

the President should refer to the work of

the Society during the past year, that he
should say something about its policy, and
that he should indicate in what directions
the Council thinks it is desirable that its
activities should advance in the near future.
In all these matters I am guided by close
association with the General Secretary and
with the more active members of the Council.

One event of importance, which it is
fitting that I should mention, is the reconstitution of the Society in regard to the
Council and the Standing Committees. This
reconstitution was entered upon with a
view to securing greater business efficiency,
to a sharpening of the tool, as it were, for
the better performance of the work for which
the Society exists. The number of members
of Council has been considerably reduced,
as also has the frequency of its meetings.
The Executive Committee has been strengthened and greater power has been given to it.
The officers of the Society are hopeful that
the results of the reconstitution will justify
the time and thought that this reform has
necessitated.

I am constrained at this point to refer to
the great loss to the Society by the death of
Sir Basil Blackett, a powerful element in the
conduct of its affairs, whose gift for administration was offered so generously and whose
absence from our councils we _ greatly
deplore.

Dr. Julian Huxley’s Galton lecture was
as stimulating, and was as full of incisive yet
constructive criticism, as might have been
anticipated. I refer to some parts of this
lecture elsewhere.

The Joint Committee on Voluntary Sterilization has received the whole weight of the

|: is customary, on this occasion, that

*The Presidential Address on the occasion of the
Annual General Meeting of the Eugenics Society, on
May 19th, 1936.

Society’s influence and also a_ generous
subsidy from its exchequer. Here is a
definite, concrete objective which the Society
is anxious to see attained. It has therefore
done all in its power to increase that body of
public opinion in favour of the Bill shortly
to be put before Parliament without which
it is not likely that politicians will give it
their support.

Activities of the Society

Propaganda, by lectures, exhibitions, films
and the work of the Eugenics Alliance, has
proceeded healthily. The Eugenics Alliance,
a new departure, exists to bring our principles and practice into contact with those
citizens who do not become Fellows or
Members of the Soczety. The Alliance, so far,
has only seventy members, and this is, of
course, only a beginning. If the Alliance is
to succeed in its purpose its membership
should be in the thousands. We want to tell
people what eugenics is mot and what it 7s—
that it is not pure mathematics or abstruse
biology, or a mere question for highbrows,
but something in which the man in the
street can, and should, interest himself. Our
principles may be sound, and our efforts
to carry them out may be sound also, but
if we do not link up with the men and
women who are the material upon which our
principles are to work we are like a motor
car that has no cardan shaft and leaves the
back-axle motionless. Our propaganda and
our Alliance are therefore fundamental to
our success. Six out of ten people still think
of eugenics as something crankish or idealistic, or concerned in the main with adding
prohibitions to life. Or they have a dim
notion that it isn’t quite nice, and has a
faint flavour of the stud about it. Only
education can alter all this.

The Soctety has produced a pre-marital
health schedule which has been well received

265
266

—not, be it observed, a document designed
to discourage marriage, but to tell people
who are intelligent and responsible enough
to want to know what sort of children they
are likely to produce if they produce any.

A research studentship of £250, tenable
for two years, has been founded in honour
of Major Leonard Darwin, who was President
of the Soczety for seventeen years. The first
holder of the studentship is Dr. R. B. Cattell,
Director of the School Psychological Clinic
at the City of Leicester. Dr. Cattell proposes
to investigate a typical rural population and
a typical urban population of schoolchildren
from the point of view of the average size of
the family at each level of intelligence,
together with cognate enquiries.*

The Population Investigation Committee

Population problems have been much
under consideration of late, and the Society
has appointed a committee to investigate
the factors influencing the fall in the birthrate. Members have been co-opted from
various other bodies concerned in this
question. The expenses of the enquiry will
be met by the Soctety. The personnel of this
committee consists of representatives of
the Eugenics Society, the British College
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, the Medical
Research Council, the Royal Economic
Society, the Society of Medical Officers of
Health,and the British Population Society,
with Professor Carr-Saunders as chairman.

Now it is, in my judgment, well within the
province of the eugenics idea that population
questions should be fully considered. All
the same, the very essence of Galton’s
teaching was the promotion of favourable
differential fertility, so that the aim of those
who, alarmed by the falling birth-rate, are
concerned about a mere increase in numbers,
really runs counter to Galton’s objective.
There can, of course, be no eugenic opposition
to quantitative increase in the birth-rate,
provided this differential factor is borne in
mind, but to the eugenist in the Galtonian
sense qualitative considerations must never
give way to quantitative ones. There are

* The results of this investigation were published in
the EuGENics REviEw of October 1936, p. 181.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

reasons for believing that in France, in
Italy and in Germany official opinion on this
matter concerns itself merely with numbers
in the family, and not with quality, although
in Germany certain compulsory eugenic
considerations are borne in mind, such as
compulsory sterilization of the unfit.

But we must remember that all three of
the countries mentioned are influenced
almost entirely at present by a feverish
desire to increase their population for the
pure pursuit of nationalism, if not actually
for war. Such a spirit, we must hope, will
only be of temporary duration, and will soon
be checked by economic considerations, if
not by the annihilating action of modern
warfare, which will inevitably make a holocaust of the civilian population, as well as
of the fighting units, to a degree never
witnessed before. Surely our severest critic
does not suggest that the Eugenics Society
should frame its policy along such lines as
these ?

Differential Fertility

But when we deal with matters of a
differential or qualitative kind we are on
safe, and permanent, ground. As the result
of the differential birth-rate, enormous
numbers must rise each year into the richer
half of society. The case of a workman being
made a foreman or being put to some betterpaid job is typical of what is going on very
widely. The qualities which count in such
selections are honesty, tact, good workmanship, perseverance, physical strength and
ability. They are all useful qualities, and
in so far as they are hereditary, this process
tends to correlate them permanently with
class distinctions. Certain bad qualities
help; but the good undoubtedly outweigh
the bad very greatly. Recent statistical
results point to the conclusion that intelligence is correlated with wealth, and these
considerations make it probable that if
these other good qualities could be measured,
they also would be found to be thus correlated. A conclusion of this sort is naturally
unpopular with many social reformers. Is
it possible that some of the recent movements in favour of a positive population are
EUGENICS AS I SEE IT

based upon a revolt against an unpopular
fact? But if eugenics is to be rendered
scientific, or even if it is only to be rendered
useful, it must disregard bias, and take for
further guidance and further activity the
truth which research discovers. ‘‘ The contest between truth and unpopularity is very
old and much of the history of scientific
progress has been bound up with it.”

A Programme for the Future

What of our programme apart from this
question of population? There are several
important matters touched upon in the
Soctety’s Aims and Objects* concerning
which we badly need to formulate our
policy. In outlining the views which we have
in mind with regard to them, I draw liberally
upon the carefully considered, if tentative,
statements drawn up for our consideration
by Dr. Blacker.

There is the question of what we call
“human evaluation and_ registration.”
Everyone agrees that there are unquestionably superior people whose fertility we should
like to increase. Conversely, there are inferior
individuals whose parenthood we should
like to discourage. At the present moment
we have no satisfactory criteria as to these
two groups beyond the vague one of economic
and occupational success in various social
grades.

If an attempt were made to formulate a
scheme whereby, amongst the limitless variety
of physical, mental and moral qualities
which together constitute good and bad
citizenship, it were made possible to recognize, when we see one, a eugenically average
type, we should achieve a great deal. It is
therefore suggested that the Council should
appoint a committee to investigate this
matter thoroughly and to decide what
physical and mental tests would be appropriate to enable us to grade people on a
eugenic scale.

In regard to race mixture our statement
says that “‘in certain circumstances race
mixture is known to be bad. Further
knowledge of its biological effects is needed

* EUGENICS REVIEW, 1934, XXVI, 133.

267

in order to make it possible to frame a
practical eugenic policy.”” In what circumstances 1s race mixture known to be bad,
and what knowledge of its biological effects
do we specially need? The Soczety has no
answer to these questions. We might very
profitably appoint a Darwin Research student to go thoroughly into this matter.* He
would be asked to summarize the evidence
in favour of the view that, in certain circumstances, race mixture is either good or bad.
When placed in full possession of such
evidence, the Socrety might find itself in a
position to indicate along what lines further
knowledge is required to enable us to frame
a practical eugenic policy. It might even
be able tentatively to outline such a policy.

Immigration is also a subject into which
the Soczety might well promote an inquiry.
It would be very interesting to have a
summary of the eugenic bearings (if any) of
the immigration laws of different countries.
A careful consideration of these, together
with an examination of the effects of recent
immigration into this country, might enable
us to formulate a reasonable policy, which
would serve a useful eugenic purpose.

In regard to taxation the Soctety might
formulate a definite policy upon the question
of rebates for children. The Statement of
our Azms and Objects says that ‘“‘ The present
system of income-tax allowance should be
amended, extended and rendered more
effective.”’ Definite proposals are required
under each of these three headings. Here is
another useful piece of research which the
Society proposes to promote.

In the matter of education the Society
favours for children of superior ability the
extensive provision of scholarships sufficient
to ease financial burdens, and thereby promote the further reproduction of the parents.
How much more extensive? Some precise
recommendations might be formulated by a
committee containing persons familiar with
educational and budget problems.

Here are questions of considerable
moment, most of them concerned with positive eugenics, at which it is proposed to work.

* Effect has been given to this recommendation, see
Pp. 293.
268

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

II—GENERAL PRINCIPLES

In regard to our general outlook, how shall
we best pursue the definition of Francis
Galton, which is our motif and our purpose :
“ Eugenics is the study of agencies, under
social control, that may improve or impair
the racial qualities of future generations,
either physically or mentally ” ? If we desire
to fulfil our mission, it is necessary to keep
this definition clearly before us. The temptations to wander away from it are frequent
and numerous, and the range of possible
means by which it is supposed that we can
carry out Galton’s purpose is almost limitless. In regard to all this, there are two
propositions which, I think, we should put
to ourselves. The first is that every proposal
for human betterment that comes before us
should be criticised severely before it is
admitted as being in the truest sense
eugenic according to the Galtonian definition.
The second is that whenever, as must needs
happen, proposals arise concerning which
there is no clear indication whether or not
their study, or their application, brings them
within the Galtonian definition, whilst they
should not be rejected, they should yield
first place to research and action concerning
matters about which there is less or no doubt.

No society which exists for a purpose like
ours can do everything. To be effective at
all it must limit its scope when it comes to an
actual, and practical, programme. Societies,
like individuals, would do well, as it seems to
me, to say to themselves now and again:
“This one thing I do,” or ‘“‘ These things I
do,”’ as the case may be, rather than yield
to the clamour to enlarge their field of action
until their original purpose is obscured and
their potency dissipated.

From time to time quite worthy people have
striven to attach to the eugenic programme
a number of subjects of immediate, and
therefore attractive, interest. These have
included such things as venereal disease, the
teaching of sex hygiene, divorce, temperance, abortion, racial poisons, housing policy
and so forth. To concern ourselves with these
things is to take the short, and not the long,
view. And it is the long view which is the

essence of the eugenic outlook. Galton
never thought in terms of quick results, or
of popular reforms. How could he, when the
essence of his idea of eugenics lay in the field
of heredity ?

It is important to think clearly about all
this. As Leonard Darwin says: “It is
pleasant to hope that good health and good
conduct, the results of improved surroundings, will automatically reappear in future
generations.’’ But there is not the slightest
reason to think that they will. And even if
environmental conditions do indirectly, and
ultimately, favour the production of superior
individuals or races, to improve these is not
the task allotted to the Eugenics Soctety.
It is ‘ to-morrow’s children,’ not to-day’s,
with whom we are concerned, and we believe
that time and thought and money spent
upon any and every means that are known
now, or can be known in the future, to
increase the chance of a heritage of better
qualities, physical, mental and moral, are
more profitably spent if the long view be
taken.

Let me be clear upon this. The eugenist
has no quarrel with the environmentalist.
He is sympathetic with all the activities of
the latter, keeps in touch with them, assists
them to the best of his power. But this is
not primarily his contribution to human
betterment. The environmentalist desires to
make fit homes for heroes to live in; the
eugenist desires to make the heroes. To the
question frequently heard, whether nature
or nurture be the more important, we can
answer: Neither, both are so important that
it is mere pedantry to sit and discuss it.

May I try to make a difficult point here ?
The quality of a change in inheritance,
whether that change be for better or for
worse, goes deeper, has greater strength,
than has any change in environment. It is
therefore all the more worth striving for.

It is frequently assumed all too readily
that environmental improvement must
necessarily carry with it a permanent value
for the succeeding individuals or groups of
individuals. There is a possible fallacy here,
EUGENICS AS I SEE IT

clearly. We are entirely ignorant of the
ultimate effects of environmental changes,
or even of the length of time that the changes
themselves will last. But there is much more
reason for believing that a successful eugenic
reform will continue to exercise its benefit
through successive generations.

Influence of Environment

The social effects of environment, that is,
the effects produced on individuals by
changes in their own surroundings, may be
mental or they may be physical. It is
necessary to remember that different considerations apply to these two effects. The
attitude of the eugenist is necessarily
different in face of them. Let me again quote
my distinguished predecessor in this chair,
Major Leonard Darwin :

‘Every eugenist admits, or acts as if
he admitted, the immense importance of
mental and traditional environment ; for
when considering the effects produced by
these factors, problems connected with
heredity are often consciously or unconsciously pushed into the background. For
example, if we completely ignored everything but heredity, we should now be
advocating child murder instead of utterly
repudiating it, as we most certainly do.
The agony of the mother of a murdered
child is rightly held to be the predominant
consideration in studying the ethics of
infanticide, and this agony is wholly due
to a change in her environment. Moreover,
no fears or apprehensions would be aroused
in the minds of the cats of the next generation by the drowning of any number of
kittens to-day; and, if all the environmental conditions were the same in the
case of man as in the case of the lower
animals, I see no reason why babies and
kittens should be treated differently. The
higher mental powers of man and the fact
that knowledge may be transmitted from
generation to generation for an indefinite
period, however, make any analogy with
domestic animals a dangerous guide in
human affairs and justify the more or less
complete neglect of heredity in considering

269

certain social questions. But with regard
to physical environment the eugenist is
unquestionably right in demanding that
the hereditary factor shall always be given
a prominent place in discussing the
problems involved, a demand which might
have been made even before all our recent
statistical knowledge had been acquired,
knowledge which I myself hold to be of
the greatest value.”

Dr. Julian Huxley has quite recently, in
his Galton lecture, faced us anew with this
same question of the relative degrees of
influence exercised upon successive generations by genetic and environmental or social
conditions. Referring to differences in the
average of stature, physique and intelligence
known to exist between schoolboys of
different classes, he quotes Professor CarrSaunders’s conclusions that

“so far as persons in this country are
concerned, the mental differences which
we observe, after stripping off the obvious
acquirements in the form of knowledge of
facts, habits, customs, manners, are due
only in very small part to differences in
the physical environment, and in a varying though never to a large degree to
differences in the social environment, and
for the greater part to inherited differences.”

And Professor Carr-Saunders draws the same
conclusions with regard to the physical
differences.

Dr. Julian Huxley questions these conclusions, pointing out that they may easily
be vitiated by our recent knowledge with
regard to vitamins, and that moderate
insufficiency of these accessory food factors
may result in retardation of growth, stunting,
lack of physical and mental energy and
reduced resistance to infection.

“In the face of such facts,’ says Dr.
Huxley, “it is no longer legitimate to
attribute the observed differences in
physique and intelligence between social
classes mainly to genetic factors. Genetic
differences may, of course, exist; but the
strong probability is that most of the
differences are dependent on differences in
270

nutrition. Further, the defective nutrition
of the poorer classes is in part due to
ignorance, but in a large measure to mere
poverty. . Until we equalize nutrition, or
at least nutritional opportunity, we have
no scientific or other right to assert the
constitutional inferiority of any groups or
classes because they are inferior in visible
characters.” *

And the lecturer concludes that it is practically impossible to compare results obtained on
material from different environments and to
draw genetic conclusions on their face value.

Very good. No one who thinks clearly and
forbearingly denies the difficulties inherent
in the argument. And we may accept the
dictum of Hogben, and admire the clarity
and the succinctness of his phrases, when he
says, of these matters, that ‘‘ the ambiguity
of the concept of causation .. . has completely obscured the basic relativity of
nature and nurture.’’ But let us not confuse
the issue. Granted, as Dr. Huxley says, that
it zs practically impossible at present to
evaluate the environmental and the genetic
factors if we mix the social classes, what does
this mean except that here is work for the
Eugenics Society, namely, to study the
different social classes as distinct groups,
and compare the results ? But this is already
included in the aims and objects of the
Soctety.

Some Critics and Criticisms

Dr. Huxley warns us that our methods
need overhauling, and this warning—the
urgent need of “ methodizing”’ our programme, as he puts it—is very timely.
Julian Huxley has always been a great
bulwark of the Eugenics Movement. We
look to him and to others like him, whose
scientific training and outlook are invaluable
in any field where science is a basic necessity
for successful advance, for guidance. Yes,
and for criticism. It were perhaps invidious,
in close proximity to this obvious compliment, to suggest that effort may be paralysed
by excess of criticism. But we must bear such
a contingency in mind. It can never be said

* EUGENICS REVIEW, 1935, XXVIII, 16.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

that the Eugenics Soctety has been in danger
of going to sleep for want of criticism:
criticism from without and criticism from
within. We may have had our nightmares,
but we have never lapsed into coma.

Dr. Huxley is much too wise, and, moreover, much too humanistic, to dissuade us
from pursuing certain limited activities of a
concrete sort just because the corpus of
knowledge which we so far have to guide us
is small. He knows too well how small is
this corpus of knowledge in any of the social
sciences even, and no one would seriously
speak of eugenics as being a social science,
still less one of the natural sciences. The
nearer eugenics gets to becoming a social
science the better, but that it is still a long
way off should not be allowed to stifle our
efforts. We do not desist from helping a man
to get well of rabies because the virus causing
his disease has never yet been isolated.

Indeed, the analogy between eugenics and
medicine is very close. I have said more than
once that eugenics is the most profitable
form of preventive medicine, and I believe
it. It is this creed which accounts for my
being in this chair to-day.

Before Jenner and Lister and the other
pioneers of prophylaxis in medicine there
were still things for the doctor to do, pending
the slow increase in the knowledge and the
approximation of public health to established
scientific principles. Those critics who say
that our knowledge of genetics is so slender
that we dare not act upon it yet, lest we make
mistakes, would, if they applied their
criticism to medicine, make first aid in many
circumstances and conditions pure folly.
And, in this connection, what is the cure for
ignorance unless it be observation and
research? And it is largely to encourage
both of these in relation to genetics that the
Eugenics Soctety exists.

Then there are critics who say: You are
too idealistic, anyway. This thing cannot
be attained, it is too high. An attitude
which, again, might have been taken up
quite as reasonably in regard to diseases
which have come under control as the result
of painstaking research.

Dr. F. C. Schiller has some pungent
EUGENICS AS I SEE IT

comments to offer upon the attitude of
“ obstructive conservatism ’’ with which the
eugenist is frequently faced. “ The practical
eugenist,”” he says, “is not really found to
wait for a quixotic agreement and an
illusory finality about the knowledge he
needs. He only needs knowledge enough
to warrant his first tentative experiments
to cope with crying and admitted evils, and
can trust his very experiments to yield him
the instruction needed to carry him on to the
next step. He can well reply, therefore, to
those who counsel caution to the pitch of
inaction: ‘ True, I know little enough, but I
know enough to start on; moreover, it is
only by experimenting and taking certain
risks that I can ever hope to learn what as
yet I do not know.’

“To traverse this contention it would
have to be shown that we have not, as a
matter of fact, enough knowledge to venture
on any experiment. But will any of the
critics of eugenics contend that the whole of
our present knowledge of genetics and
biology is practically irrelevant, and leaves
us just as helpless as the most ignorant
savages? It may be that we have not
knowledge enough to try a particular
experiment; but in each case specific
reasons should be given for thinking so.
Merely general insistence on the defectiveness of human knowledge should no more
suffice as a deterrent than general enthusiasm
for eugenics should {suffice to exculpate the
authors of some foolish experiment that
claims to be eugenical.”’

Even if we had to start from scratch;
and had no biological facts to go upon at all—
which is, even by the critics, allowed not to
be the case—I would still be a eugenist. In
the words of our pamphlet dealing with the
aims and objects of the Society: ‘‘ Modern
civilized man revolts against submission to
the crude process by which the less capable
are eliminated by early death. Eugenics
seeks to find the means by which conscious
human direction may be applied to the
preservation and increase of racial improvement through heredity.”

One more type of criticism still crops up,
‘the old bugbear about the possible losses to

271

mankind from the elimination of feeblebodied men of genius. We are once more
asked to remember how much we owe to
St. Paul, Newton, Kant, and other weaklings. But no attempt is made to show that
our indebtedness would not have been
incomparably greater if these great men had
enjoyed a robuster physique, or that their
physical infirmities promoted, rather than
impeded, their spiritual activities. It is
conveniently forgotten that with just a little
more physical debility these geniuses would
not have been able to achieve anything at
all, and that for lack of a little more adequate
physical equipment much ability has always
been lost to the world. Nor again is any
tear bestowed upon the geniuses whose
physique was so defective that they never
lived to manifest their superiority even to
their friends. Least of all is it shown to be
impossible that as much genius (or more)
might not be engendered by a eugenical
society from its sane and healthy stocks as
anti-eugenical societies now produce from
their tainted and uncertain sources. It is so
little genius that we get at present and we
make such miserable use of it that the very
conjectural loss which eugenics might
occasion need scarcely enter into a statesman’s calculations. At any rate the chances
of obtaining genius might be enormously
improved by diminishing the great waste
and elimination of ability which is now
promoted by our social order in the very
families which seem most fitted and likely
to engender genius.” :

And so, despite the critics, I am disposed
to regard the Galtonian effort as worth
while, and I grudge neither the time nor the
thought that I give towards helping to push
the eugenics plough in co-operation with the
sturdy colleagues who have borne much
more of the heat and burden of this particular day than I have. The soil is a stiff one,
and the pains which are needed to keep the
furrow straight are considerable. But we
are not going to turn back because we are
convinced that the tilth is good and that we
can rely upon Nature, who is ready with the
seed, to give a better harvest as the result of
our labours than she would give without them.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVIII, No. 4.
