D. T. HUGHES
B.Sc., Ph.D., The Chester Beatty Research Institute, London

Some Fundamental Considerations
in Human Population Cytogenetics

URING THE PAST six years another
1) aspect of genetics, namely cytogenetics,
has joined other disciplines, such as biometrical and biochemical genetics, in making a
contribution to our knowledge of human populations. The present communication is concerned
with outlining the basis of the data which is being
collected, its interpretation and implications.
Cytogenetics is the study of inheritance in
direct relation with its structural basis in the cell.
Much evidence has now accumulated to indicate
that the nucleus controls the hereditary pattern
of higher animal and plant cells. In some microorganisms the cytoplasm, which forms the
extranuclear jelly-like matrix of the cell, controls
certain aspects of heredity that are independent
of the nucleus. However, so far there is no evidence for cytoplasmically controlled aspects of
inheritance in Man. So we are primarily concerned with the chromosomes which are the
major component of the nucleus, and can be
observed clearly when a cell undergoes a division.
The role of the chromosomes, as the mechanism
controlling the potentiality for various genetical
characters and conveying this potentiality from
one generation to the next, was first realised by
Sutton in 1903 in America and Boveri in 1904 in
Germany after it was found that half the chromosomes of an individual are derived from each
parent. Sutton observed that each chromosome
could pair with one other with which it was
linearly homologous. Sutton and Boveri studied
plant and animal species with a low number of
chromosomes so that no major technical difficulties were encountered in spreading the
chromosomes for observation. The SuttonBoveri chromosomal theory of inheritance was
vindicated by work on numerous plant and

animal species. But it was not until 1956 that the
normal basic chromosome number of Man was
first found to be 46, as a result of work by Tjio
and Levan in Sweden on somatic cells in tissue culture and confirmation by Ford and Hamerton at
Harwell, England, in their studies of male germ
cells (testis). Then in 1957 Kodani, in Japan, found
chromosome numbers of 46, 47 and 48 in germ
cells. Subsequently a study of somatic chromosomes in a Japanese population, by Makino
and Sasaki (1961), revealed a normal chromosome number of 46 like that observed in all other
human populations since 1956, suggesting that if
there are extra chromosomes, supernumerary to
the basic complement then their occurrence may
be restricted to the germ line cells (Stern, 1959).
These advances in our knowledge of the structural
basis of human heredity were made possible only
as a result of innovations in technique (Ford,
1961) that enabled workers to spread a relatively
large number of chromosomes for counting
clearly. Subsequent observations on chromosome morphology enabled a study group at
Denver in America in 1959 to publish (Puck
1960) a tentative classification of 23 chromosome
pairs, on the basis of their morphology. This has
been followed by rapid advances in certain
aspects of clinical medicine such as the role of the
chromosomes in sexual abnormalities (Ford
1961b). Further work over a wide field is revolutionizing our understanding of the causes of
many diseases, by revealing the role of heredity.

Since the study of human chromosomes has
marked a new era in some aspects of medicine,
let us hope that the implications of these studies
will be applied even further in Society. Thus it
would, perhaps, have a desirable effect in improving relations between various populations if it

205

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1963, a ‘.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

became generally realized that we are all members of the same species, allowing our separation
into different geographical or racial groups to
assume a secondary importance, as is the situation biologically.

Present Trends in the Application of Chromosome
Studies

Most research is being directed towards further
elucidation of the nature of many inherited
diseases to determine whether there is a gross
chromosomal abnormality (in number or structure). In addition, the chromosome complements (karyotypes) of families including patients
with aberrations of some of their somatic cells,
as in leukemia and other forms of cancer, are
being studied in the hope of distinguishing
those karyotypes associated with a hereditary
predisposition to develop cancer (Baikie et al.
1961). Since most studies during the last six
years have been on medical populations it is
questionable whether there is adequate control
data on the normal range of variation of the
karyotype. Studies on normal chromosome
variation have been reviewed by Hamerton et
al. (1962) including variation in chromosome
morphology, and numbers of chromosomes in
relation to age. However no studies have been
reported on any chromosome variation in details
of morphology in relation to differentiation of
tissues in the body. This may be important since
it is a common practice to compare karyotypes
between individuals when the chromosomes are
studied in different tissues.

Since the finding of changes in the amount of
the enzyme alkaline phosphatase (associated
with protein synthesis) in cells of chronic myeloid
leukaemia, there is some speculation as to
whether the blood group genes are situated on
the linkage group of chromosome 21 or chromosome 22. Work is proceeding on this question.
The location of the ABO blood group genes may
possibly give us the first definite beginning in
mapping the autosomes (chromosomes other
than sex chromosomes). In addition, metabolic
anomalies at the cellular level (Lathe 1961) are
being studied in tissue culture (Westgale 1961) and
may be related to the chromosomes when a
chromosomal anomaly is also involved.

On a social level, the heredity counselling

206

service of medical practice is taking into consideration the individual’s karyotype and where
a distinct chromosomal anomaly is associated
with a clinical condition an unaffected “‘carrier”’
may be advised about the chances of producing
abnormal progeny. This eugenic service is being
limited by inadequate means of identifying
abnormal chromosomes unless the aberrations
in chromosome structure are large. Further
technical advances beyond the limits of chromosome morphology will reduce present restrictions
in identifying carriers of abnormal chromosomes.

Future Applications

Huxley (1959) has aroused discussion concerning
Man’s place in nature and his destiny. He suggests that since man has now entered the
“psycho-social phase” of evolution he is in a
position where he can control evolution of man
and other species, which is an extension of
Galton’s aim of replacing natural selection by
artificial selection, but on a larger scale. Huxley
made a laudable plea for the creation of a new
scientific discipline “Psychosocial Science’ to
cope with the need for objective assessment of
Man’s resources and knowledge of Man’s
evolutionary potentialities and how to direct
them. Cytogenetics can make a fundamental
contribution in this field.

In order to put the control of evolution into
practice more knowledge about the mechanism
and range of variation in Man is needed. When
maps of the gene sequence on human chromosomes have been obtained (by relating the linkage
of genes in heredity with chromosome structure),
they may possibly serve as a guide for the controlled production of mutations in any desired
direction: reversing deleterious ones back to
normal or inducing new mutations to meet
environmental stresses as they arise. These aims
are considered desirable by many geneticists,
including Dobzhansky (1961) and Carter (1962).
But before we can reach this exalted situation it
is necessary to consider some fundamental
aspects of our present knowledge and the next
steps in advancing it.

Variation: the Contributions of Heredity and
Environment

At the time that Darwin discovered the role of
SOME FUNDAMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS IN HUMAN POPULATION CYTOGENETICS

natural selection in evolution as a result of his
studies on variation (on the paleontological,
morphological, embryological and _ biogeographical levels), the mechanism of heredity was
not known and so he was not able to distinguish
the exact role of the environment on variations
within a species. Darwin’s counsin, Galton, in
1875, was the first to attempt to determine the
roles of heredity and environment in variation by
studying identical and non-identical twins in
man in various environments, the difference
between heredity and environment being then
referred to as “‘nature”’ and ‘“‘nurture.”’ However,
it was Johannsen (1911), a Swedish plant
breeder, who determined the exact extent of
heredity versus environment, in the inheritance
of a single quantitative character. He studied
“pure lines” of beans obtained by self-fertilization from single plants so that each line had a
uniform heredity distinctly different from other
lines. His experiments demonstrated that variation within the “pure lines” was due to environment and that differences between the “‘pure
lines”” were due to heredity, providing the first
evidence that hereditary variation is distinct
from environmental variation. (We may recall
that Darwin thought that all variation was
inherent in an organism’s heredity, but changing
in time, in response to environment.) Johannsen
(1911) followed his experiments by clear definitions depicting his observations. He named
Mendel’s hereditary factors, the “‘genes”, and
called the hereditary constitution the ‘“genotype’’: the type which creates. The product of the
reaction between genotype and environment was
designated the “‘phenotype’’: the type which is
seen. It followed that three types of phenotypic
variation could be distinguished: (a) genotypic
differences not known to be influenced by
environment in their expression, such as eye
colour and blood groups of man; (b) environmentally induced differences, independent of
heredity, such as certain cultural characteristics;
(c) differences due to a combination of both
heredity and environment such as height and
weight. The third group is the most difficult to
decipher, so that even to-day we have not
conquered the problem of distinction between
heredity and environment at all levels of observation in human heredity. It therefore seems worth

expressing Johannsen’s concept in terms of
present knowledge:

Factors Affecting Variation in Man

In Figure 1 an attempt has been made to represent, diagrammatically, the salient features of the
environment that affect the needs of human
genotypes and their phenotypic expression.

Human populations around the world live
under a range of environmental variations including extremes of temperature, humidity
amounts of light and types of food. As a result of
natural selection in the past we have varieties of
man now living in environments to which they
have bodily advantages, for example the Eskimo
populations of the Arctic and the Negroes in the
Tropics. They have evolved in relation to their
environments, becoming more genetically stable
to these regions by selection operating on their
genetical systems (Darlington 1958). Thus there
is a limitation in the size of populations within
which genetic variation may be studied owing to
the extent of environmental variation. Ideally the
size of population studied should be limited to a
group experiencing similar environmental conditions.

Genetical variation is dependent on the
reassortment and segregation of genes in the
germ cells during meiotic “reduction” division
(meiosis). The monk, Mendel, not only discovered the first laws of heredity whereby genes
are reassorted into different combinations in the
transfer from one generation to the next, but he
also discovered that the genes are carried in only
one cell from each parent. (He observed that one
pollen grain could effect fertilization and lead to
the formation of one seed.) The process of germ
cell formation (meiosis) is now known to involve
exchange of chromosome parts between each
member of most chromosome pairs (called
“crossing over” or chiasma) so that each
chromosome obtains a potentiality for a different
combination of genes. Then only one chromosome out of each pair enters a germ cell to give
a total of 23 chromosomes in each germ cell in
Man. The somatic number of chromosomes, 46,
is reasserted on fusion of the nuclei from two
germ cells at fertilization. The type of genetic
variation (outlined above) involving reassortment of existing genes is described as

207
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

LIGHT and other
forms of radiation AIR

  
  

GENOTYPES

found in the world's population of Homo sapiens

ABNORMAL

  

Sex chromosomes Autosomes

  

  

   
 
  
 

e.g. trisomy
chromosome 21
chromosome 17 (or 18?)

translocation
e.g. chromosome 15/21

  
  
 

e.g. XO XXY
XXX XXXY

    

Plants

WATER
Animals

Minerals

NUTRIENTS

    

 

represented in terms of their chromosomal phenotypes: 
  
 

involving aberrations of chromosome number and (or) structure

Sex chromosome
translocation
with an autosome

Chromosome
mosaics

TEMPERATURE

     
 

<— CO-OPERATION with other genotypes
(of the same species and
and species of other genera)
as individuals,
— COMPETITION communities or as
organisations.

  
  
  
   
 
   

  
  
   
   
   

!

EGESTION

EXCRETION of waste products of metabolism

FIG. 1. AN OUTLINE OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN MAN AND THE ENVIRONMENT

“continuous” variation. The other kind of genetic
variation is the “discontinuous” type, called
“mutation” by De Vries in 1890. He defined it as
an abrupt change in heredity not ascribable to
segregation or recombination. Examples of the
range of genotypes, so far found in human
populations are summarized in Figure 1. They
are represented in terms of their chromosomes
according to the nomenclature proposed by the
Denver group in America (Puck 1960). Details
of the cases with abnormal karyotypes, involving
chromosome mutations, have been reviewed by
Hamerton et al. (1962). There is some speculation
regarding the cause of the chromosome mutations but owing to the impossibility of confirmatory experimental evidence they may be regarded
as due to adverse environmental factors affecting
germ cell formation, or due to an unbalanced

208

combination of genes affecting germ cell formation or cell division during embryological
development.

The influence of some environmental factors
on genetic variation has been determined experimentally, especially in experimental systems such
as the fruit fly (Drosophila) and mice. On the
level of biochemical genetics, studies with fungi
such as Neurospora and Aspergillus have been
quite informative. Thus the ultraviolet part of
the light spectrum can induce mutations of
microorganisms but not of the germ cells of
mammals. But mammalian skin cells can be
induced to mutate into cancer cells. In man the
latter type of mutation can only affect the genes
in a population indirectly if it eliminates a
genotype before reproduction. Thus albinos are
prone to cancer development in tropical counSOME FUNDAMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS IN HUMAN POPULATION CYTOGENETICS

tries. Other forms of irradiation such as X-rays
and shorter wavelengths can induce mutation of
mammalian germ cells even to the extent of abnormal chromosome numbers and chromosome
breakage. Temperature is another factor directly
affecting genetical variation of both “continuous”
and “discontinuous” types. The frequency of
chiasma formation (structural crossing over)
between chromosome pairs at meiosis has been
found to be affected by environmental temperatures (White 1954). Mammals may find it
difficult to regulate their own temperature when
that of the environment is well outside their
inherited thermotactic optimum (Griineberg
1952). In view of these observations one may
expect more “continuous” genetical variation
in groups that have migrated from one climate
to another in which their genetical system has
not been stabilized by selection. In this connection a comparison of the chiasma frequency
of West Indians in their natural habitat with the
chiasma frequency of those that have migrated
to Britain would be interesting. But since it is
not practicable to obtain samples of adult gonad
we are limited to observations on their phenotypic variation and somatic chromosomes.
Changes in temperature also affect the gene
mutation rate. Some genes mutate at a low rate
in the environment to which a genotype is
becoming stabilized, increasing or decreasing
the mutation rate when the organism is placed
at another temperature (Dobzhansky 1951).
Under conditions of civilization man is subject
to other factors besides the main factors in
Figure 1. Notable examples are preservatives
in our stored food, drugs used in medicine and in
our drinks. These chemicals may be mutagenic.
In fact caffeine which is particularly high in
strong black coffee has been demonstrated to be
capable of inducing mutations in experimental
systems (Novick 1955).

When confronted with a bewildering array of
environmental variations contributing to the
human phenotype and probably capable of
changing the human genotype, it seems very desirable to be able to compare genotypes in a standard environment or in a range of controlled
environments. Recent developments in tissue culturing technique have made it possible to reduce
the number of factors affecting the genotype of a

human cell being subjected to cytogenetical analysis. The number of factors necessary for the
growth and division of a human cell in culture can
be defined. Figure 2 shows a simplified representation of the environment of a cultured human
cell. It shows a marked reduction in the categories of environmental factors outlined in Figure 1
and has the advantage of experimental control.

TEMPERATURE
(controlled by an incubator at 37 +0-5°C)

AIR

Humidity Carbon dioxide

— NUTRIENTS _

— Serum
~~ Amino Acids
_ _ Sugar
— . Vitamins

— Mineral Salts

__ PRODUCTS OF ~
- METABOLISM ~

 

LIGHT
during observation with a microscope
and in subculturing.

MAIN FACTORS OF THE ENVIRONMENT IN RELATION
TO THE CULTURED CELL UNDER EXPERIMENTAL
CONDITIONS
Unless genotypes are compared in the same or
similarstandard controlled environment, observations on the chromosomes must be regarded with
caution in case of phenotypic variation although
variation in some environmental factors may
have no immediately observable effect on
chromosome morphology. Besides, although
chromosomes are known to represent the major
part of the physical basis of inheritance no one
can claim to see the genes on them, not even in
the structure of the giant salivary gland chromosomes of Drosophila, which are the largest

2 09g,
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

chromosomes ever found. Both the “gene” and
the “genotype” are genetical concepts and the
elucidation of their structural basis requires
further research on several levels of observation
including biochemistry, cytochemistry and cell
morphology. It is not surprising that chromosome morphology and chemistry are not always
a direct reflection of the genotype when it is
realized that chromosomes respond to changes
in cell physiology, since they are a part of the
dynamic system controlling the physiological
potentiality of a cell. It is therefore safer to
regard chromosome observation as a study of
phenotype at the subcellular level.

Factors Contributing to the Chromosomal
Phenotype

Present techniques, in clinical medicine, for preparing human chromosomes for analysis are so
varied that the making of good chromosome
preparations has been described as an art (Ford
1961a). Yet under these circumstances the main
characteristics of the human karyotype in terms
of measurements of chromosome morphology,
observed in a number of laboratories, with
differences in technique, is similar (Puck et al.
1960). The number and size of chromosomes
forming the main groups of the Denver system of
nomenclature is thus characteristic of normal
individuals of the human species. However,

variation between the morphology of chromosomes, between laboratories, was found within
the nomenclature groups, which may be due to
differences in technique. Thus the identity of the
X sex chromosome was based on entirely different chromosome measurements in each laboratory
contributing to the Denver nomenclature. In
view of possible variations due to technique,
Patau’s (1961) suggestion of classifying the
human chromosomes into eight main groups,
without attempting to identify all the chromosomes by their morphology, seems more
practicable when comparing karyotypes obtained
by different techniques.

In order to determine the extent of phenotypic
variability of human chromosomes it is desirable
to replace the art of chromosome preparation by
a scientific definition of the variables involved.
If it is necessary to have variables, their effects, if
any, should be determined. Figure 3 summarizes
technical factors of the environment that may
contribute to the chromosome phenotype. Apart
from the direct examination of chromosomes in
bone marrow biopsies all other methods require
dividing cells in tissue culture. Factors of the
culturing environment have to be carefully regulated in order to avoid the occurrence of somatic
mutations due to environmental factors to
which the genotype of a cell is unstable. For
example, if the tissue culturing medium (for

FACTORS AFFECTING THE PURE CULTURE OF CELLS
(outlined in Fig. 2)

 
   
  

ANTIMITOTIC DRUGS

for arresting chromosomes
at a stage suitable for analysis: colchicine. colcemid or
vincaleucoblastine

Their effect varies with concentration
and duration of treatment

  
    
   
     
  
  
     

METHOD OF CELL SEPARATION

from the culture vessel and from
one another (as in subculturing)

(a) Mechanical: scraping and pipetting
ib) Chemical

{i) Enzymes: trypsin or collagenase
(ii) Versene
é

FIG. 3. ENVIRONMENTAL

   
   
 

     
  
  

THE CELL
(a) Living

210

CHROMOSOMAL
PHENOTYPE

 

PHYSICO-CHEMICAL STATE OF

(b) Dead: structure preserved by
various fixation methods

 
   
  
   

HYPOTONIC TREATMENT

to swell cells and spread
chromosomes before fixation

The effect varies with concentration
and duration of treatment.

 
    
   

METHOD OF PREPARATION
(of fixed cells) FOR OBSERVATION

(a) Squashing or air drying of cells
to obtain chromosomes in one
optical plane

(b) Staining

(c) Slide Mountant

(a) Optical system used for observation

   
    

 

   
     

  
 
   

  

FACTORS CONTRIBUTING TO THE CHROMOSOMAL PHENOTYPE
SOME FUNDAMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS

cultures of solid tissues such as skin) is not
changed frequently enough then the products of
the cells’ own metabolism can damage their
genotype and result in abnormal karyotypes. In
addition it is conceivable that since the physiological activity of a cell, in culture, is dependent
on the constituents of the culture medium, the
chemical pattern (phenotype) of the chromosomes may depend on which aspects of their
potentiality are being involved. Thus Sasaki
(1961) has demonstrated experimentally that the
relative lengths and arm ratios of human
chromosomes are affected by the use of an antimitotic drug to arrest cell division for chromosome observation. This produces a definite
phenotypic variation in chromosome morphology
so that caution is needed in comparing details of
length and chromosome arm ratio in karyotypes
obtained without an antimitotic drug with those
influenced to various extents by such a drug.
Also, care is needed in the use of enzymes for
cell separation during transplantation of cells
from one vessel to another, in culture, since
excessive exposure to trypsin is known to cause
chromosome breakage. Versene, a chemical also
used for cell separation can also cause somatic
mutation and its use has been discontinued in
most laboratories carrying out cytogenetical
analysis of human cells. Then, hypotonic treatment to swell the cells may be responsible for
varying degrees of chromosome uncoiling and
the appearance of secondary constrictions
(regions of the chromosomes that do not stain or
only do so faintly) according to the concentration
of the hypotonic solution, duration and temperature of treatment. These factors vary from
laboratory to laboratory. Thus some laboratories give hypotonic treatments at room temperature (another variable item) and others at 37° C.
Since it has not yet been found possible to obtain
clear observations of human chromosomes in
one optical plane in living cells all analysis is
conducted on dead cells. The method of cell
preservation and method of preparing the
chromosomes for observation (as outlined in
Figure 3) also contribute to the final picture of
the chromosome phenotype obtained.

Varied reports have been made concerning the
occurrence of satellites (a ball of chromosome
material at the end of some chromosomes either

IN HUMAN POPULATION CYTOGENETICS

apparently attached by a thin stalk or apparently unattached) and secondary constrictions of
human chromosomes (reviewed by Miller, et al.
1962). Both these features have been observed to
vary within a population of cells from one
individual, between individuals and between
studies conducted in different laboratories!
Since the satellites are probably concerned with
nucleolus organization (and hence protein
synthesis) it is likely that the frequency with
which they are observed is influenced by the
physiological state of individual cells during
their division cycle and also in relation to their
culture environment. The occurrence of secondary constrictions is also probably influenced by
cell physiology since the present author has
induced secondary constrictions of some chromosomes by means of cold temperature treatments
of cultured cells.

Mapping of the Chromosomes

Numerous possibilities would be open to us if we
had complete structural maps of the chromosomes indicating the positions and sequences of
chromosome parts responsible for the genes.
Thus it could indicate the direction of evolutionary changes in genotypes of human populations. It is perhaps a sobering thought to be
reminded that the human species probably
evolved from lower primates only about 100,000
years ago (a relatively short time on the geological time scale) and we cannot be absolutely confident that our present genetic structure will not
change. But unlike other species, Homo sapiens
may be able to make a conscious contribution to
maintaining its genetic structure, or directing
evolutionary development, by utilising knowledge of genotype—environment interactions. In
addition, therapy of diseases having a genetic
component, such as cancer could be helped by
identifying which genotypes respond to particular drugs.

However, in order to obtain the desired maps
new techniques will need to be developed, probably involving experiments with human cells in
tissue culture. In order that the location of the
genes may be related to the deciphered patterns
of chromosome structure, advances in biochemistry and cell physiology, also studied in a
controlled environment, would help. Ideally,

211
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

differences between genotypes are most clearly
demonstrated when they are observed in an
identical environment. Already, Waymouth has
developed a completely chemically defined culture
medium for the growth of mammalian cells
(Waymouth 1959). Perhaps the controlled
environment of tissue culture will enable the
cytogenetics of individuals in larger populations
(experiencing a range of geographical habitats)
to be compared, on the levels of morphological
and biochemical genetics. In addition, environmentally induced changes in genotype under
controlled conditions would enable some mechanisms of evolution (on a micro-scale) to be
determined experimentally.

When tissue culture conditions are completely controlled by using chemically defined
culture media the physiological expression of
genotypes on the cellular level may be determined with accuracy. Then it will be possible, in
conjunction with maps of chromosome structure, to determine the contribution of individual
chromosomes to the control of metabolism.
Experimental approaches towards identification
of chromosome phenotypes by elucidating their
genetical patterns of physicochemical structure
will be described in a future communication.

REFERENCES

Baikie, A. G., Buckton, K. E., Court Brown, W. M. and
Harnden, D. G. 1961. Two cases of Leukaemia and a
Case of Sex-Chromosome Abnormality in the Same
Sibship. Lancet, 2, 1003-1004.

Carter, C. O. 1962. Human Heredity. Penguin Books.

Darlington, C. D. 1958. Evolution of Genetic Systems.
Oliver and Boyd.

Dobzhansky, T. 1951. Genetics and the Origin of Species.
p. 42. Columbia University Press.

Dobzhansky, T. 1961. Man and Natural Selection.
Amer. Sci. 49, 285-299.

Ford, C. E. 1961 (a). Methodology of Chromosomal
Analysis in Man. Syverton Memorial Symposium on
Analytical Cell Culture, Detroit. pp. 105-119.

Ford, C. E. 1961 (b). The Cytogenetics of Sex in Man.
Eugen. Rev. 53, 21-24.

Griineberg, Hans 1952. Thermotactic Optimum; The
Genetics of the Mouse. pp. 118-121. Martinus Nijhoff.

Hamerton, J. L. 1962. (Editor.) Chromosomes in Medicine.
Heinemann.

Huxley, J. S. 1959. Man’s place in Nature; The Destiny of
Man, by Huxley et al. Hodder and Stoughton.

Johannsen, W. 1911. The Genotype Concept of Heredity.
Amer. Nat., 45, 129-159.

Lathe, G. H. 1961. Defective Molecules as a Cause of
Disease. Eugen. Rev., 52, 205-216.

Makino, S. and Sasaki, M. 1961. A Study of Somatic
Chromosomes in a Japanese Population. Amer. J.
hum. Genet., 13, 47-63.

Miller, O. J., Mukherjee, B. B. and Breg, W. R. 1962.
Normal Variations in the Human Karyotype. Trans.
N.Y. Acad. Sci., Ser. 2, 24, 372-382.

Novick, A. 1955. Mutagens and Antimutagens. Brookhaven Symposium in Biology, no. 8, Mutation. pp.
203-244. Assoc. Universities, Inc.

Patau, K. 1961. The Identification of Individual Chromosomes especially in Man. Amer. J. hum. Genet., 12,
250-276.

Puck, T. T. 1960. A Proposed Standard System of
Nomenclature of Human Mitotic Chromosomes.
Lancet, 1, 1063. Eugen. Rev., 52, 87-90.

Sasaki, M. 1961. Observations on the Modification in
Size and Shape of Chromosomes due to Technical
Procedure. Chromosoma (Berlin), 11, 514-522.

Stern, C. 1959. The Chromosomes of Man. Amer. J.
hum. Genet., 11, 301-314.

Waymouth, C. 1959. Rapid Proliferation of Sublines
of NCTC Clone 929 (Strain L) Mouse Cells in a Simple
Chemically Defined Medium. J. nat. Cancer Inst.,
22, 1003.

Westfall, B. B. 1961. Characterisation of Cells in Tissue
Culture. Syverton Memorial Symposium on Analytical
Cell Culture, Detroit. 147-157.

White, M. J. D. 1954. Animal Cytology and Evolution
p. 99. Cambridge University Press.
