PRACTICAL FAMILY ENDOWMENT

With Especial Consideration of the Independent Worker
By C. WICKSTEED ARMSTRONG

(The prize-winning essay in the competition, announced in our October number, for

the most practicable suggestion for introducing a eugenic scheme of family endowment

in England, “‘ particular attention to be paid to the difficulty of providing for the large

body of valuable ‘ free-lance,’ unattached workers whose earnings range from £4 a week
to several thousand pounds a year.’’)

endowment of families, which shall

make for race betterment and shall,
at the same time, be practicable under
present conditions in Great Britain, we
must first note that an ideal scheme, based
on eugenic principles unadulterated by
opportunist considerations, would be quite
outside practical politics to-day; and the
most we can hope to carry out, by dint of
far-reaching and untiring propaganda, is
some plan which may at least convert the
principle of endowment from a_ highly
dysgenic agency, as it is at present, to one
that will make for betterment..

Ideally, of course, family endowment
should be strictly proportioned to the
valuable hereditary qualities of the parents.
Tests should be applied to verify such
qualities, wherever possible, whether
physical, intellectual, or moral; and it is
not improbable that some day this will be
done, if not in Britain, in some more enlightened community of the future. But
probably the nearest we can get to this here
and now is to make endowment proportional
to the parents’ earnings. The working man
is apt to resent the suggestion that those
socially above him are his superiors; but
that eugenic value is roughly and generally
speaking correlated to social status, and
this to a man’s earnings and abilities has
been so often demonstrated by writers on
eugenics, that we must ask to be allowed
here to take it for granted.

At the present time, in both Britain and
France, there are family allowances; but

Bev: discussing a scheme for the

whereas in France it is the workers who are
given this advantage, in Britain it is almost
exclusively such persons as have ceased to
be self-supporting, and are maintained at
the expense of the rest of the community.
These consist very largely—though, of
course, not entirely—of individuals who,
through their own hereditary faults or
defects, have come down in the world, or
who, having been born near the bottom
rung of the ladder, have never risen.
Indeed, it is only too true that quite a large
proportion of those whose multiplication we
thus subsidize belong to the ‘‘ social problem group,’ and include feeble-minded and
insane persons, habitual slum-dwellers, confirmed criminals and incorrigible paupers,
as well as all sorts of other social inefficients, not to mention those unfortunates
who, suffering from epilepsy, phthisis, and
other grave hereditary diseases, nevertheless bring up large families of sickly
children at the public expense.

No eugenist—nor indeed anybody with
even the most elementary notion of the
science of heredity — needs to have
pointed out to him the likely results of
these two opposite policies—the French and
the British. Evidently, the one tends in
the direction of race construction and the
other in that of destruction ; and if this continues, the British nation must eventually
become inferior to the French in every way.
Are we, as a people, indifferent to this?

It will be as well, since the French
scheme has been found to work admirably
and is popular with the working classes, to

107
108

consider that system at once, and perhaps
adopt it as the basis for that which could
most easily be introduced on this side of
the Channel; though naturally it will need
modification, with a view both to adapting
it to home conditions and to extending its
scope, while making it also more definitely
eugenic in its effects. _

The French system is not one imposed by
law, but is of gradual growth and entirely
voluntary ; yet so advantageous has it been
found that very few employers of large
numbers of workers have failed to adopt it,
and all public bodies employing labour use
it as a matter of course. The system had
its origin in the simple common sense and
love of justice that characterize the French
working classes—and in that term should
be included both employers and employed—
for it is evident that the same wage as will
allow a single man or a childless couple to
provide for all their needs is likely to be
insufficient for the man who has to maintain
a family, and the children may suffer in
consequence. ‘To give both, therefore, the
same wage, according to a fixed scale,
besides being unjust, is a direct and severe
discouragement to the worker to have and
to bring up fittingly a number of children
—although, without this inestimable service, the State would soon cease to exist.

The feeling in France, therefore, which
is pre-eminently a sound and logical judgment, is that family allowances must be
considered, especially in the case of healthy
and intelligent parents, as a just reward
for services rendered to the community.
There it is the community of workers that
shoulders this duty towards its own members. This idea is eugenically sound, and,
as we shall shortly suggest, it might well
be extended to the body of taxpayers.

Already before the War, a number of
public bodies and private businesses had
begun to make special allowances in the
case of workers who had children to support. But it was during the War that the
great rise in the cost of living made conditions more and more impossible for large
families; and as, at the same time, there
was a great rise in wage levels, which meant

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

for the unmarried worker an excess of
income over his needs, it was then that the
custom of pooling all increases above a
certain level, and distributing this excess
amongst those whose family needs were
greatest, became general, and was felt to be
so essentially just that nobody had anything to say against it. Evidently the best
time, perhaps the only occasion, when such
a system can be made more or less universal, without legislation and without protest from the unmarried, is when wages are
rising to exceptionally high levels; for at
any other time it involves considerable
sacrifice on the part of those who have no
families. .

During the War, therefore, the Caisses
de Compensation were established, and the
system has since rapidly developed. In
1920 there were still only six such caisses ;
in 1928 there were 218, to which 20,000
employers subscribed. Nearly four million
workers were by then included in the
scheme, which, in 1927, distributed
1,476,000,000 francs among the workers’
families. ‘Though later figures, at the time
of writing, do not seem to have been published, it is common knowledge that the
scheme continues to extend its scope and
the number of workers involved continues
to grow.

In the caisses or special banks are the
funds subscribed by a number of employers,
who club together for the purpose, since it
is manifest that under any system not
universal, if a single employer were obliged
to endow the families of his own workpeople, he would be tempted to employ only
single men. By clubbing together they are
enabled to choose their workmen without
reference to the number of children they
may have, since they subscribe not according to those numbers, but to the total number of workpeople, married or single, that
they may have in their employ. A fixed
annual, quarterly or monthly premium is
quoted by the caisse, calculated generally
at so much per cent. of total wages, but
sometimes at so much per day or per hour
of work done in the factory or workshop.
There are also other ways of calculating in
PRACTICAL FAMILY ENDOWMENT

special instances—as, for example, agricultural labourers by the hectare—but these
we need not here examine. As these subscriptions have to be paid in advance, an
estimate is made at the beginning of the
period, and the amount paid in excess is
returned or the amount short made good,
at the end. Frequently, however, these
differences, which are generally calculated
so as to be excessive rather than deficient,
are allowed to make up a reserve fund,
which bears interest, to the credit of the
employer.

HOW TO APPLY IT TO ENGLAND

In sketching out a system, based on the
_ above, which may be suitable to our own
country, we shall have to remember, in
the first place, that as wages are not now
rising, it would be hopeless, at the present
time, to try to make it voluntary. It will
either have to wait such time as it may
take for a considerable rise in wage levels
to come as the result of a boom in trade—
and that may be a very long time indeed—
so as to be initiated just as in France, or
it will have to be a State scheme, on a compulsory basis. As industry cannot at
present bear this as an extra burden, on the
top of compulsory insurance, it will either
have to replace the latter—would that were
possible !—or the workers alone will have
to contribute to the fund from their wages,
when much trade union opposition may be
confidently expected.

This is, nevertheless, the ideal arrangement; but in Britain, under trade union
dictation and the extravagant legislative
schemes of idealists who ignored biological
and psychological facts, the working classes
have been encouraged to rely upon spoonfeeding to such an extent that it is doubtful
whether or not it will be possible at the
present time to get them to look favourably
upon any scheme that does not involve
State aid. .

Possibly, however, much could be done
in this direction by well-organized propaganda, more especially by making the
British workman know and understand the
good results which have been obtained in

B Kore)

France. But, in the last resort, courage
is a thing we have the right to expect from
any Government worthy of the name—once
we succeed in demonstrating beyond dispute the expediency and urgency of the
reform, Fear never was a good counsellor.
Successive Governments lived in mortal fear
of the ‘‘ dole vote ’’—so much so that they
shamefully betrayed what they knew to be
the national interest in their desire to
propitiate it. Yet this proved in the end
to be a bogy after all!

Secondly, we must take into consideration the higher standard of living in this
country, and the fact that paupers have
often drawn as much as four shillings a
head for their children, weekly, which
would make the modest French family
allowance of twenty or thirty francs a
month appear ridiculous. It would be vain
to imagine that our present standard of
living can be indefinitely maintained, since
it has involved us in mortgaging the future
to such an extent that the most clearsighted among the ministers, even of our
late spendthrift Socialist Government, had
to call a halt; but we may perhaps hope
to keep it higher than that of the French
working classes, and for that reason we
might aim at allowances of about double the
amount of those given by the French
caisses. These have varied from five to
fifty francs a month, but average at the

present time about twenty-five francs for

one and seventy-five for four children.

A third matter to be considered is the
family endowment of free-lance or unattached workers, and the inclusion of
other valuable sections of the population,
working with hand or brain, who are left
entirely out of the French scheme. With
us this is the more necessary since we have
gone further than any other nation in subsidizing the procreation of our poorest
stock, and this policy has, together with
indiscriminate charity and other dysgenic
influences, already spread the rot far and
wide—as Dr. ‘Tredgold has declared,
*“ mental defect is but one manifestation of
a disease which is slowly but surely eating
its way into the heart of the nation.”’
IIO

In these circumstances, the wider the
scope of a eugenic system of family endowment, likely effectively to combat the unsatisfactory differential birth rate now
known to exist, the better will be our chance
of saving our sound stock, still unaffected
by sinister influences, and regenerating our
race, naturally unsurpassed in valuable
hereditary qualities by any other in the
world. |

THE SCHEME PROPOSED

Taking all these matters into consideration, and also the fact that, to be eugenic
in its effects, it is essential the scheme
should provide that the amount allowed for
each child be strictly proportioned to the
father’s earnings, we shall do best to divide
it into two sections: that of employed
manual workers and that of unattached
workers and taxpayers. Furthermore, in
each of these, we shall have to establish
several grades, according to the income
earned. It goes without saying that the
allowances made to non-workers, whether
through the machinery of ‘“‘ insurance benefit ’’ or that of public assistance, must never
exceed nor even equal those which can be
obtained through the lowest class of manual
labour. It would be better to replace them
by payment in kind, failing relief work ; and
this might be extended to the families of
those earning less than thirty shillings,
when necessary.

Section I should include wage earners
receiving from 30s. to 50s. a week. ‘Those
with less than this not only could ill spare
any part of their meagre earnings for the
endowment of others, but, also, the children
of their class would be so unlikely to
improve our average racial qualities that it
would not be good policy to encourage their
multiplication.

Section II should include all with earned
incomes of from £130 to £2,000 a year. As
to unearned incomes, they could either be
excluded altogether from the scheme, or,
being included, they could be subject to
full contributions while having the right
only to draw family allowances of half the
amounts allowed in the case of earned

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

incomes. In that case, to avoid giving
other people the benefit of the remaining
fifty per cent., it could be utilized as hereinafter suggested. Those with more than
$2,000 a year, if of independent spirit,
would probably resent aid in any form, even
though contributed solely by others of their
own class—and in any case public opinion
would reject it, because such incomes are
ample for the needs of any family. So they
should be left outside the scheme.

SECTION 1.—WAGE EARNERS

A special bank having been established
by legislation, all employers of labour
would be obliged, from a certain date
onward, to furnish it with complete lists of
their workers or those they expected to
employ, say, during the coming half-year,
and of the number of children dependent
upon each. No distinction should be made
between ‘‘ legitimate ’’ and ‘‘ illegitimate ”’
children, so long as one of the parents was
bringing them up; but, of course, in no
case could allowances be claimed by both
parents in respect of the same child. As
regards adopted children, it would probably
be expedient to include these, too, in the
scheme, even though they could not, of
course, inherit the qualities of their adoptive parents. The French scheme includes
also ascendants when dependent upon the
worker, and these too might be included in
the present scheme as a matter of expediency though of no eugenic significance.
The amount of allowance in such cases
should not exceed that distributed for the
younger children.

These lists would be accompanied by
signed declarations from the workers themselves. Possibly the local post offices might
be utilized as branches of the central bank,
so as to avoid the necessity of establishing
local caisses all over the country. After
receiving and verifying the lists, the bank
would notify each employer what amount
he must deposit for the half-year. In the
case of small businesses, living from hand
to mouth, quarterly or monthly deposits
might be allowed. Each trade or industry
would have its own fund. The amount of
PRACTICAL FAMILY ENDOWMENT

the deposit would be calculated, not on the
number of children, but on the number of
workpeople and the wages to be received by
them. In paying wages, whether daily,
weekly or monthly, the employer would
then deduct from every worker Io per cent.,
and it would be the total amount of these
deductions that would constitute his deposit
in the endowment funds.

Each week the bank would then distribute
among the workers with families a certain
amount for each of the first three children
under fourteen years of age, proportionate
to the man’s earnings, and a slightly lesser
amount for every subsequent child.
Although, of course, the expense of two
children is not quite double that of one only,
nor that of three treble that of one, it would
be a good thing to offer this small extra
encouragement to families of three, as being
the minimum number needed to replace the
present generation, after allowing for those
who, for one reason or another, might fail
to leave descendants. Where husband and
wife both work, both should contribute,
though only one should draw in respect of
their children. This would tend to discourage the custom of wives leaving their
homes and their children to go out to work,
which is an evil to be combated if children
are to receive proper attention at home.

THE WORKING OF THE SCHEME

For the sake of illustration, let us suppose that an employer has three orders of
workpeople. Class A consists of Ioo men
at present receiving 30s. a week; Class B
of 50, receiving 4o0s.; and Class C of 25,
receiving 50s. He will probably have also
some more highly paid workers, but these
will come under Section IJ. Their names
will be given in with the others and handed
on to the income-tax assessors to deal with
under that part of the endowment scheme,
if not for the collection of taxes.

Class A, then, earns 30s. x 100=3,000S.
Having deducted 10 per cent. for the fund,
the employer will pay to each of these men
27s., and to all 2,700s., and will pay into
the fund £15 in respect of each week, or
£390 for the half-year.

IIt

Class B earns 4os. x 50=2,000s. Deducting Io per cent., he pays to each of these
36s. and to all 1,800s., while paying to the
fund £10 per week, or £260 for the halfyear.

Class C earns 50s. x 25=1,250s. Deducting Io per cent. he pays to each 45s., to all
I,125s., and to the fund £6 5s. a week or
#162 10s. for the half-year. Altogether,
then, he pays into the funds £812 Ios., in
respect of the half-year.

In the Endowment Bank there will be ten
or twenty classes, not three only, for each
industry, each class embracing, say, wages
of from 30s. to 32s., 32S. to 34s., and so
forth; but here we give only three for the
sake of simplicity.

The married men among the employees
will get back from the endowment fund the
amounts deducted, or more or less than
those amounts, according to the number of
children, the total amount subscribed by
each class of workers throughout the
industry being divided among the children
of that same class.

Supposing the average number of children under fourteen years of age, in those
families where there are any, to be three;
and supposing 50 per cent. of the workpeople to have children, after deducting the
number of women whose husbands are
entitled to draw, then Class A will have, for
each child, a sum equivalent to 300s.
divided by 150, that is to say an average
of 2s. per child. This will probably enable
the bank to distribute 2s. 1d. for each of
the first three children in a family and
1s. 6d. for each of the others. This is about
double the average allowance in France (at
par), and though, from the eugenic point
of view, it may still be considered insuffcient—especially as only those with at least
two children will get back an amount equal
tg or greater than that deducted from their
wages—it is probably the best we could do
at the present time. Later on, at a time
when wage levels are rising, it might be
increased.

Class B will have, for each child, an
amount equivalent to 200s. divided by 75,
it being remembered that the larger diviIIZ

dend, corresponding to the whole class when
all workshops are taken into consideration,
will mean a correspondingly larger divisor,
so that the quotient will be approximately
the same, for any large numbers. This will
allow about 2s. gd. for each of the first three
children and 2s. each for the others.

Class C will have about 3s. 6d. for each
of the first three and 2s. 6d. for the
remainder.

SECTION 2.—UNATTACHED WORKERS

In Section 2 we have unattached workers
and all those with incomes of more than
£130 a year and less than £2,000. Unattached workers earning less than £130 can
well be left out of the scheme for the same
reason aS wage earners receiving less than
30s. a week. If unearned incomes are to
be included at all, they should not entitle
a man to draw more than fifty per cent. of
what others draw, and an income partly
unearned should be divided up accordingly
before arriving at the figure required for
endowment purposes. But the workers in
Section 2 should not get more generous
treatment than those in Section 1, except
in so far as their higher subscriptions
entitle them to higher endowment; wherefore the 50 per cent. withheld from those
unearned incomes should not go to the
workers of that class but to the foundation
and maintenance of orphanages for children
of the same class, or other such purpose, as
might be eventually decided. When the
‘* unearned ’’ income is the result of many
years’ work and final retirement it should
be considered as earned.

A io per cent. levy should be made in
Section 2, as in Section 1. That is to say,
a special levy of two shillings in the pound,
to constitute the endowment fund, should be
charged through the income-tax machinery
on all incomes falling between the limits
just mentioned. ‘There must, however, be
grades just as with the wage earners, for
the ideal is that in each social class the
childless members contribute to the maintenance of families of their own class;
because only in this way can we avoid
encouraging procreation among those of less

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

racial value at the expense of those with
more.

No deductions will be made for earned
income, personal allowance, or children
except on assessing income-tax proper,
because in respect of the endowment-tax,
the difference between earned and unearned
income will be considered, as above suggested, in the rate of endowment, as also,
of course, the number of children. Moreover, as no such deductions are allowed in
Section 1, they could not logically be permitted in Section 2.

As, however, the income-tax payer is
already heavily burdened, and the load
would become wellnigh intolerable for the
lower middle classes if endowment-tax and
income-tax were both exacted—especially in
the case of married people until they had
at least two children—it would be well to
take the opportunity, when legislating for
family endowments, to relieve all those with
less than £400 a year, or £500 if married,
of every other burden beyond the 10 per
cent. levy, and compensate the ‘Treasury
for the loss by increasing the surtax, more
especially on unearned incomes, and even
by making it payable, in such cases, on
incomes of £1,200 a year upwards. It is
fitting that the idle rich should bear whatever extra burden may become necessary.

If the increase of income-tax under this
scheme appears intolerable, even with these
provisos, it should be remembered that none
would be asked to make sacrifices likely to
cause them privation, because those with
children or ascendants to support would
get back nearly all, or more than all
they gave. The worst that can be
said of such increased taxation is that it
would tend to discourage energy and
initiative in the case of the earned incomes
of men without families. This disadvantage
might be mitigated by increasing the deductions for earned income and personal allowance in the assessment of income-tax proper.

In Section 2, as in Section 1, allowances
will be distributed among the children of
each class according to the funds available
for that particular class. The amount will
be arrived at by dividing the total collected
PRACTICAL FAMILY ENDOWMENT

by the number of children, and in Section
2 will be paid in monthly instalments.
Each of the first three children will receive
something slightly over the mean amount
and each subsequent child something less,
according to what may be available. As the
upper classes have, at present, smaller
families than the lower, it would be easy to
include in Section 2 children up to sixteen
years of age, thus facilitating secondary
education. |

Class A might be those with incomes
ranging from £130 to £150, Class B those
from £150 to £200, Class C from £200 to
£250, and so on, up to incomes of £400,
when they might include wider ranges.
Thus class G would include incomes from
£400 to £500 and Class H from £500 to
£600. Class M, again, could take in a still
wider range, say from £1,000 to £1,200, and
so on, up to £2,000.

By means of a table accompanying the
income-tax form, the amounts to be claimed
in respect of each child for different incomes
might be indicated to the taxpayer, while a
note would explain that the amount allowed
would be more or less than the claim,
according to the total number of persons in
the class and the total number of children.

SOME SAMPLE CASES

Taking a few examples, at random, to
show how this would affect different individuals, we have, for instance, the following :

X is a man earning £130 a year. He has

no children or dependants, so he pays £13

- a year to the endowment fund, and receives

nothing back. He pays, however, no

income-tax proper, and his case would be
the same if his income was unearned.

Xi earns £130 but has two children. He

pays £13 to the fund, but claims an amount

- for each of his children slightly above that

to be arrived at by dividing the total amount
paid by his class by thé number of children
in it. If there were 100,000 individuals in
' class A (this may be an over- or an underestimate, but this is irrelevant, for the
divisor will vary with the dividend and so
the quotient will remain essentially the
same), then the A class fund will amount

II3

to about £1,400,000 per annum. If we
estimate the number of children as we did
in Section 1, this amount will be divided
among 150,000 children, which means that
each will get, on the average, £9 6s. 8d. a
year, or about 15s. 6d. a month. Xz might
therefore receive 32s. a month for his two,
which would make his yearly income
£136 4s., instead of £130.

X2 earns £640 a year and has five children. He is subject to income-tax. Let
us suppose he is allowed to deduct onequarter for earned income and £250 fon
personal allowance. Then he will pay £23
income-tax proper and £64 to the endowment fund. If there are 50,000 people in
his class with 75,000 children, he will claim
£45 in respect of each of his three elder
children and £35 for each of the others.
His final income, therefore, after paying
taxes, will be, roughly, £758.

THE MAIN ADVANTAGES

In conclusion, let us very briefly recapitulate the main advantages of the scheme:
It converts the present dysgenic system of
family allowances into one that will make
for race betterment. It is based upon a
scheme actually working, in France, which
has there increased the birth rate among
certain valuable sections of the population,
is popular, and works smoothly. It
embraces every social class which can be
considered racially valuable, except perhaps
some of the very rich who cannot well be
offered this sort of advantage ; though there
must always be individual cases among both
poor and rich which will be exceptions to
the rule. It treats all equally, since it
offers to every family an endowment proportioned to contributions made, and yet it
encourages procreation more or less in proportion to real eugenic value. Even the
better elements among the unemployed will
be included when Government decides to
adopt the system of rewarding each workman according to the economic value of his
work, instead of according to trade union
dictation—for in this way alone can relief
work be made economic and practicable. It
imposes extra burdens on none but the idle,
the childless, and the very rich, while it
114

benefits all others. Lastly, it need cost the
Exchequer very little. Even the cost of
administration could probably be met by
using, to defray it, the interest on moneys
deposited.

To prepare the way for the introduction
of the scheme in Parliament, it should first
be published and widely circulated, together
with the arguments which support it. Every
effort should be made to air it in the general
Press and reply convincingly to every criti
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

cism. To avoid the fate of the recent
Sterilization Bill, it should not be presented
until there are reasonable prospects of
success.

But we may need first to destroy the
fiction, so widely believed to-day, that
already too many children are born, and
that we should try to reduce, not to increase,
the number ; the truth being, of course, that
we have too many of the wrong sort and
too few of the right sort.

VE SE

ee
— SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW |
= JOURNAL OF THE INSTITUTE OF SOCIOLOGY =
= Acting Editor: ALEXANDER FARQUHARSON =
= Vol. XXIV. JANUARY, 1932 No.1 =
= CONTENTS =
= of the First Part of the 24th Volume, January, 1932 =
= Tendencies in Recent German Sociology : I. F. Oppenheimer =
= The Regional Social Unit A. H. Macmurdo =
= Tributes to the Memory of Victor Branford: III. =
= Sociology Considered as Moral Philosophy Gladys Bryson =
= Rural Sociology in the United States Richard Kaysenbrecht =
= Francis Galton on Hereditary Genius; I. G. Spiller =
= Social Amenities in the Western Islands of Scotland W. S. Gibson =
= Book Reviews Le Play House Notes and News Books and Periodicals Received =
= Supplement: A Survey of Boys’ Organisations in Southampton =
= Annual Subscription £1 1s. Od., post free. 5/- per copy. =
= The He Play house Press, =
= 65 BELGRAVE ROAD, WESTMINSTER, S.W.1 =
Sai UMA AUORN ATE UTTAR ELIHU KET

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 2.
