ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION (DONOR)*

MARGARET HADLEY JACKSON, M.B., B.S., D.Obst.R.C.0.G., J.P.:

S I have the doubtful privilege of

A eeeeting first—for no other reason
that I can think of than that it is a
matter of “‘ ladies first,’ I take it that one of
my functions is to deliver a kind of introduction to this subject of artificial insemination.
It is no new idea, and A.I. has been used in
animal husbandry probably for centuries,
but the idea behind it in this field is more to
make full use of and to conserve a valuable
sire rather than to overcome barrenness. In
the human field we have no definite knowledge when A.I. was first attempted or
considered. One of the earliest, if not the

earliest, publications on the matter was by

Marion Sims in 1866 when he described the
successful insemination of a woman with the
husband’s semen in a case of impotence.
This roused considerable interest and a
storm of criticism, even though it was the
husband’s semen that was used. It should
be clearly understood that what we are
discussing is not this form of insemination
(A.I.H. or homologous insemination) but the
other (A.I.D. or heterologous insemination).
The two forms have different moral and
legal implications, which will be fully
discussed by other speakers. Clinically they
also have quite different uses: A.I.H. is
primarily of value in certain cases of
impotence, vaginismus, or of deformity of
the genital organs and in cases where the
husband’s semen is lacking in density or
motility and where he produces an adequate
volume so that he can fractionate when
collecting.

- ALD. is asked for and i is suitable:

I. Where the husband is irremediably
sterile according to present knowledge or
totally impotent (i.e. unable to copulate or to
produce an ejaculate).

* A symposium held at a Members’ Meeting of the
Eugenics Society on October 17th, 1956.

2. Where there have been one or more
Rhesus tragedies in a family, then a Rhesusnegative donor is indicated.

3. Where the husband is a carrier of some
severe hereditary disability.

4. Finally, and somewhat theoretically,
A.I.D. can be considered as a means of
improving the stock by using donors with
outstanding mental and physical attributes.

The husband may express a wish that his
semen be used with the donor’s; this request
can be granted in the first group but not, of
course, in the other three. It is worth
explaining to the couple that normal coitus
does not interfere in any way with the
insemination, it helps if anything; in the
first group it can be unprotected, in the last
three contraceptives must be used.

It is of interest to inquire what the
magnitude of the problem is, and it will be
found that it can never be large and, at:
present, in this country, is very small indeed.
Speaking from my own experience over the
last twenty-five years with some 2,500
infertile couples, I can say that, out of that
number, about 200 have asked for A.I.D. but
not all have proved suitable. Thus, less than
I per cent. of my cases have needed and
asked for A.I.D. and since fewer than 10 per
cent of all married couples can be reckoned
as infertile the contribution, so far as the
general population figures are concerned, is a
drop in the ocean, but in terms of human
happiness the score is much higher.

You will also want to know what kind of
people ask for A.I.D. and why they choose
A.I.D. rather than adoption, and, again
speaking from my own experience, I can tell
you that they come from a surprisingly wide
range of occupation and income levels: I have
among my cases carpenters, surveyors,
groundsmen, Civil Servants, miners, policemen, farmers, schoolmasters, university

203

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January, 1957. 48, 4
204

lecturers, business men, doctors, grocers,
transport workers,, butchers clergymen, but
only one lawyer, and I would say of them asa
whole that they-are outstandingly decent
and childworthy people. It has been my
custom to ask my A.I.D. patients to write
down in their own words why they have
decided on insemination as the correct
solution to their problem, and a_ very
interesting collection of documents it is. The
general theme that runs through all of them
is: ““ We want children very much, we feel
that marriage is only half fulfilled without
them; my wife is barred from having a child
through me (her husband); she greatly
desires to bear a child; I have chosen her as
my wife not only because I love her but
because I wanted her to be the mother of my
children. We would much rather have her
child by an accredited donor than adopt
a child whose parents are unknown to us.”
The request for A.I.D. usually comes from
the couple themselves, quite often helped
by the family doctor or, more rarely, by a
consultant. The final decision as to whether
a couple should be helped in this way must
rest with the doctor. carrying out the
insemination, and arriving at this decision is
-an onerous and sometimes difficult task. A
personal interview with both husband and
-wife and a careful history and examinations are essential; much help can be
derived from the family doctor; complete
agreement on the part of both husband and
wife as to the desirability of A.I.D. is a
sine qua non. Much more could be said on
this subject but time does not allow.
Similarly I will only briefly mention the
donor problem, as the next speaker will be
dealing with it more fully. The building up
of a panel of donors is indeed one of the
serious difficulties encountered in this work
and carries with it a great responsibility. I
am largely dependent on personal friends
and on husbands whom I have got to know
during the treatment of their wives, and
both I and the patients are deeply indebted
to them. I do not offer my donors any
payment, though this is the custom in some
places. They must remain anonymous and
completely unknown to the recipients. I

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

have a list of some thirty regular donors and
the problem of limiting their progeny has not
yet arisen since the highest individual score
of pregnancies produced by any one donor is
twenty-three (seventeen live births, one stillbirth, five miscarriages) and the next highest
score is fourteen pregnancies (eleven live
births, one stillbirth and two miscarriages).
A donor needs to be medically, physically
and mentally sound, and of course it is a help
if he is highly fertile. It is very seldom
possible to match the colouring and build of
donor and sterile husband at all precisely; it
is more important to attempt to match their
capabilities and aptitudes.

You will not, I think, want to hear much
about practical details. First let me say that
without the technical skill and knowledge of
Mrs. Clare Harvey, who has been responsible
for all the semen analyses, preparation and
sterilization of collecting outfits, diluting
fluid and so forth, it would have been
impossible to do this sort of work. The
semen is collected direct into sterile, perfectly
dry, polyethylene tubes. We have found no
satisfactory method of storing human semen
for long periods such as those used with bull
semen; our most successful method is
dilution with Walton’s buffered glucose, if
the semen is dense, and storage at about
4° C. or at cool room temperature. The
oldest semen sample stored in this way
which has achieved success was 154 hours
old. We have, however, one freak specimen,
kept undiluted at outdoor summer temperature for 28 hours which produced a conception which went to full term with a live birth.
We have had no success with deep-freeze
methods but I have no doubt we have not
yet perfected the technique. You will be
hearing more of this from Dr. Parkes. Nearly
always I use semen collected one to five
hours before I see the patient, and after
visualizing the cervix and collecting a sample
of vaginal content and of cervical mucus for
examination about 1 ml. of semen is
introduced, part. into the cervical canal and
part near the external os, with a special
syringe. I do not employ intra-uterine
insemination. The patient rests for half an
hour and then goes on her way. Since
ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION (DONOR)

long-distance cases tan usually manage only
one visit a month the real difficulty is
hitting on the correct day in the wife’s
cycles; this is done by combining all the
information that can be gleaned from basal
temperature chart readings, vaginal smears,
cervial mucus characteristics, average length
of cycles over many months, and so forth.
(85 per cent of the successful inseminations
were done between cycle days ten and
fourteen inclusive, the outside extremes
being days eight and twenty-two.) If the
wife’s pelvic and general examinations are
normal I usually try for three cycles before
carrying out a more detailed investigation.

TABLE I
AID. A.I.D. + H. Totals
No. of cases 127 37 164 |
Gave up soon 13 5 18
Went abroad 10 I II
Failed to conceive
(Wife barren or ?
cause) 36 14 50
Trying now 16 4 20
Conceived 52 13 65
Pregnancies
Preg. now 4 (in 4w) ~— \
L.B. 52 (in 4w) 13 (in I1w) .
S.B. 4 (in 4w) — [86 (in65w)
Misc. 9 (in 8w) 4 (in 4w)

Preg. more than

once 14x 2 preg. 2 2 pregs.!

1X4 preg. 1X3 pregs. 39 (eee

Finally, a few words on results and
follow-up (see Table 1), which is sadly
lacking in this type of work. This being so,
I am convinced that it is the duty of those

A.I.D.,

205

who carry out A.I. D. to do all they can “to
follow the families, if possible until the
children have reached independence. So far
I have only lost touch completely with one
family; one patient refuses to communicate
with me direct but her doctor sends most
valuable reports; two others express their
reluctance but nevertheless do keep in
touch; the rest co-operate to the full, some
even to the extent of sending school reports.
Eighteen couples have asked for encores;
sixteen have had two pregnancies, one has
had three and one four. I do my utmost to
arrange for the same donor if there has been
a previous live birth, but it is not invariably
possible. The results on the whole are.
extremely encouraging, the children are
rather above the average mentally and
physically and, with one exception, the
marriages have been consolidated and improved. I have met many of the “ fathers ”’
since the birth of their A.I.D. children and I
have not encountered the psychiatric tangles
we were told would probably ensue. The

-exception I mentioned’ was one of my early

cases where I knew the marriage was in.
danger of breaking and was persuaded.
against my better judgment to carry out:
the wife being convinced that the:
cure for their difficulties was for her to have:
a baby. In fact the husband was psychotic
and had to be certified. The infant, a girl,
was too young to be troubled and she and
her mother are now a very happy pair—but
it was an error on my part. :

PHILIP BLOOM, M.B., Ch.B.:

At a recent conference on fertility attended
by 500 physicians in the United States, one
of the resolutions adopted was that if
artificial insemination was in harmony with
the beliefs of the couple and the doctor, it
then became a completely ethical, moral and
desirable form of medical therapy.

This resolution implies the great responsibility that rests with the doctor. A.I.D. is a
comparatively recent innovation and though
it may be accepted logically and intellectually by a large portion of the community, it
is subject to old traditions, prejudices and

taboos which may lead to intense emotional.

problems. Individuals or couples may be
completely unaware of their deep-ingrained
attitudes and fears and it is up to the doctor
to assess to what degree they exist and how
great an influence they are likely to have.

This will depend to a great extent upon the

stability of the marriage itself.

There is always the danger of a sense of
guilt due to a fear of having somehow |
committed adultery. Logically it can be.
argued that adultery is frowned upon because
it indicates subservience to lust, or endangers.
206

family life and thereby society as a whole;
the transfer of a sperm through a glass
container by a third person, from man to
woman unknown to each other, can certainly
satisfy no sensuous, unbridled lust; since the
very object of A.I.D. is to enhance a marriage
by the creation of a family, the further
objection to adultery is ruled out. This is a
reasonable argument and may be _ the
intellectual conviction of many couples
considering A.I.D. Unfortunately, intellec.tual convictions are not all-important in
establishing emotional reactions, and it is
the emotional reactions that set the tone of
marriage and family relationships.

In my own practice I rarely, if ever,
suggest A.I.D. but leave it to the couple to
broach the subject. We may then talk
generally about the various aspects of
insemination but come to no decision at the
time. It is preferable for them to consider
the matter at leisure and to work out their
own pros and cons. This also allows me more
time to make my own estimation of their
feelings towards A.I.D. and of their emotional
make-up.

It is important to estimate the true
quality of the marriage, and here I must
emphasize that A.I.D. is no answer to an
unstable marriage or to a romantic idea that
the presence of the child will save the
marriage from going on the rocks. It is
obviously not the right procedure for the
woman who says that she cannot go on with
the marriage unless she has a child.

The opinion is often voiced that many a
woman desiring to undergo A.I.D. must
tpso facto be suffering from an obsessional
neurosis. Occasionally such an obsessional
neurosis, or a condition bordering on it, may
be present. At exactly what point do strong
maternal feelings frustrated by a lack of
maternity become an obsession? .Surely the
same situation exists when a woman is
herself subfertile and attends a gynecologist
for investigation and treatment. On that
level of reasoning one might easily suggest
that it is more ‘‘ normal ”’ for a couple to try
A.I.D. rather than adopt a perfectly strange
child in the manner that. has: become
commonly accepted practice. ,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW |. 
In cases of adoption there are certain rules
and regulations, some covered by law, others
by the policies of adoption societies, which
must be observed for the welfare of all
concerned. In A.I.D. it is the doctor alone
who must decide whether the relationship
between husband and wife is right, whether
the child will find a loving and secure home
and whether its presence will add to the
value of the marriage or endanger it.

Is the mother likely to transfer all her
emotions to the child? Will she suffocate it
with protectiveness and possessiveness? Is
Father going to be left out in the cold? Is
there a likelihood that he may become
jealous or hostile to the child, particularly a
boy, not his own? Such problems and others
are not unknown in many marriages where
children are conceived normally. Their
possibility exists even more where there, is
the added emotional strain inherent in
deciding on A.I.D.

One might easily expect a feeling of
inadequacy in the husband, especially if the
wife is the more dominating personality, and
this may have serious repercussions either
directly or indirectly, e.g. by overcompensating, or becoming aloof and retiring into an
ivory tower.

Occasional relief of emotional tension is
obtained when a marked oligozoospermia is
present rather than a complete azoospermia.
In these cases one may mix the semen of the
husband with that of the donor. There is
then the possibility, though, of diluting the
total specimen unless the quantity is regulated.

On only two occasions have I instituted
A.I.D. when both impotence and infertility —
were present in the male. In these cases the
maturity and personalities of both men were
sound enough to disregard the impotence as
being symptomatic of a major neurosis, and
in both cases the wives had completely
accepted the probability that they would
never have.a normal sex life yet were
satisfied. In one there was complete sexual
harmony outside normal coital relationship.
I was convinced of the stability of these
marriages and went ahead. Years have
brought no reason to regret the decision.
ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION (DONOR)

| Needless to say a marriage that is held
together for purely practical reasons—social,
economic or religious—is not necessarily a
good one for A.I.D. Yet these factors are not
to be excluded in assessing the overall
picture. One. must, however; be fairly
certain that the personal relationship between
husband and wife is mature, that there is
mutual understanding and give.

Donors are not all that easy to find. They
must have the right ethics and not be liable
to suffer from any guilty or obsessional
feelings. It would be ridiculous to sacrifice
the donor’s personal adjustment fof the sake
of the patients. And again it is up to the
doctor to make certain of the complete and
deep understanding of the donors.

Obviously they must be physically and
mentally fit, and I usually prefer those who
are happily married with families of their
own. They are found mainly by personal
approach to acquaintances, friends or even
colleagues.

Complete histories are taken and thorough
examination carried out before they are used.
Men of average height and coloration are the
most suitable choice unless there is need to
match some particular characteristic genetically indicated and common to both husband
and wife.

There is less strain on donors if each is used
not more than three or four times a year and,
generally speaking, not more than three or
four years in succession.

Two separate donors are used on alternate
days at each estimated ovulatory period.
Not only does the donor not know the patient

207

but it is my practice never to tell the donors
whether the insemination is successful or not.
Even I do not know which of the two donors
was responsible, and as I keep no records of
which donors come for which patients I am
usually in the position of not knowing which
of quite a number of donors was responsible.
I believe it is better that way.

I would like to end with a last word about
the child. It is getting an inheritance which,
being calculated, has every chance of being
as good as, if not better than, those in the
majority of children conceived normally.
Furthermore, before performing A:I.D. I am
reasonably certain that the environment in
which the child will be reared is good. Not
all children have that advantage.

For the child’s sake particularly I prefer
that absolutely nobody but the parents
themselves and myself should know of the
insemination therapy. My last advice to the.
parents is that under no circumstances
should thev, or need they, ever tell the child
the method of conception—in fact they
should forget about it themselves.

This last advice is not as difficult to
follow as might be thought. It is generally
known how quickly adopting parents feel
that the adopted child is their own.. How
much stronger, therefore, is that feeling
likely to be when husband and wife have
gone through the full period of pregnancy
and the birth itself. An infant is infinitely
lovable and this love is rarely affected to any
extent by recollections of the actual moment
of conception whether it occurs normally or
through A.I.D.

A. S. PARKES, C.B.E., M.A., Se.D., F.R.S.:

Preservation of Human Semen

The technical problems of artificial insemination in man would be much simplified if
some method were available of preserving
human semen for long periods without
impairing its fertilizing power or running the
risk of genetic damage to the spermatozoa.
According to present knowledge such longterm preservation will almost certainly
depend on the use of temperatures far below
freezing point, and the possibility has been

brought much nearer by recent work on

maintaining the viability of cells and tissues

in the “ deep freeze.”’
The idea of preserving living cells at very
low temperatures is, of course, far from new,

‘and experiments on the freezing of living
cells have been going on for the better part

of two centuries. The idea behind much of
this work was quite simple, namely that the |
biochemical processes of life would be
arrested at low temperatures so that if the
208

(

cell could be frozen and thawed without
damage, then indefinite storage should be
possible at the low temperature. Most of the
living. cells of mammals, however, are
destroyed by freezing and thawing, and until
recently little progress had been made in
giving practical expression to the idea. A
few years ago, however, it, was observed by
Polge, Smith and Parkes (1949) that the use
of suspending media containing glycerol
enabled certain living cells to be frozen and
stored in solid carbon dioxide at —79 deg. C.
or in liquid air at —1go0 deg. C. without losing
viability. The most spectacular application
of this discovery so far has been the preservation of bull semen for use in cattle insemination centres, and it is now known that bull
spermatozoa suspended in a medium containing egg-yolk and Io per cent. glycerol
and frozen slowly to —79 deg. C. will retain
fertilizing power for several years if not
indefinitely. By this method at least one
bull has begotten calves long after his death.

The principle has also been applied to the
preservation of human red blood cells for
transfusion, and in long-term experiments
cells have behaved normally when reintroduced into the circulation after being
preserved for two years at —79 deg. C. In
this case, however, the practical use of the
technique is hindered by the fact that it is
necessary to remove the glycerol before the
cells are transfused, and the overall process
is therefore too complicated to be worth
while for routine blood banks. The method
has, however, been found to be of value for
the preservation of rare types of blood which
cannot necessarily be obtained quickly.
Application of the method to other types of
single cells, to tissues, and even to whole
organs is rapidly being made (Smith, 1954).

It so happens that human spermatozoa
are one of the few types of normal mammalian
cell which will survive freezing to some
extent without the use of special methods, as
observed as long ago as 1897 by Davenport
who recorded that human spermatozoa
would survive cooling to -17 deg. C. This
observation received little attention for
many years, but in 1938 Jahnel, apparently
in the course of experiments on spirochetes

THE EUGENICS REVIEW —

observed that a proportion of human
spermatozoa could be revived after freezing
for forty days at —79 deg. C. or for shorter
periods at —196 deg. C. Jahnel does not
appear to have taken any special precautions
to control the rate of freezing, nor does he
appear to have used diluents. Shettles, in
1940, reported less promising results following the freezing of human semen in thin glass
capillary tubes, at the temperature of solid
carbon dioxide or in one of the liquid gases.
Shettles obtained only a very low revival
rate, though he found a few motile spermatozoa in semen thawed after seventy days at
—79 deg. C. Soon afterwards, Hoagland and
Pincus, in 1942, based a series of experiments
on the theory put forward mainly by Luyet
and his co-workers” that (a) the essential cause
of freezing damage was the formation of ice
crystals which crushed and distorted the
cells and perhaps even punctured their
membranes, and consequently that (b) the
way to avoid freezing damage was to freeze
to a very low temperature ultra-rapidly so
that the water vitrified rather than formed
ice crystals. Hoagland and Pincus therefore
used an elaborate series of devices to
facilitate the instantaneous cooling of minute
amounts of human semen. Their results,
however, were even less satisfactory than
those of Shettles. In trying to resolve the
apparent discrepancies in the literature, I was
able to show (Parkes, 1945) that the recovery
of human spermatozoa after the freezing of
the semen was much affected by the volume
of material used and that, contrary to the
premise of Hoagland and Pincus, better
survival was obtained when larger amounts
were frozen. This result implied that rate of
freezing was important, but that ultra-rapid
freezing should not be aimed at. Work with
human semen seems to have stopped at this
point for some years until interest was
aroused again by the discovery of the
protective effect of glycerol. From the fact
that human spermatozoa, unlike all other
mammalian spermatozoa so far investigated,
show some revival after freezing even by
crude methods, it seemed very likely that the
use of the glycerol technique would permit

* (19338—I940.)
ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION (DONOR)

rapid progress with human material. Unfortunately, this expectation has not been
fulfilled, and little progress has been made.
The dilution of human semen with media
containing glycerol does little or nothing to
promote the survival of spermatozoa during
freezing and thawing and their storage at low
temperature. Some success was however
reported by Sherman and Bunge (1953) who
added up to Io per cent of neat glycerol to
undiluted semen before freezing. These
authors record a recovery of the order of
67 per cent following this treatment. In our
hands, however, this method, although
better than those involving diluents, has
not proved satisfactory. Nevertheless, this
work must be taken seriously, because of the
subsequent report by Bunge, Keettel and
Sherman (1954) of the birth of three children
following the insemination of frozen and
thawed semen. The children are said to have
been perfectly normal as would be expected
from general principles and from the fact
that many tens of thousands of normal calves
have been born following the use of frozen
bull semen.

It cannot be doubted that further work,
when it is carried out, will improve enormously on present methods of preserving
human semen at low temperatures, and that
results as successful as those now obtained in
cattle breeding will be possible.

Apart from moré spectacular possibilities,
this achievement may assist subfertile men

209

and will certainly mean that the unavoidable.
separation of husband and wife need not
necessarily debar the couple from having children. These, surely, are applications to
which few would object. Whether a general
relaxation of the limitations normally set by
time and space on human reproduction
would be desirable is, of course, debatable, .
but at present we should concentrate on
obtaining sufficient facts to permit a permanent decision on technical grounds as to
the feasibility and safety of the use of long
preserved human semen. Decisions as to the
desirability of telegenesis, built on the
shifting sands of emotional, religious, ethical,
moral, sociological, esthetic, and legal
considerations can only be impermanent.

REFERENCES

Bunge, R. G., Keettel, W. C. and Sherman, J. K.
1954. Fertility and ‘Sterility, 3, 520.

Davenport, C. B. (1897). Experimental Morphology I.
New York. Macmillan. p. 244.

Hoagland, H. and Pincus, G. 1942. J. gen. Physiol., 25,

337:

Jahnel, F. 1938. Alin. Wschr., 17, 1273.

Luyet, B. J. and Gehenio, P. M. 1938-1940. Life and
death at low temperatures. Biodynamica, Nos. 33,
48 and 60.

Parkes, A. S. 1945. Brit med. J. August 18, ii, 212.

Polge, C., Smith, A. U. and Parkes, A. S. 1949.
Nature, Lond., 164, 6606.

Sherman, J. K. and Bunge, R.G. 1953. Proc. Soc. Exp.
Biol., N.Y., 82, 686.

Shettles, L. B. 1940. Amer. J. Physiol., 128, 408.

Smith, A. U. 1954. Effects of low temperature on
living cells and tissues. Chapter 1 in Buological
Applications of Freezing and Drying. Ed. R. J.C
Harris. New York. Academic Press.

C. P. BLACKER, M.A., M.D.:

Dr. C. P. Blacker said that, in the course
of the twenty-one years that he had been the
Society’s General Secretary, he had several
times been approached by women who wanted
A.I.D. The possible use of artificial insemination in man had, during the inter-war years,
been outlined in the U.S.A. by Dr. H. J. Muller,
and in this country by Mr. Herbert Brewer,
among whose many gifts were those of
imaginativeness, enthusiasm and persuasiveness both in speech and writing. The term
“ eutelegenesis ’’ had been invented by Mr.
Brewer to denote the use of artificial

insemination by man on himself with a
eugenic end.

Our late president, Lord Horder, had been
interested in Mr. Brewer’s ideas and had
given him encouragement; so had our late
Treasurer, Mr. Clinton Chance.

The people who, in the decade before the
war, had turned to the Eugenics Society for
guidance on A.I.D. had mostly been those
belonging to the third category described by
Dr. Margaret Jackson, namely those who had
misgivings about hereditary abnormalities in
the husband or in his family. Rather than
210

adopt a child, they preferred that the wife
should have one by A.I.D. The husband’s
relation to the child would essentially be that
of a step-father, though in fact the bond was
psychologically closer because the child
would, during its early years at least, treat
him as its real father. There were, in the
inter-war period, several gynecologists in
London and the provinces willing to do
artificial inseminations and the speaker had
given to the inquirer’s doctor the names of
two or three of these. Dr. Blacker had also
been sometimes concerned with the selection
of donors and had nearly always followed
Dr. Jackson’s practice of withholding his
identity. In one case the woman ‘and her
husband named a man, a cousin of the
husband’s, whom they wished to be the donor
and who had expressed willingness. In none
of the cases with which the speaker had been
concerned had there been recriminations or
difficulties. :

Three unmarried women, whom he had not
felt he could advise, had approached him
asking for A.I.D. These women declared that

they wanted children but disliked the idea

of marriage and the prospect of being tied
for life to a particular man. One of these
women, now dead, gave detailed specifications of the man whom she wished to act as
donor. His physique, appearance, intelligence
and character had to be such and such. She
knew of a rnan who met her requirements,
but his wife objected to his acting as donor.
Could the Eugenics Society find another man
of the same type? A second woman had
broached the proposal in an exalted religious
spirit. She had felt a call to become a mother,
and had talked about the baby she was going
to have as if he were a future Messiah.

In 1937 Dr. Blacker had had a cautionary
experience which he felt at the time might
foreshadow the future. A’most eloquent man
came to see him who had been referred to the
Society by a then well-known gynecologist,
now dead. This man was a central European
who had recently arrived in this country
from America and who spoke with a strong
American accent. He had a proposition over
which (his gynzcologist friend had assured
him) the Eugenics Society could be of much

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

help. He wished to set up an organisation
which was to be in part philanthropic and in
part commercial which might be called a
Seminological Institute or Bureau. Its
object would be to collect seminal specimens
from as many contemporary celebrities as
possible. These specimens would be
refrigerated according to a technique which
he described, and stored in a seminal bank.
The longer the lapse of time, and the higher
the posthumous reputation of the donors,
the more valuable would’ the collection
become. Indeed, the value of the treasures
in the proposed bank, like that of wine in a
cellar, would augment with time. It was
essential that this project should be
conducted under auspices which were above
suspicion, for there were many openings for
fraud. This man had asked if the Eugenics
Society could offer any suggestions as to how
to solve a most awkward problem. How
could one guarantee the authenticity of a
seminal specimen? Supplies would be in a
high degree exhaustible; how could anyone
be sure that an unscrupulous competitor in
the field of the projected institute would not
mislead the public by fraudulently substituting the semen of a contemporary mediocrity
for that of a long-dead celebrity? It would
certainly not be long before the institute
would incur fierce competition; for nothing
could stop the project from being
commercialised in a big way. Rival firms
would enter the field, each with its list of
celebrities arranged according to a scale of
charges. These rival firms would bid against
each other in obtaining specimens from living
contemporaries who would find opened to
them a new way of making big money.
There was an even further possibility. The
art of tissue culture was making strides.
The projected institute would promote
research designed to preserve in a state of
suspended animation, but capable of activa
‘tion when required, specimens of testicular

tissue. If an appropriate technique were
discovered, the bank’s treasures would cease
to be expendible; they would become selfreplacing and the great men of our age would,
in the most real sense, be immortalized. Dr.
Blacker had expressed doubt as to the
_ ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION (DONOR) ~

possibility of inducing contemporary
‘geniuses and celebrities to consent to being
partially castrated.. But his interlocutor
had replied that he had learned from
experience that nothing was impossible
provided you were willing to pay enough.
That was why the Institute should have
ample funds. By judiciously outlaying its
resources today, incalculable dividends
could be harvested tomorrow. Not only
dollar dividends, but also dividends in the
form of the most priceless collection of

‘211

concrete objects that had ever been gathered
together since the dawn of history. He felt
sure that.Lord Horder (then our president)
and the Council of the Eugenics Society, who
were doubtless imaginative people of the
highest integrity, would quickly grasp the
unprecedent importance of his proposal and
recognize their indubitable obligation to
assist in bringing it to fruition. _

Dr. Blacker said that he had often
wondered what had become of this man,
whom he had never seen again.

CECIL BINNEY, M.A.:

Mr. Cecil Binney said he would confine
himself to legal aspects of the subject and his
speech would therefore be short since
artificial insemination, unlike sterilization
which the Society had often discussed, raised
few legal problems. He had been interested
to hear from Dr. Jackson how long ago
artificial insemination had _ been first
achieved; there was nothing in the Law
Reports to show it was known before the
time the Society first considered it about
twenty years ago. Parliament had not
thought fit to pass any Act on the subject
and the law had to be deduced from general
principles. The only reported cases
concerned artificial insemination by the
husband and its effect where one party was
otherwise entitled to a decree of nullity on
the ground of the other’s incapacity—which
was outside the subject before the meeting.

Artificial insemination could obviously
not constitute a crime, since it was no crime
for a man to have sexual connection with a
woman to whom he was not married and
even to have an illegitimate child by her,
though that might land him in the police
court as defendant to a bastardy summons.
It had been suggested, however, that for a
married woman to be artificially inseminated
by someone other than her husband
constituted adultery. Though this opinion
had been expressed on behalf of the Church

of England by no less persons than Mr.
Justice Vaisey and Mr. Henry Willink it was
mistaken, for adultery involved “ carnal
concupiscence ’’ to use the ecclesiastical
phrase, which could not be improved upon.
For practical purposes it did not greatly
matter whether artificial insemination
constituted adultery since the Court would
certainly hold that a woman who had this
done without her husband’s consent was
guilty of cruelty entitling him to a divorce,
whereas, if he did consent, this would
amount to connivance disentitling him to
a decree even if it did constitute adultery.

Artificial insemination by a donor raised
no question of the law of inheritance since a
child so conceived was neither in law nor in
fact the child of the husband, but it might
give rise to cases of a sensational character.
If, for example, a person was entitled to a
settled estate worth a hundred thousand
pounds on the death without children of his:
elder brother and the brother’s wife gave
birth to a baby though the brother had
suffered injuries in the war which made it
impossible for him to conceive a child, there
might well be legal proceedings; but such a
case would raise only questions of fact not of.
law and would be similar to earlier cases in:
which suppositious children conceived in a
more conventional manner have been put
forward as heirs to property.
