EDUCATION FOR FAMILY LIFE*
_ By CYRIL BIBBY, M.A., MSc., ELS.

T is now generally accepted that sex
| eaucatin should be a part of the whole

educational process and that it should be
considered not as a new “ subject ’’ but as a
new orientation of teaching. This desire not
to deal with sex in isolation has led to the
view that ‘‘ sex education is merely a part
of health education.” This is true enough if
the phrase “‘ health education ”’ is interpreted
sufficiently widely, but it is helpful sometimes
to think of sex education rather as part of
education for family life.

Charles Eliot has stated that “ the security
and elevation of the family and of family
life are the prime objects of civilization,” and,
even if rather sweeping, this statement has a
good deal of truth in it. There are, however,
those who object (as is always the case when
a new aspect of education is suggested) that
there is no need to pay any special attention
to this matter, since ‘‘ we have managed all
right up till now without it.” The validity
of this objection depends on two assumptions
—first, that in the past we have in fact
managed “all right ’’ (which most social
workers would deny); and secondly, that
changing social circumstances do not require
changing educational aims and techniques
(which most educationists would deny).

While it is probably true that the institution of the human family grew out of mankind’s biological peculiarities of all-the-yearround mating and reproduction and very
extended period of infancy, it is also true
that there have been many different forms of
family in the past and are many different
forms in the world to-day.

-In the modern world it seems that the
family has four main functions. First, it
satisfies the physical and mental needs and
aspirations of husband and wife (this is put
first because it is probably the main reason
why most people do in fact marry). Secondly,

* The substance of an address given on behalf of the

Eugenics Society at the Conference of Educational
Associations, January 1946.

it provides a socially recognized channel for
the perpetuation of our species. Thirdly, it
is the prime agent for the socializing of
children, thus freeing them from the domination of their own physiological processes and
re-creating our cultural pattern anew in each
generation. Fourthly, it fosters the personality of the child, thus providing an integrated
personality as the parent of the next generation. In drawing up any plans for family life
education all these functions must, therefore,
be considered.

While family life education of some sort
may always have been desirable, there are
circumstances peculiar to our own times
which render it essential. Because of modern
mobility, children may continually have to
readjust themselves to new neighbours, new
schools and so on, and, therefore, need more
than ever the stabilizing influence of the
home. But because of irregularity of occupation (such as shift working, transport work-.
ing, etc.) it is often very difficult to establish
a family routine ; while the father may work
at a distance from home and barely see his
children except at week-ends, and the

- mother, in an effort to reconcile her claims for

self-fulfilment with the claims of her family,
may also not provide the stable family
nucleus which she has provided in the past.
Moreover, now that the conception of children has become not an accident but an
active affirmation of faith, most families are
smaller, removing that valuable “ buffer ’’
between personalities which used to be
provided by the many members of a large
family. It is also perhaps the case that the
weakening of religious belief has diminished
the authority of the father, who no longer
basks in glory reflected from the Supreme

‘Father in Heaven. Finally, whereas social

87

life used to be very largely family social life
(e.g., family groups at harvest festivals, “ at
homes,” family parties, etc.), nowadays the
family in its leisure activities is fragmented,
with mother at the whist drive, father at the
88 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

club or pub, the older children at cinemas,
dance halls or youth organizations, and the
young children at play-centres—with perhaps
occasional and often rather artificial family
parties on feast days and birthdays. In the
light of all these outside attractions the home
appears comparatively unattractive and
tends to become merely a place to eat and
sleep in. The difficulty is accentuated by the
fact that whereas the small all-age school,
despite many disadvantages, had many of
the characteristics of family life, the modern
large school with its limited age-range is
quite unlike the home and is, therefore, less
able to replace it. |

Apart from these more obvious factors,
those modern “ gadgets ”’ which are so often
taken as the index of a degree of civilization
tend to weaken family life in all sorts of
subtle ways. What, for example, has been
the effect of replacing oil by electric lighting ?
There have, no doubt, been many gains—but
when one considers how the single oil lamp
provided a focus for the activities of the
whole family of an evening, whereas cheap
and convenient electricity encourages mother
to sew in one room, father to read in another
and children to do their homework in yet a
third, one wonders whether we may not have
purchased better eyesight at the cost of
family solidarity. There is, however, another
side to the picture. Many of the old household “ virtues ’’ depended on the necessity
for almost continual housework, and modern
labour-saving devices make nonsense of
them. Thus, whereas family living has in the
past been largely a by-product of house
keeping and has received only marginal °

energy, it should be possible in the future, as
more mechanical domestic aids become available, for full living to become the main
function of family life. This is the more
important in that, since our modern complex
society requires increasing standardization
and regimentation of many activities, the
family will increasingly provide the main
surviving area for the development of
individuality.

Education for family life, therefore, should
include an explanation of these family
values ; an interpretation of family relation
ships which brings out the responsibilities of
each individual and an understanding of the
social factors acting on the home; some
training in the skills of what the Americans
call ‘‘ home economics ’’; sex education in
the widest sense ; education for the fruitful
use of leisure in a way which will expose the
mammon of false commercial values ; and,
perhaps most important, education of those
emotions (loyalty, co-operativeness, love,
affection, respect and responsibility) which
will provide the voluntary ties holding the
family together when the shackles of economic necessity have been sundered.

In working out a plan for such education,
prime attention must be given to the
parents’ part, because, as Dickens wrote,
“We thought that, perhaps, it is right to
begin with the obligations of home, Sir ; and
that, perhaps, while those are overlooked and
neglected, no other duties can possibly be
substituted for them.” The family has
handed over much responsibility to other
social agencies, but, in the moulding of the
child’s character, it has as great a part to
play as ever. The general home atmosphere
and routine will, from the earliest years,
largely determine the child’s attitude to
family life, and this general influence can
be reinforced by the conscious fostering of
co-operative family activities and projects
both in housework and in leisure.

The primary school should be able to
develop many similar activities in games,
plays, etc. ; while elementary nature study,
if it dealt, not with dreary details of leaf
form and flower structure, but with the more
interesting animals, the education of their
young and their family life, could do much
to encourage an appreciation of family
values. In the secondary schools, biology
teaching with a human and social bias could
do much to encourage an understanding of
those peculiarly human characteristics which
at once render parental care and family
solidarity valuable and render their achievement possible. Other sciences could similarly
deal with household affairs; while there is
much to be said for developing (for boys
equally with girls) a course in “ homecraft ”’
which would include not merely cookery and
EDUCATION FOR FAMILY. LIFE — 89

needlework, but also minor home decorating
and repairs and maintenance, family budgeting, child care, guidance in sex relationships
and, at an appropriate age, advice on choosing a spouse. Similarly the social studies
(such as history, geography and citizenship)
provide innumerable opportunities for developing an appreciation of family structure
and functions and of how changing economic
and social circumstances render necessary
changing duties on the part of the members
of the family. Physical education can be
used to encourage co-operativeness in various
activities and, if linked up with physiological
instruction, medical examination and care,
can provide a medium for encouraging not
merely lusty health but also those qualities
of vivacity, vigour and poise which are so
important to personal attractiveness. It
would, indeed, be very difficult to find any
subject of the curriculum which could not
play a part in this education, while many
out-of-school activities (e.g., visits to nursery
schools, clinics, etc.) would also be of value.

In further education, the County Colleges
could do much to help in education of this
type, which is equally necessary for both
sexes. There should also be marriage guidance of the widest kind, consisting not merely
of pre-marital advice on sexual technique
but of continuing help in all aspects of

married life. Much also remains to be done
in the further education of present parents
and teachers, so that they may have an
understanding of the normal development of
children and their needs, an appreciation of
the respective rdles of home and school and,
perhaps most important, an understanding
of each other. | |

If this leads to close co-operation between
home and school, parents will perhaps realize
that they do not “send their children to
school to be educated,’’ but rather that the
school exists to supplement the basic
education given in the home. Similarly,
teachers might perhaps make ‘‘ homework ”’
veal homework, consisting of tasks which can
be done at home, but cannot well be done at
school ; while, instead of there being an explicit instruction or a tacit understanding
that parents should not help their children
with homework, tasks might be set which
actually require the help of parents, and
parents encouraged to give as much time as
they can to aiding their children.

Clearly, co-operation should be much wider
than merely between home and school.
Youth leaders, social workers, medical practitioners, health visitors and nurses all have
a part to play, and only when they all play
it will education for family life be of the
highest quality.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXVIII, No. 2
