SOCIAL SELECTION OF
EMIGRATION.

Taken from the Discussion at the Paris Conference on the fore-going
article.

Emigration problems may be studied from many different angles.
Every student of race and population, indeed of every problem
presented by heredity and natural selection in its effect on human life,
has now turned his attention to the United States. And the civilised
world has cause to be grateful for the very promising beginning which
has been made there within the last five years of the study of immigrants. In the main, so far, attention has been concentrated on the
immigrant in his new surroundings, and naturally, in a first survey,
the racial factors mainly have been analysed.

It is not however, sufficient to leave the analysis of types at this
point. The immigrant must not solely be studied as immigrant; his
history in the homeland is vital to a true solution of the problems of
what he is and what he becomes within the new community.

It is, of course, true that the Immigration Committee in Washington
is fully alive to this ; and the suggestion was made not long ago that a
family history must be subjoined to the personal examination of the
individual presenting himself for citizenship to the United States, a
proposal as far-reaching in its implications as it would be far-reaching
in its results.

We find that many European social students of the recent American
Statistics level serious criticisms at the validity of the enormous and
valuable series of psychological tests of Army recruits, of which a
resumé was published in this REviEw, by one of the men mainly
responsible for initiating and carrying out that great work. It is not
surprising that those who have strong sympathies with Mediterranean
culture in Europe, should feel that any mental assessment which classes
these races very low, cannot claim validity. If, however, European
emigration is studied from the social and historical point of view, it
‘may transpire that the tests themselves are reliable enough, while the
first crude European interpretations require revision, there is ample
explanation of the tests if other than mere racial analysis is made,
taken as true in standard, without stultifying the claims which the
Latin races rightly and naturally make, to hold a high place in this
civilization, as in former eras.

These much criticised tests, which are tabulated at the end of
the preceding paper by Dr. André Siegfried, will show after careful
study that the first criticism usually lodged against them has but little
foundation, This is that the linguistic element entered so largely
into their administration as to destroy their value as a test of intel‘lectual ability.
224 EUGENICS REVIEW.

While English and Scotch come first, the Dutch, who would not
necessarily know English better than any other immigrant, stood only
2.3 per cent. below the Scotch, while the Scotch to whom English is
the native tongue, stood 4.7 per cent. below the English sample.

No inhabitant of Great Britain would be prepared to maintain
that the Scotch as a race are less intelligent than the Anglo-Saxon
half of the United Kingdom. It is obvious here that we have to seek
for some other explanation as to why the Scotch sample in the United
States stood lower than the English. To go a step further, the Canadians,
who at least to a considerable extent are English speaking, come below
the Dutch by 0.2 per cent, and further, the difference between the
Swedes and Germans is a difference of 4.0 per cent. Here for both
the chance being cqual that they speak a foreign language they yet
show a wider difference than that between the Dutch and the Scotch.

_ Dr. Laughlin and others who have laid great stress on the value
of these tests as a criterion of the type of immigrant arriving from the
home countries, stand after all, on a fairly secure and logical basis..

The difference can not be wholly racial, indeed, there is considerable evidence to show that it is to a large extent social. The Army
appears to have been justified in assuming that these differences in the
samples tested indicate a wide divergence in mental calibre between
the immigrants attracted to the United States from these European
sources, that is between the actual samples with which they were
dealing. |
We may well inquire into selection as exercised by social conditions in the home country on emigrants. A careful study remains
to be undertaken on this point, but there are many indications to show
that not only would such a study well repay investigators in a rich
harvest of data of social importance, but that those facts which can
even now be readily ascertained go a long way to explain the phenomena
disclosed by the American Army tests.

If we compare the standard of living in the countries contributing
immigrants to the United States, we find that nowhere in the world
do the very poor and the grade below them, namely, the inefficient and
those dependent on State Aid, find life so easy as in England. There
is absolutely no incentive for an unemployable person to leave the
British Islands. For a considerable period the workman who tends to
leave England has been the skilled artizan or the skilled agricultural
worker ; it is he who is so near the upper levels of his group that he feels the
stress of keen competition in his progress to the top of the ladder who goes
abroad. In England wages are comparatively high, in fact the only
places in the world where they are higher, are in the industrial centres
of the Dominions and in the United States. Therefore the English
emigrant is mainly the intelligent and ambitious person who desires
to rise and who realises that his skill commands a higher wage in the
States than at home. This is the type ever ready to work harder for
higher reward. :

It is possible without extensive research to give a history of the
social factors which have caused the successive waves of British emigration. First comes the adventurer group whose love of travel was
doubtless enhanced by the expected riches which the new side of the
SOCIAL SELECTION OF EMIGRATION. . 225

world was reputed to hold. They were a mixture at once of pioneers
and pirates of the more respectable sort. These were followed by
determined and keen politicians or sectarians, Royalist and Roundhead
in turn, with Puritans and keen Churchmen, who fled persecution at
home, and welcomed the freedom of a pioneer’s life as an alternative to
giving up their principles and their beliefs. This epoch brought those
strikingly contrasted groups which were really the backbone of the
American Colonies. Almost contemporary with their exodus from
Europe, came a very considerable immigration from Holland, comprising people of much the same social status—gentlemen and landowners in the main—but however well they contributed to the commercial wealth and the merchant enterprise of the new States, have
not made such a distinctive impress of their nationality on the emerging
community. Partly overlapping with this wave and continuing after
it had somewhat ceased, arrived the contribution from Great Britain
of a distinctly inferior type. The advent of these poor and down
trodden Englishmen (described in Estabrook’s interesting résumé,
recently given to the American Eugenics Association)marks the only
English contribution representative of the lower social strata. The
extent of the influx of conscripts and prison population is not at the
moment ascertainable, and it would be of absorbing interest to investigate this phase of the colonisation of the States.

Recently, in the period within the memory of present writers and
in the period just preceding it, the social selection above referred to
became operative ; for the poor and the degraded there was absolutely
no stimulus to emigration after the boom in industry set in. Before
the considerable exodus of the skilled worker there was however, a long
period during which the least promising members of some of the best
English families were attracted to the States : generally driven from home
by the very serious competition for place and power occurring amongst
the upper classes. And furthermore, in those families where tradition
of adventure was strong came the additional lure of new experiences
and new conquests, in a world where the prospect of fighting was being
much reduced; the extent of this influx has probably not yet been
properly surveyed. It is not unlikely that a number of the somewhat
primitive qualities supposed to characterise American civilisation
excluding the Eastern States, may be due to the dominance of this
type.

P More recently, the Dominions have probably drawn this type of
emigrant, so that for at least two generations the English contribution
to the United States has been mainly as stated, that of the very best
individuals of the lower middle classes.

In the other Nordic countries contributing to the States, there are
constant complaints in the homeland that the best tend to be attracted
away. Nevertheless, in Sweden, Holland, Denmark, conditions of
life for the very poor are not so comfortable but what all but the most
abject may well be driven from time to time to seek an easier life in
new surroundings.

The French contribution to the United States is interesting. It
has been much less studied than that of many other countries. Some
of the ablest blood in France went five generations ago to the Southern
226 EUGENICS REVIEW.

States. This wholesale purging of France of its top-most group has
left for a considerable period ample scope for the ambitious amongst
the middle class to satisfy their aspirations at home, or in the French
Colonies. So that from France, any recent contribution would be
chiefly amongst the poor, while of course, of recent years, France has
absorbed large numbers of immigrants and has sent none away.

In Eastern Europe and in the Mediterranean States the standard of
life for the very poor is exceedingly low: work is very hard, and those
who have reason to be discontented with their lot in life find every
inducement to leave their Fatherland, so that from Italy, Greece,
Russia, Poland, the United States has been drawing from the very
lowest social strata, while from England and Scotland it is only over
one very brief period that any of this group went out there.

The extent to which the Nordic races have best adapted themselves
to American civilisation may, for the moment, be regarded as a
question apart. But in the matter of the results of the intelligence
tests of Army recruits the foregoing rough analysis shows that they
correspond exactly to what might be expected as the outcome of the
selection caused by European social conditions. In fact the scores
represent the resultant of two intelligence distribution ranges, racial,
and social, and of these two it may well be that the social distribution
accounts most for the totals.

Any study of emigration must always take account of the two
sides, the selection by attraction of the conditions and opportunity of
the new home, and the selection exerted by social conditions in the
country which the emigrants leave.
