EUGENICS AND SOCIALISM

By S. HERBERT,
M.D. (Vienna), M.R.C.S. (Eng.), L.R.C.P. (Lond.)

PROPOUNDERS of new theories are ever apt to over-emphasise
what is new in their systems; and still more is this the case with
their ardent disciples, who often outrun their masters’ discretion
in the application of the principles enunciated.

We can observe this tendency in the adherents of both the
above schools. Eugenists and Socialists, strange to say, are
opposing each other, each party insisting on one of the fundamental factors of race-improvement, each advocating its own
scheme to the exclusion of the other.

Whilst Marx, the founder of modern Socialism, declared
that ‘“‘ the method of material production conditions the social,
political and. intellectual process of life,” thus making the
economic factor the basal foundation of society, his followers
have thoughtlessly extended the meaning of this axiom by asserting that it is the ‘“‘ environmental ”’ factor which 1s all-important,
determining, as it does, man, his morals, character, and even his
progeny. They have become Lamarckians, believers in the inheritance of acquired characters, on the ground of their political
convictions. According to their idea it is only necessary to alter
our present economic structure in order to effect a radical change
in the physical, mental and moral condition of the people.

Such off-hand reasoning, ignoring as it does the whole order
of biological facts, can of course easily be reduced ad absurdum.
For it can be shown without much difficulty, as Dr. W. Schallmayer has done, that the Socialists, by insisting on the environmental factor as the only element in matters of race-improvement, land themselves in a cul-de-sac. For if the effects of good
surroundings are ¢o ipso accumulated by inheritance in successive
generations, the same must hold good for bad environments,
which thus would lead to unavoidable racial degeneracy. Indeed
EUGENICS AND SOCIALISM Ii7

mankind should long since have been wiped out of existence,
considering the unhygienic conditions it has had to live under
forages. Or to say the least, the labouring classes, being most
exposed to unwholesome influences, should, if such ill-effects.
are with ever greater strength inherited, be a mass of degenerates:
a conclusion our Socialist would be the very first to demur to.
It must be evident to any unbiassed student of the problem that
the Socialist with his economic re-organisation of society (however necessary and valuable this may be in itself) does not go
to the root of the race-question, because in the light of the latest
science it has become evident that inheritable racial degeneration
has to be distinguished from individual deterioration, which is.
not transmissible.

To have brought into prominence this vital distinction and
to have formulated a scheme in accordance with this now largely
accepted view of the non-inheritance of acquired characters, is
the merit of the Eugenic school. To see that the fittest selected
in the struggle for existence be the socially fit, this is the ideal of
the Eugenist, who, basing his procedure on Rational Selection,
looks upon the proper mating of the good stock and the prevention
of the propagation of the bad as the only sound process of race-.
improvement.

For this reason we think Dr. Saleeby is overstepping the
confines of true Eugenics by making it conterminous with RaceCulture, so as to include all modes of race-improvement under
the same term. ‘‘ Eugenics”’ consists in ‘ selective breeding’’;
it can only lead to the old confusion once more to include
in it such other social schemes as may be brought forward for
the betterment of the people. To say that the only question to
decide is, whether any given proposal is eugenic—that being its.
final test—is just as one-sided and unreasonable as the claim of
the socialist partisan that there 1s no other problem than the
economic. |

Such exaggeration on both sides will certainly not solve themost difficult subject of social progress. What we have to do, is to.
consider both proposals, to examine them in their mutual relationship, so as to be able to come to a right conclusion as to their
respective merits.
118 S. Herbert:

The Socialist proposes to bring about, by the abolition of
the private ownership of the means of production, an equalisation
of the distribution of wealth, such that every man should have
equal opportunity to exercise his innate powers to the widest
extent. Freed from the incubus of poverty, everyone would
be able to develop his individuality to his own benefit and that of
society. Equal chance in the race of life for each without
distinction—that is the aim of the Socialist policy.

Whether or not the proposals, as specifically set out by the
socialist school of politics, are practicable or feasible, this is not
the place to consider. But what we do maintain and intend
showing in the following pages, is that some such change as the
establishment of economic freedom and equal opportunity for all
members of the community alike, is essential to the success of
the scheme of the Eugenists. If the eugenic ideal means the
betterment of the race by selective breeding, encouraging the
mating of desirable stocks and discouraging the propagation
of the socially unfit, then it is clear that it occupies itself only
with the hereditary factor in the making of the individual. The
environmental factor which enables the individual potentiality to
spring forth into actual being, lies not within its special scope,
but remains the proper field for the social reformer.

And here we must point out that at the very beginning of his
task the Eugenist, under our present-day conditions, is confronted with the difficulty of sifting his material, in order to be
able to separate the tares from the wheat, the socially unfit from
the fit. It will not do to assume, as nearly every writer on
Eugenics seems to imply, that those aggregated in the slums are
the dregs of the population. They may be so in an economic sense ;
nay, they may be deteriorated physically, mentally and morally
as the result of the adverse conditions of their life and labour.
But to argue that because of this they are intrinsically bad, that is
biologically speaking, of an inferior caste, implies the same false
scientific argument as the Eugenist is wont to find fault with in
his opponents. The masses can be considered to harbour degenerates in a greater proportion than the so-called higher
classes only if the effects of disuse—or rather ill-use—and other
detrimental outside influences are taken to be inheritable. If on
EUGENICS AND SOCIALISM L19

the other hand it is argued, that the best and most capable of
the lower classes mount into the higher ranks, leaving a “ residuum,”’ it may be answered that, first of all, under our capitalistic
system it does not depend on innate qualities alone, whether a
given individual rises out of his own class,—very often it is due
to a concurrence of favourable circumstances over which the individual has no control; and secondly, only a limited number of
such favoured people can win the prize in the race for success,
leaving a large number behind who, from the eugenic point of
view, are by no means to be classed as undesirables. Indeed, a
stream is constantly flowing from the socially lower to the higher
strata, tapping with the advance of social reform ever wider
and wider reservoirs: thus showing that the masses are by no
means so devoid of talents as is generally assumed.

On the other hand, because some of the ruling classes are
self-made men, it does not follow, either that these represent
the best or the most desirable types, or that their progeny (and
most of our upper classes are only descendants of such highly
gifted men) will exhibit the same talents. On the contrary, it
is a well-known fact, established by Sir Francis Galton himself,
that the offspring of exceptional men, if they come from a
mediocre stock, must regress within a few generations to the
average level of the population. Only such men as come from
exceptional stock have a chance of establishing what we may
call high-bred families. It has even been argued by Prof. Ray
Lankester, that if degeneration is actually taking place in our
population, it will rather have to be looked for in the higher,
well-fed, well-cared-for and well-nursed classes than in the poor
struggling crowds of the labouring class, where the weakest are
vigorously weeded out in the battle of life.

It becomes apparent then, that so far we have no safe
criterion by which to judge the natural capability of any given set
of individuals. Our present-day conditions are so glaringly
unequal, the accidental factors of social influences are so obvious,
that in order to arrive at a sound basis for eugenic valuation we
should first of all have to eliminate the disturbing elements of
social inequality. And this is just what Socialism stands for. It
will lead to a ‘‘ revaluation of all values” according to natural
120 S. Herbert =

abilities, which is the first essential and preliminary to any
eugenic undertaking whatsoever.

But assuming that this first difficulty is overcome—that we:
have learnt how to choose and from whom to choose—a second
great obstacle becomes at once apparent. After the material
has been sifted it is necessary for a proper fulfilment of eugenic.
marriages that the persons concerned be not only willing to subscribe to the eugenic ideal, of which more anon, but that they
possess liberty to act according to their views. Now it
must be evident to any unbiassed observer that this is far from
being the case at the present time. Ulterior material motives
enter not only largely with men into their consideration of
marriage, but by women in their present-day low social condition wedlock is looked upon—and alas, necessarily looked upon
—as the only possible provision for life. It will not suffice to offer
incense, or even the vote, to the suffering sisterhood. These will
not freethem. It is not even sufficient, as the Eugenist proposes,
to quicken the public conscience in matters of sex-relationship, by showing how the future weal or woe of our race is.
determined by the right kind of marriages. So long as woman
is dependent for her livelihood on man, sentiments, however
beautiful or beneficial, will be of no avail. For eugenic mating
one of the primary conditions is perfect freedom of choice of the.
contracting parties; and this can be attained only under such
social conditions as will assure to woman complete economic
independence. Only then will she be in a position to choose her
mate, unhampered by other worldly considerations, according: to
a given social standard. It hardly needs saying that these conditions would be fulfilled under a Socialist régime. In any case,
it is the Socialist alone among social reformers who recognises this essential fact and strives to give it political expression,
thus advocating a policy which would furnish the necessary
prerequisite towards the achievement of a successful eugenic.
system.

We have seen that we have to distinguish two factors in
the process of Race-Culture: the hereditary factor which is concerned with the change of the germinal composition of the
stock, and the other, as it may be called, the modificational factor,
EUGENICS AND SOCIALISM Tar

which influences the individual development of the social unit.
Eugenics, as we have argued already, deals only with the
hereditary element. To burden it with the second factor also,
as Dr. Saleeby would do, tends not only to obscure the scientific
distinction between the two principles involved, but would
impose upon Eugenics a task which is intrinsically alien to it.
For the improvement of the race by the betterment of social
surroundings is essentially the work of the Social Reformer.
It is for this very reason, because Eugenist and Reformer have
separate fields, that it becomes necessary to supplement the
method of the former, which is essentially a selection for parenthood, with that of the latter, which aims at the protection of
the parent and his offspring.

To bring up healthy citizens, fit physically, mentally and
morally, is the final object of the Eugenist ; but he can achieve
this end only if, after procuring the right stock, society is so
constituted as not to bring to naught his efforts by letting go to
waste the precious seed he has been so carefully selecting. As
matters now stand, the best of the people have a poor chance of
rearing large families in comfort. Sir Francis Galton showed
his recognition of the influence of the material factor by suggesting the endowment of specially gifted pairs, so as to encourage the
propagation of members with high civic qualities. All we have
to say to this is, that in a matter of such vital social importance,
individual effort is a poor substitute for the general endowment
of the people as a whole.

Here once more the Socialist steps in. He alone stands
for ‘‘ equality of opportunity,” based not on the theoretical
ground of political liberty, but on the practical ground of
economic freedom, vouchsafing to all, in return for services
rendered to the community, the proper means of living, that is,
living in the real sense, making possible the enjoyment of life,
and not mere existence. The socially fit would find free scope
for the full development of their faculties, while the unfit could
be dealt with according to eugenic methods. Endowment of
motherhood, state-help for children, and other such reforms,
foreshadowing the future trend of progress, embody this

very principle. Indeed, it is hard to see how the fruits of
3
122 S. Herbert:

eugenic proposals can ever fall ripe without substituting for the
present-day brutal struggle for existence the more civilised and
moral process of ‘‘ mutual aid’’ coupled with ‘rational
selection.”

This brings us round to another aspect of the mutual interdependence of Eugenics and Socialism. The socialist position,
as we have seen, provides not only a vantage-ground for the endeavours of the Eugenist, but it can be shown to form a real
adjunct to the eugenic ideal. The Eugenist, aiming at the
propagation of certain types of individuals, would try to imitate
the breeder’s art by carefully selecting his stock. But in addition
to this artificial selection, which after all is very cumbersome and
limited in its action, we have the possibility of another method,
which is more in accordance with the process of selection, as we
see it in nature. Here we have the environment acting, as it
were, like a sieve, separating the fit from the unfit and selecting
those who are best adapted to their surroundings. Every
change of environment necessarily alters the incidence of
selection, the type of the survivors in each instance being
determined by the survival-value. It depends on this survivalvalue what sort of organisms are to be predominant at any given
time. Now man, distinguished from the lower brute creation
by his self-consciousness and foresight, is able, if not to alter the
law of natural selection, yet so to direct its action as to make it
subservient to his own social needs. He can so conduct his
affairs—indeed has done this to a large degree—as to eliminate
more and more the worst features of the battle of life, lifting the
struggle for existence on to the higher, more moral and intellectual plane of, what may be called the “struggle for
excellence.” The whole trend of civilisation has been in this
direction, and the Socialist is only following up this line of
progress to its logical conclusion. Indeed, the grand ideal of the
Eugenist himself is to create a moral atmosphere, new ethical
conditions, such as would prevent the undesirables from finding
mates and leaving progeny. In this task Socialism is its most
natural and powerful ally. For Socialism, by changing the
economic conditions of life, would abolish the present-day
capitalistic valuation, which measures success in terms of money,
EUGENICS AND SOCIALISM I23

crushing out the studious and the moral man, who does not know
how ‘‘to get on.”” It would, by removing the material handicap
of the masses and by giving equal opportunities to all, create
such social conditions as would lead to the automatic and natural
survival of the types most desired.

For, it must be noted as our last point, that Socialism
would not only change the incidence of the survival-value, but
would also change it in the right direction. One of the fundamental postulates of Eugenics is the identity of the individual
with the race. It asks us to consider our actions in relation to
the community asa whole. Restriction in marriage and similar
proposals can be justified only on the plea of the welfare of
future generations. In short, eugenic teachings are, so far as
they go, essentially communistic in spirit. It is the common
interest of each social unit with the whole, which the Eugenist
wishes to evoke as the central motive power in society. And it
is just here, in the most vital part of its programme, that the
eugenic ideal shows complete identity with that of the Socialist.
Socialist morality is essentially “‘social’’ morality, based on the
community of interest of all citizens. Not only has it put on its
banner the motto: ‘‘ Each for all and all for each,’ but it tries
to place the ethical standard on a sound practical foundation by
establishing economic freedom and equality for all members of
the community alike.

For—and this is our final plea—to preach a high ideal without at the time establishing the means of attaining it, is futile
effort. Whatever Eugenics may achieve in the future, it can
achieve only with the help of Socialism or some such proposal.
