THE

EUGENICS REVIEW

QUALITY NOT QUANTITY.
Major LEONARD Darwin, Sc.D.

I.—Both a general increase of the population and a general
decrease in the birth-rate have been advocated because of the
war. An increase in the rate of multiplication of the poor
and a decrease in that rate amongst the rich would both,
however, be harmful in their economic results.

Demands with decidedly conflicting aims concerning the
needs of the nation have recently been put forward in consequence of the war. A general increase in the population has
been advocated, both on account of our future military needs
and in order to fill up the gaps made by the war in the ranks of
industry; whilst, on the other hand, the poverty expected to
result from the war has been adduced as an additional argument in favour of the promotion of a general decrease in the
birth-rate. Obviously these demands ought to be considered
with reference to both their probable economic and eugenic
effects ; for, since reforms should be judged by a balancing of
their good and evil consequences, no eugenist must neglect to
consider the immediate social effects of his proposals, and no
economist must neglect to weigh ultimate racial effects in the
balance. To clear the ground for a brief discussion of the many
topics thus presented for consideration, it may be as well to
begin with a few general observations on the effects of an
increase and of a decrease in the population—observations which
must be dogmatic in form for the sake of brevity.

The works of Malthus unquestionably form “‘ the starting
point of all modern speculations on ’’ these questions concerning population; and, although some of his arguments are
‘* antiquated in form,’’ yet there is good authority for regarding
298 EUGENICS REVIEW.

them as being “still in a measure valid in substance.’’? His
view was that all nations are naturally prolific to such a degree
that a rapid growth in numbers must inevitably take place unless
it is checked by scarcity of food, disease, or voluntary restraint.
Under certain economic conditions the population might, it is
true, increase quickly -without any apparent evil effects; and he
held, in fact, that ‘‘ everything depends on the relative proportion between population and food and not on the absolute
number of the people.’’?

The fact which probably first strikes the imagination in
connection with the Malthusian propaganda is that the smaller
the family the less must be the economic strain on the household, at all events whilst the children are quite young. But on
this consideration alone a logical argument in favour of actually
endeavouring to diminish the birth-rate can hardly be based;
because if such a plea were once admitted to be valid, it would
remain valid until the whole human race was swept off the face
of the earth. We are morally bound to make sacrifices and to
bear burdens up to a certain point for the sake of future generations, and we are not justified in injuring posterity merely
because we should thus lighten our own burdens. It is doubtful, moreover, if the economic strain resulting from the mere
preservation of life in families large enough to produce a rapid
increase in the population is necessarily very onerous; for, if it
always were so, such an increase in the population as that which
took place in Ireland, for example, namely an increase of over
six hundred per cent. in two and a quarter centuries, would
never have taken place.* At all events, in an advanced civilised
community, it is the moral and intellectual rather than the
physical starvation of the children which generally has to be
held in view, and it is the weltare of the family as a whole
which ought to be promoted.

The existing density of the population appears to be the
result of the balancing of two main opposing forces. On the
one hand there is the natural desire for marriage and home life,

* Marshall’s ‘‘ Principles of Economics,” Third Edit., Book IV., Chap. IV., Sec. 2 & 3.
* Essay, Book IV., Chap. XIV.
* Malthus, Essay, Book II., Chap. X.
QUALITY not QUANTITY. 299

leading to early marriages and large families; whilst on the
other hand there is the fear that the cost of maintaining a family
will render the maintenance of the existing standard of living
an impossibility—a fear which tends to make marriages take
place later in life, and which leads to limitations in the size of
families. When society is in a stationary condition, these two
forces balance each other in all its grades, but in such a manner
as to produce, in conjunction with other factors, different
standards of living in the different grades. Now a demand for
an increase or a decrease in the population is a demand for the
introduction of some factor which will tend to upset this
equilibrium, and thus to cause a change of density one way or
the other; and, in judging whether any such reform would be
beneficial or harmful, we have to endeavour to estimate not
only the direct effects resulting from the change in the density of
the population, but also all the indirect effects due to the methods
by which it is proposed that the desired result shall be attained.
It is the difference between that state of society in the future
which would have been experienced if no such reform had been
advocated, and that condition of things which would result from
its successful accomplishment which we must attempt to
estimate.

The supply of goods and services necessitates the employment of both capital and labour, whilst the demands now under
consideration are for an increase or a decrease in labour only.
If the supply of labour were to increase, whilst the amount of
capital available remained stationary, the inevitable result would
be that each labourer would get a smaller share of the spoils.
-Capitaf must increase concurrently with labour if this unfortunate result is to be avoided; and as an increase of capital can
only be produced by further saving on the part of the people,
what we have to consider is whether any reform tending to
produce a relative increase or decrease in the population will
itself cause an increase or a decrease in savings. Considering
the effects of an increase in the population in the first
place, in the poorest ranks a fall in wages will be the
primary consequence of the increase in competition necessarily
resulting from such an increase in the population; this fall
300 EUGENICS REVIEW.

will almost inevitably decrease the savings of the wage earners;
this decrease in savings will, in its turn, tend to increase rather
than to retard the fall in wages; and though the greater profits
amongst the capitalist class, resulting from this fall in wages,
will increase their power to save, the harmful effects on the poor
are very unlikely to be thus completely obliterated. It is, however, the wish to save quite as much as the power to save that
must be held in view; and, if this be remembered, it will be seen
that these harmful economic results, which would arise amongst
the poor from an increase in their rate of multiplication,
cannot be predicted with any certainty in the case of well-to-do
citizens. An earlier marriage will often lead a man to spend less
on luxuries in order to save for the future welfare of his children ;
and consequently any factor which tends to increase the rate of
mutiplication of the rich is not unlikely to lead to a material
increase of capital, an increase which might well be more than
sufficient to prevent the increase in their numbers from causing
any lowering of the average incomes of any other part of the
community. It must also be remembered that human beings,
as well as inanimate objects, differ in regard to their capital
values; that the savings of the self-respecting bulk of the community are largely invested in the better education of their
children; and that a relative increase in the numbers of the
citizens who are even moderately well educated might constitute a material increase in the average value of the capital
available per head of the population. Thus any reform, in so
far as it merely tends to produce an increase in the numbers of
the very poorest strata of society, is likely to produce harmful
economic results; whilst, in so far as it tends to increase the
rate of multiplication of the well-to-do strata, it may well be
positively beneficial. Moreover, as it can be shown that the
economic results of a decrease in the population are the reverse
of those resulting from an increase in numbers, we may conclude that ‘population should grow at the top, not at the
bottom,’’! and should decrease at the bottom, not at the top,
if the aim be to improve the immediate economic condition of
the people.

1“Introduction to Economics,” Seager, p. 292.
QUALITY not QUANTITY. 301

Though the works of Malthus constituted a great step in
advance at the time, yet it is no doubt true that economic
science has progressed greatly since his days, notably in regard
to the laws of increasing and diminishing returns. Food does
not make itself; and an additional application of labour and
capital may yield returns in the production of food and goods,
sometimes proportionately more and sometimes proportionately
less than those generally previously obtainable, the differences in
these results being due to differences in the prevailing economic
conditions. If the returns obtainable as the result of each
additional dose of these factors of production, as they are called,
is becoming less and less, then every addition to the population
becomes more and more likely to be harmful, as requiring
greater and greater additions to the available capital in order to
maintain the average output of goods per head. But this law of
diminishing returns has not been in operation in England in
recent years, and the proportional increase in the output of
goods, resulting from the employment of each additional amount
of capital and labour, has enabled the standard of living to be
generally raised in spite of the great increase in the population. Whether the standard would have risen still higher, had
the population remained stationary, is another matter. But we
can, at all events, be certain that when this law of increasing
returns is in operation, as it probably is with us at present, an
increase of the population at the bottom of the economic scale
is less economically harmful than it would otherwise be, whilst
an increase at the top becomes more likely to be economically
beneficial. It is impossible, in fact, to form any just estimate
concerning the probability of an increase in the numbers of a
nation being positively beneficial or harmful, without studying
both the prevailing economic conditions and the probability of
the increase being more likely to take place amongst the poorer
or amongst the richer classes. And this conclusion, derived
from purely economic considerations, we shall find to be strongly
reinforced if we pass on to study the eugenic aspects of the
questions involved.
302 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Il.—The well-to-do classes are on an average somewhat innately
superior to those quite at the bottom of the economic scale;
and from this it follows that reforms intended merely either
to increase or to decrease the population are likely to have
harmful eugenic effects.

Malthus seems to have been on the verge of grasping the
eugenic problem when he declared that it does not ‘‘ by any
means seem impossible that by attention to breed a certain
degree of improvement, similar to that among animals, might
take place among men,’’? and we cannot even now deny, as
emphatically as we should like, his conclusion that ‘‘ it is not
probable that attention to breed should ever become general ”’
amongst human beings. He was naturally much influenced by
the environmentalism of his contemporaries, which seems to
have led him to believe not only that a diminution in the
struggle for food would lead to a general improvement in human
surroundinys, but that, man’s nature being the product of his
surroundings, the progress which might thus be made would be
almost without fixed limitations. It was not then known that
selection has been the most potent cause of racial progress in
the past, and Galton had not then made it clear that men are
not born equal as regards their innate qualities. It is, therefore,
not in the least surprising that he focussed his attention almost
entirely on the external surroundings of man and hardly gave
a thought to the great and unchangeable innate differences
between different individuals.

In some matters the advance in thought in recent years has
been less than might have been expected; for the arguments
which the eugenist has to face frequently show that the
evolutionary doctrine is even yet widely misunderstood. No
sane person denies that the differences of environment to
which the young are exposed result in great differences
amongst adult human beings; and from this it follows that
differences in the successes achieved in life, which may
be due to differences in early surroundings, do not afford
any sure indication of differences in innate qualities. But
this is by no means equivalent to declaring, as is often

1 Malthus, Essay Book III., Chap. 1.
QUALITY not QUANTITY. 303

mistakenly supposed, that selection based on success in life
would be futile as a method of ensuring racial progress.
With animals and plants in a state of nature, the chance of
survival depends very largely on differences of environment ;
for example, out of the thousands of seeds which fall to the
ground to perish, the single seed which lights on a suitable
vacant spot, and which, therefore, survives to form another tree,
seems to have been selected from the rest by blind chance. But
it is, in truth, not a purely haphazard process, dependent on
pure luck in the matter of environment, by which each new
generation of trees is brought into being; for the seeds which
live to carry on the race are, on an average, slightly superior in
natural qualities to the innumerable seeds which fail to give rise
to a full-grown tree. Nature has, however, found this trifling
average superiority sufficient for her purposes, and it has been
by, as it were, persistently ignoring the fact that environment
counts for so much, and by persistently continuing to select by
the mere test of survival, that such wonders have been worked
in the past. Those of us who accept the doctrine of evolution
by selection hold that man has thus been evolved out of a mass
of inert living jelly, and this is a belief which cannot but affect
the policy we advocate. If in human affairs we took no thought
of the influence of good or bad luck in the matter of surroundings; if we estimated the merit of the individual solely by his
success in life, and also assumed that the innate qualities leading
to such success were heritable; if all we required to know about
any section of the community was whether in average merit,
not in individual merit, its members were above the average of
the whole community (as in the case of the surviving seeds);
and if, finally, we were to promote the fertility (in the widest
sense of the word) of any class in accordance with the judgments thus formed—if we did all this we should at all events
know that we were following the lead given to us by nature.
The doubts which we should feel as to how far we were right
in following this lead would arise largely from the fact that
all the qualities leading to success are not good, and certainly
not from any doubts as to whether these qualities would really
thus be promoted. In any case, let us at all events note the
304 EUGENICS REVIEW.

warning obtained from this great instructress not to let the
certainty of making innumerable mistakes stand in the way of
all progress.

Though it is clear that we must rely on our ethical
standards in judging what are the human qualities which we
wish to promote, unquestionably there will always be considerable practical difficulties in separating the desirable
from the undesirable types, a difficulty which would often
remain quite insurmountable if we were never permitted to
judge a class according to its average merits. Now we have
seen from the point of view of economics that any increase in the
population had better take place at the top of the economic
scale, or amongst the well-to-do classes; and it becomes, therefore, a matter of practical importance to ascertain what would
be the eugenic consequences of following this economic rule.
No one denies that large numbers of persons endowed with bad
qualities of all kinds are found amongst the rich, and that
amongst the poor are many noble characters. But what we
want to know is whether the poorest strata are, on an average,
in any degree less well endowed by nature than are the rest of
the community; for, if they are, the eugenist must hold that for
the future of the race it would be best that any increase in
numbers should take place by preference amongst the well-to-do.

We have seen that the density of the population is determined
by the balancing of two opposing forces, namely, the desire for
a normal home life and the desire to maintain a certain standard
of living. But why are such different positions of equilibrium—
such different standards of living—thus established in the
different grades of society? The obvious reason, which may,
perhaps, be called the environmental explanation, is as follows.
Differences in wealth arose in past days when might was more
nearly right, and these differences, which have been maintained
by our system of inheritance of private property, have not been
obliterated by the attempts since made to equalise the distribution of wealth. Moreover differences of wealth are always
arising in a fortuitous manner; as, for instance, when anyone
strikes oil literally or metaphorically, or when the father of
young children is killed accidentally. Since differences in
QUALITY not QUANTITY. 305

income are certain thus to have arisen and then to have
been maintained for long periods of time, and since each
grade of income will in time give rise to a_ certain
standard of living, we thus obtain a very simple explanation of the differences of the modes of life in the different
ranks of society, an explanation which is unquestionably in
large measure correct. But simplicity is not a test of truth, and
it is now recognised that another explanation, the hereditary
explanation, must also be taken into consideration. Men of
exceptional strength and ability are constantly being selected
out of the poorer ranks and transferred to the richer strata of
society, whilst wastrels and other failures amongst the rich keep
falling down into the lower economic ranks; and as all our
qualities, mental and physical, are the result of our environments
acting on our inborn natures, it follows that inborn qualities
must count for something in this sifting process, and that the
richer ranks on this account contain a higher proportion of
persons of inherently superior types than do the poorest strata.
Now every eugenist, at all events, believes that all those qualities
which lead to success or failure in life are, in some measure,
passed on to succeeding generations through the agency of
natural inheritance; and from this it follows that the natural
qualities of sons, and consequently the incomes earned by them,
will be in some degree correlated to the natural qualities and the
incomes of their fathers, and that the differences in the standards
of living will, therefore, have some tendency to be maintained
generation after generation, without any reference to the
inheritance of private property. In fact, though fortuitous
differences of environment are an undoubted cause of enduring
differences in standards of living, yet it is a priort in the highest
degree probable that these differences are also in part due to
differences in inborn qualities.

In comparing the above-mentioned methods of accounting
for the existing differences in the standards of living, it must be
freely admitted that it is extraordinarily difficult to estimate how
much weight should be attached to the hereditary as compared
with the environmental explanation. Fortuitous differences in
surroundings in the past not only seem to afford the more
306 EUGENICS REVIEW.

obvious explanation, but the effects of bad surroundings also
appear to completely account for such facts as that birth
and infantile mortality rates are always high in very poor
districts. But this throws but little light on the subject;
for, as we shall see, these facts also tally with the
hereditary explanation. The qualities which are most
likely to make a man fall in the economic scale are physical
defects and mental inferiority, especially in regard to the power
of taking thought for the morrow; and, to whatever extent these
qualities are heritable, to that extent those belonging to the
poorest strata may be expected to be deficient in these respects.
But a want of forethought will lead to early marriages and a
high birth-rate, whilst both physical defects and innate carelessness or stupidity will result in a high infantile death-rate; and
here, therefore, we find a rival explanation of the correlation
which undoubtedly exists between poverty and high birth and
infantile mortality rates. We may agree that the environment
of bad houses will tend to encourage a low standard of living;
but this does not enable us to deny that the naturally inferior
types will tend to drift into bad houses, and that this will raise
their death-rates. It is true that those who believe in the efficacy
of selection must hold that, even if infantile mortality is largely
fortuitous, it will in a measure tend to eliminate the unfit; and
as the death-rate is highest amongst the poorest strata, it follows
that their inferiority in inborn qualities, which we have seen is
certain to arise, will thus be lessened. It is, indeed, conceivable
that fortuitous environmental circumstances might so raise the
selective death-rate amongst the poor as to make them innately
superior to the rich; but this possibility may, I think, be
neglected as regards the very poorest ranks, because the
incidence of death amongst them is far more fortuitous than
is the selection by which individuals are transferred to or
from this particular rank of society. In any case, whilst
every encouragement should be given to those striving
to reduce infantile mortality amongst the poor, it ought
to be admitted that any success in their endeavours
must result in some degree in the preservation of the unfit, and
consequently in an increase in the correlation between poverty
QUALITY not QUANTITY. 307

and innate inferiority. This correlation will, moreover, also be
increased whenever any prop preventing the unfit rich from falling is removed, and by every success in the many efforts now
being made to give the more fit amongst the poor an increased
chance of rising in the social scale. But if, as we thus see,
the correlation between poverty and innate inferiority is being
increased by many social reforms, this should show itself in an
increase in the correlation between poverty and the birth and
infantile mortality rates, an increase which is in fact undoubtedly
taking place. Thus not only have we seen that it is a priori
highly probable that the poorest classes are in some degree
innately inferior to the well-to-do, but now we find that the
hereditary explanation of the differences in the standards of
living tallies with many other important circumstances. That
the middle and artizan classes should be endowed with a high
level of ability is certainly what might be expected as the result
of these various causes of differences in innate qualities in the .
different sections of the community; and all who believe in
selection as a main agent in evolution, and all who have learnt
from Galton how greatly men differ from each other in inborn
qualities, will accept it as a fact and not as a mere doubtful
hypothesis, that average excessive poverty must be accepted
in this country in some degree as a test of the average unfitness
of a class, and, moreover, that destitution is likely to become
a more and more reliable criterion of innate inferiority as time
goes on.

Those who accept the foregoing conclusion as to the growing association between excessive poverty and average innate
inferiority must hold that in future any relative increase in the
rate of multiplication of the class in question must be dysgenic,
whilst the opposite would be true of a richer class; it being,
however, freely admitted that great uncertainty exists as to
where the boundary between these two classes should be drawn.
We have, in fact, arrived on eugenic grounds at the same conclusion as that previously reached when the matter was studied
from the point of view of economics, namely, that the population should grow at the top and not at the bottom. And the
validity of this rule is certainly seen to be strengthened if we
308 EUGENICS REVIEW.

take eugenic and economic considerations conjointly into
account; for any relative increase in the numbers of the unfit,
which would result from a growth at the bottom, would throw a
financial burden on the community asa whole, possibly of a very
serious nature. Moreover, if a relative increase in numbers at
any part of the economic scale would be harmful, whilst a relative
decrease at another part would produce a like result, it follows
as an inevitable consequence that a successful propaganda for
either a general increase or a general decrease in numbers must
be accompanied by harmful results in one direction or another.
A general increase in the population is to be condemned as
entailing an increase amongst the poorest class, which would in
itself have harmful economic and eugenic results. A general
decrease in numbers would not only now be generally admitted
to be undesirable on military and industrial grounds, but it
would entail a decrease amongst the well-to-do, in itself an
economically and eugenically undesirable result. A demand for
an increase and a demand for a decrease in the rate of reproduction of the people, if unaccompanied by qualifications or conditions, are both, therefore, to be condemned. |

IiI.—To make the poor own more wealth will be beneficial;
whilst State and charitable aid to the poor as a class will
often be harmful as regards racial qualities. Soctal reform
will do little or nothing to render the submerged tenth
less prolific. |

Thus far the conclusions at which we have arrived have
been mainly negative; that is to say, we have found that we
should not attempt. either to increase or to decrease the population as a whole. But from this negative result positive conclusions are readily obtainable. Human welfare may be
estimated in two distinct ways, the difference between the
methods being dependent on whether we look to the individual
or tothe group. We may attempt to measure the actual welfare
of each individual—or the amount of his welfare above a neutral
datum line—and thus endeavour to ascertain the average welfare
of all the individuals in the group in question; or we may
measure individual welfares as before, and by adding them all
QUALITY not QUANTITY. 309

together, thus obtain an estimate of the total welfare of the
group. Now if a fairy by a stroke of her wand could halve the
population of the world, whilst at the same time nearly, but not
quite, doubling the average contentment of the people, thus
somewhat diminishing the total welfare; and if this change
could be brought about without any suffering thus being caused,
would anyone have the slightest hesitation in praying the fairy
to proceed with her task at once? In fact, what we naturally
aim at is an increase in average welfare without troubling ourselves concerning total welfare, and this intuitional aim
indicates, it seems to me, the right ethical concept. But the
welfare of an individual depends entirely on his ‘‘ qualities ”’;
that is if we give a wide enough meaning to that word, so as to
make it include actual contentment or happiness. And as each
of our qualities is the resultant of the action of our surroundings
on our inborn natures, it follows that our object should be to
improve both the average environment and the average inborn
qualities of mankind. The social reformer and the eugenist are
both endeavouring to promote human welfare; and, whilst
neither should study numbers merely, the one should strive
for immediate benefits resulting from improved surroundings,
and the other should aim at that ultimate advancement which
would unquestionably result from improved inborn qualities.
Then as to the economist, whose object is the increase of
wealth, and who studies that great stream of goods which is
perpetually being produced and consumed—the national
dividend, as it is called—he also must aim at average welfare,
and he, therefore, should consider, not the size of this stream as
a whole, but rather the average of the sizes of the portions
of it allotted to all human beings. And as the average of the
sizes of these portions must depend on the average qualities of
the workers producing the goods, and thus ultimately on their
average surroundings and inborn qualities, the economist
must join the social reformer and the eugenist in their joint
efforts to improve both the average nature and average
nurture of mankind. It is true that at the present moment
demands for an increase in mere numbers, in order to fill up
the gaps made by the war, are ringing in our ears. But in so
310 EUGENICS REVIEW.

far as their object is either to enable wrongs to be righted, or to
enable our commerce to flourish, and thus in either way to
promote average human contentment, these demands do not
run counter to the conclusions just arrived at. These military
questions, no doubt, raise difficult ethical problems, which will
not now be discussed ; and the subject is here touched on merely
to show that the ethical foundations of the demand for quality
rather than quantity remain unshaken, and no doubt need be
felt as to the conclusion that the main aim of all reformers
should be to improve average environment and average inborn
qualities.

As our object as eugenists is to improve the inborn qualities
of future generations, and as we have seen that the poorest strata
of society are somewhat below the average of the nation in
innate qualities, it follows that we shall in some measure attain
our ends if the rate of multiplication of these sections of the
community is reduced. How is this to be done? Recent
investigations have proved that both a high birth-rate and a
high death-rate are associated with poverty, and it seems,
moreover, to be gradually true that, as we pass from the poorer
to the richer districts, the fall in the birth-rate is greater than
that in the ceath-rate, and, consequently, that the rate of
multiplication is found to be lower. But are we, therefore,
justified in concluding that to make any section of the community richer would have the effect of reducing its fertility ?
Are the differences in the wealth in different districts the actual
causes of the differences in their rates of multiplication? To
judge whether this is so or not we must consider what are the
factors which affect both the birth-rate and the infantile mortality
rate. According to Professor Brentano, who has made a careful
study of this subject, the principal causes of that ‘‘ decline,” or
difference in fertility which is associated with greater wealth,
are that “‘as prosperity increases so do the pleasures which
compete with marriage, while the feeling towards children takes
on a new character of refinement,’”” by which presumably is
meant the greater interest of parents in the future welfare of
their progeny; and this seems to me to be in large measure
QUALITY not QUANTITY. 311

sound.’ As to the pleasures which compete with marriage, a
man may see, for example, that he cannot keep his pleasure
grounds intact if he becomes the father of too numerous a
family; and as the poor come to have more wealth at their
disposal, and as they in consequence acquire in a greater degree
the habit of purchasing these competing luxuries, a tendency
will thus be produced for them to become less and less prolific.
Any reform which makes the innately inferior sections of the
community either work more effectively, or obtain higher wages,
or be more saving in their habits, is, therefore, to be commended on eugenic as well as on other grounds. Then as to the
sentiments towards children, all that makes men and women
more self-respecting, including better education and home conditions, will have some tendency to make them more ready to
limit the size of their families, in order better to insure the
future prosperity of their progeny. Thus we see that all social
reforms which make any section of the community either own
more wealth, or be more self-respecting, will tend to reduce their
rate of multiplication, and that in so far as they are applied to
the poorest classes they will therefore be, in this respect, eugenic
in their action.

Many, and perhaps most, of the efforts now being made to
raise the economic position of the poor, however, take the form
of a transfer of wealth from the rich to the poor as a class, and
not to the poor individually ; and the natural and commendable
desire to raise the status of the submerged tenth is likely as
time goes on to lead to an increase rather than a decrease in
reforms of this type. In regard to the eugenic effects of this
movement, we have just seen that, in so far as it succeeds in
raising the tone of the innately inferior types relatively to the
rest of the community, it will have beneficial eugenic consequences. But we have also seen that amongst the poorest classes
there will be found a relatively large proportion of persons little
endowed by nature with certain innate qualities which make for
success in life; and, innate qualities being unalterable, it follows

that to whatever extent the differences between the birth or

1 Quoted in “Wealth and Welfare,” p. 31, by Professor Pigou, who, as far as I
know, is almost the only economist who has paid serious attention to eugenics in
connection with economics.
312 EUGENICS REVIEW.

the infantile death-rates of different sections of the community
are due to the differences in the extent to which the individuals
composing them are on an average endowed with these innate
qualities, to that extent an increase in the general level of
wealth will not tend to make the poorest classes less prolific.
The birth and infantile death-rates ought, in fact, to be
regarded as being correlated, not only to the wealth of the
district or social class, but also to the position of the group in
the social scale, a position which is not necessarily changed by
any cause affecting the community as a whole. Then, again,
as to money which is taken from one class and applied so as to
benefit another class as a whole—which is always the case to a
large extent with funds raised by taxation—it can readily be seen
that it will do but little to increase the pleasures which compete
with marriage in the class benefited. To give the poor a chance
of walking in pleasure grounds free of costs, for example, may
tend to elevate their standards of living; but nearly all municipal
expenditure will, as in this instance, produce benefits which will
be enjoyed by large families equally with small, and it will
therefore have comparatively little tendency to reduce the birthrate. Indeed, certain expenditure, such as that on the free
feeding and clothing of children, on educational facilities, etc.,
together with nearly all charity, will have some tendency to make
the classes affected more prolific; whilst all that is now being
done at the public cost, or by charity, in regard to sanitation,
better housing, infant care, etc., may materially reduce the
infantile mortality rate. In short, the methods of increasing the
economic well-being of the poor, dependent on charity and
State aid, seem likely to increase the rate of multiplication of the
classes affected.

The eugenic effects on the well-to-do themselves of a
transfer of their wealth to the poor must not be overlooked,
especially as the sums involved are enormous. If human beings
could be divided into two great classes, namely, those who could
not support unaided their own households and those who help
to support others—or rather those who produce goods of less
utility and those who produce goods of more utility than the
goods which they themselves consume—then we should find in
QUALITY not QUANTITY. 313

that class requiring external aid that there would be large
numbers of habitual criminals and paupers, of lunatics and
imbeciles, of the sick, the deaf, the dumb and the blind, of
wastrels and spendthrifts, besides masses of more or less ineffective workmen. And it is obvious that any great improvement
in the innate qualities of a naticn would enormously lessen the
strain thrown on the whole community by lessening the
numbers of all these undesirable types, many of whom would
simply starve if left to their own devices. . But the question now
under consideration is to what extent any enforced or voluntary
reduction in the selfish expenditure of the richer half of the
community, resulting from either increased taxation or charitable gifts, would, in reality, relatively increase their rate
of multiplication—an increase to be expected in so far as
wealth is really the operative factor in lessening fertility
to a greater extent than the infantile death-rate. Those
who are obliged to increase the hours of their work in
order to gain a livelihood will, it is true, have less leisure in
which to enjoy those pleasures which compete with marriage,
and in this way decreasing wealth will tend to increase the size
of families. Amongst those classes where habits of forethought
and thrift are firmly established, however, not only will
differences in income be generally unaccompanied with great
differences in fertility, but the first and transient effects of such
changes will certainly be to materially decrease the rate of
multiplication ; because the effort to maintain the former social
position will lead to a further postponement of marriage and
a further limitation in the size of families. We have, in fact,
grounds for believing that if the rate of multiplication of the
wealthier half of humanity were relatively raised, an increase
in the proportion of the innately superior types would take
place; but the foregoing considerations indicate that it would
be unwise to place any reliance on a transfer of wealth to the
poorer classes as a method of producing an increase in the rate
of multiplication of the fit, and thus of compensating for the
increase of the unfit which would probably thus be caused.

Of all human impulses that is the noblest which leads men
to strive for the welfare of their suffering fellow creatures; but
314 EUGENICS REVIEW.

its nobleness must not be made an excuse for blindness as to the
consequences of the efforts made. By making the poor more
self-respecting and self-sustaining we shall, no doubt, make
them less prolific; but let it be admitted that the more easy it is
thus to raise the individual, the higher on an average will be his
innate qualities, and the less will be the need on eugenic
grounds for reducing the size of his family. Again, the greater
the difficulties encountered in the attempt to raise the submerged
tenth, the more we should persevere in these efforts; but let it
also be admitted that the more we do so, the greater will become
the percentage of the unfit in the very lowest strata of society,
and the higher probably will become their rate of multiplication.
What has been done in the past certainly has not prevented
those at the bottom of the social ladder from increasing
more rapidly than the rest of the community, and we have
no right to assume that this difference in fertility will not continue to exist or even to increase in future generations. The
man who requires and obtains a considerable amount of
extraneous help to enable him to maintain his children with
decency is likely in the future, even more than at present, to
perceive that an addition to his family will bring with it further
State or charitable assistance, and he will be even less likely
than now to limit the number of his progeny. The many efforts
which have been made in the past to reduce the numbers of
those living an utterly degraded life by the rescue of individuals
from their state of wretchedness, may have continually been
defeated by dregs of society being thus made to multiply more
rapidly, and by the gaps made in their ranks by these philanthropic efforts being at the same time thus constantly filled up.
Can it be said that a study of the worst slum areas of our great
cities makes it at all improbable that this is a true. picture
of what is now actually taking place? No one is deliberately
striving to weed out the unfit into a class apart and to make
them multiply more rapidly; but this is the direction in which
it seems we are now moving. If so, there exists a growing
cancer in the body of the nation which ought to be cut out at
all hazards.
QUALITY not QUANTITY. 315

IV .—Risks must be run; and the safest course 1s to advocate an
increase in some types and a decrease in others, thus
boldly striving for quality and not quantity.

We have seen that in spite of all the many highly commendable efforts to purify the lowest strata of society, there is
likely to remain at the bottom a mass inferior in quality and so
growing in quantity, that the cup is always kept full. We
have seen, moreover, that the welfare of the nation is to be judged
by the average qualities of the people, and that progress would
certainly be promoted by relatively increasing the rate of multiplication of the fit and decreasing that of the unfit. To fully
discuss how the desirable result could be attained would open up
the whole question of eugenic reform; and here all that will be
attempted will be to point to certain considerations indicating
the necessity of vigorously attacking these problems by, at
the same time, striving to increase some sections of the community and to diminish others.

Eugenic reforms may be divided under the headings of
compulsory, economic, and persuasive. As to compulsory
reforms, or the actual enforcement on individuals of a line of
conduct which they would not voluntarily adopt, it is impossible
to apply this method so as to promote the output of the fit; for
compulsory marriage cannot be contemplated for a moment.
As to the application of compulsion in regard to the unfit,
murder being for ever debarred, segregation seems to be the
only method now practically available for diminishing their
fertility, and, consequently, their rate of multiplication; and
since segregation necessarily inflicts some suffering, and, therefore, rightly runs counter to our sentiments concerning
individual liberty, it can only be applied to the worst
specimens—to cases where there is no doubt whatever as to the
existence of very serious heritable defects. The possibility of
compulsory eugenic action is, in fact, greatly curtailed by the
necessity of judging the unfit by their individual merits, and
not by their merits as members of a class. As regards the
economic methods of eugenic reform, or the methods of
promoting the fertility of desirable types by making parenthood more economically desirable, we are not hampered
316 EUGENICS REVIEW.

in this way; for the stimulus may be applied to a whole
class indiscriminately. But whereas compulsion can only
be applied to the unfit, the economic methods are entirely
inapplicable in their case; for it is, of course, out of the question
to contemplate attempting to increase the chances of death of
individuals however undesirable by deliberately increasing
their poverty. As to the fit, the economic promotion of
their fertility must in large measure take the form of lessening
the burden of taxation on parents and throwing it on to the
childless ; a method which is likely to have eugenic consequences
because it will only materially affect the well-to-do classes in
possession of considerable incomes. Here, however, the point
to be noted is that as compulsory reforms can only be applied
so as to reduce the rate of multiplication of the unfit, and
economic reforms only so as to increase that of the fit, it is
essential, if both methods of attempting to improve the racial
qualities of future generations are to be employed, that an
endeavour should be made simultaneously to promote an
increase and a decrease in numbers in the different classes of
the community.

Passing on to consider persuasive reforms—that is, eugenic
reforms which are based on efforts to make individuals realise
more fully than at present those duties falling on them as
parents which are dependent on their innate and _ heritable
qualities—the point to emphasise is how widely the responsibilities of parents, whose innate qualities are seriously
defective, differ from the responsibilities of parents with sound
constitutions. If no thought were given to the qualities of the
parents, and if in order to lessen the sufferings of the poor, an
all-round decrease in the birth-rate were to be advocated, the
result would be, if previous experience may be taken as a guide,
that the thoughtful and educated classes would be influenced far
more than the lowest strata of society; and to whatever extent
this proved to be the case, to that extent the consequences would
be both uneconomic and dysgenic. Obviously, the danger of
thus relatively increasing the rate of multiplication of the less
fit would be lessened if care were taken to make it clear that the
demand for a decrease in the birth-rate only applied to families
QUALITY not QUANTITY. 317

whose economic position was such that ag increase in numbers
would be a cause of suffering; and the situation would be still
better safeguarded if an increase in the fertility of the fit were to
be simultaneously advocated. As to an advocacy of an all-round
increase in the birth-rate on patriotic grounds and without
reference to economic conditions, this propaganda would find a
more fruitful soil amongst those who take no thought for the
morrow than amongst those endowed with proper sentiments as
to their children’s future welfare, and it would, therefore, in this
respect be dysgenic. It is true that though slum dwellers would
take little pressure to influence them in favour of having large
families, yet this is also the class least likely to pay any attention
to such appeals. And here, again, the danger could be materially
lessened by carefully limiting the advocacy of an increase of
fertility to families where the economic conditions are favourable, and by simultaneously advocating a decrease in the birthrate where poverty exists. In short, since both persuasive
reforms promoting a general increase and a general decrease in
the birth-rate are apt to be dysgenic in their tendencies, we
again conclude that a well considered propaganda in favour of a
simultaneous increase and decrease in fertility of individuals and
families, dependent on their economic conditions, is what will
do most good from the point of view of both eugenics and
economics. .

The plea that all steps, however well safeguarded, if taken
with the object of increasing the population are to be condemned
as tending to add to the miseries of the poor, may, perhaps,
be brought forward in reply to what is here urged. There
are, however, here and now many circumstances which
tend to lessen the fear of such consequences. In the first place
there are no sure signs that we have come anywhere near the
end of the long series of inventions and discoveries which have
done so much in the past to cheapen the necessaries of life; and
if the law of increasing returns is still in operation, the world
will, in the near future at all events, be capable of bearing an
increase in the population without necessarily involving a fall
in the standards of living. Again, if we look to the statistics
concerning the fall in the birth-rate in recent years in civilised
318 EUGENICS REVIEW.

countries, an actual increase in numbers amongst the well-to-do
classes is unfortunately an unlikely contingency ; and, moreover,
if such an increase did occur, it would probably be economically
beneficial to the poor. Then as to the eugenic effects of an actual
increase in the total population, which the advocacy of an
increase in the fertility of the well-to-do would, no doubt,
render somewhat more likely to occur, such an increase, if
contrary to the view expressed above, did increase the burden
on the rest of the community, there would, at all events,
be compensating racial benefits of great value to future
generations. ‘‘ Man, like every other animal, has, no
doubt, advanced to his present high condition through
a struggle for existence consequent on his rapid multiplication; and if he is to advance still higher, i is to
be feared that he must remain subject to a severe struggle.
Otherwise he would sink into indolence, and the more gifted
men would not be more successful in the battle of life than the
less gifted. Hence our natural rate of increase, though leading
to many and obvious evils, must not be greatly diminished by
any means ’’—or rather only by those means which ensure that
the diminution should take place amongst the relatively unfit.’
And as to the fears of the suffering likely to arise from a
continuance of the present irrational struggle for existence,
every effort should be made to lessen these apprehensions in so far as that can be done by replacing this
struggle by rational eugenic selection; a change which
might save untold human misery in the countless generations of
the future. But in no case must these fears prevent us from
advocating an increase in the rate of reproduction among all the
sections of the community which are above the average in
inborn qualities.

A demand for a decrease in fertility, however carefully
limited in reference to economic conditions, is, on the other
hand, equally certain to be condemned with the utmost confidence on patriotic and military grounds on account of the
necessity of filling up the gaps made by the war. But no
greater mistake could be made, whether we are looking to the

1“Descent of Man,” Darwin, II., p. 439. Italics not in original.
QUALITY not QUANTITY. 319

industrial or military position of the nation in the future, than
now to consider quantity without reference to quality; for the
enormous number of men rejected, on or after enlistment during
this war, alone ought to be sufficient to teach this lesson. It
will be urged, no doubt, that the present relative inferiority in
numbers of the white races constitutes a grave danger to the
human race in the future, and this is unquestionably a consideration by no means to be neglected. But we have in the
past mainly relied on our intellectual superiority, and it would
be a fatal blunder now to neglect any steps which would produce
a tendency for that superiority to be maintained or enhanced in
the future. Moreover, every wastrel removed from the ranks of
the nation would now mean a diminution in the amount of
food brought to our shores from beyond the seas, with a corresponding setting free of men either for military or for
industrial purposes, together with a freeing of capital wherewith to add to the wealth of all classes. Every successful effort
now made to lessen the numbers of the unfit in future generations will add to the wealth and the security of the nation as a
whole in the future, and such efforts must fail unless a decrease
in the numbers of the unfit is advocated, concurrently with and
as warmly as an increase in the numbers of the fit. Lastly,
Malthus is still worth reading in order to show how easily in the
past the cup of the population was filled up to the brim. The
population of England and France kept increasing all through
the Revolutionary and the Napoleonic periods; Germany, moreover, made great strides in numbers after 1870-71; and this
evidence still gives some reason to believe that the increase in
numbers necessary to fill the population up to that level which
is consistent with the standards of living in different classes of
the community, will not be slow in making its appearance after
the war is over. It must, however, be admitted that new factors
influencing fertility have appeared in recent years, and that,
consequently, past experience is not a very reliable guide in this
matter. But it must never be forgotten that unless some radical
change is made, there is likely to remain at the bottom of the
economic scale a mass of highly fertile human beings, and that
from the point of view of eugenics there is no greater need than
320 EUGENICS REVIEW.

that it should be acknowledged that our present means of
lessening their fertility would, even if they were effectively
utilised, be utterly insufficient to cure this national disease. To
increase their rate of reproduction would be a grave evil, and
consequently, if judged by the probable results, the advocacy
without qualifications of an increase in the population, equally
with any propaganda for a decrease in numbers without
reference to quality, must be condemned as being unpatriotic.
Not improbably it will be urged that the foregoing conclusions concerning the rate of multiplication of the population
are useless on account of their vagueness, and it must be
admitted that the science of eugenics does not yet admit of the
laying down of rigid laws on all points. But certain rules can
even now be suggested which are sufficiently explicit to be
useful, and which would produce racial results of enormous
value if they were widely followed. When both parents are
fairly healthy, we can affirm that it is now both immoral and
unpatriotic to limit the size of the family except on two grounds,
namely, that the children must be brought up in comfort but
not necessarily in luxury, and that there should be a fairly wide
interval between births. Were such a rule to be generally
adopted, whilst no suffering from poverty would thus be caused,
the output of the fit would be materially increased, and there
would be no fear of a decline in the relative superiority of the
white races either in intellect or in their power of influencing
the world for good. On the other hand, it can be laid down as a
rule that parenthood is immoral either when both parents are
clearly defective in ways rendering it highly probable that the
cause is constitutional, or when one parent is very markedly
defective, or when there is not a reasonable prospect of its being
possible to maintain the child in mental and physical well being
without extraneous help being received by the parents. There
would be, no doubt, an enormous number of intermediate cases
not covered by either of these rules, in regard to which common
sense must be relied on as a guide. But even without going
beyond these two precepts, if they were steadily followed, there
would, as the generations succeeded each other, be a corresponding steady rise in the innate qualities of the nation with a correQUALITY not QUANTITY. 321

sponding increase in the moral and intellectual well being of the
people, as well as in their wealth. The patriot who dreams of
the future greatness of his country has, therefore, in enforcing
these ideals, an endless field open to him for his efforts.

The endeavour made in the foregoing pages has been to
point out that we must not be led astray by ignorant demands
for a great increase in numbers or for an all-round decrease in the
birth-rate, and that we ought boldly to proclaim the necessity
of taking such steps as are calculated to make the rate of
multiplication of the different classes of the community bear
some relationship to what is believed to be their average innate
worth. It is true that there are dangers in whatever course we
decide to adopt. To endeavour to stand still is, however, certainly not the least dangerous course; for, at all events, in such
an endeavour we should be certain to fail. ‘Unceasing change
seems to be the law of the universe; our nation is now assuredly
either advancing or retreating in all the qualities which lead to
well-being and renown ; and to do nothing is not to be stationary;
but most probably to drift down the hill of racial decline. In
Burke’s words, it is our business “‘ rather to run the risks of
falling into faults, in a course which leads us to act with effect
and energy, than to loiter out our days without blame and
without use.”’
