THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Eugenics versus Civilization.
By F. C. S. Scuitter, D.Sc.

Civilization just now has more than one string to its bow. It is
bow-stringing itself with several. Of these the most expeditiously
effective in strangling it is doubtless modern war, though modern
revolution runs it close, and its ravages are more irreparable. For,
as we see it operating to-day in Russia and elsewhere, it simply wipes
out the classes which produced the intelligences that controlled the
intricate web of mechanisms called Civilization; and their destruction
is irreparable at a time when it was becoming doubtful anyhow whether
these mechanisms were not growing too intricate to be controlled by
intelligence at all. And there is also a third factor, which operates
much more slowly, but unceasingly and with cumulative effects; so
that it must in the end prove absolutely fatal, not only to Civilization,
but perhaps even to the continuance of the human race. It is a
disease permeating the whole organisation and ordering of our civilization and continually poisoning the whole social organism; to such an
extent diffused in it that it may be debated whether it is an inherent
disease of Civilization or whether Civilization is not the disease itself.
For this reason it has long eluded diagnosis, and Eugenics. in attacking
it, seems to be challenging Civilization. Yet we can look to scientific
eugenics alone to understand this malady, and to suggest (perhaps) the
means for arresting its progress.

In this respect it differs from the other dangers that beset the
future of mankind. The danger of Revolution is acutely realised by
the upper classes all the world over; and if their efforts to bottle up this
evil spirit are not always signalised by superior sagacity and sanctioned with the Seal of Solomon, they are at least sufficiently resolute
and ruthless. The danger from War has sufficiently impressed itself
even on the dullest minds; for the princes of the powers of the air
have made it sufficiently plain that in future they will spare neither
age, nor innocence, nor sex. The more thoughtful are accordingly
excogitating devices to diminish war, and if these fail, it will not be for
lack of trying or for lack of foresight. But as yet neither the rich northe wise have had their attention properly directed to the still profounder sources of social failure which it is the mission of Eugenics to.
reveal. Hence this lecture. Hence also its somewhat catchy title,
which must not however be taken to assume that Civilization and
Eugenics are naturally hostile, except in so far as our civilization,
unable to control the social influences it has generated, has identified
‘itself with its vices, and so has fallen short of being truly civilized.
382 EUGENICS REVIEW.

At any rate my aim is merely to examine the relations between Eugenics
and Civilization, to point out certain flaws in the functioning of the
latter, and to suggest how, in its own interest, as much as in mankind’s, it may be amended.

For this purpose it may be well to consider to begin with the meaning of both these terms, and to propound at least a provisional definition
of each.

Let us try ‘Eugenics’ first, as being the more scientific, and therefore more definite, term. As a science, Eugenics is the study of the
conditions of improving the human race; as an art, it is the putting
into practice of the results of this study. |

It should be noted that this definition rules out at once the caricatures of Eugenics that are still so popular. Neither as a science nor
as an art is Eugenics committed to a ‘low’ view of human nature. It
is not a form of ‘materialism.’ It is not blind to whatever is not
physical. It is not pledged to treat man as merely animal. It is not
a crude and silly attempt to intrude the methods of the stock-breeder
into realms where they must ludicrously fail. Its past reveals that it
was first conceived by the most idealistic and ascetic of philosophers,
Plato, and its future points to a higher and nobler scheme of morals
than is now in operation anywhere.

Nevertheless our definition has a serious flaw. It is quite true
that at a vital point it contains an indeterminate term.

To ‘improve’ is to make better, and ‘better’-implies a standard of
good. What this ‘good’ is it does not tell us. Now this is a serious
omission. For unless we have a standard of good we can use, we
cannot tell whether a change we are observing or effecting is for better
or for worse. And even if we have such a standard in mind and can
use it to measure with, there is a further question whether our standard
is a good one, or the best, and so whether our measurements are right.
We need not however as yet discuss these difficulties; it will be enough
if they are borne in mind.

‘Civilization’ is a much vaguer and trickier term; but like ‘progress’ it may be shown to have lurking in it this same notion of a
standard of good. It is used to designate a state of mankind which is
superior to, and exclusive of, ‘barbarism’ and ‘savagery.’ But
‘civilization’ admits of degrees, and it is far from clear by what
criteria it should be decided whether a community is civilized, and
whether the civilization of one community is ‘higher’ than that of
another. It is clear however that ‘Civilization’ is an achievement of
man, or rather of some men, and is not a congenital quality, like, say,
sex. In other words the baby of civilized parents is not born civilized,
but has to acquire civilization. He is born just as ignorant of it as the
little savage. It has to be impressed on him by the education and
social training to which he is subjected, and if he likes it, it is an
acquired taste. If he grew up in a different society he would become as
big a barbarian or as sordid a savage as any native to the manner born,
and Mr. Rice Burroughs’s Tarzanades to prove that British peers are
better educated by gorillas in an African jungle than by athletes at
Eton are not science but fiction. At any rate I would bid you recognize
that the transmission of Civilization is effected, in very complex
EUGENICS VERSUS CIVILIZATION. 3883

ways, by education, in a social order: this fact has the important
consequence that if the mechanism of this transmission is destroyed or
seriously damaged, Civilization may disappear in one generation—
as we shall probably observe in Russia. Its life habitually hangs by
one thread.

Historically also Civilization seems to be unique. It has been
developed only once. All the existing civilizations are probably
traceable to a single source, and to what, in view of the vast masses of
savages who have continued to inhabit the earth for untold ages, must
be regarded as an historical accident of relatively recent date. The
earliest known civilization grew up some 8—10,000 years ago around
the Persian Gulf,* and spread thence into Central Asia, China, Egypt
and the Mediterranean. It appears to have been rendered materially
possible by a discovery, the domestication of the wheat plant, which
gave ‘Cain’ the victory over ‘Abel,’ and provided for the settled graineating tiller of the soil a better livelihood than was secured to the meateating nomad.t It also rendered possible the city-state or woAXus,
which was at first the small but impregnable fort in which the cultivators took refuge when raided by the nomads.

Now we have learnt from Aristotle that though the ods arose
from natural necessity, tov nv évexa, to render life possible at all,
its justification and essential meaning lie in the reference it contains to the ‘good’ life. The city-state, and a fortiori the larger and more
complex civilizations that grow out of it, minister, by definition, to
the good life, or should doso. So political philosophers have devoutly
believed, or at least declared, after Plato and Aristotle, for the past
2,300 years.

If however a man is at all of a reflective and critical disposition,
he will not accept this as the alpha and omega of political wisdom.
It should prompt him to inquire further and to raise two big questions.
The first is a question of fact, viz., Does it? Does the State, does
Civilization, does the actual social order in point of fact enable men to
live well, to live better than they otherwise could, to live best, with
the organization actually in being? These are all big questions which
cannot be answered offhand. For in answering we have to begin with
discounting the bias with which we are naturally equipped or afflicted,
as a result of our education in a particular society. We should not forget.
that we have been moulded by enormous social pressure and imbued
with the beliefs that Civilization is infinitely preferable to savagery
and that our civilization is far superior to any other. It demands
therefore a great and sustained effort to question an habitual belief
that has become a second nature, and few are capable of it, unless they
are actually being stimulated by a painful consciousness that they
are not in fact living as well as they desire: in that case they expose

 

*The archaeological evidence still leaves in doubt whether civilization in
Babylonia and Elam was anterior to that in Egypt, but the geographical reasons
are very strong.

{My friend, Prof. S. Langdon, tells me that actually the first food plants to
be cultivated were the date-palm and millet ; but this does not affect the point of
the argument.
384 EUGENICS REVIEW.

themselves, of course, to the retort that their personal] distress is giving
them a contrary bias, hostile to the claims of Civilization. Again, it is
hardly possible to decide whether Civilization enables men to live
better than they otherwise would without surveying the alternatives
to it that are practicable, or may become so, and such consideration
might take one far afield in the realm of political speculation. Lastly,
it seems probable that no one, except a few favourites of fortune and old
men who have become psychologically conservative, would be willing
to contend that our actual civilization is literally and in every respect
the best that can be conceived. The ordinary conservatism of most of
us rests upon fear, the fear that the social order might very easily be
changed for the worse.

One result, however, stands out, that at every step in such inquiries we are running up against the problem What 7s the Good?
What is it that sets the standard by which we estimate and measure
the advantages and defects, or in other words the value, of the various
social orders, actual or ideal? Without a knowledge of this good it is
plain that we cannot intelligently discuss the claims of the State, the
value of Civilization, and the possibilities of betterment. It is
equally plain that all social co-operation demands as a preliminary a
certain measure of practical agreement about what is ‘good’ and worth
doing, and ‘bad’ and so desirable to avoid. Wherever therefore social
co-operation exists as a fact, it involves a certain practical agreement
about the ‘good,’ which need not extend to ethical theory, because
very various theoretical reasons may be given for doing what is practically the same thing. Moreover, this fact of co-operation is not only
practically valuable, it is also a great help in attacking problems that
would otherwise be theoretically insoluble. Theoretically and in the
abstract there is no solution of a really fundamental disagreement about
values: for exemple, if A, applying a pessimist standard , condemns as
‘bad’ the life which B, an optimist, approves as ‘good,’ and if both
are consistent in drawing out the consequences of their principles,
they must arrive at scales of value that will have little or nothing in
common. But as actually men are not consistent pessimists or
optimists, they contrive to agree very fairly about what is desirable and
not. And if, in addition, they are fairly intelligent and reasonable,
they may extend their initial agreement by talking over the social
situation from their several points of view, and making allowances for
each other.

But why, it may be asked, harp on this string of elementary
platitudes? Because it can not be made too plain that eugenics and
civilization are actually in the same boat, and that the theoretic
difficulties of the former are identical with those of the latter. Both
are rooted in the notion of the good, but neither of them knows what
the good is, and both are vitally affected by the doubts and disputes
that beset the good. If we cannot tell what the good is, we can
neither know how to better the human race, nor decide whether Civilization is or is not a good thing. And in either case, if we disagree
about the good, we shall get divergent aims, quarrel about it, and
probably shall have to fight it out; with the result, very likely, that
both sides will miss the goods they aimed at.
EUGENICS VERSUS CIVILIZATION. 3885

Fortunately, however, it would seem that we may evade, or at
least postpone, the vexed question as to what is the real good to which
both Eugenics and Civilization appeal. Differences of opinion on
this subject are not in the first instance relevant to the discussion
whether Civilization is conducive to Eugenics For a little reflection
will show that, just because Eugenics and Civilization are in the same
boat, whatever conception of good is involved in the one will be
involved also in the other; so that the two views, whether ultimately
right or wrong, will always be comparable.

To illustrate this implication more concretely, let us suppose
that a certain social order has adopted a certain scale of values, and
organised itself accordingly. It thinks. or acts as if it thought (for
societies often act without thinking), let us say, that the military life
is the best; it admires the military man above all others; it regards
courage as the highest virtue. It will consequently and consistently,
therefore, put a soldier on the apex of the social pyramid, and make
the possession of military qualities a condition of social approbation,
promotion, and remuneration. It will, moreover, educate its members to accept and enact this conception of the good life. Its prevalent
social belief, moreover. will affect and determine the beliefs of its
eugenists and their conceptions of what is ‘progress’ and human
betterment and the ideal for human society to aim at. The ‘heaven’
of such a society would presumably resemble the Valhalla of the
Norsemen. Other societies similarly might organize themselves so as
to express their admiration of the scholar, like China, of the sage,
like India, of the business man, like America; and if they came into
conflict with each other, as they probably would, there would be involved
a question of the survival of conflicting ideals as well as of States and
individuals.

The external international struggles between ideals should not,
however, engross our attention; there is also quite as important a
problem as to how a society must organise itself internally so as to give
effect to the faith that is in it and to ensure the triumph of the ideal
it has adopted. For it does not follow as a matter of course that
because a society theoretically prefers a certain type of man it also
favours him in practice and succeeds in producing him. It may
actually be so stupidly and badly organized as simultaneously both to
admire and to destroy him. Thus love commonly ‘spoils’ and the
tuin of the beautiful is very commonly the effect of the social admiration of beauty ; how this may come about can easily be understood if we
revert to the militarist ideal of excellence and consider its social
‘operation. The militarist ideal of the good life is of course the oldest...
of all, and also the most persistent: it is very widespread and most
aggressive, very popular and theoretically very obvious to this day.
It ought surely to have become universal long ago. Yet somehow it
has not succeeded in extirpating all other ideals or in moulding all
mankind according to its model. There are still vast populations
which cravenly prefer to live ingloriously in peace and would think
Valhalla Hell. The glorious days of Chivalry, when every gallant
gentleman loved fighting for its own sake and roamed about the world
to pick quarrels with all and sundry on a point of honour or a questign
3 86 EUGENICS REVIEW.

of the supreme beauty of his lady (whom the other fellow had not seen)
in a pure spirit of knight-errantry, are dead and done with. The
religion of the Vallhallians has become obsolete, and in its stead most
‘civilized’ communities profess (though they do not practise) a highly
paradoxical religion which is essentially pacifist and after 2,000 years
has shown itself to be still as capable as ever of generating conscientious
objectors to the whole militarist ideal.

It is not easy, at first sight, to account for this. But we should
reflect that it is not enough for a society to will a good for it to come
about. It must also so organize itself as to bring it into being. Hence
it will be vain for it to preach and inculcate militarism and to lavish
upon its representatives the highest rewards and positions in its gift,
if it does not succeed in securing an adequate supply of militarists
whom it can honour and obey. Now this last is apparently the essential point which militarism has overlooked, with the result that it
always tends not to propagate, but to eliminate, itself. ‘All through
history those who have lived by the sword have perished by the sword.
All through history the fighting races have fought themselves out.
All through history the meek have inherited the earth, which
they were willing to cultivate for proud lords whose violence and
vices: were presently to lead to their extinction. All through history
there has been going on in every community an internal selection , which,
though far beneath the notice of historians, may profoundly change the
character, the ideas and the type, of a people.

This is doubtless why the Scandinavians, a thousand years ago the
fiercest of warriors, are now about the most peaceable of Europeans.
This is why in a country like Egypt, whose political history has been
a spectacular series of conquests by all sorts and conditions of men,
black, white, yellow and brown, there has been so little biological
change that the bulk of the population is still physically indistinguishable from the pre-dynastic Egyptian of 6,000 years ago. This is
why aristocracies die out and men of ancient lineage and noble birth are
rarities in every land. This is why sheep are more plentiful in nature
than wolves, and rabbits than tigers. A society clearly must not
organize itself so as to eliminate de facto the qualities it honours, but
must see to it that its admiration is not fatal to them.

Yet it is apparently upon such a self-contradictory and selfdefeating policy that all civilized societies are embarked. The case of
militarism does not stand alone. It is not exceptional, but universal.
And there is a very simple reason for this in every existing society.
It is a well-known statistical fact that every civilized society is at
present cursed with a differential birth-rate of the wrong kind. That
is to say, the birth-rate is everywhere much lower in the higher than
in the lower strata of the social scale, and even in England, which is
not by any means the worst off of civilized communities , it is only onehalf of that necessary to maintain the numbers in the upper classes.
As this difference is nothing like compensated for by the lower deathrate in the upper strata, the effect is that every civilized society is
engaged in extirpating its upper classes and in recruiting itself from its.
lower.

From this situation there results the paradox that every society
EUGENICS VERSUS CIVILIZATION. 3887

is busily substituting worse racial qualities for better, and extirpating
the very qualities it values most. The proof runs as follows. In
every society some qualities—it matters not what, for the moment—
are valued and supposed to be admirable and good, and are selected
and rewarded accordingly. Hence the lucky possessors of these qualities are highly remunerated and enabled to rise in the social scale.
Social promotion is thus the reward of whatever merits a society
chooses to recognize. What degree of merit is recognized and how
highly it is rewarded, varies somewhat in different communities, but
in a general way it may be said that the barriers of class-distinctions
have everywhere been broken down and that ability—of the sort that
each society values—has no longer any serious difficulty in rising.
But its reward is also its capital punishment. For as it rises it passes
from a social region in which the birth-rate is relatively high and the
prospects of parentage are comparatively good to others where the
birth-rate gets lower and lower. The higher it gets therefore, the
more it tends to be sterilized. Thus the particular kind of ability a
society recognizes, the cream the society wants, is always rising to the
top; but when it gets there it is always being skimmed off, and cast
away. Could anything be more fatuously suicidal than such an
organization of society? Could there be a more crushing confutation
of the pretensions of the civilized State to benefit the-human race?
Is it not clear that while it operates as it is doing, it must conduce
to the deterioration of the human stock, because it is continually
pumping up from the lower strata the particular sorts of ability that
are valued, concentrating them in the upper strata, and there destroying 50% of them in every generation ?

Consequently the organization of all existing societies must at
present be pronounced to be appallingly dysgenic. They are all
engaged in destroying, radically and racially, whatever ‘ew’ they
themselves have recognized. This would seem to render it rather a
blessing that eugenists are not yet able to pronounce any cut and dried
scheme for the betterment of the human race. It may be more or less
true, as is so often alleged, that they cannot ‘breed for points,’ because
they do not know what points to breed for. But if they had known,
and tried it, they would at once have encountered a formidable institution, which is perpetually engaged in breeding out of the human stock
all the points that are recognised as ‘good’. Civilization is even more
ignorant than eugenies of the nature and marks of the truly good ; so, to
make sure that it shall not escape, it so organizes itself as to extirpate
even the apparent good. In other words Civilization has become
an instrument, not of the progressive improvement of the human race,
but of its deterioration, and if there still is progress, it is not in the
inherent qualities of man, but in the mechanisms by which he controls
the world and in the knowledge by which he works them. This in
brief is the very serious charge that Eugenics brings against our
Civilization.

It is, clearly, quite independent of the disputes as to what is the
real good, and whether the good actually aimed at by societies and
eugenists is the right one. Whatever view is taken of the Good,
Civilization stands self-condemned as destroying the good it is en888 EUGENICS REVIEW.

deavouring to promote, and the valuable qualities it is trying to augment, and it is the duty of the eugenist, whatever his own ideal of
human excellence, to accuse Civilization of insidious treason against
the human kind.

It does not follow, however, that because Civilization is now
playing us false, it has always done so, and must always continue to do
so. The two cases demand separate consideration.

(1) As regards the past of Civilization, examination shows that
its bad influence on racial fitness is no new thing, though the harm it
did was probably not so extensive formerly as it is now. Still all
through history aristocracies have decayed and died out. In ancient
times the Roman patricians and the Spartiates are conspicuous examples. The Venetian oligarchy, though it maintained its grip
politically for over 1,000 years, became utterly effete. In England
the Norman nobility destroyed itself in the Wars of the Roses, in
France the Ancienne Noblesse has been fading away rapidly since the
Revolution deprived it of its lands and privileges. The late war
will probably be found to have dealt a death-blow to the nobility in the
whole of Europe east of the Rhine. In short it seems to be by a sort of
biological necessity that aristocracies are always dying out, even
where their numbers are recruited from among the nouveaua riches.
The increase in the numbers of the House of Lords is not a biological
but a political phenomenon, and connected with the methods used by
politicians in replenishing their party chests. In short, as the Romans
recognized, the ‘fatherhood’ of the ‘patricians’ was always largely
honorary, and the State had to look to the ‘proletarians’ to maintain
its numbers. On the other hand it must be remembered that the more
rigid structure of ancient societies was a biological advantage; it
conserved and multiplied what ability existed in the lower classes, by
preventing it from rising to its own destruction. Throughout the
Middle Ages the church alone offered a carriére ouverte aux talents, when
the talents happened to have been born in a humble station; but as its
price was celibacy, it can hardly escape the censure of the modern
eugenist.

The conclusion that Civilization is detrimental to human excellence
and that its claim to have bettered human life is not well founded, is
curiously borne out by the zoological fact that the bodily development
of man has long ago come to a standstill. Palaeontology steadfastly
refuses to countenance the belief that there has been any physical improvement in the human type since the beginning of history. Modern
man is not bigger, stronger or more beautiful than his ancestors were
10,000 years ago. Nor is there reason to think that he is intrinsically
more intelligent. He has at any rate no bigger brain. When the
Americans during the war applied to their young conscripts the mental
tests of scientific psychology, they discovered to their surprise and
disgust that their ‘mental age’ was not 16 as they had supposed, but
only 13; thus the average American had to be classified as a ‘highgrade moron,’ which is scientific jargon for ‘feeble-minded.’ These
tests have not been systematically applied as yet to the old, nor to the
psychologists themselves, but I have little doubt that, if they were, the
results would be equally devastating. If we go back to prehistoric
EUGENICS VERSUS CIVILIZATION. 389

eras we find that in remote palaeolithic times the Cro-Magnon race,
which inhabited Europe in the Magdalenian period, seems to have been
definitely superior to any modern race in size, strength and cranial
capacity. Even the still earlier Mousterian man, Homo Neandertalensis, though he had a very receding forehead, presumably because
he needed to develop other brain-centres than those we most commonly
use, had distinctly more brains than the average man has now. The
Boskop skull, found in the Transvaal, and ascribed to an ancestral
Bushman, had 1832 c.c. of brains, 350 more than the average English
braincase holds at present.* Our brain-development has apparently
been retrogressive for a long time, and it is a mere assumption that we
use smaller but more compact and convoluted brains more efficiently.
The only real advance that science will allow the human body to
have (probably) achieved in the last 10,000 years is in its powers
of resistance to microbic diseases; it hastens to add that from this
point of view the two most superior races on the earth are the Chinaman and the Jew—simply because they have for many centuries had
to adapt themselves to living under the most appalling slum conditions, and only the toughest have survived !

In spite of this well-attested arrest of man’s physical development, it must be regarded as highly probable that the human body
once was physically progressive. There must have been a time when
the conditions of life conduced to the improvement of the human race,
and when social influences did not conspire to thwart them. For there
must have been a time when man grew the massive brain that mediates
the exercise of his intelligence, and is plainly the organ in which he
indisputably surpasses his anthropoid cousins. Assuredly man has
sometime had to develop his brains. Only this time must have
antedated what we now call civilization. It must have extended over
long ages of what we now call barbarism and savagery; nor is it altogether impossible to understand how these may have conduced to
man’s eugenical improvement in a way Civilization refuses to do.

It is clear in the first place that uncivilized man has much less
control over nature,and is much more at the mercy of natural conditions, and that his fellow men can consequently do much less for a
defective, maimed or inefficient member of their community. Hence
the phenomenon of social ‘contra-selection,’ whereby under social
conditions those are preserved who would otherwise be ‘unfit,’ and are
‘preserved at the cost, and to the detriment, of the fit, cannot occur.

Personal efficiency and intelligence are much more essential to survival
“in a savage or barbarous society than in one which is full of institutions
dike hereditary rank and wealth, charity, philanthropy, and ‘demoperacy,’ which, whether designedly or not, have the effect of sheltering,
(fostering, preserving and propagating vast masses of unfitness, inefficiency and inferiority. A society which has the power over nature
Ethat we have can corrupt its way upon the earth to an indefinite extent ;
pout one that is subject to severe natural selection cannot afford to
mreed inefficiency, either individually or socially. Of course, howpever, i in respect to the qualities which are criteria of selection at the
Rime and place in question.

   
   
 
  
   
   
 

*Cf. Nature, No. 2671.
390 EUGENICS REVIEW.

It is a mistake, however, to think that intelligence is not among
them, and has not been of vital importance in savage life. For in
truth the savage simply cannot afford to be a fool, or to breed fools:
the fool-killing agencies in his life are much too potent. Accordingly
he is not a fool; in the ordinary affairs of his life he is far more capable
of acting intelligently and of fending for himself than the bulk of those
who deride his ‘stupidity.’ His apparent stupidity arises, not from
lack of native endowment, but from lack of knowledge and of the
apparatus handed down by the social traditions of ages of Civilization :
nor is he more helpless in the City of London than a bank-clerk would
be on a desert island or a professor in a primeval jungle. Hence it is
perfectly conceivable that human intelligence was in fact developed
under the severest natural selection, by anthropoids who could only
make a living by the most strenuous exercise of their faculties under
rapidly changing conditions. Probably our ancestors became men
because they had to, when they found themselves cut off in a deteriorating climate with diminishing supplies of vegetable food. So, as
Prof. Carveth Read has ingeniously suggested,* they became carnivores, and banded themselves together to hunt big game in packs of

‘wolf-apes,’ incidentally acquiring in the process the moral qualities
and social solidarity of {a wodtixa which Aristotle so much
admired, and so unjustly scored to the credit of the adds. This
then was probably how and why the big human brain was grown; or
possibly the reason why the early races of man seem to have had such
surprisingly large brains is simply that the fool and the idiot could
not then grow up to leave behind him an adult skull.

All this, of course, is conjectural reconstruction of what we should
all recognize as the most important and formative period of human
history, if only we knew more about it; but it is confirmed by what we
can still observe among the higher ‘barbarians.’ At this stage of
human development it is still a real biological advantage to be wellborn, as the son of a chief rather than of a commoner, and a real advantage to a chief, especially in old age. to be amply provided with sons
and heirs. Perceiving this, the chiefs tend to monopolize the women,
and even when they do not, life is so hard that their offspring survive
better than those of the low born. There is in other words a differential
death-rate in favour of the upper classes, which more than out-weighs
their inferior fertility, if it has begun to develop.

We meet with indications of this social condition in Homer
and in Greek Mythology. Priam had 50 sons, but Thersites was
not married; or if he was, had to leave his wife at home
for years without any prospect of acquiring, like Agamemnon or
Achilles, a captive damsel or two; hence his democratic discontent with the social order. The sons of Herakles on the other
hand, descended, ,doubtless, from an exceptionally vigorous sire,
could form themselves into a conquering tribe that overran half
the Greek world: whereas in a later age nothing became of the 354
children 0° Augustus of Saxony, whom Carlyle is so fond of praising
as the physically strong—with the sole exception of Maurice de Saxe.

*The Origin of Man ch i, ii,
EUGENICS VERSUS CIVILIZATION. 391

And even he only became a Maréchal de France and founded no dynasty.
Sir H. H. Johnston gives an interesting parallel from modern barbarism
which shows that the eugenical career of Herakles is not quite a thing
of the past. In his Uganda Protectorate (1902), Vol. II., p. 720, he
tells us about the Busoga that ‘‘The race is being saved by a few
notable chiefs who are marvellous getters of children. The great chief
Luba is still a vigorous man of perhaps 60, and has had more than 100
stalwart sons, each of whom have become the father of a numerous
progeny. So that Luba, when he dies, will probably be the progenitor
of 1,000 children. Another old chief of Nilotic race is now past 90, and
is said to be the father of 1,000 children, more or less. It has been in
fact very much the custom in Busoga for the chiefs, who being at all
times well-nourished, were well sui ed to be ‘sires’—to impress all the
young women of the district into their harims. . . . Among the
peasants infant mortality is terrible. It is rare that a peasant woman
succeeds in rearing more than one child. The influence of the two
missionary societies in Busoga is restraining the excessive polygamy
of the chiefs and the hetter conditions of life among the common
people together tend to equalizing the production of children.’’
This is what ‘civilization’ at work means! Presumably the quality of
the Busoga baby is now deteriorating rapidly.

It is clear then that under certain conditions societies can be conceived, and can exist, which unlike ours, are recruited preferentially
from their upper classes and their superior members. It is equally
clear that a society which wishes to improve must so organize itself as to
produce this desirable result. And it is clear, lastly, that only if it
does, will it be organized rationally and deserve eugenical approval.
On the other hand a society which does the opposite of this must be
called irrational and foolish; for it is simply committing suicide.
The longer it continues to prefer the feeble in mind and body, the lower
it will sink; ultimately it must sink so low that no amount of tradition
and inherited knowledge can keep alive the congenital idiots of which
it will eventually be composed, if only because they will be fools
enough to pervert the customs, and to fail to assimilate the knowledge,
that sustained them. Of both these dangers an eye that is not blinded
by the conceit of civilization may already discern the incipient symptoms: the reason why they are not more pronounced is probably that
European civilization is still living.on its biological capital, on the
qualities bred into the Nordic stock by the severest natural selection,
while it was still barbarian, only 1,500 years ago.

But it is time that we approached the second question: must
Civilization continue to be in the future as it has been in the past,
literally the hostts humani generis? May not the eugenist hope to
enlighten and convert it, and to guide the forces that control it into |
saner ways ?

Well, it may not be necessary to despair of Civilization. For
after all there has now come into being a new fact: Civilization is no
longer acting blindly. It is beginning to know what it is doing,
whereas until now it was unconscious of its eugenical ineptitude, and
did not ascribe the maladies from which it suffered to its own action.
So it may perhaps be prevailed upon to stop doing evil, or at least to
3892 EUGENICS REVIEW.

try to control itself. Nevertheless the more one studies the ways and
means of reversing the inveterate trend of civilization to deteriorate
its victim, man, the more minutely one traces the ramifications of its
corrupting influence, the more one realizes the psychological subtlety
of the institutions which produce and support the present social order
(or mal-arrangement) and mould modern man into conformity with
their requirements, the more formidable seem the difficulties which
eugenics will have to overcome, if it is to induce humanity to save
itself.

For one perceives that the causes of the dysgenic working of
civilized society are literally all-pervasive,and that every institution,
and nearly every idea, now current will have to be transformed and redirected, if this working is to be reversed. One is almost tempted to
exclaim that the only hope of human improvement lies in a clean sweep
of civilization, made, say, by Bolshevism, and followed, after long
ages, by a fresh start from a healthy barbarism that has perforce purged
itself of our physical and mental maladies! But one has no right to
say this without first examining the difficulties of practical eugenics,
which is far too extensive a subject for the present paper. Until
eugenical opinion is consulted by our legislators we may fairly shirk
them, and devote our conclusion to a much-needed piece of theoretical
analysis.

At the outset the question of how it was possible to ascertain
whether a ‘good’ aimed at as an ideal by a society ora scheme of
eugenics, was really good, was deliberately put aside; not because it
was insoluble, but because it was irrelevant to the proof of the perverse
working of Civilization. True, the problem may not admit of cut and
dried solution in advance and in the abstract ; but we may nevertheless
be able to forecast the method by which the human race may work
towards a solution and feel its way towards self-improvement. The
problem of ascertaining the true good is not different in principle
from that of ascertaining the real Truth; in both cases the real clue lies
in making adequate provision for the continuous correction of error
and the substitution of better views for worse.

This involves, of course, a frank admission, that we do not start
with any absolute or complete knowledge either of the true or of the
good, though we have plenty of opinions about both, which are
foolishly wont to lay claim to absolute validity. As they are also
normally incompatible and usually incoherent, they breed nothing but
quarrels and contentions, and conduce to social chaos. But these
contentions are inherently unprofitable, because both sides are more
or less wrong, and both positions need amendment. What we need to
foster is the willingness to accept correction at the hands of experience
and to abandon positions that are no longer tenable. For then, and
only then, will the better cease to be an enemy of the good, and become
a guide to it.

We may next discard the dialectical possibility that the human
race may actually be improving when it supposes itself to be deteriorating, precisely because it has adopted a false standard of good which it
is failing to attain. Abstractly this is just possible, but there are such
multitudinous ways of going wrong that it is very improbable that one
EUGENICS VERSUS CIVILIZATION. 393

one of them, viz., the failure to reach what is wrongly supposed to be
good, will lead, by mere chance, towards the true good.

The procedure actually used by men in developing their ideals,
correcting errors in their valuations, and substituting better ones for
worse, may be better illustrated by a homely analogy with the way of
deciding whether a certain foodstuff, say a new fungus, is good to eat.’
Of course we donot know thisat first: it may be poisonous, and not
edible at all. To settle this question, it will be necessary to find
some one enterprising enough to run the risk of experimenting witn it,
and to sacrifice his health or his life in backing his opinion. If he is
wise he will be cautious, and will only commit himself to a little bit at a
time. His tongue and his organic sensations will instruct him,
provisionally, whether it is ‘good to eat,’ and he will report about it
accordingly. The value of his report will of course depend on the
facts (1) that there has already been established in the human race a
certain agreement about what is good to eat and that what is sweet to
one man does not normally taste acrid to another, and (2) that the
established tastes are not utterly unrelated to our true good in the
way of bodily nutriment, i.e., are not wholly wrong. Thus a certain
agreement of tastes about the good-to-eat, and a certain rightness of
these tastes, are presupposed. Now may not the same assumption be
made about the human search for the good generally? We saw in the
beginning that human beings do agree, largely and broadly, about the
things they think ‘good,’ though they vary greatly in the theoretic
reasons they give for their agreement. And this sensus communis,
the consensus of mankind, can hardly be wholly wrong, unless an
extreme pessimism is wholly right.

Accordingly we seem entitled to experiment with opinions about the
good-for-man. They diverge in many directions, but some seem more
promising than uthers. We may select these and test them, tentatively, by acting on them and noting the consequences, advancing cautiously and a little way at a time, withdrawing before the opposition of
hard facts, winning over rather than crushing dissent, continually
readjusting our opinions and ever learning from experience, until we
arrive at a general agreement that so-and-so is good and right. This
agreement will probably not be strictly universal; but those who do not
share it, like the persons who do not like oysters and cannot stomach
caviare, will submit and keep silent, because they themselves will
feel that they must be abnormal and wrong, just because they are not
able to assent to the conclusions of mankind, and yet cannot make out a
case against their rightness.

In this way then it is not inconceivable that the best type of man
should be determined, and that Eugenics and Civilization should reach
an agreement about the principles on which the former should reform

the latter. =
