PAUL BLOOMFIELD

Captain

APTAIN BARCLAY, THE great pedes
trian, was a son of Robert Barclay, fifth

of Urie, by his second wife Sarah Allardice. His father’s first wife and cousin Lucy
Barclay had borne him a daughter, another
Lucy, who in 1777 married the Birmingham
gunmaker Samuel Galton and was the grandmother of Sir Francis Galton.

The Barclay Family

The Captain’s grandparents had also been
cousins, for Robert Barclay, fourth of Urie, had
married a daughter of that formidable Ewen
Cameron of Lochiel who had killed one of his
enemies in battle by biting him in the throat, and
whose wife Jean was one of the many long-lived
children of Robert Barclay, the Apologist of the
Quakers. Ewen Cameron himself lived to be
ninety. Since, too, the Apologist’s father,
Colonel David Barclay had fought in the wars of
Gustavus Adolphus brandishing a sword which
other men could hardly lift, it does look natural
enough that this remarkable inbred stock should
have gone on producing men of unusual bodily
vigour. Such a man, certainly, was Captain
Barclay, born 1779, died 1854 from a kick given
him by a horse: at seventy-five he still seemed a
long way from dying of old age.

The Barclays are one of the most interesting
families in England; they are also the equal
oldest, being one of the only two—and much the
more distinguished of them—which can be
traced back to a pre-Conquest Englishman.
From the other family, Arden, there may
possibly have sprung the mother of William
Shakespeare. The Barclays, derived from the
Gloucestershire Berkeleys, with their royal connections, their record as leading Quakers, their
wealth got from banking and brewing, and not
least their fertility, have never had a poet ora
Prime Minister, but they have been yeast to the
whole vast Quaker cousinhood, and their genius
has announced itself under such names as Buxton, Fry, Wakefield, Forster—and Galton. In

Barclay

our world of mainly small families, cousins
don’t seem to care for each other particularly.
The Barclays and their cousins have found each
other irresistible; it is true the choice has been
wide, and the background (one may mention
without cynicism) comfortable. When the late
Isabel Fry said of the innumerable cousinmarriages of her clan: ‘““We all knew each other
so of course we all married each other’’ someone
might have pointed out that there would have
been no “of course” about it, but for the peculiar
character—not peculiar in any disparaging sense
—of the people she was talking about.

The Galtons before Sir Francis remained
Quakers even after their obstinate adherence to
gunmaking had led to formal excommunication
by the Birmingham Meeting. Their cousin
Robert Barclay joined the army (the 23rd Regiment) in 1805; he had a passion for hunting and
shooting, went to dances, trained the great prize
fighter Tom Cribb, and was constantly making
or losing large sums of money in wagers: nothing
Quakerish about him except his blood and his
fine personality. Though he remained known to
his contemporaries as Captain Barclay, he is
found under Allardice in the reference books
because on his mother’s death he added her
name to his own, believing he had become heir,
through her, to the three Scottish earldoms of
Airth, Strathern and Montieth. His cases were
heard in 1839 and 1840, but the claims were not
established.

Barclay’s Athletic Career —

It was in 1796, the year before his father’s
death that Barclay started his athletic career.
“When only fifteen years of age, he entered into
a match with a gentleman in London to walk six
miles within an hour, fair TOE AND HEEL, for one
hundred guineas, which he accomplished on the
Croydon road .. .” The quotation is from W.
Thom, whose valuable little book Pedestrianism
is the chief source for Barclay’s performances
and includes a chapter more or less dictated by

25

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1962, 54, 1.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

him on his method of training. Thom, by the
way, takes it quite for granted that Barclay’s
aptitude was inherited, as he makes clear when
alluding to the pedestrian feats of the Captain’s
father, who once walked from Urie to London,
a distance of 510 miles, in ten days, and on other
occasions did 210 miles in three days and eightyone miles in sixteen hours. Thom also tells us
that Barclay’s grandfather was known as “‘the
Strong.”

When walking, the Captain took comparatively short steps and had an air of leaning more
than slightly forward. Fully grown he was about
six foot. His weight in 1809 at the beginning of
his most famous walk was thirteen stone four
pounds. This was the time when he did a thousand successive miles in a thousand successive
hours. Though running was not his line, in 1804
he ran two miles in eleven minutes fifty-seven
and a half seconds. (Champions to-day can do
this in under nine minutes.) His earlier feats
included a walk of 110 miles in nineteen hours
twenty-seven minutes and another, Urie to
Boroughbridge in Yorkshire, 300 miles, in five
days. Nothing more vividly suggests what an
unusual creature he was than the record of his
—‘‘behaviour” really seems the mot juste—in the
summer of 1808, when he was on the point of
going overseas with the Walcheren expeditionary
force as aide-de-camp to Lord Huntley. He got
up at 5 a.m., walked thirty miles to shoot grouse,
dined at 5 p.m., walked sixty miles to his house
at Urie, where he attended to some business
matters, walked sixteen miles to a dance at
Laurence Kirk, back sixteen miles to Urie by
7 a.m., and spent the day shooting. After a
few days’ rest, fresh as paint, he packed and went
off to the wars.

The British diversion against Napoleon’s flank
is commemorated by the well-known lampoon:

The Earl of Chatham, with his sword drawn,

Stood waiting for Sir Richard Strachan;

Sir Richard, longing to be at ’em,

Stood waiting for the Earl of Chatham.
Though the historian Fortescue considers we
gave Napoleon rather a fright—for what use that
was to our Austrian allies—the Walcheren
expedition proved a failure, and Barclay was
soon home again. It was in the following year
that he set out to walk a thousand successive

26

miles in a thousand successive hours. He had
no incentive to speed; in the first week his average for the mile was fourteen minutes fiftty-four
seconds, in the last, twenty-one minutes four
seconds. His weight by the end had dropped two
stone and four pounds to eleven stone. His strategy, as one would expect, had been to walk at the
beginning of one hour and at the end of the next,
but even so by the last week he was getting no
more than seventy-eight-minute intervals for rest
and sleep—which was a severe test of endurance
after five weeks on the move.

In 1811 we hear of 100-mile walks twice a
week, and in 1812 of sixty-six-mile walks three
times a week, but after that Barclay devoted
himself more and more to the management of
his estate; perhaps he had at last got bored with
pedestrianism. He kept up his games and sports,
his cricket, shooting and hunting to the end of
his life. In 1841 he went to the United States
to study farming methods there, and published
an account of his visit when he came home. He
had married Mary Dalgarno in 1819. They had
an only child, a daughter, who has many
descendants in America through her second son.
When Barclay died he was succeeded at Urie by
his cousin Charles.

During his life-time Barclay enjoyed considerable celebrity, expecially in the years 1809 to
1811, at the peak of the great Tom Cribb’s
career, for it was known that this amazing
bruiser and national hero had gone up to train
with him in Scotland. Since Cribb had only once
been beaten, his first and last defeat (by George
Nichols in 1805), it could be felt that by taking
him up Barclay merely showed he knew what
horse to put his shirt on, and that Cribb needed
no help from him while he was getting into shape
to meet the redoubtable American negro Molineaux. Actually the two men were in natural
sympathy with one another, and nobody could
say that Barclay cramped Cribb’s style. Cribb
has been described as bearing “‘a character of
unimpeachable integrity and unquestionable
humanity.” After twice worsting Molineaux he
remained unchallenged for ten years, though the
weight he was putting on behind the bar in his
West End public house (see Conan Doyle’s story
The Lord of Faulconbridge) might have led a bold
man into temptation. In 1821 he was voted
CAPTAIN BARCLAY

Champion for life. The first encounter with
Molineaux had brought him £400—and Barclay
£10,000. Be all this as it may, the best advertisement for Barclay’s method of training was
himself.

Training Methods

What was that method? We shall be correct if
‘we guess it was different from Dr. Barbara
Moore’s. It is just over two years since this
modern pedestrian walked the 871 miles from
John o’ Groat’s to Land’s End in twenty-two
days, doing about four miles an hour for eleven
hours a day, and “sustaining herself on raw
vegetables, fruit, nuts, fruit juices, honey and
milk.” The Annual Register says of her: “Of
Russian birth, aged fifty-six, a ‘scientist-dietitician’ and fanatical vegetarian, she believed that if
we could discover the right diet we should live for
ever, and she did not seem to realize what an
unmitigated disaster this would be.’’ By common
consent her feat for a woman of her age was
magnificent, so there is no question here of
odious comparisons or veiled insinuations that
fruit juices are not all that some people allege.
During his travels in France before the Revolution, Arthur Young had noticed with pleasure
that even the less well-off French were addicted
to vegetable soups and fruit, but a quarter of a
century later (and for long after that) the British
had no idea of cooking green vegetables interestingly, and the insular tradition that it was
unhealthy to eat much fruit died hard. But to
come to Captain Barclay’s system.

The trainee had to start with a good purge:
three doses of from one to two and a half ounces
of Glauber’s salts at four-day intervals. Then to
work. Up at five every morning, run half a mile
at top speed, then walk six miles at a moderate
pace. Seven o’clock breakfast: underdone beefsteaks or mutton chops with stale bread, washed
down with old beer. Six more miles at a moderate pace, half an hour’s rest lying naked, and
four more miles before dinner (the same fare
as breakfast). Then the run and the walk as at
the beginning of the day, and bed at eight.
After running two half-miles and walking
twenty-two the trainee had had a strenuous day
of it.

When a month was up came the sweat. First a

four-mile run in flannels, then a draught concocted as follows: Half an ounce each of coriander seed and sugar-cane, one ounce each of
caraway seed and root liquorice, these ingredients dissolved in two pints of cider and boiled
down to “‘one English pint.” Having drunk this
—presumably hot—and rested heavily covered
on a bed for half an hour, the trainee is rubbed.
dry; afterwards he goes for a gentle two-mile
walk in an overcoat, and so to breakfast, this
time a roasted fowl.

Then, except for the purge, da capo for the
next month.

As to diet, Barclay believed above all in beef
and mutton. “The lean of fat beef cooked in
steaks, with very little salt, is the best, and it
should be rather underdone than otherwise.”
‘Biscuit and stale bread are the only preparations of vegetable matter which are permitted to
be given .. . Vegetables, such as turnips, carrots
or potatoes are never given, as they are watery
and of difficult digestion.” No fish, no butter, or
cheese or eggs, except from time to time the raw
yolk of an egg in the morning. “‘And it must be
remarked that salt, spiceries, and all kinds of
seasonings, with the exception of vinegar, are
prohibited.”

Drink. Always cold. Best of all, old homebrewed beer (not bottled), and no more than
three pints of it per day. If the trainee didn’t like
malt liquor he could have half a pint of red wine.
Water never undiluted, spirits never, nor milk
either, ‘“‘as it curdles the stomach.”

Three months after the purge the trainee
should be seen to be fit from the firmness of his
flesh and the smoothness of his skin.

Barclay’s method worked—for those whom it
suited; and evidently Dr. Barbara Moore did
nicely on her fruit juices, etc. Let us recall here
that Wendy Lewis, an eighteen-year-old hairdresser from Liverpool, followed in Dr. Moore’s
tracks and came in three days later, having kept
up her strength with steak-and-kidney pies “and
anything else I could lay hands on.” Then when
Mr. Butlin of the Camps offered two £1,000
prizes, one for each sex, to the winners of a race
over the same route, John o’Groat’s to Land’s
End, Wendy, coming in second, took only sixteen and a half days. She got her prize, for the
absolute winner was a man, James Musgrave, a

27
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Doncaster glass-packer, who made the distance
in fifteen and a half days, going at a shade over
fifty-six miles a day.

Could Barclay on his beefsteaks have bettered
that? Given his constitution and fitness he might
have done, either on the beefsteaks, etc. or on
some other diet and more up-to-date methods of
training. When Galton in his Inquiries into
Human Faculty (1883) alluded to his cousin’s
famous 1,000-mile walk, he went on to write as
if he believed that the fitness of the “better
housed and fed’’ part of the population had so
far increased, in less than a century, that it was
greater “faculty” rather than improved methods
of training which accounted for the athletes of
his own day breaking so many records, including
Barclay’s. This is giving evolution more than its
due. There may be learned ways of reckoning the
outside limit of faculty for pedestrianism if men
were bred for it. A limit there must be, as most

28

people probably realize from so many records
nowadays depending on a split second.

The essential issue was, by a fair analogy,
summed up on January 31st of this year by Mr.
Peter Burrell, Director of the National Stud. As
reported in The Times he said that “records were
still broken, but this was because of improved
tracks, training methods and the different style
of riding races; in other words through environment, not heredity. So there was a further problem common to breeders of all animals, that of
keeping up the standard after the peak had been
reached.”

Captain Barclay was an all-round sort of
English (or Scots) country gentleman, and it is
unlikely he would have wished men to be bred
and conditioned to be nothing more than recordbreaking pedestrians, as horses are bred for
racing. But, modern training methods would
have fascinated him.
