EUGENICS AS A MORAL IDEAL

The Beginning, of a Progressive Reform

By F. C. S. SCHILLER, M.A., D.Sc., F.B.A.

HE subject of eugenics divides

naturally into two great branches,

which may be called the negative
and the positive. Negative eugenics aims
at checking the deterioration of the human
stock owing to the rapid proliferation of
what may be called human weeds under the
conditions created by cultivation : it is imperative to cope with this growing evil, and
easy to see that, unless something is done
to stop them, the weeds will impose intolerable burdens upon the more valuable
flowers of humanity, and will crowd them
out. The admonition to cultivate our garden includes, therefore, the duty of weeding
it.

It is also fairly easy to see what sort of
thing must be done. For the weeds of
civilization are largely consequences of civilization. Under other social conditions they
would not flourish and could not exist.
Natural selection would speedily eliminate
them. All that a society desirous of
rational action has therefore to do is to refrain from cuddling and cultivating them, to
withdraw the protection extended to them
by social institutions, or better still, so to
improve on nature’s crude and cruel methods
as to eliminate them painlessly, rapidly, and
effectively. Of such improved methods
many are known, and others can be devised.
Negative eugenics therefore, though an urgent need, is practicable, and probably the
most important social aim philanthropy can
set itself.

But negative eugenics is not enough. It
is powerless to improve the human race and
to lift human life to a higher level. It can
only arrest deterioration. If we want improvement, progress, the creation of superior types of humanity, the realization of

ideals, we must look to positive eugenics,
which sets itself to inquire by what means
the human race may be rendered intrinsically better, higher, stronger, healthier,
more capable, so that human life may become happier and more worth living.

Now this is a very much bigger and
harder job. The more one goes into the
ways and means of it, the more difficult it
looks. Still, it is not a task to despair of.
It is not impossible. Something very like
what is needed has been done once, and can
presumably be done again. For the present
human race has evolved, from something
we all think lower and inferior, by the
etforts of creatures much less potent, intelligent, and well equipped than ourselves.
Under providence no doubt; but is it not
very near blasphemy to assume that the
creative nisus was exhausted in evolving us,
and cannot be trusted to sustain further
efforts if we will make them? Is it not unspeakably base and craven for us to content
ourselves with remaining the poor creatures
we are, when we might become something
greater and better? For us to despair of
carrying on the evolution of man would be
to confess ourselves traitors to the cause of
progress and essentially infertor to our apelike ancestors who aspired to better things
and attained them! As, moreover, only the
most besotted optimist would contend that
at present man is perfect and needs no improvement, it is clear that he ought to be
improved. He ought to be improved in a
great variety of respects and in all possible
ways. And it is a great shame that we have
done so little to explore the possibilities.
Herein lies the essential and enduring justification for positive eugenics.

103
104

THE DECAY OF OUR IDEALS

Now if the function of positive eugenics
be such as I have indicated, it clearly constitutes a moral ideal at least as good and
legitimate as any other. For it is fit to
stimulate our moral energies and to evoke
moral enthusiasm. Moreover, it may very
well fill the gap in our social structure left
by older ideals which have faded or become
defunct under the conditions of modern life.
It is almost a secret de polichinelle that
modern life stands in great need of new and
effective ideals, and that morals are in desperate need of reinforcement, precisely and
particularly in the quarters with which positive eugenics would most directly be concerned. I mean, of course, the social relations of the sexes and the arrangements for
the propagation, preservation, and education
of the human kind. These have always
constituted one of the major problems of
human society, and to whatever ideals,
motives, and sanctions any society has
appealed, no arrangement has ever been
quite effective and satisfactory in practice.
Now it is no exaggeration to say that over
large areas of the civilized world sexual
morality has broken down, not merely in
practice—which would be nothing new—but
even more palpably in theory, and that the
great institution which has hitherto assured
the continuance of the race, the family, is
everywhere showing ominous symptoms of
collapse. It is high time, therefore, that
we discovered or devised some further
moralizing influence.

It is evident, moreover, that the moral
agencies on which we have hitherto relied
to curb individual licence and self-assertion
are progressively losing their grip on the
moral situation. For a variety of reasons,
including the unwisdom and unprogressiveness of their attitude towards the problems
of modern life, the religions all seem to be
waning, and though their moral value is not
perhaps in all cases beyond cavil, there is
nothing to take their place.

Certainly ethics cannot hope to do so.
Theoretic ethics is a broken reed. No intelligent man can live long in any academic
atmosphere without becoming aware that

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

academic ethics has no positive moral value.
Indeed, on the whole its value is strongly
negative. It is often positively demoralising. The academic disputes as to how (if
at all) the Good is to be defined, and how it
is related to pleasure, may conceivably be a
good mental gymnastic, though even this
may be doubted. But it is an old story,
as old as Socrates and the beginnings of
ethical reflection, that, as his critics complained, ethical reflection is very upsetting to
moral beliefs. ‘ Know thyself’ does not
mean ‘ Respect thyself,’ and does not tend
to translate itself into ‘Improve thyself,’
So the intellectual analysis of instinctive
and ingrained emotions and convictions is
apt to be merely disintegrating.

The professors of morals usually try to
counter this criticism by contending that
moral theory cannot be expected to have any
beneficial effect upon moral practice.
Morals, they say, merely provide the material for ethical theories to contemplate and
speculate about, and it is vulgar and Philistine to look for any more intimate and vital
relation between theory and practice. Substantially the same answer is given to a
second objection that ethics, as it is taught
in universities, diverts our natural moral
energy into unprofitable channels, and fritters it away in the futile discussion of artificial and antiquated subtleties which never
mattered much and have long ceased to
have any practical meaning, while it leaves
aside, untouched and unmentioned, the real
pressing problems of moral life.

This second charge leads on to a third,
the most damaging of all. Moral philosophy
is practically useless, not merely because it
has adopted a false theory of the relation of
theory to practice. Its professors have intentionally, of malice prepense and in their
own selfish interests, made it useless and
meaningless, in order to shirk a theoretic
problem which they could not solve and
dared not touch, lest it should get them
personally into trouble. This problem
concerned the application of moral principles to concrete cases. After the Catholic
moralists in the seventeenth century had
come to grief and fallen into ill repute by
EUGENICS AS A MORAL IDEAL

evolving a very scientific but very demoralizing system of Casuistry (upon mistaken lines) in their vain endeavours to solve
this problem, the Protestant moralists, who
were really involved in the same difficulty,
thought it safest to steer clear of the subject
of application, to cases, to fact, to life, altogether. So, in order that the purity of
moral principles might run no risks of contamination from contact with the sordid
facts of life, they proceeded to make them
inapplicable in principle.

The culmination of this sort of trickery
—for it is nothing more—is to be found in
the Categorical Imperative of Kant, which
ostensibly proclaims the sacrosanctity of
Duty with tedious reiteration, while actually
forbidding us to ask it what, in fact, our
duties are. It is still esteemed in academic
circles as the supreme effort and example of
a pure morality, and largely accounts for
their emptiness. Its academic admirers have
overlooked the damning fact that it is only
‘safe’ because it is utterly meaningless.
For a principle that cannot be applied to concrete cases at all, or (what comes to the same
thing) can be made to answer them in any
way any one pleases, is as meaningless and
worthless in theory as it is in practice.

EUGENICAL ETHICS IN PRACTICE

Eugenical ethics clearly will not fall into
this trap. It will not refuse to be ‘ practical.’ It will not refuse to consider application to cases. It will avoid the dilemma of
Casuistry by pointing out, with Aristotle,
that moral rules are never absolute, nor
meant to be taken in abstraction from cases.
Hence they are never in themselves decisive.
They are meant for the guidance of moral
agents with whom the decision must remain.
But these must learn to apply them with
an intelligent appreciation of the circumstances of each case. And the better they
understand the circumstances under which
they are called upon to act, the better is
their judgment likely to be.

Hence the enormous enlightenment, which
we owe to modern biology, as to the laws
which determine our physical and mental

105

inheritance, can, and should, affect our
actions, and modify them for the better.
For example, the man who knows that there
is heritable weakness, defect, disease, or
insanity lurking in the stock from which he
springs should conscientiously consider the
probable effects of his defect, not only on
himself, but also on his offspring. If he
finds himself compelled to regard himself as
hopelessly tainted, he should abstain from
parenthood. If he is not so bad as that,
he should at least make sure that he does
not marry into another tainted stock, and
should scrupulously avoid defects identical
with those of which he knows himself to be
the hereditary victim. If he is drawn towards a woman afflicted with a similar taint
in her blood, say insanity, he should vividly
realize the likelihood that some or all of
his children will go mad, even if their
parents themselves escape the doom they
transmit. Already eugenical moral judgments of this sort are far from rare, though
they will have to attain a much greater diffusion and intensity before they can do much
to rid human stocks of dangerous ‘ recessives,’ or even create a social sentiment
strong enough to support strong measures
against those who will not or cannot
see their duties in this eugenical light. For
it is one of the most distressing features of
the situation that such considerations will
not occur to those who need them most. The
feeble-minded, for example, just because
they are such, are very unlikely to perceive
their duty to posterity. Being incapable of
exercising self-control, they will have to be
controlled by other means.

But this social control of those who cannot control themselves clearly belongs rather
to the problems of negative eugenics. There
is no doubt that heritable but preventable
defects contribute a large percentage to the
flood of human misery and that their inheritance can and should be stopped. But
I have only alluded to the social failure involved in the existence of vast numbers of
blighted lives brought into the world to
suffer needlessly and uselessly, to illustrate
the hideous and repulsive immorality of our
present social order and of the systems of
106

ethics and moral philosophy that do not hesitate to approve of its atrocities, or at best say
nothing about them.

REVIVAL OF THE CLAN

But my aim now is to consider what suggestions positive eugenics can make to improve
the social order and the human race. I
should advocate for this purpose, in the first
place, a resuscitation of an ancient institution which has played an enormous and, on
the whole, a beneficial part in history, but
has in recent times lost greatly in repute
and in many countries fallen into disuse.
I mean the larger family, clan, or gens. It
is not too much to say that originally the
gens was the backbone of the early civilizations. It was nearly everywhere the social
unit interposed between the individual and
the tribe, city, or state, and far more potent
than the latter in controlling and training
the former. The most cursory reader of
Roman history can hardly fail to apprehend
that it is very largely the history of the
great Roman families, their ambitions, rivalries, and policies, and owes its distinctive
features to their continuity and tenacity of
purpose. Similarly, the Roman character,
in virtue of which, more than of anything
else, Rome conquered the world, was formed
by the stern discipline of the patria potestas.
Our histories do not perhaps make it equally
plain that the early history of the Greek
cities was almost equally dominated by the
great families, and that so long as these
endured aristocracy was the natural form of
government in Greece as in Rome. Similarly, it is obvious that the history of the
medizval Italian city-states is essentially
family-history, and the superb palaces which
adorn them are intelligible only as the
abedes of noble clans of whom a surprising
number have survived to our days. The
stable civilizations of the East, again, the
Chinese and Japanese, owe their survival
primarily to the family-system which endured through all the vicissitudes of wars
and dynasties.

It seems clear then that the gens as a
form of social organization is highly con
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ducive to the preservation of a biological
stock, and so of any valuable qualities of
which it may be the vehicle. The gens
is not, however, by itself or merely, a biological stock ; it is at most one half of such
a stock, and as inbreeding is impossible or
dangerous, an association of gentes into a
congenital aristocracy is requisite to conserve the qualities of a superior stock. It
follows that the conception of the gens must
be reformed in the light of modern science ;
it must embrace the cognati as well as the
agnati, it must no longer be conceived as
patrilinear or matrilinear, but as both. Our
noble families should realize that they must
trace their descent through both their
parents, and that biologically the mother is
just as important as the father, and that
the captivation of a callow boy by a flighty
ballet-girl may mean the ruin of a noble
stock. This realization is likely to be
a powerful check on the mésalliances which
are a blot on so many pedigrees. In future
King Cophetua will not marry his beggar
maid so lightheartedly at sight.

DEMOCRATIZING AN ARISTOCRACY

Another reform to introduce into the old
clan-system would be a more democratic
organization. There does not seem to be
any good biological or social reason why
the position of head of the clan should descend by primogeniture or seniority without
regard to merit and ability. It should be
made elective, after the fashion I have
sketched in the paper on Eugenical Reform
of the House of Lords,* and it is conceivable
that with a small number of electors with
a strong esprit de corps and an intimate
knowledge of all the circumstances, all
keenly alive to the welfare and greatness
of their family and anxious both on public
and private grounds to pick the best man,
better elections might as a rule be made
than with the vast hordes of ignorant and
careless voters to whom we now entrust our
political destinies.

Of course, it would be necessary to endow
the clan with a legal status and certain

* EuGENiIcs Revirw, January, 1929, Vol. XX, No. 4.
EUGENICS AS A MORAL IDEAL

sorts and degrees of authority over its members. In particular there would devolve
upon it the duty of controlling the matrimonial vagaries of its members. Rules, of
a eugenical character and intent, would have
to be laid down as to the conditions under
which the clan’s assent to a matrimonial
alliance would be granted or withheld.
These rules would evidently be more effective and easier to enforce than ordinary
legislation to prohibit socially undesirable
marriages, and would more narrowly restrict
the right of a member of a noble class to
follow his whims than that of ordinary citizens. Rightly; for the principle of noblesse
oblige would ¢learly apply.

But in itself there would be nothing new
about the principle of family control of
matrimonial affairs. It is already and everywhere a very real influence, and in many
societies, past and present, left the individual, especially the woman, very little
choice. Too often it took the form of foreing women to make ‘ good matches,’ i.e. to
marry rich or powerful old men, whom they
detested. Perhaps under eugenical tuition
they may detest them less in future, because
they will have more admiration for the
qualities of which wealth and power are
commonly the consequences. It may be
hoped, however, that in the eugenical
society of the future family pressure on the
individual will tend to be exercised in a
more rational and salutary way, and will interfere with the individual’s liberty of choice
only in cases where there is genuine ground
for objection and he might well pray to be
saved from his own desires. Hitherto, the
strongest argument for the love-match has
been, not the insight and wisdom of the parties to them, but the shallowness and unwisdom of the principles on which the mariage
de convenance has usually been arranged.
In future we may hope that eugenical
qualities and records will enter more and
more into the preparations for the great adventure of mating, and will exercise such a
fascination over the young that they will
find it easy to fall in love with their possessors. It is not probable indeed, for several
reasons, that marriage will speedily cease

107

to be a lottery, but it need not be so appallingly risky a lottery as it is now rendered
by the prevailing ignorance of both parties
as to their own and each other’s defects.
And in course of time it ought to become a
lottery in which every one worth marrying
should have a good chance of drawing a
prize, in the shape of a eugenically sound
and commendable mate.

The institution of the improved clansystem I have outlined would not detract
from the influence of the narrower family
upon the individual, but would reinforce and
reinvigorate it. It might indeed be contended that it would suffice to rely on the
family spirit alone, without the clan, to control the individual, simply by cultivating
social approbation and_ recognition of
eugenically superior families and thus fostering family pride. Now history shows
that family pride is a potent passion, and
one to which men are capable of sacrificing
themselves and everything else. It would
therefore be a master stroke to enlist it as
an ally of the eugenical conscience. But
there can be no harm in further reinforcing
and regulating it by setting it in the wider
context of the clan. We can hardly err by
imposing too many structural restraints on
the licence of the amorphous hordes that
throng our modern cities.

SELECTION OF SUPERIORITY

Of course, I am aware that these proposals mean a revival of aristocracy. But
I would raise the question whether a true
aristocracy is not worth achieving. If we
emancipate ourselves from  catchwords,
democracy is a means not an end, defensible
only as conducive to a better life than was
possible under a reign of privileged classes
whose superiority was merely imaginary.
The real argument for political equality is
not that men are born equal, but that they
are born so unequal in so many ways and
that society requires such a variety of services that the only practicable form of pollitical organization is to ignore their inequalities and to give votes to all, and then to
trust to the intelligent few to manipulate or
108

cajole the many into abstaining from fatal
follies. Now this is not a very strong argument, though it may have been stronger
than any that could be urged for any of the
old alternatives to democracy. But a
eugenical aristocracy would be a novelty in
the political world, and would really be
superior. Moreover, if we aim at better
things, we must follow nature’s method.
Whatever else natural selection means, it
means that some are to be preferred to
others, and we too must select if we aspire
to better types of man.

But what are the better types of man we
should aspire to? The critics of eugenics
often assume that it must be possible to
state them with their specifications all complete, before it is possible or worth while to
make the least eugenical effort. But this is
a complete delusion. It is not the way we
ever learn. We learn by trial and error.
We do not know what the good, or
rather the better, is, any more than
we know what the true, or rather
the truer, is, in advance of experience.
Until we have experimented and learnt wisdom from the outcome of our experiments,
we can only state in general terms that it
would be good to achieve something better
than the existing average of man, a creature stronger, healthier, wiser, more intelligent, trustworthy, and moral, and less ephemeral, Nor need we hesitate to add, ‘ more
beautiful,’ though from the strictly biological point of view beauty is perhaps the
hardest of all the coveted qualities to account
for rationally.

There is, however, one piece of advice
which may safely be given to any society
that attempts to remould itself nearer to the
heart’s desire by eugenical expedients. This
is that all attempts to reach an ideal must
start from the actual. It is no use to postulate to begin with a human nature that does
not exist. The mentality invoked and the
motives appealed to must be such as are
familiar to human psychology; the institutions presupposed must be those operative
in our actual world. Neglect of this proviso
was the fatal mistake which Plato made in
his Republic, and which condemned all his

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ideals to sterility and futility. Plato postulated a philosopher-king with absolute power
and perfect wisdom who was to institute the
ideal state by an instantaneous coup d’état.
But his first measure was to be grotesquely
impossible. All above the age of ten were
to be driven out of the city, and the philosopher-king was to rule and educate the remainder. Evidently Plato did not realize
that he could not have taken care even of
a single baby.

PRIZES FOR DESERVING BABIES

Any practicable, and therefore serious,
proposal for eugenical reform must eschew
such follies. It must not presuppose a revolution but must begin to be operative here
and now, and operate more potently as more
resources are placed at the service of the
eugenical idea. I will conclude my remarks
by sketching one such institution which
could be started by private enterprise with
quite a moderate outlay, and ask whether
it would not have an effect of the sort desired. I would call it the Eugenical Baby
Show, and proceed as follows :

First, let a representative committee be
found of doctors, educators, scientists,
artists, practical philosophers, and other
persons in whom the public would have confidence. Next let them collect funds and
organize their Baby Show (or perhaps
merely a Eugenical Section in a Vulgar
Baby Show, which would serve as a control
experiment), offering as many and as substantial prizes as their funds permitted. The
parents of the babies entered for these prizes
would, of course, have to state their pedigree and allow their statements about the
history of the family to be verified. ‘Then
the babies would be themselves examined
and the awards made after due consideration
both of themselves and of their ancestry.
Finally, and as a matter of course, their
pictures would be published, like those of
our successful athletes and other notorieties.
For evidently, to be the first eugenical
prize-winner of the year would be a high
social distinction, and a prelude and stimulus to further honours. In subsequent
years there would be periodical revisions and
EUGENICS AS A MORAL IDEAL

renewals of the awards, and further publicity about the doings and development of
the prize-winners, who would no doubt be
aided by eugenical scholarships, with more
pictures. They would thus remain in the
public eye, and much would be expected of
them—more, and more important things
than are now expected of a prince, duke,
athlete, or film star, the attractions of whom
they would in a manner combine. They
would lead a strenuous life and one highly
competitive, but glorious, and would from
time to time be re-examined and reappraised, in order that the committee of
eugenical judges might estimate how far
they had judged aright, and whether the
prize-men were availing themselves of their
opportunities. When their education was
completed, they would go out into the world
as distinguished men ready made, with a
national reputation, greater and better deserved, because more in accordance with
their intrinsic merits, than those of the
characters with which I have compared
them. Every profession would be open to
them, and their success would be practically

109

assured. They would be flooded with lucrative and honourable offers of employment,
and no right-minded girl would dream of
refusing their offers. A eugenical first
prize would soon be recognised as the greatest prize to be won in the lottery of life.

And what about the lower prizes and the
honourable mentions? ‘They too would be
well worth winning, and would stimulate
many ambitions, including that of reversing the original verdict and surpassing the
original victors. ‘Thus, insensibly but constantly and inevitably, the thoughts of all
would be turned in the direction of eugenical
excellence, and gradually but surely, their
thoughts would influence and improve their
acts. It is safe to predict that sooner or
later an enlightened public opinion thus converted to eugenics would compel every
State to take over the private enterprise of
improving the race, and to extend and enforce it by legal sanctions. And then biological evolution might get under way again,
and man might grow into a being as far
superior to his present type as he now is to
the gorilla and the chimpanzee.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 2.
