REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

Wallace, ALFRED RUSSEL. Social Environment and Moral Progress.
London, New York, Toronto, Melbourne. Cassell and Co.; 1913;
price 3s. 6d.; pp. 164.
MEMBERS of the Eugenics Education Society will regret that the
celebrated author of this little volume, who has so recently passed
away after a long life of generous labour and great achievement,
expresses no sympathy with the aims of the Society, and that
all his references to eugenics are disparaging. The following
passage strikes the keynote of the book: “ Nature—or the universal
mind—has not failed or bungled our world so completely as to
require the weak and ignorant efforts of the eugenists to set it right,
while leaving the great fundamental causes of all existing social evils
absolutely untouched. Let them devote all their energies to purifying
this whitened sepulchre of destitution and ignorance, and the beneficent
laws of human nature will themselves bring about the physical, intellectual, and moral advancement of our race” (p. 149). This thoroughgoing condemnation of “ eugenists”” by so eminent a biologist calls for
some examination of its grounds and of the attitude maintained by him
towards the questions with which “eugenics” is concerned. Dr. Wallace’s peculiar views on human evolution are well known; but it is
perhaps worth while to give the briefest possible summary of them. He
believed that the higher intellectual and moral qualities of the human race
were bestowed upon it at some definite date in its history by a creative
act of God; these qualities being superadded to all those lower or simpler
mental powers which it had, and still has, in common with the higher
animals. This process of endowment, which is described as a “ divine
influx,” is supposed to have been of a nature entirely different from the
slow processes of natural selection by which all the rest of the marvels
of life and mind were (in the author’s view) brought into being.

This is no doubt a defensible hypothesis; but eugenists will perhaps
be helped to bear up under Dr. Wallace’s strictures if it is pointed out
that the arguments by which he seeks to establish and elaborate this
doctrine are in some respects confused and inconsequent. For his contempt of eugenics derives from his faith in this doctrine. Dr. Wallace
rightly contends that we have no evidence which could justify us in
believing that the intellectual or moral powers of the human race have
undergone any progressive evolution since the time of the earliest civilisations of which any traces survive. Alongside this fact he places the
extreme diversities of the great groups of languages, arguing that these
imply the separate endowment with higher mental powers of several
distinct branches of the prehuman ancestral stock.

Now, in drawing his conclusion from these facts, Dr. Wallace seems
to ignore the immense duration of the periods of human life which preceded the few thousands of years of recorded civilisation. For, when we
remember that man was a highly intelligent tool-making creature during
a period measured in thousands of centuries, and that we may reasonably
suppose the evolution of his higher powers to have been going on throughout these long ages, the argument from the lack of racial progress in the
historic period is seen to be of no weight. But Dr. Wallace himself
undermines his argument in another way. He points out forcibly enough
that, throughout much or all of the period of civilisation, the conditions
of human life have been such as must have tended to bring about
degeneration of the race by reversed selection rather than any further
REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 361

progress of its innate powers. So strongly is he impressed by the picture
he draws of human degradation under civilisation, that he infers from the
continued existence of examples of human virtue (still to be found in out
of the way corners of our civilised countries) that the higher powers conferred upon the race by the “ Divine influx ” must be regarded as incapable of being degraded by processes of reversed selection.

Nevertheless, he regards these powers as capable of undergoing
further improvement through natural selection, and he confidently anticipates that such progress of the race will result from socialistic legislation
of a kind which will secure material well-being for all persons, but will
strictly abstain from eugenically intended measures. The mode of selection on which he chiefly relies tor the advancement of the human species
is the wise choice of husbands by women. And he believes that this
can be brought into effective operation by legislation of the type he
favours. For, he argues, such legislation would produce a surplus of
marriageable males (by putting an end to war and diminishing the other
agents, disease, accidents, and emigration, to which the present surplus
of females is due), and would render women economically independent ;
which again would increase the surplus of males, because under such
conditions a certain proportion of women would prefer to remain celibate.
Women could then be relied upon to choose for their husbands the better
endowed males only, leaving a sterile surplus which would consist of the
males least fit for fatherhood. This in brief is the train of reasoning
which leads the author of Wallaceism or neo-Darwinism (the biological
doctrine which denies all transmission of the effects of use and environment) to range himself upon the side of those who look solely to the
betterment of the conditions of social life for all advance of the human
race and who commonly take their stand (whether explicitly or not)
on the assumption that the Lamarckian doctrine is true.

It appears, then, that Dr. Wallace was himself a eugenist; for he
looked forward to the improvement of the human breed through the intelligent purposeful action of human beings. And, unless he was prepared
to maintain that the mothers of the race under his socialistic scheme would
exert their choice of husbands no less wisely if they were to give no
thought to the future of the race and the quality of their offspring than
if they were guided by an enlightened forethought for these things, then
he was logically committed to approve of the aims of the Eugenics
Education Society and morally bound to supportit. And it appears that he
differed from us other eugenists, chiefly in the two following ways: (1) he
had an absolute confidence in the practicability and beneficence of social
legislation of the type he favoured. (2) he felt no urgent need for action
to arrest the processes of reversed selection that seem to be making (and
always to have made) for racial degeneration among the most highly
civilised peoples; because he believed that the work of the “ Divine
influx ” cannot be undone; the sudden advance of the race brought about
by that process is irreversible; and so the race is secured against degeneration and can afford to wait, marking time with what patience it may,
until the Socialists shall have demonstrated the harmlessness and practicabilitv of their schemes, without presupposing any radical transformation of human nature by the green gases of a comet or by any other
miraculous occurrence.

Although it may, then, be admitted that if the socialistic scheme of
society were otherwise workable and desirable, sexual selection would
probably become once more under it a eugenic factor, we cannot find in
Dr. Wallace’s book any justification for his hostile attitude towards
eugenics. For, in the first place, if we were to grant all his premises
and to accept all his conclusions, we should still have to recognise the
work of eugenic education as important for the guidance of sexual selection by women. Secondly, since the doctrine of the insusceptibilitv of
man’s higher nature to degeneration is so slenderly based, we cannot re362 EUGENICS REVIEW.

concile ourselves to the continuance of the conditions which seem to
threaten to destroy our civilisation as they seem to have destroyed so
many others, namely, by bringing about deterioration of our stock.
Thirdly, although reasonable men may perhaps regard the socialistic plan
of society as a hopeful experiment and as one that ought to be given a
trial, no impartial person will regard the success of the plan as so well
assured that we can afford to stake upon it the whole future of our race,
holding ourselves absolved by the hope of it from the duty of giving
careful consideration to all other eugenic possibilities. W. McD.

Woods, FREDERICK ApaMs. The Influence of Monarchs: Steps in a
New Science of History. New York. The Macmillan Co. ; 1913;
price 8s. 6d.; pp. xili., 422.

READERS of Dr. Adams Woods’s “ Mental and Moral Heredity in Royalty ”
will not be slow to welcome this continuation of his interesting researches and the further elaboration of his striking plea for a fuller recognition of the decisive influence on the course of affairs of the
hereditary personal qualities of the great family (in a biological sense)
which is known as European Royalty. He would not, perhaps, himself
contend that he had absolutely proved by his statistics that the quality
of rulers is the chief factor in a nation’s advance or decline, or that the
verdicts of historians are essentially just, and that “ historiometry ” is
an “exact” science; but it may be admitted that he has made his positions exceedingly probable, at any rate for the period he reviews, viz.,
from the later Middle Ages to the French Revolution. And he has certainly provided a salutary antidote to the mechanical theory of history
which ascribes everything to “ conditions ” and nothing to the personalities
of the actors in the drama of history, and has too easily been accepted
as the only “scientific” view. No higher praise could be bestowed
on Dr. Woods than that he worthily continues the criticism of this theory
which was so brilliantly initiated by William James, in his essay on
“ Great Men and their Environment ” in the “ Will to Believe.” To come
more specifically to Dr. Woods’s present argument, he finds that “ between the mentalities of the rulers and the conditions of their realms ”
there is deducible from his data, the verdicts of historians, the correlation
of ‘60 or more, which, in view of the character of some of the data, he
justifiably regards as very high (p. 247). The only considerable exception to the rule is found in England, where national prosperity has of
late proceeded independently of royal influence. He suggests therefore
that “the real differences among nations, as among the individuals who
compose them, are caused by arrangements of chromosomes within the
gametes,” and looks “ upon these great statesmen as born and not made,
and... . the nation as much favoured by certain forces almost hidden
and unsuspected as yet, forces in-born in their nature, such as may
well be acting all the time without easy detection—differences brought
about by natural selection, by immigration and emigration, by differences
in net fertility, sexual selection, the formation and development of the
caste system, and other eugenic or aristogenic movements but little under
stood ” (p. 238). ;
Clearly Dr. Adams Woods’s researches are eminently deserving
of eugenical approval, royal patronage, and democratic denunciation! To promote, however, their scientific completeness there are a
number of further problems he should endeavour to solve by his methods
—as, indeed, he has already begun to do. As it is evident that royalty
can only influence national welfare where this institution exists, to what
influences are national progress and decay to be ascribed under republican
or quasi-republican (as in England) forms of government? Probably it
will be possible here too to trace personal and hereditary influences
(of governing families, etc.) with some definiteness. Again, what is the
social value of institutions which either secure the survival of the strong
