DARWINIAN INTERPRETATIONS.

By E.+S. GOODRICH

(Linacre Professor of Zoology and Comparative Anatomy—Oxford).

In spite of the general acceptance of the epoch making work of
Darwin on ‘‘the Origin of Species by means of Natural Selection’’ there
is still much difference of opinion among naturalists as to relative
importance and exact mode of action of the processes concerned in the
differentiation of the various forms commonly known as ‘species.’
The close study of nearly related varieties or subspecies is one of the
most important fields of research likely to yield significant results in
this connection, and light will no doubt be thrown on the question by
a careful analysis of the natural conditions under which divergencies
arise among individuals composing a ‘species.’ Mr. Hinton, in the
valuable paper printed above, has drawn attention to several instructive examples among mammals. With his final conclusion that the
mammalian ‘species’ have evolved by ‘‘descent with continuous and
progressive modifications’’ no modern zoologist is likely to quarrel,
provided the words ‘‘continuous and progressive’’ do not imply some
mysterious modifying force, but mean merely that change takes place
by the summation of variations. But with Mr. Hinton’s opinion that
‘mutations’ are entirely absent from wild mammals, and his implication that such mutations have nothing to do with the evolution of
mammalian species or subspecies, we are quite unable to agree. And
when he goes on to argue that evolutionary changes must be due to the
inheritance of ‘acquired characters,’ we believe he has fallen into a too
common but none the less very serious error. He seems to be unaware
that the whole theory of the permanent alteration of organisms by the
inheritance of so-called acquired characters is now discredited, and has
been shown to be inconsistent with well-established facts brought to
light since the time of Darwin by the study of heredity.

Mr. Hinton’s attempt to support ‘Neo-Lamarckism’ by an appeal
to palaeontology cannot be admitted. However correct were Kowalevsky’s descriptions of the structure of fossil Ungulates, however
correct were his interpretations of the mechanical purpose to which they
were put, these observations and conclusions can have no bearing on the
question of the causes which led to the appearance of these structures
or the mode of their inheritance. One of the first duties of the investigator in search of the causes of evolutionary change is to find out
whether the differences between the characters of divergent subspecies
are determined by the direct action of environmental stimuli (are
phentotypic), or by differences in their genetical endowment or factorial make-up (are genotypic). The true nature of a change or difference of structure can only be made out by experiment—that is to say
DARWINIAN INTERPRETATIONS. 115

by breeding. In this connection it may be pointed out that Mr.

Hinton makes no reference to the important work of F. B.. Sumner
who has shown that many of the local races or subspecies of the deermouse Peromyscus preserve their distinguishing features and breed true
even when brought together and reared in one and the same environment. For instance, Sumner after breeding at La Jolla, California,
the pale race (subspecies P: Maniculatus sonoriensis) from the Mojave
desert for eight years (through 7—12 generations), and the dark race
(subspecies P. m. rubidus) from N.W. California for 6 years (4—7
generations) found that the distinguishing characters remained stable.

In spite of their having been brought into a common environment from
widely differing localities, there was no convergence either between
these two geographical races, or between them and the local race P. m.

gambeli occurring at La Jolla. More work on these lines, to supplement observations made in the open and speculations based on the
inspection of collections in museums, is greatly needed.
