THE ASCERTAINMENT OF PROMISING”
FA MILIES*

By SIR CHARLES DARWIN, K.B.E., F.R.S.

E have ventured to come here on

\ \ / behalf of the Eugenics Society in

the hope of getting your advice,
and also I hope the help of some of you, in a
project that we are trying to get going. We
call it the Promising Families project, but to
explain what this means you must allow me
to go a little way back into the past.

The Eugenics Society was founded some
fifty years ago, and its aim is to study the
possibilities of benefiting humanity, through
working on the inherent qualities of the
human species. There are a great many
organisations—including our _ national
government—which aim at making us all
better and happier, but this they try to do
entirely by controlling external conditions.
We try to look deeper, being moved to this
by the consideration that natural selection,
which is Nature’s method of keeping any
species of animal up to the mark—if I may
so put it—is a brutal method, and that in fact
the mere controlling of external conditions
is wholly directed towards destroying the
influence of natural selection, that is to say it
is tending not to keep us up to the mark. We
fear therefore that there may be a danger
that, under present conditions, generation by
generation, the human species may be becoming steadily stupider and lazier, and weaker
in character, and it is the aim of our Soczety to
study how such a trend should be combated.

Francis Galton, the founder of the subject
of eugenics, gave a phrase which embodies
these ideas so admirably that it has been
adopted as the motto of our Society.” He said
“Man is gifted with pity and other kindly
feelings; he has also the power of preventing
many kinds of suffering. I conceive it to fall
well within his province to replace Natural

* An address given on behalf of the Eugenics Society
at the Thirty-eighth Conference of Educational
Associations, December 30th 1954 to January 5th 1955.

Selection by other processes that are more
merciful and not less effective. This is precisely the aim of eugenics.”’

This is precisely the aim of eugenics, and
it is the aim of our Society to see how far it
is possible to carry it out. The essential
matter that we think about is one that plays
rather a small part in the general planning
of the human world. It is heredity, because
it is by encouraging the better members of
the community to have more children, and
the worse members less, that we may hope to
replace the action of natural selection in the
way proposed by Galton. There is of course

_by now a lot of fairly deep knowledge about —

17

the laws of heredity, but there is no need
to think about them, because in fact we all
do know that a child is rather more likely
to resemble its own parents than somebody
else’s parents. As to personal appearance
this is obvious, but I think most sensible
people will agree that it also applies to things
like character and intelligence. There is of
course nothing absolute about it ; just as
ugly parents may sometimes produce beautiful children, so stupid parents may sometimes have intelligent children, and vice
versa. But in spite of this it is true more
often than not that the good will reproduce
the good, and the bad the bad, and that is
quite enough to work on. It is with this.
background of thought about the importance
of the family that we have embarked on our
present project. |

It is obvious that a small Society like ours
cannot hope by itself to accomplish much in |
the way of actually changing the world,
but we think we could help by discovering
ways in which it might be done, so that if
some other larger body—even perhaps the
government—should some day adopt a
eugenic policy, we could tell them how to
implement it. We would like to be able to

4
18 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tell them how to discover which are the really
valuable types of family which should be
encouraged to multiply, and conversely for
the other end of the scale, the bad families
that are to be discouraged. Now it is easy
for any of us to think over our acquaintances
and decide to which of them either of these
rules should apply, but that is not enough.
We want to discover a much more objective
way of “ascertaining ’’ who the families
of either type-are, 1f possible on something
like a national scale, because only so would
the results be practically useful. In attempting this we have to reckon that the results
will not by any means be perfect—we shall
miss some, and shall accept some that we
ought to have rejected—but we would like
to know whether we cannot find the majority
of them. If we could get results that were
seventy or eighty per cent right, that would,
on statistical principles, be quite good enough.

There are two ends to the problem; what
I may call the good end and the bad end, and
I. think you will see that it is very much
easier to treat of the bad end. This is because
you can get an easy start in it through
Police records, the special schools, slums
and so on. Our Soczety very rightly started
at this easy end, because one can thus expect
quicker results, and ever since then it has
directed attention to the disastrous way in
which the feeble-minded children of feebleminded parents were being carefully preserved, so that they should be able to grow
up and carry on the same good work for

themselves. I think we may claim to have

played an important part in waking the
country up to the existence of this’state of
affairs, but it has now certainly got into the
general consciousness, and there are other
organisations considering how to deal with
it by some form of control or legislation.
I need hardly say more about this side of
the subject, but I may mention that one
of our recent activities has been a study of
what we call Problem Families, by which
we mean families above the feeble-minded
level, but so low-grade that dealing with
them is an important problem to their
betters. They are the sort of people who live
in slums, and if a benevolent municipality

provides them with better housing, the only
effect is to turn that into a slum too.

We now want to turn our attention
to the other end of the scale, and we have
adopted the name Promising Families, as
Contrasted with Problem Families. We have
of course always had in mind to do this sort
of thing but, as I have said, it is a very much
more difficult matter to work on, and the
more you look at it the harder it is seen to be.
It is not a bit like judging race-horses, for
there you can see both which horse wins and
which comes in last. The breed of racehorses has been improved—and indeed to a
quite remarkable degree during as short a
time as the past two centuries—by sending
the winner to the stud, and by ensuring that
the horse that ends last leaves no offspring. The first of these things is obviously
the more important, and we would like to do
the same for humanity, but it is a very different business deciding what human beings
have won the race of life, compared to the
horses that win races, whereas it is fairly
easy to see which people can certainly be
classified as ending last in the race of life.

It is easy to have-a standard of badness
that will be accepted by all responsible
people, but for a standard of goodness there
will never be the same agreement. Some
people value intelligence highest, some
strength of character, some virtuous conduct,
and some such things as good health, good
physique or the capacity to acquire skill in
one of the arts or in games. Undoubtedly
we should like to have a race of perfect
human beings possessing all these qualities,
but that is not the question because we
certainly shall not get it. But fortunately
it does not seem necessary to make any exact
choice between this list of rival merits. In
the first place we take the line that there
is no point in thinking about the most
superior people of all ; they cannot be kept
down and will reveal themselves anyhow,
and you have to recognise that even if some
people like the “village Hampden” of
Gray’s Elegy are going to be missed, it would
be, out of all proportion, difficult to try and
devise any system for the task of finding
them. Of course we should not reject any
THE ASCERTAINMENT OF PROMISING FAMILIES . 19

such people that we did find, but we have
made up our minds that we are not thinking
about budding Shakespeares or Newtons or
Churchills. .

Our interest, then, is not at all in the
supreme geniuses, but rather to find how easy
it is to “ascertain” the distinctly lower,
but still immensely valuable part of the
population, say something like the top fifth
of the community. We very definitely do
not want to pick out any special quality
at the expense of the rest, but rather we want
to accept any combination of the generally
meritorious qualities which will be accepted
by most reasonable people. We want to
discover the Promising Families, but for
reasons [ shall explain later we plan that the
starting point should be promising pupils at
school. This is to give us our start, but our
aim is very definitely not merely to be able
to say “ I know that this boy promises to be
a valuable citizen,’’ but the rather different
matter “I know that this boy is a member
of a family which is likely to produce a lot
of valuable citizens.’ This is our aim, and
we hope we may in this way be able to get a
line on the way to discover Promising Families, for if we succeed, it may be that one
day some larger organisation would say
“We like these promising families so much
that we will endow them so that they may
produce more children for the succeeding
generations.”

As I have said we want to keep the field
broad, that is to say, we do not want simply
to pick the boy at the top of the class, though
we do not in the least want to under-rate
that as.one of his merits. We are looking
for much wider good qualities than that,
such as capacity for leadership and for
co-operation with his fellows and so on.
In fact, broadly speaking, the selection we
are aiming at is for all or any of the qualities
that we most of us do value in our fellow
men. -Now it happens that a very fair
prescription of this kind was given long ago
by Cecil Rhodes when he founded his
scholarships; He prescribed: literary and
scholastic ability and attainments ; qualities
of truth, courage, devotion to duty, unselfishness and fellowship ; exhibition during

school-days of moral force of character and of
instincts to lead and to take an interest in his
school-mates. Fondness for sport. There is
of course nothing sacred about these definitions, but they do give a very good description of what I will call the “ valuable
citizen; I would have said simply ‘ good
citizen ”’ if that term were allowed to have its
true meaning, and were not likely to be
taken, as it sometimes is nowadays as a term
of slightly contemptuous abuse.

How are we to start these families? The
chief question is to know where to start.
We do not want to be open to the charge of
favouritism by simply looking round for
them, and this anyhow could not work on
anything like a national scale. We want a
good objective start, and this we hope to get
with your help. We are proposing to ask
the headmasters of the schools of a few
districts to nominate some of their pupils
as having the sort of superior qualities that I
have mentioned. We definitely do not want
an automatic nomination of the pupils at
the top of each class, though I expect that a
good many of those nominated will be near it,
because after all intelligence and application
and interest in school work are qualities
which go to make up the valuable whole.
man; but we certainly want attention
given to the other qualities enumerated by
Rhodes, in particular the type of quality
that goes with leadership. There are also
other qualities he did not enumerate that
many people would want to include, for
example artistic ability, and these we should
certainly accept as part of a qualification
for nomination. What we do not want is
the type of boy whom his masters think
to be intelligent, yet who is always at the
bottom of the class, not because he has other
over-riding interests but just because he is
too lazy to try. In fact we want to leave the
choice really quite open to the schoolmasters
who are making the selection and we shall
welcome a good deal of variation in the
types of choice they may make, so long as
the selectors are genuinely of the opinion
that the boys they are nominating are the
best in their schools in the general sense I
have tried to describe.
20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

One other point may be mentioned. It
will sometimes happen that the master is
acquainted with the parents of a boy he is
thinking of nominating, and this might
influence him in his choice, for he may well
himself feel that the family is promising
or the reverse. In so far as it is possible, we
would like this not to happen. We would
prefer the judgment made on the boy himself, because only if that is done is the
comparison fair between him and another
boy whose parents are unknown to the
schoolmaster.

To give an idea of the size we contemplate
for our list, we are thinking of something
like five per cent. of the school. As to their
ages we propose that they should not be
younger than about eight, because it would
be hard to recognise easily the qualities
we demand until that age. As upper limit
we fix twelve or thirteen, but for quite a
different reason. The reason is that the
ultimate aim of the inquiry is to find
families which ought to be encouraged to
have more children because of the excellence
of those they have already produced, but by
the time one of these children has reached
twelve or thirteen the parents would probably usually be unwilling to have any more.

We shall thus have fairly short lists of
pupils nominated by the headmasters to start
on. We call the selected pupils nominees.
We then propose to approach the parents of
all the nominees with a questionnaire asking
about the circumstances of the family which
are appropriate to our inquiry. The questions ask about the careers of the parents
themselves, and also outlines of the careers
of the fathers and mothers and the brothers
and sisters of the parents. There are also
questions about the brothers and sisters of
the nominees, and it is hoped that permission
will be given by the parents for us to follow
up the school careers of these. Though we
hope that most of the parents will be cooperative, we are planning to have in each
district a local committee to follow the
matter up and to give help if the question
naires have not been answered spontaneously.
I need hardly say that the whole business is
to be absolutely confidential. We will very
willingly show the master a blank copy of the
questionnaire, but not the answers of the
parents. These will be kept secret and will be
dealt with statistically by a classification of
the answers into groups, which we hope will
show us how to find the Promising Families.

That is the outline of our scheme, but I
would like to make a point that may not have
emerged from what I have said. ‘One of the
great advantages of English over most other
languages is its abolition of grammatical
genders, but the abolition is not complete,
because we still have no single word for
“he-or-she’” or “his-or-her.”” If I had
actually used “ he-or-she”’ in all I have
been saying the result would have been quite
intolerably clumsy, and I have therefore
spoken as though the nominees were all
male, which I certainly did not mean. So
you must believe that I had in mind a sort
of grammatical Sex Disability Act implying
sex equality ; girls are just as good as boys
to act as the starting point in discovering
Promising Families. This equality is particularly true in our subject, because from
the genetical point of view the two sexes
are of exactly equal importance whatever
the difference between them may be in
other things of life.

We do not, of course, know what will be the
outcome of the inquiry. At the best we shall
find it easy to detect which of the nominees.
really do lead us to be able to identify
Promising Families, and it will be important
for us to know what fraction of them do.
At the worst we might be forced to the conclusion that, though we believe there are
such things as Promising Families, this is
not the way to discover them ; but there is
absolutely no reason to expect such a disappointing result. However we cannot tell
without trying ; and in our trial we hope we
may interest some of you to help us, at any
rate by criticism of our scheme to-day, and
perhaps later by active co-operation.
