EUGENICS IN NORWAY

By C. B. S. HODSON, FL.

HE world at large has become aware

of eugenic progress in Norway owing

to the passing of the Sterilization Law
in May of this year. English eugenists, however, have known something of the long and
strenuous work which has preceded this
achievement, for the EUGENICS REVIEW has
been fortunate in receiving, from time to
time, articles from Dr. Jon Alfred Mjoen
dealing with various aspects both of his own
work and of that achieved in his Institute,
the Winderen Laboratory.

It may be of interest to go more into detail
in the history of the movement in Norway,
partly as a study of methods of achieving
effective eugenic propaganda ; partly for the
demonstration which that history gives of
the value of interchange of thought between
one country and another. Indeed, it would
be a difficult task to disentangle the priority
of the eugenic movement, stage by stage, as
between Germany, Scandinavia and England ; for while Francis Galton is the recognized founder of eugenics, the labours in
Germany of Ploetz and his friends round
about 1900 precede the crystallization of the
group of eugenic workers in England in 1908,
while in Norway it was in 1906 that Dr.
Mjoen first set up the Winderen Biological
Laboratory.

It should be interesting at some future date
to get the precise story of the interchange of
ideas between Germany and Norway; the
veteran leaders, whose influence still figures
so large in the International Federation of
Eugenics, recall schemes laid before the
foundation of the Laboratory for an international meeting, and an informal gathering
took place in Germany prior to the London
Congress in 1912, which ranks as the first
International Eugenics Congress. From the
first the Winderen Laboratory made biology
of man the pivotal point of its work. It has
combined in a happy way biological research

41

—education in the form of publication of
results—and finally formulation of legislative
proposals for the practical realization of race
hygiene. Here one may deduce an important
point—namely, the necessity for such a combination in any fruitful attempt at lasting
human progress. Improvement based merely
on theoretical ideals and ignoring the fundamental natural laws which can only be
probed by careful scientific investigation,
builds, if it builds at all, on sand; indeed,
more often than not such well-meant but illfounded attempts bring results widely different from those desired. On the other hand,
research isolated from practical problems and
practical issues may, for a long time, give
neither tangible nor valuable results.

Another interesting point about the work
of the Laboratory in general is brought out
by the degree to which preliminary researches
on animals can and may be used to indicate
which lines of investigation on man can most
conclusively be undertaken for the solution
of any particular problem.

In the following survey it will be noted that
a number of subjects have been followed up
at the Winderen Laboratory, and later by
Norwegian Committees, which by English
eugenists would not be considered as falling
strictly within their field. Although the
terms race hygiene and eugenics are sometimes taken as interchangeable, they cannot
be so regarded in this particular instance.
Race hygiene for the Norwegians has meant
more than eugenics pure and simple, in that
it has covered a number of factors influencing
maternity and the healthy life of unborn
children, as well as embracing those factors
which concern a remoter posterity, namely,
heredity and selection. Indeed, in the brief
outline of the work at Winderen which was
published for its twenty-five year jubilee by
Professor Dr. O. Reche, the objectives are
described as being heredity and race hygiene.
42 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

THE 1908 PROGRAMME

It was in 1908 that Dr. Mjoen made public
the programme of measures aimed at race
hygiene under the following headings :

1. Negative race hygiene (measures for
diminishing undesirable racial elements).

(a) Permanent segregation of recidivists in
working colonies.
(0) Sterilization of the unfit.

2. Positive race hygiene (measures aimed
at the increase of valuable racial elements).

(a) Selective internal colonization with
schemes for diminishing the movement
from country to town. Agricultural
organization independent of urban
centres. Decrease of rates and taxes
according to family.

(6) Maternal insurance. Introduction of
human biology in school and university curricula, with discouragement of
the tendency for the education of girls
to approximate to that of boys by
laying stress on preparation for motherhood.

(c) Centrally controlled propaganda in
knowledge of the renewal, health and
nutrition of the population, with
bureaux for giving information on
questions of racial hygiene.

3. Prophylactic race hygiene (protection

of the unborn child).

(2) A campaign against racial poisons,
venereal diseases, narcotics, etc.

(b) Measures to make these part of the
functions of public health control.

(c) Certificates of health before marriage,
including the discouragement of marriage with widely unrelated races.

(2) Biological assessment of the whole
population. Introduction of individual
registration including health data.

(e) Immigration control based on _ biological standards, with powers to
prevent admission.

Certain sections of this programme received
full development somewhat later, in particular the control of migration and the drink
laws. As for the latter, whilst Sweden has
tried to put down excessive alcoholism by

making the merchant responsible for withholding intoxicants from certain categories
in the community, the Mjoen plan, as it has
been called, taxes alcoholic drinks according
to their content of alcohol, so that from a
small tax on light wines and beers a steeply
graded tax leads up to an almost prohibitive
price for spirits.

THE CONSULTATIVE EUGENICS
COMMISSION

The eugenic section of this programme of
1908 was considered by a commission which
grew out of the London Congress. In Paris
this commission in 1913 accepted the programme as a basis for eugenic endeavour.
Subsequently, the Norwegians succeeded in
forming a group known as the Consultative
Eugenics Commission of Norway. In addition to eminent Norwegians, other Scandinavians have served from time to time on
this commission, notably, up to the time of

‘his death, Professor Johannsen of Copen
hagen and Professor Herman Lundborg.
Recently Professor Herribert Nilsson of
Lund has replaced Professor Johannsen.
This Commission has been of importance
not merely for Norway and Scandinavia, but
for the International Eugenics movement.
It has attracted, one after another, a number
of eminent Scandinavians, and the difficult
work of careful periodic revision of the practical programme was left largely to that
group. Between the International Congresses in New York in 1921 and 1932, this
Committee secured comments and critiques
of the Norwegian programme from practically all the outstanding eugenists of
Europe and America and published their
opinions as a commentary. This is a document of very considerable interest, giving
cross-section references to the opinions of
those whose researches and studies, either in
eugenics itself or in kindred sciences, entitles
them to be heard with attention, and we
believe that not a little of the favourable
public opinion which has resulted in recent
eugenic legislation in Norway is due to the
existence of this Consultative Commission.
The original members were undoubtedly wise
in securing membership of lawyers, social
EUGENICS IN NORWAY 43

economists, and men of affairs as well as
medical men and biologists. It is only by
such co-operation that sound practical measures can be outlined, while on the other hand
enactments supported by eminent people of
such different standings are more readily
accepted than the findings of scientists
unsupported by those with political knowledge.

CONFLICTS OF OPINION

Acceptance of eugenic measures was not
won without prolonged and sometimes acrimonious opposition, proceeding not only
from the uninstructed laity but from scientists as well. There would be no special
interest or profit in studying in detail the
phases of the conflict, but one aspect should
be mentioned, namely, that the group which
has worked most keenly for contraception
and for the legalization of abortion has, in
the main, been in the opposite camp to the
eugenists proper. Norway does not stand
alone in this ; the same type of cleavage has
appeared in the Eastern United States and
has cropped up from time to time in the
course of the German movement. England
has perhaps shown best that such opposition
is not inherent in the two positions when they
are properly understood. Here we have come
nearer to realizing that contraception is
primarily a question of maternal hygiene, to
be wisely used for health in pregnancy in the
mother, which naturally contributes in its
turn to the well-being of the offspring. Such
health measures are outside eugenics in the
strict sense, but may be a potent practical
ally. Birth-control has been proved to be of
little use for the avoidance of pregnancy
amongst the physically and mentally unhealthy. On the other hand, its mere existence need not endanger the size of families
amongst those naturally well endowed for
parenthood where a sufficient eugenic incentive exists.

RECENT DEVELOPMENTS

With the passing of the Sterilization Bill
this spring, there remains but little of the
Norwegian programme which still awaits
introduction. The two main outstanding
points are personal registration with health

data incorporated in the identity book
(Kennbok) and more effective biological
control of migration. It is noteworthy that
the Sterilization Bill was introduced by a
cousin of Dr. Mjoen, representing the agricultural interests of his country, and was
passed with one sole opposing vote.

The researches at the Winderen Laboratory have turned mainly in two directions ;
on the one side the heredity of intellectual
capacity, and on the other the results of race
crossing. Dr. Mjoen selected music as the
chief subject of his psychological research,
the first task being conceived as the isolation
of basic faculties. In his earliest researches
published on musical faculty, this analysis
isolated ten factors. Later these were further
subdivided or added to, and now number
twenty. Some of these are more definitely
diagnostic than others, but the value of them
all for genetic studies is undoubted. A thousand families or groups of relatives covering
two to four generations have now been
investigated from the Winderen Laboratory,
running to more than ten thousand individuals. The work has demonstrated the course
of each particular faculty measured, so that
the study does not merely demonstrate inheritance of musical ability in general, but
the type of inheritance for each of this considerable number of factorial capacities.

It was these studies which gave an early
corroboration, in fact, to the Mendelian
hypothesis that any character having multiple factors will be shown to be closely correlated with the family as a whole, including
the collaterals; which is true to such an
extent that the heredity of offspring should
never be assessed and never can be assessed,
with any truth, from that of the parents
apart from their own relatives. It may be superfluous to recall that the faculties often
found in musical ability include not merely
some aspects of intelligence, but those
temperamental or emotional qualities which
we should speak of as inspiration, imagination and creative ability.

RACE-CROSSING STUDIES

In race-crossing studies the Winderen
Laboratory has shown the same prevision in
44 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

instituting a careful study to make clear the
fundamentals of the problem before embarking on particular research. Hybridization of
widely different varieties of rabbit were made
and a careful study of the hybrids was undertaken. These showed blending of antagonistic characters was not.to be expected, the
hybrids presenting a mosaic of the parental
points. Part of the bony skeleton may be
inherited from one race, part from another,
and physiological and psychological aberrations showed similar disharmonies in
glandular and other tissues. When study of
the offspring of Norwegian Lapps mating
with Norwegian Nordics was undertaken, it
was towards such indications of disharmony
that the research was directed. Physical
measurements of 600 Nordics, 600 Lapps and
300 hybrids showed the following points:
wider variation amongst the hybrids in
stature, facial symmetry, lung capacity and
skeletal structure, a higher incidence of
diabetes and a loss of immunity from certain

diseases. Hand grip also showed greater
variation in the hybrids.

The question of mental stability or instability was not disregarded, but this difficult
diagnosis has not been fully worked out.
Mjoen suggests that hybridization amongst
races showing great similarity may have considerable value, in that the aptitudes of one
superimposed upon those of another may
give very valuable combinations, particularly of psychological faculty, so long as the
somatic and physiological kinship between
the two is sufficiently close for there to be no
question of disharmony.

The Winderen Laboratory has been a
training ground for a small but distinguished
body of students, scientific and medical, of
human biology and research method, and it
is to be hoped that these happy traditions
will, in the future, continue not only for the
good of Norway but of students of eugenics
the world over.

\ pee) Ey”

 

MANSON (Manchester University).

Academy, Elbing).
Congresses, News, Reviews.

  
 

CHARACTER anp PERSONALITY

An International Psychological Quarterly
Edited by ROBERT SAUDEK

Contents of March 1935 issue

Psycho-Sociological Problems of a Minority Group, by KURT LEWIN (Cornell University).
Twin Investigations in the U.S.S.R., by S. G. LEVIT (Medico-Biological Institute, Moscow).
Does Drawing Skill show in Handwriting? By JAN MELOUN.

Character Types, by MAX DESSOIR (Berlin University).

The Conversation as a Basis for Judgment of Personality, by T. H. PEAR and R. H.

The Development Test as Applied to Infants, by H. HETZER and A. BRAUN (Educational

Subscription, 7s. 6d. per annum ; single copies, 2s.
LONDON: GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD.

     
   

  

 
 
      
   
   
   
     
  

 
 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVH, No. 1.
