ABORTION IN SOVIET RUSSIA 
Has the Time come to Legalize it Elsewhere ?
By HENRY HARRIS, M.D.

(An Address given to the Eugenics Society, December 20th, 1932.)

P to the moment, Soviet Russia is

the only European State to legalize

abortion for other than purely medical reasons. A few States—notably Estonia
and Czechoslovakia—have considered introducing new legislation on the matter, but
have not yet done so.

Any woman in Russia, who is not more
than three months pregnant, can demand an
abortion as her indisputable right. If more
than three months pregnant, it may be
granted her for medical reasons or even
eugenic, social, and economic reasons.

In Western Europe, the medical profession and others are becoming increasingly
interested in the question of legalized abortion, and it may be of interest to describe
and analyze Soviet Russia’s thirteen-yearold experiment. Having visited Russia
recently and speaking some Russian, I venture to do so under six heads:

1. The Soviet Laws on Abortion.

2. The Procedure to be adopted by women
desiring abortion.

. The Technic used.

. Statistics—such as are available.

. The Soviet Attitude to Abortion.

. Personal Impressions and Conclusions.

LAW

Abortion was legalized in Soviet Russia
in November 1920, by a decree of the
Peoples Commissariat of Public Health
and Justice.

This decree pointed out: that the number of European women having recourse to
abortion was continuously growing; that
repressive measures had led only to secret,
dirty, and unskilled abortions with their
aftermath of infection and death; and that
as a result so per cent. of the women be
An &

came infected and 4 per cent. died. While
holding that abortion was an evil to be combated in every possible way, it concluded
that in the interests of the race and of the
health of women, repressive measures must
at present be considered inexpedient. It
decreed, therefore, as follows:

1. Abortion may be performed free and
unimpededly in Soviet hospitals, where
the maximum of safety is secured ;

2. Absolutely no one except a doctor
may perform the operation ;

3. Midwives and ‘‘ Sarah Gamps ”’
guilty of performing such an operation are
deprived of their right to practise and are
to be criminally prosecuted before a
Peoples Court ;

4. A doctor who procures an abortion
for remuneration and as a private ‘ sideline ’ is to be criminally prosecuted.

In 1926, a decree of the Peoples Commissariat for Public Health specified the period
during which abortion might be performed,
and forbade it after the third month of
pregnancy unless special permission were
obtained from the medical authorities.

In the various decrees which were promulgated and in the Criminal Code, provision is
made for the prosecution of midwives, doctors and unskilled operators. In no circumstances can a pregnant woman be punished
for procuring her own abortion.
PROCEDURE

The candidate for abortion presents herself to the local birth-control or maternity
centre where the fact of pregnancy is diagnosed. If she is less than three months
pregnant, she is referred to a lay committee
who control the gratis beds and who decide
on her suitability for free treatment. If

19
20

either she or her husband is insured, treatment is free.

Where her health or economic position do
not seem to justify an abortion; or in the
case of a first pregnancy, an attempt is made
by the clinic doctors to dissuade her from the
operation. Where she is unattached to-a
man, has children already, is a worker, is
earning a small wage, or is cramped for room
accommodation, she is considered to have an
adequate reason.

After the operation, she is referred back
to the clinic, where she is given contraceptive advice and warned that abortion, even
under the best conditions, is not free from
harm. She is expected to take reasonable
contraceptive precautions, and not less than
six months must elapse before another abortion may be performed.

In Moscow the applicant presents herself
to the birth control centre in the Institute
for Mother and Child. This institute, which
I visited, was founded in 1924, and contains
innumerable clinics, research laboratories,
statistical bureaux, and a popular museum.
Here, too, is housed the State Institute for
research into contraceptive methods.

The museum is one of the most remarkable
and most useful that I have seen. Admission
is free to all. The walls are vividly splashed
with colourful diagrams, cartoons, and
statistics, so that even the simple-minded
cannot fail to understand. Beautifully made
wax casts represent unabashedly the various
stages and complications of labour.

The Muscovian girl or woman, who spends
an occasional hour here, can learn in little
time all she can possibly wish to know about
her bodily structure and functions. A
museum like this—always available when
the problems of life raise queries in her mind
—must surely be a splendid antidote to
ignorance and its consequences.

TECHNIC

Simple scraping of the womb is invariably
performed and an anesthetic is rarely used.
Glycerine or paste methods of inducing abortion are not used.

At a Moscow Abortorium which I visited,
the operator—a woman—considered five

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

minutes to be her standard time for the
operation. The scraping was vigorous, but
none of the women seemed to suffer any
considerable in despite the lack of
anesthetic. he aseptic and antiseptic
technic was simple, but probably quite ade
quate.

An English gynecologist standing by was
of opinion that scraping is only 1 up to
six weeks of pregnancy, after which an
embryo forceps should be used to empty the
womb. After the sixth week, in his opinion,
it was like washing the inside of a bottle
with a wire brush instead of a cloth swab;
the products of conception were most probably left in the womb and their subsequent
expulsion was attended by risks of recurrent
bleeding and infection. But apparently the
Russians were having no trouble in this
respect, and their death rates and illness
rates, as given below, were extraordinarily
ow.

About sixty abortions were being performed daily at this clinic, and we were
assured that the womb was rarely ruptured.
There had been, if I remember rightly, two
or three cases in the year.

The patient gets up from bed on the
second day, returns home on the fourth, and
receives ten days’ leave from work on full
pay.

STATISTICS

I offer such statistics as are available.
They are not as adequate as I should like.

They refer to (1) The total number of
abortions performed yearly, and the number of abortions per 100 births and per 1,000
population ; (2) The death rates and illness
rates following legalized abortion ; (3) Such
miscellaneous facts as (a) the ages of women
undergoing abortion, (b) the month of pregnancy during which abortion has been performed, (c) the reasons given for demanding
abortion; (4) Changes in the infant mortality and maternal mortality rates that
have occurred during the period of legalized
abortion.

1. The number of abortions performed
yearly in Moscow jumped from 5,500 in
1914 in a population of 134 million to 89,000
ABORTION IN SOVIET RUSSIA

in 1931 in a population of 3% million.
While the population doubled itself, the
number of abortions increased sixteen-fold.
An analysis of the figures by Genss suggested that the increase was mainly an
apparent one and due to the fact that abortions were now performed openly and safely,
which previously had been performed
secretly and dangerously. But—there was
also a smaller relative increase in abortions
due probably to more frequent pregnancies.

(It is interesting to note that in Germany
it is estimated that the number of abortions
in I9Q1II was roughly a quarter of a million
(240,000); in 1923, a half a_ million
(500,000) ; in 1924, more than three-quarters
of a million (875,000); and in 1927,
1,000,000. Berlin has the highest death rate
from abortion in Europe, while Moscow has
the lowest.)

For every 100 births in Moscow, 10°2
illicit abortions were performed in 1914; in
1927 the ratio of abortions to births had
jumped to 75 per roo births: in 1931 the
ratio was 86 per roo births.

There were in Moscow in 1931, per 1,000
population, 29°5 births and 25°43 abortions ;
the total number of births being 103,250, of
abortions 89,000.

In Soviet Russia in the same year there
were, per 1,000 population, 38°8 births and
8:2 abortions.

2. The death rate following abortion is
given officially as 1 in 25,000. It is estimated that out of 175,000 abortions performed in Moscow there were 9 deaths—1i.e.,
I in 19,000.

The illness rate following abortion is now
O°I per cent.—i.e., 1 in 1,000. Before
legalization it was 19°9 per cent. ; in 192I1923, just after legalization, it was 4°75 per
cent.

3(a) With regard to the month of pregmancy during which abortion has been performed: in 1926, 86°2 per cent. were
performed in the second month, 12 per cent.
in the third month, 1°3 per cent. in the first
month, and only o's per cent. after the
third month.

3(b) As for the ages of women undergoing abortion: in rural areas the majority

aI

are between 30 and 40, with three to four
children : in towns the majority are between
20 and 30, with one or two children. This is
considered to indicate that in cities lack of
dwelling accommodation is the main factor,
whereas in rural areas the chief reason is
too many children.

It is estimated that in Moscow and Leningrad, in 1929, only 3°2 per cent. of the total
number were under 20 years of age.

3(c) If we consider the reasons that
prompt women to demand an abortion, we
find that in 1927, 40°8 per cent. of cases
were for medical reasons—the term being
used rather widely—and 59:2 per cent. for
social reasons.

4. The infant mortality rate has fallen
from 29 per cent. in 1911 (pre-Soviet) to 16
per cent. at the present time. About the
maternal mortality rate I have not been able
to get figures, but there is little doubt that,
along with the infant mortality rate, it has
fallen considerably in recent years.

THE SOVIET ATTITUDE

For an explanation of the Soviet attitude
to abortion I am indebted chiefly to two
men : Dr. Genss of the Institute for Mother
and Child, Moscow, and Dr. Batkis of the
Public Commissariat for Public Health,
Moscow.

As I understand it, Soviet Russia, in
legalizing abortion, had two main aims :

1. To safeguard the health and happiness of mother and child.

2. To improve the social status of
woman by giving her more contro] over
her mode of living, and specifically—over
her sex life.

It was felt that abortion performed under
modern surgical conditions was a minor evil
—for to interrupt a physiological cycle is
always an evil—but as yet a necessary one ;
whereas secret and dirty abortions were a
major evil, and a totally unnecessary one.

While adopting what seemed to be the
only logical procedure, Soviet Russia
decided to wage a continuous campaign
against abortion: by propaganda through
films, museums, etc., by encouraging birth
control and opening an institute for research
in contraceptive methods, and by improving
the social and economic conditions of the
mother and providing her with creches,
welfare centres, etc.

Legalized abortion was to be a weapon
against the dreadful cunsequences of illicit
abortion ; but birth control and social measures were to constitute a further weapon
against the need for abortion. Abortion was
to be a second line of reserve behind birth
control; under controlled conditions it
seemed to be the logical adjuvant and corollary of a system of birth control that is not
yet 100 per cent. certain.

To Drs. Genss and Batkis, abortion and
birth control are minor and subsidiary issues
in the larger problem of improving the
social status of woman; for Soviet Russia
professes to take a special interest in the
status of women, children, and racial minorities. This aspect of the problem is too
large to be discussed here.

A third aspect of abortion—the eugenic—
is not being specially emphasized in Soviet
Russia; yet eugenic considerations may be
accepted as valid reasons for permitting
abortion even after the third month of pregnancy.

PERSONAL IMPRESSIONS AND
CONCLUSIONS

There seems to be no doubt that Soviet
Russia has succeeded amply in her first aim

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and has wiped out the dreadful death rate
and illness rate following secret and dirty
abortions. Her second aim is too large a
subject for discussion here.

ven the most superficial survey of the
Russian thirteen-year-old experiment in
legalized abortion imy impresses one with its
success and its logic.

It is seventy-one years ago since our
present abortion laws were promulgated in
the Offences against the Person Act of 1861.
Since then we are being increasingly compelled to consider legalized abortion as well
as birth control and sterilization as possible
means of influencing the fitness and happiness and quality of the race.

Birth control has already been accepted.
There seems to be a considerable body of
authoritative opinion in favour of legalizing
abortion, and I consider that the present
attitude towards it is similar to that existing
towards birth control fifteen years ago.

We may well ask: Has the time come to
legalize abortion ?

N.B.—I am indebted for information and heip
with official documents, etc., to Dr. Genss of the
Institute for Mother and Child, Moscow; Dr.
Batkis of the Pecos Commissariat for Public
Health, Moscow; Mr. G. Schmidt of the U.S.S.R.
Embassy, London ; and the Society for Cultural
Kelations, London.

~

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 1.
