EUGENICAL REFORM—
1. Of the House of Lords
By F. C. S. SCHILLER, M.A., D.Se., F.B.A.

Address delivered to the Society on November 21st, 1928, at the Rooms of the Royal

Society.

HY should eugenists concern
themselves with reforming the
Lords? Because the House of

Lords cries out for reform. Moreover, with
a little goodwill, it is very easy to reform, at
all events on paper. The House of Commons,
on the other hand, though it also greatly

stands in néed of reform, no one in his

senses would dream of reforming. Nothing
short of a Mussolini could reform the House
of Commons, and take away its baubles.

The House of Lords is our Second Chamber, and people sometimes are perverse
enough to ask why we should have a Second
Chamber. The answer is easy. A single
all-powerful Chamber is too dangerous, especially if one thinks how it is elected. It
leaves the life and property of everyone,
and the whole prosperity of the country, at
the mercy of a chance majority, which may
not even claim to represent a majority of the
electorate. A Second Chamber is as useful
and as necessary as a Court of Appeal.

If, however, a Second Chamber has the
same function in politics as a Court of
Appeal in law, it would seem to be reasonable to give a little thought to its composition. Now, though it is generally admitted
by those who see the need for a Second
Chamber that it should be something of a
Senate, replete with the ripe experience and
mellow wisdom of the aged, not all would
contend that it need imitate the Court of
Appeal in all respects. It need not, for
example, approximate to its highly octogenarian composition; nor need it be filled
entirely with unhorsed or forcibly-elevated
politicians, retired governors, veteran generals and admirals, superannuated civil
servants, pensioned headmasters and professors, ex-directors of industry, eclipsed
actors, extinct movie-stars, and the like.

What is wanted in a Second Chamber is the
unpartisan judgment of disinterested ability
on the legislative efforts of the Commons,
and outbursts of youthful energy should
occasionally be appropriate, and even welcome, in an effective Second Chamber.

More serious divergences of opinion are
likely to arise when we inquire upon what
principles the Second Chamber should be
differentiated from the First. It should
clearly be something distinctive. If we
admit that the First Chamber, in any country that still prides itself on being called a
democracy, must be elected by popular
clamour tempered by electoral trickery,
more or less misguided by journalistic
stunts, and mobilized by subventions from
a well-filled party war-chest, and then by
counting heads, regardless of their size,
shape or contents, whether dolichocephalic
or brachycephalic, whether swelled or not,
whether empty or full of fads, it follows that
mere numbers cannot form the right basis
for election to the Upper House.

A territorial basis naturally commends
itself to States whose organization is more or
less federal. A property qualification has
often been imposed on the electorate for the
Second Chamber, but looks prejudicially undemocratic, and if it were successful, would
merely duplicate, in an invidious form, the
plutocratic influence which is at present
exercised, unobtrusively and far more effectively, by employers of labour and subscribers to party funds.

That a Second Chamber may fitly be composed in part of representatives of various
important interests and institutions, is
beginning to be understood, though in our
House of Lords room has as yet been found
only for a few bishops and law lords. ‘This
principle, however, is both expedient and

237
238

just; for democratic institutions do not
guarantee that all who should be represented
will be. Many important interests, upon
which the country’s prosperity is vitally
dependent, may never be able to obtain parliamentary representation at all. There is no
constituency, for example, in which doctors
and schoolmasters are numerous enough to
elect their representative, and the City of
London is probably the only constituency in
the country which is disposed to lend an
attentive ear to the voice of the banker. And
how is science or philosophy ever to obtain a
hearing? But by authorizing the interests
to which it is socially desirable to listen to
depute representatives to the Second Chamber, a very strong and valuable Upper
House could theoretically be composed. Unfortunately this method has nowhere been
adopted to an adequate extent, although a
late eminent philosopher used half seriously
to contend that thé only reform needed by
the House of Lords was that all the Bishops
should be given seats in it! They might
then periodically resign en masse whenever
the Commons refused to pass their Prayer
Book or any similar fruit of their collective
wisdom.

THE HEREDITARY PRINCIPLE

There remains, however, one principle
which in former days was taken as a matter
of course, and is still in being; but it is
treated by our political theorists as beneath
contempt and hardly worth a mention. I
mean, of course, the hereditary principle.
Even the late Professor Henry Sidgwick,
certainly the sanest and most reasonable of
our political theorists, polishes it off in a
single paragraph of his ‘ Metapolitics.’ He
treats it as merely ‘‘a survival from an
earlier stage of social development,’’ and
thinks ‘‘ it can hardly be counted among the
methods requiring to be seriously considered.’’* Remarks like these painfully
reveal how little understanding even the best
philosophers show of the discoveries of
modern science. Here, for example, is the
great outstanding fact of Heredity, which
makes every man, woman and child, nay

* Elements of Politics, p. 543.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

every animal and plant, what they severally
are, and determines what can be made of
them, and yet when the question of its political import arises the political philosopher
does not think it need be ‘ seriously considered’! It is almost incredible how
fatuously and wickedly unscientific were
the advanced liberal thinkers of the nineteenth century !

We, on the other hand, feel bound to consider seriously the value of a hereditary
Second Chamber, and to reform the House
of Lords in a truly scientific way. And
we should consider this matter seriously in
the light of the principles of scientific
eugenics.

To begin with, let us take for granted, as
a matter of common notoriety, that the
House of Lords needs reform. Paradoxically enough, however, it is the Conservatives who desire to reform it ; or rather some
of them, to wit that section of them which
still respects the old aristocratic values and
ideals, whereas the merely plutocratic section, believing as it does in the control of
masses of voters by large employers and
vote-catching ‘stunts,’ is indifferent.
Again, the Liberals and Socialists prefer to
leave the House of Lords as it is, from fear
that any change will strengthen it. It suits
their book to leave it in the condition of a
survival of recognized absurdity, and they
would resent any reform that might make
it useful and effective. Science, however,
is not restricted in its vision to the ignoble
trickeries of party-spirit, and it ought to
consider impartially how, if hereditary
ability exists, it can best be utilized by the
commonwealth.

THE STOCK—NOT THE MAN

Now that hereditary ability exists, I propose to take for granted, or at any rate, not
to prove at length. It is just as inherent
in certain stocks as feeble-mindedness or a
tendency to sundry diseases and defects is in
certain others. So it should not be considered profanity to speak of noble lords
in the same breath with noble horses and
noble dogs and quixotry to try to develop
hereditary excellence in legislators also.
EUGENICAL REFORM

Moreover, such excellence, being inherent
in the stock, in the germ plasm as the biologists say, may crop up in all its members, whether male or female, whether firstborn or younger sons. It may also be latent
in those of its members who may appear
to be quite ordinary folk. They may not
show much ability themselves, and yet
may transmit it to their descendants like any
other ‘ mendelizing ’ quality. It is clear,
therefore, that the unit of heredity is not the
individual but the stock : ability comes out
in the individual because it lurks in the
stock.

It follows from these scientific facts that
our traditional method of selecting hereditary ability is not wholly rational. There
is, however, nothing absurd in the main idea
which underlies the House of Lords. It is
right enough to select those who have shown
conspicuous ability (in whatever pursuit or
accomplishment that a society approves and
delights to honour) for promotion into a hereditary house of legislators. This method
has, indeed, the weakness that if social
ideals are wrong and corrupt, the wrong
qualities will lead to honour and promotion ;
but all methods of social promotion whatsoever share in this weakness. If the fount
of honour is corrupted its waters will poison
the community. Moreover, it has always
been customary among political philosophers
of all schools, to shirk this difficulty and to
evade consideration of the problem how the
sovereign, whether monarch or people, may
have brought home to him the error of his
ways, and be taught to mend them. ‘To
solve this problem, science would presumably employ the same technique as it does
elsewhere to detect the truth and to correct
popular error. Here also the process would
be gradual, but in the end science would
meet with a measure of success.

PRIMOGENITURE

On the other hand, it can be seen at once
that it is not rational to act on the assumption that the ability inherent in a stock will
necessarily and invariably be concentrated
in the eldest son. Our system of primo
239

geniture, therefore, is not the best that
could be devised. This is not, of course, to
say that it is wholly bad; it may even be
relatively good. It may be better, for
uxample, than the commoner custom of
dividing the family property equally among
all the children of the rich. For if it be
granted that those who make fortunes tend
to be able, and also that the education of
rich men’s children tends to fail to imbue
them with the ideal of shunning delights
and living laborious days, it follows that
wealth is a great danger to the family which
acquires it, and threatens it with biological
ruin, if it cannot be neutralized by education. Moreover, the effect of a system of
equal division will be to corrupt all the descendants of the successful, whereas the system of primogeniture will corrupt only the
eldest sons, and may actually tend to
stimulate the ambitions and to improve the
prospects of the rest of the family. Accordingly, the achievements of the cadets of
noble families fill many of the brightest
pages of history, and it has often been remarked that primogeniture makes only one
fool, or rather wastrel, in a family.

ELECTIVE PEERAGES

Still, the present system of primogeniture
is capable of being bettered. So soon as the
social problem is seen to be that of recognizing and exploiting the hereditary ability
of a stock, it is easy to see that better
ways of bringing it out can be devised.
Much more may be done to make it more
likely that the stock will be represented in
the House of Lords by its worthiest
members.

In the first place it is the stock, and not
a person, that should be ennobled with a
peerage. Our present practice may indeed
be said to recognize this principle after a
fashion, in making the honour hereditary,
but it does nothing to ensure that the descendants of the new peer will conserve and continue to display the ability which won the
peerage. Really, the old Chinese practice
of ennobling the ancestors of a man who had
rendered distinguished service was far more
rational.
240

Next, the succession to the peerage should
be rationalized, to increase the probability
that the stock will contribute its ablest
member to the House of Lords. So when
the first holder of the peerage dies, let his
children and grandchildren meet together
and choose the one whom they regard as his
worthiest successor. If it was considered
desirable to enlarge the constituency, e.g.,
on account of the ability shown and distinction achieved by other relatives of the
first peer, his brothers, sisters, and cousins
might be included in the electorate, or even
be rendered eligible themselves.

Of course, to be an elector to a peerage
would be a social distinction, to which, with
the growth of eugenical sentiment, a growing importance would be attached, and the
electorate of the House of Lords would soon
come to be regarded as a real eugenical
nobility. On the other hand, the commission of an offence, or even persistent failure
through several generations to attain distinction, might lead to disfranchisement or to
the lapsing of a peerage. It is also evident
that the same person might be an elector to
a number of peerages and that, if he came of
an ancient stock which had laudably intermarried with others of the eugenical
nobility, he would certainly be an elector
to many peerages.

ENDOWMENT OR DEGENERATION

Moreover, inasmuch as the British public,
though essentially and admirably snobbish,
has little respect for knowledge, learning,
expertness, or distinction of any sort unless
it is adequately backed up by wealth, it
would further be expedient to endow these
eugenical peerages, in order to ensure that
their holders would always be able to support their dignity, and so should not be
forced, as at present, to have recourse to the
eugenically reprehensible, and often biologically ruinous, expedient of marrying
heiresses, for as Galton showed, heiresses
are apt to be the last effort of a degenerating
and expiring stock. As moreover nowadays
the heiresses are mostly American, the peerage is rapidly being Americanized. This device would also be an effective protection

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

against the ruin of the family fortunes by
prodigal and spendthrift holders of the title,
and if one at least of the family seats formed
part of the endowment this would preserve
its local ties, and save the country from the
zesthetic losses which it now sustains by the
break-up of ancient collections and the conversion of the stately homes of its nobility
into schools and lunatic asylums.

About the initial endowment there would
usually be no difficulty. For the rich men
who obtain titles in return for their ‘ public
services ’ in endowing the war-chest of the
dominant party have long been accustomed
to make settlements for this very purpose,
and the only difference would be that these
endowments would henceforth benefit not
merely their eldest son and his progeny, but
whichever proved to be the worthiest of their
descendants. In course of time, moreover,
the endowment fund of the peerage would
be augmented by legacies; it would be the
natural destination of the property of maiden
aunts and bachelor uncles throughout the
whole family or clan, and as the holder
of the title would only have a life interest
in it, it would naturally and properly escape
from the operation of the devastating death
duties which are at present proving so destructive to the maintenance of family traditions. Even if the first holder were not
wealthy enough to provide an adequate endowment at first, such a one would speedily
grow up, especially if wealthier relatives
were eager to recognize the honour done to
the family and were allowed to subscribe to
it, being enrolled in return among the electors to that peerage. So it can hardly be
doubted that within a short time all the
peerages would be adequately and permanently endowed, and secured against the
danger that a prodigal son might any day
find himself compelled to sell the family seat
and to dispose of its heirlooms.

THE SPUR OF AMBITION

Lastly, it is obvious how greatly the
existence of a weli-endowed peerage in
the family would stimulate ambition in all
its members. ‘They would be impelled
to use every effort to distinguish themselves,
EUGENICAL REFORM

in the hope of qualifying for the family
honours, and with a good prospect of winning further honours in their own right,
even if, by reason of bad luck or family
jealousies, the old ones eluded them. And
so our reformed House of Lords would contribute powerfully to the solution of the
great problem over which education has
everywhere failed throughout the ages, viz.,
how to provide the children of the rich and
powerful with adequate incentives to develop their abilities, and to make the best
of themselves. At present it can hardly
be doubted that there is much ability
diffused among the aristocratic classes of
every civilized community; but most of it
remains uncultivated and unstimulated, and
is unused or wasted, simply because the
actual institutions of society do not provide sufficient motives for exertion and
attractive careers for the descendants of the
able who have distinguished themselves. So
what with the fatuous organization of
society which practically imposes sterility
on aspirants to social promotion, and its
pathetic inability to utilize a great part of
the ability that exists, it is no wonder that
the affairs of nations are conducted with as
little wisdom as ever.

OUR ‘CONSCRIPT FATHERS’

These proposals may perhaps sound more
fantastic, when thus lightly sketched, than
they would seem if the details were filled
in with tedious particularity. But they
are in no sense utopian. I must insist that
their underlying idea is perfectly practicable. Indeed it has been carried into effect
with signal success. For, properly regarded, the idea is merely that the hereditary ability of the community should be
organized in hereditary clans, each privileged to depute its worthiest member to a
senate as its contribution to the collective
wisdom of the community, in order that
there may be formed an effective and
respected Second Chamber, capable of exercising an intelligent control over the transient impulses of the mob and of the ephemeral governments that emerge from the

241

turmoil and deceptions of a General Election. Historians are agreed that such was
probably the original composition of the
Roman Senate, the greatest council and the
most successful governing body the world
has ever seen. The ‘ Conscript Fathers ’
of Rome were the elders and representatives
of the noble gentes, and each gens was a
patrilinear clan claiming descent from a
common ancestor. ‘The only innovation we
have ventured to introduce into the composition of the gens has been to include in it,
in accordance with our greater knowledge of
the nature of heredity, the female members
along with the males. The historical omens,
therefore, are favourable to the eugenical
reform of the House of Lords.

A further advantage would be that its introduction might be gradual and largely
voluntary. In the first instance it would
only be the new creations that would be based
upon the constitution of a gens. The old
peerages need not be affected in thein
tenure. But their holders would be invited to come into the scheme if they were
deemed worthy; and if it were found to
involve the concessions indicated in the
matter of taxation, it can hardly be doubted
that all who were qualified—and they would
surely be a large number—would be eager to
join the ranks of the new eugenical nobility.
The rest, who would be merely the decadent
dregs of the old aristocracy, might safely
be left to die out in the course of nature,
though it would also, of course, become easy
to deprive them of their seats in the renovated House of Lords.

Whether the reformed House of Lords
should be wholly hereditary in its composition after this fashion, may be left an open
question. It might be expedient, and would
not be unreasonable, to supplement the hereditary element by Life Peers, who did not
wish to found a gens, by men of distinction
who had grown old in the public services,
by representatives of institutions and activities which form important and valuable features in national life, by the Agents-General |
and notable residents from the Dominions.
Certainly, the present university representation in the Commons should be transferred
242

to the Lords and increased so as to allow of
minority representation. On the whole it
may be suggested that not more than onethird or one-half of the House of Lords
should be drawn from the eugenical nobility,
while the rest could be made up as suggested above. A very able, attractive,
respected, and powerful Upper House would
be the result ; even without any enlargement
of its present powers it would easily outshine
the Commons.

THE DECLINE OF THE COMMONS

It would consequently arouse the latter’s
jealousy. But it would be a fatal mistake
on this account to bolster up the Commons.
The House of Commons in these days, like
the ‘ democracy ’ from which it springs, is
visibly declining in wisdom, intelligence,
and competence. It abounds in anomalies,
inconveniences, and absurdities, such as
that a nationally important statesman may
be thrown out of politics by the whim of a
local electorate for merely local reasons. Its
legislative procedure is incredibly cumbrous, inefficient, and inept, and its results
are so ridiculous and unintelligible that even
the invariable beneficiaries of its law-making, the lawyers, are moved to frequent complaints. It stifles the voice of minorities,
and habitually over-represents majorities,
and the vice of misrepresentation has grown
so chronic in its system that it can no longer
be trusted to represent the majority even of
the voters. It cannot be reformed save by
reforming the whole nation at a blow, and
this is not a practical proposition in this
country.

It must therefore be left alone; but
its power for mischief may be circumscribed. There is nothing to be said in its
favour, save that it is still, in theory, the
seat of power. As a governing body it is
farcical, and in point of fact it has lost most
of its power to the Cabinet and the Civil
Service, and has been reduced to a mob
that obeys the crack of the Whips, and lives
in constant fear of a premature dissolution.
If it were not artificially bolstered up and
privileged, it would speedily lose the best

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

part of its personnel. Its ablest members
would leave it for the greater dignity and
security of the House of Lords, if Ministers
were allowed to address either House irrespective of where their seats were,* as in
most European countries, and the greater
freedom of choice thus accorded to the Prime
Minister to fill up offices in the most suitable
way would probably lead to the construction
of better Ministries. They would ba
recruited in growing measure from the
reformed House of Lords.

SOCIAL CONSEQUENCES

Nor would the consequences of reforming
the House of Lords be merely political.
They would extend to many activities of
social life, and affect many institutions.
They would engender new ideals and revive
decaying morals in ways the present House
of Lords would never dream of doing. At
present the only ideal to which the House
of Lords can be said to minister is that of
Snobbishness. Now snobbishness is by no
means an unmitigated evil. It is a great
principle of social cohesion and in some ways
a valuable factor in civilization; for the
imitation of the manners of a superior class
by the inferior leads to a general levelling up
of manners. It has therefore great esthetic
value, and it is moreover a fact that for
many purposes esthetics can perform the
functions of ethics, and manners take the
place of morals. .

Still it can hardly be contended that in th
past the House of Lords has been a great
moralizing influence. Such familiar utterances of proverbial wisdom as ‘ drunk as a
Lord ’ do not seem to indicate that the moral
influence of the House of Lords was ever
exemplary ; nor would a study of legal biographies suggest that ‘ as sober as a judge ’
was always undiluted praise: still we may
admire the judicial ingenuity with which
many Law Lords have contrived to hit the
mean between drunkenness and sobriety.

* This simple little reform should also commend
itself alike to the Liberal and to the Labour party,
because they would no longer have to create num
bers of otherwise unsuitable peers in order to make
their voices heard in the Second Chamber.
- KUGENICAL REFORM

In the reformed House of Lords there
would be reason to believe that all this would
be changed. ‘The individual Lord would
no longer be raised aloft in a region where
he could go as he pleased, but would be
firmly set in the social tissue of his clan,
which would exercise constant supervision
and pressure upon him, conserve his form,
and prevent him from going to pieces. So
the public opinion of the clan would keep its
members in order and stimulate them to
exertion and rivalry in well doing. And,
of course, snobbishness would ensure that
the example set by the House of Lords
would spread far down the social scale.

MODERN ANCESTOR WORSHIP

So would the influence of the clan or gens.
The clans which possessed nominations to
the House of Lords would not be the only
ones that would organize themselves, and
pride themselves on their descent, and interest themselves in their distinguished
relatives. Strong clan feelings would
grow up throughout the social order, and
counteract the centrifugal tendencies of the
individual.

Moreover, these feelings could be
trusted to strengthen an ancient and invaluable institution, the family in the narrower sense, which seems at present to be
drifting on to the rocks, and to rescue it
from the dangers that threaten it. In large
sections of modern society the family seems
to be not so much breaking up as petering
out. It is losing its inherent connection
with marriage, which is itself coming to be
regarded merely as a temporary association
for mutual amusement, as in decaying
Rome. Now this is a very serious situation,
for experience shows that the only really
stable civilizations, the only ones which
have endured without eclipse, have been
based on the family. The family, moreover,
in both the outstanding cases of an enduring civilization, both in China and in Japan,
has been held together by the spiritual sanction of ancestor-worship. What we need
is something similar, a modern scientific
equivalent for ancestor-worship. And the
institution of a gens might be the very thing

243

that is needed. It would impose on the
individual the salutary restraint of a social
organization larger than the evanescent
family and less remote than the community
at large. The chances are that both the
organization and the sentiment of society
would grow more and more aristocratic.

EFFECT ON EUGENICS

What is even more important from a
eugenist’s point of view, they would also
grow more and more eugenical. And this
might prove to be the beginning of the solution of the greatest problem the science of
eugenics has to face, that of positive
eugenics, that of actually improving the
existing composition of the human race.
Compared with this, any proposal for negative eugenics is child’s play. Any intelligent person can perceive the folly of our
present methods of recruiting society, and
foresee that unless they are arrested in time
they must lead to the biological ruin of the
societies which tolerate them and possibly
of the whole human race. Any one also can
see in what ways they may be arrested and
what must be changed. ‘The necessary
reforms are clearly indicated, and would be
easier to enforce than a number of social
interferences with the habits of individuals
that have often proved successful. It is
also becoming plain that these changes are
relatively urgent, and may be forced upon
all societies which are desirous of prospering, and even of surviving, in a relatively
short time. ‘To urge only the most obvious
point, it is ruinously expensive to breed
large masses of lunacy, feeble-mindedness,
and disease. Lastly, the dangers which
negative eugenics aim at averting could be
staved off effectively in quite a few generations. But even the most energetic and
effective campaign of negative eugenics
would improve the composition of the race
only relatively and not positively. It would
weed out the unfit, but it would not raise
the standard of fitness, nor increase the
numbers of the fit, save insofar as there
would be more room for rearing the flowers
of humanity after the elimination of the
weeds.
244

STARTING POSITIVE EUGENICS

On the other hand, positively to improve
the human race is a stupendously difficult
undertaking. It will not only demand the
painless extinction of bad stocks whose
existence is only a curse to themselves and
others. It will demand from the biological
élite unremitting efforts, sustained for many
generations, to rise above themselves to
heights of physical, mental, and moral
development never yet attained and hardly
dreamt of. And there can be little doubt
that the training required to achieve this
development will not only be long, but also
severe. It will require an asceticism and a
heroism equal to any that has ever been
achieved in the past, though more rational
and more scientific alike in its aims, principles, and methods. Lastly, it will demand
from the average man willingness to cooperate with this lofty enterprise, willingness to subordinate himself to a social order
which has a definite aim, to improve the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

human race and not merely to perpetuate the
status quo, and willingness to abstain not
only from scattering the seeds of weeds
about the face of the earth, but also from
overcrowding it with inferior types, in order
that there may be room enough for the
noblest.

Moreover this great undertaking which is
eugenics will manifestly have to start from
the present state of human life, from the
actual conditions of human physique, human
nature and human sentiment, and to transform them gradually into something better
and higher. Assuredly this will be no easy
matter. It will also be slow, because only
three or four generations can be reared in a
century. But it must not be pronounced
impossible. For to do so would not only
be to renounce the ambition of rising above
our present nature, but to confess our intrinsic inferiority to the Miocene apes who
overcame the most terrific obstacles in order
to turn themselves into men!

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XX, No. 4.
