L. S. PENROSE, F.R:S.
The Galton Laboratory

Congenital Malformations in Man
and Natural Selection’

IN SPITE OF the obvious variations in size,
shape and colour which differentiate one person
from another, the idea is still prevalent that
the human species is at the top of an evolutionary
ladder and thus represents an almost perfect
animal. Even though few women are expected
to have the proportions of Milo’s Venus and
few men resemble the Apollo Belvedere or
Hermes of Praxiteles, the species as a whole
is felt to be a biological masterpiece. Man’s
domination of terrestrial life is the result of
his very large and efficient central nervous
system. In respect of other traits, however, there
is always some animal which can be found to
do better. The egocentric view that man is the
highest form of life is comparable to the
Ptolemeic system of astronomy and, in modern
times, to the assumption that, if life should
develop in distant parts of the Universe, it must
follow the terrestrial pattern culminating in
human forms. .

Belief in the perfection of the human species
is completely shattered by considering the very
high rate of malformation among the offspring
in every generation. In earlier times a freakish
event like the birth of a child with severe malformation was believed to be a divine portent
—even a warning of disaster. Hence the name
“monster” from the Latin “monstrum’’, a sign.
Accordingly such births were viewed as being
extremely exceptional.

Accurate observation, however, leads to a
different evaluation. Darwin, in the Origin of
Species, differentiated between “‘monstrosities”’
which suddenly appeared in a population and
variations of possible usefulness. It is difficult
sometimes to know where to draw this line of
demarcation. Imperfections of the skin, such
as pigmented patches, are present almost

* The fifth Darwin Lecture, arranged by the Institute
of Biology, delivered in London on 20th May 1965.

universally but these are not scored as abnormal
unless they are very noticeable. The same
applies to minor defects of hands and feet, eyes,
ears, etc. Gross malformations occur in about
2 per cent of all infants born at term and careful
observation tends to raise the proportion to
about 5 per cent if less serious defects are
included. If spontaneous abortions are taken
into consideration, the proportion of all zygotes
affected would be found to be much higher
still.

The spectrum of anomalies is extensive. It
ranges from hidden defects of internal organs,
heart, kidney or intestines, to visible malformations, like harelip, or dramatic deformities of
limbs and even of the cerebrum. In the pioneer
investigation by Malpas, gross defects of the
brain had an incidence of 1 per cent.

Traditionally there has been a strong tendency
to ascribe these disasters to the influence of an
unfavourable environment and, particularly, to
illness of the mother. Darwin took a guarded
view. In Variation of Animals and Plants under
Domestication, he stated that, although many
congenital monstrosities were inherited (e.g.
polydactyly, albinism, harelip and cleft palate),
other malformations were probably due to
non-inherited injuries in the womb or egg.
There are several well-established examples in
which external factors can be blamed.

As long ago as 1702 the observation was
made by Diittel that, if a pregnant woman had
smallpox, this disease could be transmitted to
the foetus and the child would be born with
severely pock-marked skin. The proof that
another virus infection, rubella, in the mother
could cause deafness and cardiac malformation
in the child came comparatively recently through
the work of Gregg in Australia. There are other,
less well-defined, similar effects and some
diseases, like tuberculosis, formerly credited

126

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, September 1965, 57, 3.
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS IN MAN AND NATURAL SELECTION

with the power of producing malformed offspring, are now exonerated.

Physical trauma is a rare cause even if, in
this group, we include damage by exposure to
radiation. For radiation to produce a direct
disturbance on foetal growth the dose must be
large and such exposures are not likely to pass
unnoticed in a civilized community. For example
in Russell’s experiments on pregnant mice, 200
R6ntgen units were required. With poisons, the
chain of cause and effect may be much more
difficult to establish. The dangers of thalidomide
were, for a surprisingly long period, unsuspected.
Observations on pregnant animals have disclosed
that a great number of chemical poisons can,
in sufficient quantity, induce gross developmental
anomalies in the offspring; but the effects in
man need not be precisely parallel. Experimentally, vitamin deficiency and sometimes
vitamin excess can also cause damage. The
significant point is that, in classifying origins
of malformation, allowance has to be made
for possible environmental causes not yet
identified. We may, however, with confidence,
exclude the traditional superstition that maternal
psychological impressions are significant. Microphthalmia cannot result, as Sedgwick reported
in 1863, from the mother’s being frightened
by a ferret. Living close to a Chinese laundry
does not cause mongolism. In ancient times, as
far back as those of Hippocrates (460 B.c.), it
was thought that, if any part of a parent was
mutilated, it would be so likewise in the foetus.
Darwin reviewed the evidence for this and found
it inconclusive. We now reject it without
hesitation.

Hereditary Deformities caused by Gene Differences

In so far as a defect is environmentally determined it takes no part in the process of natural
selection; that is to say, provided that genes
do not predispose to a particular malformation,
the case can be excluded from the present discussion. In a population of organisms which is
entirely homogeneous genetically, there can be
no selection in the Darwinian sense. In such
circumstances, chances which favour survival
or extinction would have no effect upon the

genetical constitution of future generations.
Genetical diversity, which Fisher called the
“energy” of a species and which enables selection to act, arises in two ways. First by singlegene mutation and secondly by chromosomal
aberration. The important point is that the
self-reproducing properties of the nuclear
material, which carries the hereditary instructions, ensure that any alteration tends to be
permanent; the changed form is replicated.

Conditions which can be attributed to fresh
single-gene mutations are rare. Typical instances
are the detrimental dominant traits, like ectrodactyly and epiloia (Bourneville’s syndrome).
The milder condition, arising by mutation in
an ancestor, though disfiguring, lasts for many
generations. The more severe rarely continues
for more than two. The force of selection is so
strong in epiloia that the incidence of this
disease in the population is controlled almost
entirely by the rate of recurrent mutation, that
is, about one in 60,000 per individual per
generation. Epiloia is not strictly a congenital
malformation because it is not visibly present
at birth. More exact examples in this respect
are achondroplasic dwarfism and acrocephalosyndactyly (the syndrome of Apert).

Next to dominant malformations, selection
pressure is greatest in sex-linked morphological
defects. Again, only a few are known, e.g. one
type of hydrocephaly and one kind of eye
defect, microphthalmia. In such instances, as
shown by Haldane in 1932, one-third of the
cases arise by fresh mutation in each generation.
The disease is perpetuated only when the results
of mutation appear first in the child of a female
carrier.

If a malformation is recessively inherited, the
force of selection is much weaker. Several kinds
of anencephaly and other central nervous system
defects fall into this category. These persist in the
population because the genes responsible for
them are carried on from generation to generation by perfectly normal people. Defects caused
in this way persist in populations all over the
world. The local incidence can vary according
to selective action for or against slight constitutional peculiarities in the heterozygous
carriers. There might also be frequency differences caused by inbreeding. Anencephaly, which

127
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

seems to be recessive in about half the cases, has
a remarkably uneven distribution throughout
the world and sometimes the origin is nongenetic: all kinds of influences have been
blamed, including too pure a water supply in
which minerals are absent.

Even though selection against recessive malformations is weak they would eventually
vanish, albeit exceedingly slowly, from the
population unless there were mechanisms which
neutralized the selective process. One of these
which has already been mentioned, is recurrent
mutation. The other is stable equilibrium of
genes, first studied by Fisher, in which homozygotes are less fit than heterozygotes. A very
slight advantage in the heterozygous carrier
can compensate the loss of genes which occurs
when the malformed recessive homozygote fails to
survive. In the extreme theoretical case, although
all homozygotes are deformed and lethal, the
population can be in equilibrium because
all heterozygotes are healthy. This phenomenon of completely balanced lethals is not known
to exist in man but might be a possible explanation
for a high prevalence of recessive malformations.
If there were many alleles at a given locus, e.g.
A, B, C, D, etc., and all homozygotes, AA, BB,
CC, DD, etc., were lethal, the population could
still survive on the large excess of normal heterozygotes, AB, BC, AC, AD, etc. For zn alleles of
equal frequency, 1/n would be the incidence of
lethals; but, for a 1 per cent incidence of lethal
deformities genetically balanced in this way, a set
of 100 alleles would be required so this explanation seems rather improbable.

There are other ways in which this type of
compensated selection may be effective and
one of them is exemplified by weight at birth.
Thus, both very light and very heavy infants
experience risks much greater than the normal.
Extreme types, moreover, are likely to represent
homozygous states, less fit than the intermediate
average types, which represent heterozygotes.

This kind of genetical equilibrium, in which
the optimal population type is maintained by
the sacrifice of unfavourable, that is to say,
less fertile, extreme types, is called by Muller
and by Crow and Kimura, “segregational’’ load
as opposed to the ‘“‘mutational” load of defects
caused by spontaneous mutation. Expressed in

128

another way, the high prevalence of malformations of the nervous system in man may be to
some extent inevitable payment, at the lower end
of the scale, for the maintenance of his high
average level of cerebral development with its
wide range of variation. The extreme upper
limit of intelligence is also believed to be
associated with some degree of infertility.

Malformations associated with Chromosomal
Aberration

In recent years, that is since 1958, it has
become clear that a frequent source of malformation is chromosomal aberration. This fact
could only be surmised before techniques of
cell culture and chromosomal spreading were
developed. Indeed, classical work on the mathematical theory of evolution, by Fisher, Haldane
and Wright in the decade from 1922 to 1932,
neglected almost entirely the kinds of mutation
concerned with gross chromosomal changes. It
was thought that these would rarely make
significant contributions because they would
lead to completely inviable states in all higher
animals. Most authorities believed that embryos
with aberrant chromosomal patterns could not
develop beyond the very earliest stages, say,
that of 8-cells. It was another blow to human
self-esteem to find that, as with plants and insects,
survival was possible with an imperfect set of
chromosomes.

Some chromosomal mutations cause little or
no disability. Females with three sex chromosomes, instead of the normal two, can be
perfectly normal; so also perhaps are some
males with two Y chromosomes instead of one.
Otherwise any marked irregularity or deviation
from the normal pattern is very liable to cause
physical defect, often identifiable at birth.
Mental defect is a very consistent accompaniment of these developmental disturbances.

Certain relatively common malformations of
chromosomal origin are now well known. In
most of these there is one extra chromosome,
which has arisen in consequence of an error
in meiosis at germ cell maturation as described
by Ford; a homologous trio is produced instead
of a pair in the cells of the zygote. In the plant,
Datura stramonium, Blakeslee had found, many
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS IN MAN AND NATURAL SELECTION

years ago, a different morphology for each of
the possible trisomics for its twelve chromosomal
pairs. In man, only four out of a possible
twenty-three kinds have been clearly recognized
so far, those associated with X, a chromosome
in the 13 to 15 group, one in the 17, 18 group
and one in the 21, 22 group. In the case of
Down’s syndrome, mongolism, believed to be
caused by trisomy-21, the standard condition
can actually be transmitted to the next generation in a manner rather like that of a single-gene
dominant trait; but this is exceedingly unusual
for such patients hardly ever become parents.

Individually, each of these standard trisomic
types occurs in about one per 500 to one per
1,500 fertilized ova (zygotes) when allowance is
made for the fact that they often cause foetal
death and abortion. This rate is about 100 times
as frequent as that of single-gene mutation.
Selection against these trisomic types is, thus,
very strong. Like single-gene dominant lethals,
they are perpetuated only because the chromosomal non-disjunctional errors recur. The causes
of Down’s syndrome are connected with the
ageing of the mother, that is to say, with the
age of the maturing ovum which begins its
cycle at the mother’s own birth. Precisely the
same effect is found in the other kinds of trisomy.
During thousands of past generations there
must have been selection against genes carried
by mothers who, when they were young, gave
birth to malformed offspring. Gradually the
age of the parent at which non-disjunction would
occur became further and further advanced.
At late ages, where the generation time is nearly
double the average, selection would necessarily
be weaker and evolutionary improvements in
the maturation mechanism would be made
more slowly. Apart from this indirect selective
action, standard trisomics have no effect on the
genetical future of the population.

Besides alterations of number affecting one
particular chromosomal pair, it is possible for
all the pairs to be transformed into triplets.
This results in cells with sixty-nine instead of
forty-six chromosomes. If the peculiarity affects
only a proportion of the cells of the body, say up
to 50 per cent, it is compatible with survival
though accompanied by mental and physical
weakness. Pure cultures of triploid human cells

have been obtained from numerous aborted
embryos and from one live birth which survived
only a few hours. Clearly there is strong natural
selection tending to eliminate such individuals
and, by implication, to a slight extent people
like their parents also, if they should carry any
genetical predisposition.

The incidence of triploidy, again, is rather
high judging by its occurrence in aborted
foetuses, perhaps about one in 500 of all
zygotes formed. The problem of its origin is
somewhat similar to that explaining chimaeras,
hermaphrodites and conjoined twins. Such
freaks can arise through accidents at fertilization
or shortly after. In so far as there are genetical
factors which determine these events, selection
will tend to make them rarer. However, it is
usually believed that they occur in response
to influences of a purely accidental nature
perhaps demonstrating physical limitations of
the reproductive mechanisms and, if this is
true, it is understandable that they have not
been eliminated from the species.

There is another, quite different, kind of
chromosomal mutation or aberration found in
association with varying degrees of malformation. This always involves breakage and reunion
of fragments so as to produce morphological
changes in the chromosomes. Individually their
frequency of occurrence is rare, resembling that
of mutation rates of single genes. Chromosomal
deletion is one variety. Some developmental
defects, so caused, are incompatible with survival,
others, if the deletion is small, are only incompatible with reproduction. Microcephaly and
heart defects are characteristic signs in such
cases. Natural selection acts at once against
these detrimental variations and they are
eliminated from the population as they arise.

Two special types of chromosomal mutation,
called inversion and balanced translocation,
require special consideration. They do not
directly harm the individual who carries them.
However, they are likely to lead to malformation
in the offspring of a carrier. Both types are
acused by incorrect rejoining after two chromosomal fractures. Inversion can follow two
breaks on the same chromosome and translocation, breaks on two different chromosomes.

It has been known for a long time that peculiar

129
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

pedigrees shown by some kinds of familial
malformations could be interpreted as the
results of translocations or inversions rather
than of irregularly dominant inheritance which
they would otherwise suggest. Examples were
shown by central nervous system malformations
and by mongolism. Cytological researches now
have made it clear that this kind of inheritance
has an explicable and recognizable pattern.

Natural selection acts directly against the
malformed offspring in such families and indirectly against the carriers of the inversions
and translocations by diminishing effective
fertility. The result is that such variations would,
in general, be fairly rapidly eliminated from
our species. However, there are two ways in
which they might tend to persist after their
entry into the population by mutation. First,
there may be, as Dobzhansky has demonstrated
in wild species of Drosophila, some special
virility conferred on the heterozygous carrier of
a chromosomal inversion which may be sufficient
to neutralize deleterious effects on fertility.
Secondly, in a small very closely inbred population, homozygotes for inversions or translocations may be produced and these could
continue interbreeding without harm.

A considerable number of minor chromosomal differences are found among members of
the human general population. In this way, as
in the blood groups, man shows again an
internal example of the polymorphism which
is so characteristic of his external appearance.
The study of chromosomal polymorphism,
indeed, gives a hint as to how some evolutionary
processes may have taken place. The translocation fusion of acrocentric chromosomes, illustrated in the carriers of Down’s syndrome, is
of a kind which has been observed in varieties
within the same species of animals and plants. A
normal human with forty-five instead of forty-six
chromosomes is now almost a commonplace
observation. In the fairly near future examples of
normal people with only forty-four chromosomes
will be found. If this same process happened
twice over, that is to say, to two sets of chromosomes, a person could be born with only fortytwo chromosomes and have a pattern not unlike
that found in the Rhesus monkey. He would
probably still look like a man and could be quite

130

normal himself though a very high proportion
of his grandchildren would be liable to suffer
from developmental defects.

I think I have said enough to indicate the
significance of studying human malformations
in relation to natural selection. In many instances
particularly in those cases caused by chromosomal aberration, the selection is of a type
which closely follows Darwin’s ideas. To some
extent the study of these phenomena helps us
to understand how man has evolved and may
be continuing to change very slowly. They also
indicate the price which has to be paid, in terms
of genetical defect, for the comparatively stable
and successful state of development which the
human race has now reached.

REFERENCES

Blank, C. E. 1960. Apert’s syndrome (a type of acrocephalosyndactyly): observations on a British series
of 39 cases. Ann. hum. Genet. Lond. 2A, 151.

Carr, D. H. 1963. Chromosome studies in abortuses
and stillborn infants. Lancet, ii, 603.

Chu, E. H. Y., and Bender, S. 1961. Chromosome
cytology and evolution in primates. Science, 133, 1399.

Crow, J. F., and Kimura, M. 1965. The theory of genetic
loads. Genetics Today, 3, 495.

Darwin, C. 1859. The Origin of Species. London, G.
Murray.

Darwin, C. 1868. Variations of Animals under Domestication. London, G. Murray.

Dobzhansky, Th. 1946. Genetic structure of natural
populations. Yrbk Carneg. Inst., Wash. 43, 120.

Diittel, P. J. 1702. De Morbis Foetum in Utero Materno.
Magdeburg, C. Henckelii.

Fisher, R. A. 1930. The Genetical Theory of Natural
Selection. Oxford, Clarendon Press.

Po. iS E. 1961. Human cytogenetics. Brit. med. Bull.

Gunther, M., and Penrose, L. S. 1935. The genetics of
epiloia. J. Genet. 31, 413.

Haldane, J. B. S. 1932. The Causes of Evolution. London,
Longmans Green.

Karn, M. N., and Penrose, L. 8S. 1951. Birth weight and
gestation time in relation to maternal age, parity and
infant survival. Ann. Eugen. Lond. 16, 147.

MacKenzie, H., and Penrose, L. S. 1951. Two pedigrees
of ectrodactyly. Ann. Eugen., Lond. 16, 88.

Malpas, P. 1937. The incidence of human malformations.
J. Obstet. Gynaec. Brit. Emp. 44, 434.

Merch, E. T. 1941. Chondrodystrophic dwarfs in
Denmark. Op. Dom. Biol. Hum. Hered. 3.

Penrose, L. S. 1957. Genetics of anencephaly. J. ment.
Defic. Res. 1, 4.

Penrose, L. S. 1961. Mongolism. Brit. med. Bull. 17, 184.

Russell, L. B., and Russell, W. L. 1954. An analysis of
the changing radiation response of the developing
mouse embryo. J. Cell. Comp. Physiol. 43, Supp. 1, 103.

Sedgwick, W. 1863. On the influence of sex in hereditary
disease. Brit. Foreign Med.-Chir. Rev. 21, 448.

Wright, S. 1931. Evolution in Mendelian populations.
Genetics, 16, 97.
