THE HORMONES

And Their Control of the Reproductive System

By B. P. WIESNER, Ph.D., F.R.S.E.

The substance of a lecture to the Society, February 26th,

1930: From the

Animal Breeding Research Department, Edinburgh University.

ORMONES controlling reproducH tion can be defined in a wide and

in a narrow sense. Obviously, every
hormone which affects the constitution
and the general functions eventually affects
reproduction. For example, thyroxin decreases the viability of rats in high
temperatures ; and hyperthyroid individuals
will be less fertile than normal animals
in a habitat of high temperature. These
general effects of many hormones necessitate a restriction of the discussion to those
which specifically influence reproduction.
Even so, a short review cannot do more
than just outline some of the problems and
results of recent research.

The case of the male hormones is comparatively simple, but perhaps only because
we as yet know little about them. It had
been known since pre-historic times that
removal of the testicle before puberty prevented the full development of maleness.
Then Berthold showed that the implantation of a testicle in a capon prevented the
atrophy of the comb which usually results
from castration; and it is to him that
we owe the conception of the endocrine
function of the testicle—i.e. the idea that
the testicle exerts its effects upon the
development of the sexual characters
through a substance secreted into the
bloodstream.

A long series of researches by many
workers has since carried us much farther.
The testicular hormone has been extracted
from the testicles of various animals, and
has actually been shown to produce many
of those phenomena which were ascribed to
its action when it was only an abstract
hypothesis—a feat probably as wonderful

as the prediction and discovery of Neptune.
For instance, the accessory genital glands,
the secretion of which forms the bulk of
the ejaculated semen, degenerate and
atrophy after castration within a short
time. Injection of testicular hormone leads
to a regeneration ofthese glands, which
recover their functional activity. The comb
of the castrated cock also recovers its
normal size and appearance after injections of this testicular hormone. All
these effects may seem not so very important in themselves, but they are to be regarded as indications of the activity of the
hormone; and they are important since
normal comb growth and normal function
of the genital glands are usually associated
with the other and more important actions
of the testicular hormone—such as the induction of the sex instinct, male development of the body, etc.

Apart from its effect on the growth of
the prostate and seminal vesicles, the
testicular hormone is necessary for the
normal function of the epididymis—an
organ attached to the testicle and important
as a storehouse of spermatozoa. ‘The
spermatozoa present in the epididymis lose
their motility very soon after the testicles

‘have been removed even if the epididymis

19

has been carefully ‘spared. But animals
will remain fecund after such an operation
if they are injected with the testicular
hormone. Apparently the epididymis gains
and retains its ability to provide the necessary conditions for spermatozoa only as long
as it is supplied with this hormone. The
retention of fecundity under its influence
will render a castrated male fertile as
long as the store of spermatozoa lasts.
20

Obviously the motility of the spermatozoa
is indirectly determined by, among other
factors, the quantity of the supply of
hormone. ‘This must be of some importance
in relation to the reproductive power of a
male, particularly in double or manifold
matings, relative fertility being influenced
not only by the genetic constitution of the
spermatozoa determining motility, but also
by the endocrine conditions of the male,
which are influenced by many and various
environmental factors.

THE INFLUENCE UPON SEX

‘The action of the male sex hormone offers
many more points of interest, quite apart
from its influence upon the constitution of
the body, which is very considerable; for
there is good ground for the assumption
that the development of the male form is
largely, if not exclusively, dependent on
the timely action of the testicular hormone.
It also seems that this hormone even kas
an influence upon the formation of the
testicle itself.

As is generally known, in the very early
stages of foetal development, male and
female embryos are completely alike, each
possessing the rudiments of the genital
organs of both sexes. Sex development
(or rather differentiation) consists normally
in the atrophy of one set and the development of the other. In cattle it sometimes
happens that  blood-vessels of heterosexual twins, male and female, fuse at an
early stage. In these cases the female is
transformed, more or less completely, into
a male or an animal resembling a male in
its genital organs. The transformation of
these so-called ‘ freemartins’ is not restricted to the accessory sex characters, but
includes also the gonad, which instead of
becoming an ovary (as it does in undisturbed
female development) develops into an organ
resembling a testicle in structure. This
transformation of the female twin into a
‘freemartin’ is due to the action of the
male twin’s testicular hormone, which is
carried across in the joint blood circulation.

Thus it appears that the testicular hor
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

mone also determines the structural organization of the gonad, so that the male
gonad is dependent in its development on
the action of its own hormone! This may
at first sound rather absurd, since it is
difficult to understand how the male gonad
can develop if it needs its own products to
do so. But one must not forget that the
testicle is a composite gland, consisting of
the tubuli, wherein the spermatozoa are
produced, and the interstitial tissue, where
the hormone is elaborated. The formation
of hormone-producing cells precedes and
conditions the development of the spermatogenic elements, which produce the
spermatozoa and are thus directly responsible for reproduction. It still remains to
be discovered in what degree the production of the hormone in the later phases of
life is necessary for, and of influence upon,
the production of spermatozoa.

The production of the male hormone influences reproductive processes in many
other wavs as well. ‘The complicated reflexes which lead to erection and eventually
ejaculation also depend on the previous
secretion of testicular hormone. But even
with all its many influences upon sexuality
and reproduction, the hormonic system in
the male appears, at least at present, to be
much simpler than in the female. Here
not one sex hormone, but at least two are
involved ; and in considering them a somewhat wider biological survey is necessary.

THE HORMONES OF THE FEMALE

In the males of all vertebrates the
ejaculation of semen represents sexual as
well as reproductive activity. In many
fishes the parallel function in the female,
the extrusion of the eggs, is equivalent to
the ejaculation of semen: it represents
both the reproductive and the sexual act
of the female. In the higher vertebrates
conditions are much more involved. First
of all, the sex act in the female no longer
consists in an extrusion of its own gametes,
but in the reception of the gametes of the
opposite sex or in the processes accompanying this reception. The actual reproductive
THE HORMONES OF REPRODUCTION

function in the female of the higher vertebrates starts with the liberation of the
ovum, preceded by sexual activity and
followed by more intensive reproductive
activity—particularly in mammals. This
separation of sexual and_ reproductive
functions is very clearly expressed in the
behaviour of the genital organs in the
great majority of mammals. Not only are
there stages of relative rest, when the
genital organs do not function at all—this
inactivity sometimes lasting the greater
part of the year—but the functional stages
are clearly divided into a ‘‘ sexual ’’ and a
‘* reproductive ’’ phase. During the sexual
phase, before ovulation, an enlargement
occurs in the vagina which during the
periods of relative rest is too small to
admit the penis. The uterus, which
is of small diameter during the phase
of sexual rest, undergoes parallel changes—
in the rat, for instance, it is filled with 4
fluid which permits the approach of the
spermatozoa to the fallopian tubes and thus
to the egg. All these complicated changes
are co-ordinated with ovulation, which
occurs during their progress; after it has
occurred they are neutralized; the fluid
from the uterus (again taking the rat as
an example) is ejected, the uterus collapses,
the special epithelium formed in the uterus
and particularly in the vagina is destroyed
or thrown off, and the tissues relapse into
a more undifferentiated state.

Thus a starting point for a fresh and
different activity is reached and made use
of. For now begin the changes in the
uterus which permit the nidation and development of the egg, conditions being
created which are entirely different from
those accompanying fertilization and insemination. ‘These pregnancy changes persist and develop until the special structures
(decidual elements, etc.) formed during
their progress are eliminated in the act of
birth or immediately thereafter, when a
neutral stage again is reached and the
initial conditions of rest are restored.

Thus the changes in the genital organs
form a complete cycle, leading back to the
point whence they started. It will be

2I

realized that this ‘sex cycle’ is divided
into two phases: the phase of the changes
connected with insemination and fertilization to which mating is restricted—the
sexual or cestrous phase—and the second
phase of changes connected with the creation
and maintenance of the conditions of pregnancy—the reproductive phase.

INDUCING PSEUDO-PREGNANCY

The changes in both phases, whether of
behaviour (‘heat’) or anatomical and physiological, are incited by hormones liberated
by the ovary. There are at least two such
hormones and they are, in mouse and rat,
liberated in succession. During the first
phase of ovarian secretion, which precedes
ovulation, a@strin is produced. It is a
hormone which has now been prepared in
a highly purified state; and some even
believe they have produced it in crystalline
form free of any impurities. Its injection
into ovariotomized mice, in which no sex
cycle occurs in the absence of any ovarian
hormone, causes the complete series of the
cestrous changes. ‘The animals mate under
its influence and also display the anatomical
conditions of cestrus. During the second
phase of ovarian, secretion which follows
ovulation there is produced another ovarian
hormone, kythin or progestin, which is
responsible for the changes in the uterus
permissive of pregnancy development. ‘The
actions of this hormone are best demonstrated in rats and mice. If one injects
kythin and then imitates the stimulus
exerted by the egg upon the uterine mucosa
by irritating it mechanically, the so-called
“deciduomata’ are formed, representing
the maternal part of the placenta. But
deciduomata are never formed after injections of @wstrin. Kythin not only prepares
the uterus for the duties it has to perform
during pregnancy, but is also necessary
for the maintenance of pregnancy. Removal of the ovaries—the source of kythin—
leads to abortion; but injections of kythin
prevents the interruption of pregnancy.

These experiments demonstrate most
clearly the influence and role of kythin,
22

which is the pregnancy hormone and thus
the reproduction hormone par excellence.
There is good reason to assume that it is
also responsible for the post-partum activities connected with reproduction, such as
the display of maternal reflexes and lactation. Its supply to the uterus in sufficient
quantities is necessary for the normal development of the embryo, which depends on
the functions of the uterine wall or their
derivatives for its nutrition.

While the fundamental role of kythin is
now established, there is still very little
known of the actual mechanism of its
action. But still, its biological role as the
hormone which creates the conditions of
reproductive activity in the full sense of
the words is established.

‘RELIEVING’ THE GERM-PLASM

It is perhaps worth while also to mention
two points in which kythin bears upon
general questions. In one sense it acts as
a ‘reliever’ of the germ-plasm. If one
had to construct an animal in which internal development occurs—as is the case
in mammals—one would have to make sure
that the uterus provided for the conditions
of development after fertilization had
occurred. If this provision depended on
the actual occurrence of fertilization, the
egg would have to send some message, so
to speak, to the uterus, informing it that
preparation for pregnancy was necessary.
This would involve the elaboration of a
hormone on the part of the egg—in other
words, a somatic activity of the germplasm.

The elaboration of kythin in the ovary
relieves the egg of this somatic function ;
moreover, it has been established in a
long series of observations and experiments
that the elaboration of kythin on the part
of the ovary is entirely independent of the
actual occurrence of fertilization and even
not conditioned by the presence of an egg.
In other words, the second phase of ovarian
function is in all mammals independent of
the occurrence of fertilization (though
there are some species in which its occur
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

rence depends on accessory factors, such as
mating).

While this independence of the kythin
secretion relieves the germ-plasm of any
somatic duties (a situation analogous to
that in the male, where also the germ-cells
are not involved in the production of a
somatically active hormone), the organism
pays a heavy price for this relief; for the
secretion of kythin in the absence of fertilization leads to the occurrence of a stage
of pseudo-pregnancy. For some time after
ovulation the uterus undergoes all those
changes which are characteristic of, and
necessary for, the early stages of pregnancy; and in some mammals, such
as the bitch of certain marsupialia,
the ovary does not realize, as it were,
that its efforts are in vain before the
normal term of pregnancy has actually
passed. ‘These empty pregnancies are, of
course, so many ‘ unnecessary ’ strains.
But while the actual duration of pseudopregnancy varies very considerably, and
the intensity of its phenomena differs very
much, its occurrence is a universal
phenomenon—much more so than cstrus,
which does not occur in some mammals,
such as the primates, including man.
Here the anatomical and psychological conditions for sexual activity, once developed,
persist and show little or no regular
fluctuation. The sexual phase of the cycle
is abolished; there is no definite precestrous development, and therefore no
process of post-cestrous neutralization, such
as occurs in the diaphasic animals, is
necessary. The cycle in primates is
monophasic and represents, in the main,
only a reproductive phase. Thus ovulation
is either followed by pregnancy or, in the
absence of ovulation, by the vain development of pregnancy conditions—by a pseudopregnancy which ends after a few days in
a pseudo-birth. The latter is called menstruation owing to the almost accidental
fact of its monthly occurrence.

While pseudo-pregnancy is universal
among the mammals and is biologically
comparable in all of them, its anatomy and
physiology are not completely comparable
THE HORMONES OF REPRODUCTION

in the various forms. The anatomical
characteristics vary with the particular
form of placentation (or absence of placentation), and the mechanism is also different
in the various groups of mammals. While
the second phase of the cycle (it may be
pseudo- or true pregnancy) in the mouse represents an effect of kythin—at least there is
no indication that any e@strin is present in
either pseudo- or true pregnancy—it is certain that in other forms, such as the cow or
human, the second phase is due to the
combined action of both w@strin and kythin.
This needs some explanation, since it is
of importance for the understanding of
hormonic action.

TWO ANTAGONISTIC HORMONES

One of the effects of @strin, which is an
integral part of the cestrous phase of the
diphasic cycle, is the incitement of cornification. ‘The vaginal epithelium, which during the period of rest consists of ‘ low’
cubic cells, undergoes proliferation (an augmentation of cells), and the newly formed
cells then become keratinized, forming
horny scales. But under the influence of
kythin those ‘low’ cells of the interval
stage are transformed into ‘ high’ mucous
cells with great secretory activity. Thus
one of two alternative reactions is possible—
cornification or mucification. The epithelium can react either way, and if a suffcient amount of q@strin is injected when
mucification is in progress, the mucified epithelium is destroyed. Vice versa, the injection of a sufficient amount of kythin prevents the occurrence of cornification. There
is obviously an antagonism between the reactions of the vaginal epithelium to the hormones. ‘The same applies to the reactions
of the uterus : estrin prevents or interrupts
the pregnancy changes if injected in large
quantities, and kythin prevents insemination by preventing the oncoming of cestrous
changes. ‘Thus it is possible to prevent the
occurrence of fertilization by the administration of these hormones, and so negatively to
control the processes of reproduction. In
monophasic animals conditions are different.

23

In man and monkeys no cestrous phase occurs, and therefore (so to say) wstrin is not
needed to prepare the uterus and vagina for
insemination. Its power to influence the
growth of the uterine elements and
hyperzemia is therefore utilized in inducing
the pregnancy changes in collaboration with
kythin. Here the reactions of the genital
systems to kythin and e@strin are not alternative, and their effects are not antagonistic,
but synergetic.

It must be assumed, however, that a certain balance of the hormones is necessary
for the progress of pregnancy (or pseudopregnancy) on its normal course. It is
surprising that similar conditions also apparently prevail in diphasic animals like the
cow : but we know as yet too little about the
details. All we can say and have to consider is that the differences in the form and
nature of the sex cycle, as they occur in
various species, are due not only to a difference in the amount and time-coordination
of hormone secretion, but also to a difference in the mode of response on the part
of uterus, etc. This is obvious although—
or perhaps because—there has not yet been
time for much research on this fundamental
fact.

EXTRA-OVARIAN FACTORS

The story of the ovarian hormones is long
enough to fill a day’s narration; but it is
bound to remain incomplete if it does not
refer to the extra-ovarian factors which control the production of ovarian hormones.
The existence of such extra-ovarian factors
had been assumed for a long time. The
English biologist W. Heape postulated the
existence of a generative ferment, the presence and concentration of which directed
and conditioned gonadic function. It had
also been shown that the implantation of an
immature ovary into a mature female led
to immediate maturation of the graft, which
otherwise would have remained immature
for some time. Vice versa, the transplantation of a senile, inactive ovary into a
mature, still sexually active female was
found to lead to a regeneration of the senile
24

graft. These experiments showed that the
beginning and termination of the functional
life of the ovary were determined by factors
outside the ovary itself; some of them, it
should be said, have since been identified. |

Thus it has been established that the removal of the pituitary prevents the onset of
puberty and retains the ovary in a state of
immature inactivity. On the other hand,
grafts of the anterior lobe of the pituitary
lead to a premature occurrence of cestrus
in immature animals. Quite rightly it had
been concluded that the anterior lobe is
necessary for, and actually incites, the function of the ovary—that it invokes the production of an ovarian hormone. We have,
however, to consider a further complication.
We cannot speak of ‘“‘ the’’ ovarian hormone, since we have learned that there are
at least two such hormones, which are in
many animals, such as mouse or rat,
secreted in two distinct phases of ovarian
activity. Now, in the absence of a pituitary
gland neither phase occurs; but, as has
been shown recently, pituitary extracts can
incite either phase of ovarian secretion, according to the method of extraction applied.
Thus one kind of extract incites cestrus
though it has no direct influence upon
either uterus or ovary—but it induces the
production of @strin. And another kind of
extract incites pseudo-pregnancy—again by
activating the ovary and inducing kythin
production. It seems that this difference
in effect is due to the relative concentration
of two factors of the anterior lobe (Gonadotropic hormones or Rho-factors as they were
called when their existence was deduced
hypothetically). It appears that one of
these hormones is c@strogenic—it induces
the formation of @strin. The other one is
the hormone responsible for the elaboration
of kythin on the part of the ovary. Thus
one must be regarded as the super-ordinated
sex hormone, and the other as the superordinated pregnancy hormone. ‘They have
been referred to as the estrogenic and
kyogenic hormones, respectively.

Many experiments with these gonadotropic hormones have already been performed and have produced interesting

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

results. If kyogenic extracts are injected
into a pregnant mouse, pregnancy is prolonged beyond the normal term, since the
extract prolongs secretion of kythin. On
the other hand, one can prevent pregnancy
with the same extracts if one injects them
before the cestrous cycle comes on. ‘The
extract, by inducing the second phase of
ovarian action, prevents the first phase ; and
the animal becomes pseudo-pregnant before
having been in cestrus. On the other hand,
the injection of astrogenic extracts prevents
the development of the pregnancy changes.

Among the many facts to be deduced from
these experiments, some are particularly
worth mentioning. It appears, for example,
that the sexual periodicity as it occurs in
most mammals is ultimately due to a
pituitary periodicity, and that pregnancy
also is ultimately maintained by pituitary
action.

This leads us on to another point of some
interest. Both pseudo-pregnancy and pregnancy are due to the same hormone (kythin)
and differ only in degree; but their duration, in most species, differs greatly—
pseudo-pregnancy, as a rule, being much
shorter than true pregnancy. ‘This is due,
as we can state on the basis of many experiments, to a difference in the duration of
kythin secretion. Prolonging kythin secretion by means of kyogenic extracts leads to
a prolongation of pseudo-pregnancy to the
full extent of true pregnancy or even beyond
it. How is it, then, that the actual occurrence of fertilization leads to a prolongation
of kythin secretion?

The answer is simpler than one might
expect. In the mouse, for instance, the
placenta produces a kyogenic hormone,
thus stimulating the ovary and prolonging
the production of kythin. The placenta,
the formation of which depends on the preparation of the uterus by kythin, itself
prolongs the conditions of its maintenance.

THE CYCLE IN THE PRIMATES

What has been said in the above paragraph applies directly only to the diphasic
animal, e.g. the mouse. When we come
THE HORMONES OF REPRODUCTION

to the monophasic animal—man, monkey—
things become more difficult. Here both
ovarian hormones are involved in the development and persistence of pregnancy conditions, and the production of both must be
maintained throughout pregnancy. It accordingly appears that both gonadotropic
factors are produced by the human placenta.
And while it is easy to prevent in the mouse
either phase of the cycle by inducing the
other phase, it is not possible to do this in
the monophasic animal where the hormones
work synergetically.

However, the influence of gonadotropic
hormones is not restricted to the incitement
of the production of one or the other ovarian
hormone, but also affects phenomena even
more intimately connected with reproduction. While no ovulation occurs after the
removal of the pituitary gland, grafts of its
anterior lobe incite ovulation; and so do
cestrogenic extracts. The follicles enlarge,
burst, and render mature (fertilizable) eggs.
A sufficient number of grafts even increases
by several hundred per cent. the number of
eggs which are liberated by the ovary at
any period of ovulation.

But the same influences which thus induce
ovulation can prevent its occurrence. It is
generally known that the enlargement of
the follicle which culminates in ovulation is
followed by proliferation of the epithelium
which lines the follicle. Finally the cells
of this epithelium fill with their proliferated
mass the whole cavity of the follicle,
having undergone a certain transformation
which renders them rich in a substance
which gives them a reddish-yellow appearance. The whole body of these cells which
replace the follicle—or rather fill it—is
called corpus luteum (yellow body). It is
these cells, by the way, which are richest in
kythin.

Now, normally the gonadotropic hormones are produced at a rate which guarantees the proper sequence in the enlargement
of the follicle, its bursting (ovulation), and
the luteinization following ovulation. But
a considerable increase in the amount of
gonadotropic hormones leads to very fast
luteinization, which is almost complete be
25

fore the follicle has had time to enlarge and
to ovulate. Thus the egg is enclosed in a
mass of cells and no ovulation and fertilization are possible.

It appears, therefore, that the same substance which induces ovulation can also
prevent it. It is of some interest that
experiments show that the same mechanism
prevails in monkeys, which are directly
comparable with man.

Space does not permit the discussion of
the many other phenomena and problems
connected with the action of the gonadotropic hormones. ‘There is, however, one field
which must be briefly touched.

THE MALE PITUITARY GLAND

What has been said of the ovary also
applies to the testicle in some degree. Here
again we find inactivity after removal of the
pituitary gland, and restoration of the function after application of anterior lobe grafts
or extracts. Moreover, precocious maturity
can be induced by such extracts. On the
other hand, it has been shown that the senile
decay of the testicle, which is connected
with the loss of spermatogenetic power and
endocrine activity, can be restored by
means of gonadotropic hormones. ‘The
senile testicle resumes its secretion and again
produces spermatozoa, which appear to be
perfectly viable. Thus apparently fecundity and testicular secretion also depend on
anterior lobe secretion, though it is as yet
uncertain whether both gonadotropic hormones exert a positive influence upon the
testicle. In fact, it seems that the kyogenic
extracts have a rather detrimental effect
upon the testicle.

Doubtless further research will reveal
many other important actions of these hormones upon the reproductive system. And
having said, in the beginning, that, in a
way, all hormones control reproduction, we
now must invert the statement and stress
the complementary view—that the hormones
controlling reproduction in the narrower
sense of the word have effects far beyond
the reproductive system. It is well known
how much they influence constitution—the
26

comparison between castrates and normal
individuals has taught us thus much. Their
influence upon the energy-production of the
body, upon the mental activities, and upon
many other functions of the organism, cannot yet be wholly visualized ; but they seem

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to be of very great importance. ‘Therefore
the knowledge of the action of these hormones means much to the physiologist and
physician; and we may say that control
over the reproductive hormones means much
more than control over reproduction.

\ ey”

MR. PUNCH ON EUGENIC FAMILY ENDOWMENT

(Reprinted by special permission of the Proprietors of ‘ Punch.’’)

the late Conservative Government, was concluded at the Old Bailey

“| te strange case, in which the accused are the principal members of

to-day.

Mr. Justice Trout, addressing the jury, said:

‘‘ This painful but important

case has revealed a singular story. The prisoners in the dock are indicted at
the instance of a Naval officer, Commander Paravane, upon two counts—first,
that they did obtain a considerable sum of money by false pretences, and,
second, that they did, severally and collectively, libel the Commander.

‘* Now a number of the officers in His Majesty’s Navy are married and have
children; and, as you have heard, it is the principle or habit of the State to

look with especial favour upon _ those

who take upon themselves the

responsibilities of matrimony and parenthood, since, for reasons not wholly
clear to all of us, it is still considered desirable that the population of these

already over-crowded islands should continually increase.

Therefore the taxes

exacted from a bachelor are greater than those required of a married man;
and the income-tax of a father is reduced, though not extensively, in exact
proportion to his fertility. Pensions are granted to widows, but not to spinsters

equally needing support.

In addition, the officers and men of His Majesty’s

fighting forces receive higher pay (or allowances) from the day that they lead
some happy girl to the altar—that is to say, the officers and men of the Army,
the officers and men of the Royal Air Force, and the men (but not the officers)
of the Royal Navy. The exception is a startling one. . .

‘It does credit, no doubt, to the heart of the nation that we deny to the
officer what we are willing to grant to the simple seaman, but it will not,

I think, enhance our reputation for common-sense.

Is it to be understood that

it is correct and desirable for an ordinary or able-seaman to take a wife, but

not for the Captain of his ship?

Are the children of a stoker satisfactory
additions to the race but not the offspring of an Admiral ?

Surely we are

agreed that the blood and spirit of Nelson and Drake are not confined to the

forecastle ?

* Hearts,’ if I may be permitted to imitate a celebrated poem:

‘ Hearts just as hard to check
Beat on the quarter-deck,’

and the arguments which support the endowment of marriage in the one place
cannot miraculously lose their substance in the other.
‘* One of the Naval witnesses, a bachelor, ventured to attack the principle

itself; but it is too late, or perhaps too early, to do that.

If it were accepted

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 1.
