NEWS FROM THE U.S.A.
By NORMAN E. HIMES, PhD. ©

quarter are of eugenic interest in the

broad rather than the narrow sense.
They relate mainly to population policy and
control.

The most extraordinary news is that
relating to the extraction, by an official of
the Massachusetts Birth Control League,
from the United States’ postal authorities
of a most significant ruling to the effect that
it is not illegal for physicians or qualified
health agencies to send or receive, through
the mail, contraceptive materials or instructions. This master-stroke, if such it turns
out to be, has been engineered by Mrs.
Andrew Marshall, who very shrewdly some
years ago induced two Boston lawyers of
high standing to make a study of the
Massachusetts law on contraception. They
came to a liberal opinion, the essence of
which was that the dissemination of advice
orally was not prohibited. Thus the way was
opened up for clinics and private physicians,
providing they gave no written prescriptions.
The publication of this legal opinion in the
columns of the influential New England
Journal of Medicine* must have done much
to allay the fears and stir the intitiative of
Massachusetts physicians.

Now we have a second attempt. If it
proves successful it will be revolutionary, for
it knocks essential props from under Comstockery, and will render all but unnecessary
efforts to repeal Section 211 of the United
States Criminal Code and the corresponding
section of the Tariff Act of 1930. I suppose
the danger is that it is more easily reversed
than legislation—especially if and when
Catholic pressure groups start operating on
Postmaster-General Farley, a Catholic.

NEW REACTIONARY BILL ON BIRTHCONTROL
Difficult to reconcile with the above is the

* The oldest medical weekly in the U.S.A., formerly
the Boston Medical and Surgical Journal.

‘HE most important events of the past

fact that there have recently been introduced in Washington two Bills, H. R. 5370
and S. 1451, designed to tighten up Section
211 of the United States Criminal Code relating alike to obscenity and to birth-control
appliances, advertising and knowledge. The
former was introduced by Congressman
Higgins of Boston, one of the urban strongholds of Roman Catholicism, the latter by
Senator Hyde of Arizona—both at the
suggestion of Postmaster-General Farley.
The present law provides for the prosecution
of the sender of non-mailable matter. The
new Bill would make the knowing receiver of
such matter criminally punishable. At hearings before the Post Office Sub-Committee,
Congressman C. Pierce urged an amendment
exempting the medical profession.

The only opponents to the Pierce amendment were three representatives of the
Catholic Church. Mgr. John A. Ryan,
representing the National Catholic Welfare
Conference, stated that in his opinion birthcontrol was not justified even to save the life
of a mother. Miss Agnes Regan, of the
National Council of Catholic Women, and
Edward J. Heffern, executive secretary of
the National Council of Catholic Men,
opposed the amendment. S. 1541 was reported out of committee, but Senator Robert
LaFollette objected, declaring that the Bill
had not been given due consideration and
that he had not even been informed that a
vote was to be taken. The Bill has accordingly been re-committed. |

Probably these Bills have slight chance of
becoming law.. They may not even be reported out of committee. But the mere fact
that such legislation has been drawn up in
this day is significant of the level to which the
democratic process can descend. There can
be little doubt that Congressman Higgins is
vote-catching. These Bills, if they became
law, would be even more unenforceable than
the present ones, which are in a state of almost complete nullification. Their successful

133 _
134

passage would increase disrespect for law,
inasmuch as from 60 to 80 per cent. of the
married population of the United States
resort to some form of contraception.
Furthermore, such a law would be open to
grave abuse. It would be very difficult to
prove knowledge of the content of a package
prior to its receipt ; and surely mere passive
receipt without knowledge of content could
hardly be considered a criminal offence.
Otherwise grave injustice might be inflicted
upon innocent parties: an individual could
send contraceptive literature to an enemy,
inform post office inspectors, and secure his
prosecution, even though the recipient had
no intent whatever to commit a punishable
offence. If these Bills are not cheap votegetting they represent the efforts of a religious
minority to enforce its moral values by law
upon the majority. We, in the United States,
have always prided ourselves upon religious
toleration, but if one tolerates intolerance,
toleration tends to perish. It is safe to say
that the American people have no conception
whatever of the extent to which Catholic
clerical and lay leaders have been, in recent
decades, breaking down a fundamental
American ideal and standard.

There has been much criticism in birthcontrol circles of Postmaster-General Farley,
who has permitted the dissemination through
the mails of books describing the safe period
technique, at the same time that books
describing other methods have been prohibited.* If the ruling extracted from the
post office authorities by the Massachusetts
League proves upon later investigation to
be authentic, the concession will be a noteworthy one. I must confess that I am at
present very sceptical of the Massachusetts
report, inasmuch as it runs directly contrary
to Section 211 of the United States Criminal
Code. It is extremely doubtful if it is within
the authority of the Treasury or Post Office
Departments to amend this legislation by an
administrative ruling. This matter will be
investigated further, and there will be a more
adequate report in my next letter.

* See EuGENIcS REVIEW, 1935, X XVI, 256.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

MEDICAL SOCIETY OF THE STATE OF
NEW YORK

On May 18th the House of Delegates of the
Medical Society of the State of New York,
representing approximately 14,000 physicians, adopted a resolution urging the
American Medical Association to make a
thorough study of birth-control and _ its
related problems. The following resolution
was introduced by Dr. George W. Kosmak,
an eminent New York obstetrician and editor
of the American Journal of Obstetrics and
Gynecology:

“Whereas State and Federal legislation governing the control of reproduction is conflicting and
renders certain phases of medical practice illegal,
it is important that the medical profession as a
whole should undertake to clarify and lead in the
solution of these questions which involve medical
practice and procedures. The importance of such
control in medical practice, where such control
constitutes a therapeutic measure, is obvious to all.

“* Resolved, that the House of Delegates of the
Medical Society of the State of New York recommends to the House of Delegates of the American
Medical Association that it officially sanctions the
appointment by the board of trustees of a committee to study carefully all these related problems
and formulate at least a preliminary report to be
presented to the 1936 session of the House of
Delegates of the American Medical Association.”’

The Women’s Medical Society of New York
State, meeting at the same time, also moved
a “unanimous and hearty endorsement ”’ of
the stand taken. The New York delegates
and those of two other State medical
associations will attempt to press for action
at the annual meeting of the American
Medical Association to be held in June, but
I hardly expect that favourable action will
be taken this year. The American Medical
Association seems to have two outstanding
phobias: birth-control and socialized medicine.

WOMEN’S INTERNATIONAL LEAGUE

At the closing session of its annual meeting
held in Washington on May 7th, the Women’s
International League for Peace and Freedom,
unanimously adopted the following resolution
in support of the Birth Control Bill now
pending in Congress :

Whereas it is generally recognized that population in relation to natural resources and world
NEWS FROM THE US.A.

markets is one of the causes of war; and whereas
the intelligent control of population is a present
need ; and whereas to achieve this intelligent control, scientific birth-control information must be
available for all classes; therefore be it resolved
that we, the Women’s International League for
Peace and Freedom, support the bills now before
Congress, S. 600 and H.R. 5600.

Though there are national sections of the
League in twenty-seven countries and corresponding groups or individual members in
twenty-one other countries, the membership
in the U.S.A. is only about 10,000. The
Catholic organizations, on the other hand,
represent much larger memberships. Unfortunately, when it comes to counting heads
in legislative halls, numbers impress legislators much more than the quality of intelligence they represent.

MARGARET SANGER’S AMENDMENT

The National Committee for Federal Legislation on Birth Control has just published a
list of organizations endorsing Mrs. Sanger’s
amendment to the restrictive birth-control
legislation. Probably a thousand organizations are listed, among them national, state
and county medical societies and clubs,
deans of medical schools, public health and

135

nursing organizations and officials, social,
educational and labour groups, business and
professional women’s clubs, parent-teacher
associations, Junior Leagues, American
Legion Auxiliaries, rotary groups and political societies.

EUGENICS IN COLLEGE TEXTBOOKS

It is gratifying to learn that many recent
college textbooks on the family are giving
more space than formerly to contemporary
aspects of familial relations, including quality
of population and eugenics. Among these
are Hornell Hart’s Personality and_ the
Family (Boston, Heath), the new edition of
Goodsell’s Problems of the Family (New York,
Appleton-Century) and J. K. Folsom’s The
Family: Its Soctology and Social Psychiatry (New York, Wiley). It seems true to
say that eugenics has received more sympathetic treatment from American sociologists in recent decades than heretofore.
Sociologists, perhaps because they deal
essentially with social forces, are apt to be
strong environmentalists. Yet recent socsal
trends gave guarded approval of eugenics, an
event which could not have occurred in
American sociology two decades ago.

§ Oey”

Applications are invited for the post of part-time

Secretary to the Editor of the Review. A knowledge

of shorthand and typing is essential. Write, in the first

instance, to Mrs. Collyer, Eugenics Society, 69 Eccleston

Square, London, S.W.1.
