The Population

of England and

Wales in 1967

SOME FACTS

HE RECENT PUBLICATION of the
Registrar General’s Commentary Volume

for the year 1957 provides an opportunity
to summarise, briefly, a few current features of
the national demographic experience that are of
outstanding interest:
Migration
By a coincidence, the number of persons entering the country from Scotland and Ireland just
balanced the net overseas emigration: each of
these numbered about 20,000 during the twelve
months ended June 30th, 1957. This is all the
more remarkable as net overseas migration is
itself a narrow difference between two large
opposing movements; immigrants and emigrants
each numbered about 300,000.

Population

As net migration was negligible, the excess of
births over deaths wholly determined population
growth, which was by 226,000 persons in the
year ended June 30th, 1957 and by 209,000
persons in the calendar year 1957. By mid-1957
the total numbers in the country had reached
45 million persons, and a moderate further
growth of some 3 million may now be expected
over the next twenty years.

Marriages

The 347,000 marriages celebrated in 1957 represented a rate of 15-4 per thousand total population, but as nearly one-quarter of the population
are too young to marry and about one-half are
already married this rate is rather meaningless.
Measurement in relation to the numbers unmarried at ages over fifteen shows that 7 per
cent of bachelors and widowers and 5 per cent
of spinsters and widows married in the year, that
the tendency to marry is increasing and that the
numbers remaining unmarried are decreasing.
Eligible men are still becoming more numerous

59

relative to eligible women, and the age at
marriage continues to grow younger.

Births

The number of live births during 1957 was about
723,000, and this was some 6 per cent above the
annual average for the earlier years of the
1950s. The birth rate was sixteen per thousand
population. As with the marriage rate, however,
this rate is rather meaningless and it is more
useful to relate births to the number of women
of childbearing age. The number of legitimate
live births expressed per thousand married
women aged fifteen to forty-four was nearly
112, as against 106 for the earlier 1950s.
Legitimacy

The proportion of live births that were illegitimate remained at about 5 per cent. Another
74 per cent of children were conceived out of
wedlock but were legitimated by the parents’
marriage before the occurrence of the birth.
The total of about one-eighth of children conceived out of wedlock has not varied much in
recent decades, but during the Second World
War fewer children were legitimated by speedy
marriage, with the result that illegitimacy rose
from 5 to 10 per cent at one time.

Family Size and Replacement

An average family size of 2:2 children per married
couple may be expected if the fertility rates of
1956-57 continue to be experienced. The
Registrar General estimates that this family size
should be sufficient to replace the population,
perhaps with a small margin to spare, if current
mortality and proportions marrying continue to
be experienced.

Mortality
The expectation of life at birth according to
current experience is now nearly sixty-eight
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

years for men and seventy-three years for
women. Each of these has risen by about three
years since the end of the Second World War.
The crude death rate has remained the same at
about eleven and a half per thousand during this
time. As with crude marriage and birth rates,
however, this is misleading; the ageing of the
population has kept it high. The proportion of
persons aged sixty-five and over was 11-7 per

cent in 1957 whereas in 1945 it was only 10-2
per cent. The disturbing feature of recent
mortality experience is the failure of the rates
for men in middle and older life to improve. The
rate for the age-group fifty-five to sixty-four, for
instance, which before the Second World War
was twenty-three per thousand, is now (1957)
still twenty-two per thousand. The corresponding
figures for women have been sixteen and eleven.

IN THE OCTOBER 1959 NUMBER OF

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY

Edited by Thomas Park, University of Chicago

Reproductive Cycles of Five West Coast Crabs.
Intranuclear Co-ordination in Tetrahymena,
Sea-Water and Salt Utilization by Savannah Sparrows.

Changes in Activities of Uricase and Xanthine Oxidase during Life-Cycle of Japanese Beetle (Popillia japonica Newmar).

Formation and Distribution of Esterase in Gammarids.

Studies on the Physiology of the Masked Shrew Sorex cinereus.
Time-Lapse Photography: A Technique for Studying Diurnal Rhythms.
A Unique Method for Control of Brightness Cues in Study of Color Vision in Fish.

Fate of Fructose in the Alimentary Canal of the Cockroach.
Index.

R. A. BooLooTian, A. C. Griese, A. FARMANFARMAIAN and J. TUCKER

D. L. NANNEY and S. L. ALLEN
Tom J. CaDE and GrorGE A. BARTHOLOMEW

NALD J. Ross

W. L. Doyzs, R. RAPPAPORT and M. E. DoyLe

PeTER MORRISON, FRED A. RYSER and ALBERT R. DAWE
D. G. M. Woop-GusH

RosBerT A. MCCLEARY and JERALD J. BERNSTEIN
M. K. K. Piiai and K. N. SAXENA

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY is published quarterly in January, April, July and October.
Subscription 82s. 6d. per volume. Single copies 24s. 6d., including postage.

THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS, 5750 Ellis Avenue, CHICAGO
Agents in Great Britain:

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS, Bentley House, 200 Euston Road, London,

N W.1

 
