—C. P. BLACKER,
M.A., M.D.

Voluntary Sterilization:

Transitions Throughout the World.

- FOLLOW-UP INQUIRIES
JAPAN
INDIA

- SWEDEN
. DENMARK
.» REVISED POLICY FOR BRITAIN

1. TRANSITIONS IN PUBLIC OPINION AND IN
LEGAL ASSESSMENTS

HE MAIN FEATURE which emerges from
this brief review of a few selected

countries is that the practice of sterilization throughout the world is undergoing a rapid
transition.

At one end of the spectrum is the now mainly
historical view that sterilization is primarily a
method for controlling the multiplication of the
“unfit”; at the other end is the idea, born after
1945, that its voluntary practice can contribute
to a solution of the world’s population problems.
Operative in the middle ranges of the spectrum is
the belief that voluntary sterilization can contribute much to the health and well-being of both
individuals and families.

In the view that voluntary sterilization has
demographically beneficial possibilities, Asian
countries now lead. Indeed, for these there has
been little transition, since sterilization was
never seriously regarded as a measure of social
prophylaxis against the excessive reproduction
of the “unfit.” The full range of the spectrum is
best seen in the United States.

In communities where sterilization is, or has
been, compulsorily applied to people who were

143

. TRANSITIONS IN PUBLIC OPINION AND IN LEGAL ASSESSMENTS
. PUBLISHED AND UNPUBLISHED FIGURES

. UNITED STATES AND PUERTO RICO

deemed to be unfit or legally incompetent, and
still more when it was punitively applied, it can
be felt as a hall-mark of disgrace. And surgeons
performing such operations rightly feel that they
need legal protection. The distinction in law
between compulsory and voluntary sterilization
tends to be obscured; and in at least one country
doctors were at one time advised by a big
Medical Protection Society not to undertake
voluntary sterilization—advice which has since
been modified. The past practices of the Nazis
have added to the fears and the general distaste.

Now, however, tens of thousands of people
are being sterilized throughout the world who are
in no sense whatever unfit; and the alleged legal
dangers are either ignored, as in India, or circumvented as in the United States. Indeed, bold
initiatives have been taken in Asian countries.
Their disrespect for legal niceties resembles the
way a newly formed Division treated suspected
mine-fields in Normandy during the battles of
1944: this Division ignored the mine-fields
which had held up a more experienced and
cautious unit: it treated them as if they did not
exist and swept through suffering no casualties.
Now the new possibilities which are being
explored in Asia are being increasingly discussed

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1962, 54, 3.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in European countries and the United States
where a re-orientation is taking place.*

Also in transition, therefore, are opinions as
to the legality of voluntary sterilization. This
used to be regarded as akin to a maim. Consent
is no defence against a charge of maiming.
Sterilization, like all therapeutic operations,
entails a wounding. Since sterilization (especially
vasectomy) is widely sought and practised in the
absence of disease, it belongs to the class of
non-therapeutic operations—such, for example,
as face-lifting and other cosmetic procedures,
the puncture of the vein of the donor of a blood
transfusion, and ritual circumcision. The view is
gaining ground that, provided discrimination is
used and reasonable safeguards observed, a
surgeon performing a sterilizing operation at a
patient’s request runs a negligible risk. The perfection of a technique of reversible sterilization,
in particular the reanastomosis of the vas,
would still further reduce the risk.

Not only are standards in transition. So are the
data from which changing standards are inferred.
Every year—every month in India—new material
is published. Hence the figures given in the
ensuing tables are not to be treated as in any
sense final. They are interim figures, some of
which will be out of date by the time this article
is published.

2. PUBLISHED AND UNPUBLISHED FIGURES

Another point should be stressed at the outset.
The published figures may represent but a fraction of the total sterilizations. The status of the
candidate may call for safeguards. When there
are doubts about his mental normality, the
authorization of a Ministry or Board may be
required (as is usual in Sweden) or else the
recommendations of one or more doctors other
than the surgeon performing the operation may
be necessary (as is usual in Denmark). But when

* This revision of view is perhaps comparable with
that involving the sheath as a contraceptive. This was
first ignored, being associated with prophylaxis against
venereal disease. It took a long time to recognize the
indubitable statistical fact that the sheath is the most
widely used of contraceptive methods.

t The Prognosis after Sterilization on Social-Psychiatric
Grounds, by Martin Ekblad. 1961. Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica Supplementum 161, Volumen 37. Translated from the Swedish by Richard Cox. Munksgaard,
Copenhagen.

144

a normal individual wants to be sterilized
because no more children are wanted, such
safeguards are increasingly felt to be superfluous. The matter is left to the discretion of the
surgeon. He may, if he likes, seek the advice or
support of a colleague. But if he does not have
to notify the operation to some central authority,
it will evade the country’s health statistics.
These can only be compiled when operations are
somehow notified or reported. Un-notified
sterilizations may greatly outnumber notified,
as in the U.S.A.

3. FOLLOW-UP INQUIRIES

A valuable follow-up inquiry has recently been
reported in Sweden.t This monograph describes
a detailed and thorough investigation begun in
1956 of 225 women sterilized in Stockholm in
1951 after an application, made by them to the
Swedish Board of Health, had been sanctioned.
It differs from most other similar inquiries in
the fact that contact was made with all but two
of the women in the originally selected sample.

Some simple but fairly obvious conclusions
emerge. The first is that the results of sterilization
as later assessed by the sterilized persons depend
much on the grounds on which they have been
sterilized. The greater the prevalence of mentally
abnormal conditions, especially of neuroses, in
the sample, the larger the proportion of unfavourably assessed results. The same would
apply to any form of medical or surgical treatment the effects of which were followed up in a
mixed sample containing psychiatric cases.
When any form of treatment is applied to any
representative group of psychiatric cases, about
75 per cent commonly report recovery or improvement at the end of the treatment. The
remainder give qualified responses; and a substantial proportion (greatest among patients
subject to recurrent depressions) later relapse.
Hence it would be astonishing indeed if all
people sterilized on mainly psychiatric grounds
later reported favourably on the effects of the
operation.

There is a general similarity of results of
reported follow-up inquiries of voluntarily
sterilized people. A substantial majority of from
75 per cent upwards report themselves as entirely
satisfied; a minority of from 10 to 15 per cent
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION: TRANSITIONS THROUGHOUT THE WORLD

report dissatisfaction not amounting to permanent regret; and a smaller minority, usually
under 10 per cent, express definite regret. The
larger the proportion of psychiatric cases in the
sample, especially of neurotics.and sufferers from
hypochondriacal anxiety, the larger are these
last two minorities.

Other factors contributing to dissatisfaction
in Dr. Ekblad’s and other samples are the
following: Youthfulness (unfavourable aftereffects are rare among women sterilized after
thirty-five); few children (complaints rare among
women with more than four children); unhappiness in marriage; pressure to give consent
brought to bear by a relative; and intense
maternal feelings.

Of Dr. Ekblad’s 225 women, 116 (52 per cent)
were assessed by him as having neurotic or
abnormal personality traits. Their attitudes to
sterilization were: satisfied 82 per cent; dissatisfied but not to the point of definite regret 14 per
cent; permanent regret 4 per cent. Comparable
inquiries have mostly been done in Switzerland
and the United States, most of which are reported by Dr. Ekblad.

Among the Swiss investigations may be
mentioned those of:

H. Binder (1937, Basle): 293 women of whom
90 per cent were on the whole satisfied, some with
reservations;

E. Bauman and O. Geiser (1939): 187 women
of whom 81 per cent were satisfied, 10 per cent
had reservations and 9 per cent regretted;

R. Wenner (1939, Basle): 904 women of whom
95 per cent were satisfied and 5 per cent dissatis
A. Labhart (1939): 652 women of whom 96-6
per cent were satisfied and 4-4 per cent dissatisfied,
all the latter having been sterilized on psychiatric

grounds;

A. Naville (1952, Zurich): 230 mentally healthy
women sterilized at their own request. Reactions
wholly favourable 82 per cent, mainly favourable
13 per cent, mainly unfavourable 3 per cent,
wholly unfavourable 2 per cent;

P. A. Hoppeler (1954, Zurich): 100 women
sterilized on psychiatric grounds: 89 per cent
favourable, 5 per cent reservations, 6 per cent
regretted, though according to Hoppeler “‘the
advantages were objectively greater than the
disadvantages.”

* Sterilization in Japan. Eugenics Quarterly, September, 1961, 8, 3.

Among American investigations may be
mentioned those of:

J. H. Craft (1936, South Dakota): 127 mentally
defective women of whom 77 per cent were satisfied, 17 per cent indifferent and 8 per cent
dissatisfied.

A. C. Barnes and F. P. Zuspan (1958): 311
women sterilized in puerperium of whom 90 per
cent were wholly or partly satisfied and 10 per
cent regretted.

A. Guttmacher (1957, New York): Fertility
and Sterility, 8, 6. (Not quoted by Ekblad): 150
puerperal sterilizations: 95:3 per cent satisfied;
4-7 per cent regrets. Dr. Guttmacher comments:
“On the basis of this study one may hazard the
guess that nineteen patients in twenty will be
happy and grateful for the permanent prevention
of conception, which they wished and still wish.
However, one patient in twenty will change her
mind, frequently because of circumstances beyond
her control. Can we pick out this twentieth
patient? I think not.”

The salient feature of these Swiss and American
inquiries, like those reported below from Japan
and India, is the uniformly large majority who
were on the whole satisfied with the operation.
Dr. Ekblad’s valuable monograph gives full
references.

The five countries here considered are selected
from a quite wide range of countries and islands
wherein sterilization is practised. The five illustrate different contemporary approaches. The
experiences of Japan and India—particularly
their follow-up inquiries—are considered at
some length because of their novel features and
because of the large numbers dealt with during a
short period (after 1945). The positions in both—
expecially that in India—are highly transitional.
The interim nature of the figures now available
(June 1962) is especially pronounced.

4. JAPAN

The most recent figures known to me have been
published by Dr. Yoshio Koya.* This authority
quotes national figures which suggest (though
Dr. Koya does not say so) that, in the last
decade, sterilization has been more widely
practised in Japan than in any other country in
the world.

But the national figures give imperfect information on important issues. Hence Dr.

145
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Koya supplements them by the findings of a
fairly detailed investigation, conducted by his
staff, of 812 persons sterilized since Japan’s
Eugenic Protection Law was passed in 1948. In
what follows the national figures are first given.
They have been prepared by the Government of
Japan from the reports of “designated doctors”’;
I will then consider some of the findings of the
special inquiry. The tables here shown are a
selection, some slightly adapted, from those
which appear in Dr. Koya’s article.

Under Japan’s Eugenic Protection Law (1948)
both sterilization and abortion are sanctionable
in the following circumstances:

When the mother or father has a hereditary
disease, psychosis or leprosy. (The presence in
more distant relatives of a hereditary disease or of
psychosis likewise provides grounds.)

When pregnancy threatens the life of the
mother.

When the mother already has several children

' and when every pregnancy and delivery can lower
her health

It will be noticed that two of these three provisions involve the mother only; also that they
are concerned with health and not with socio
TABLE 1

NUMBER OF STERILIZATIONS OFFICIALLY REPORTED

IN JAPAN FROM 1949-1959 CLASSIFIED BY REASON

GIVEN FOR THE OPERATION AND BY THE
PERCENTAGE OF OPERATIONS ON MALES

1-4
1-1
1°5
1:7
20

Ww pu»
OOoOnNowN

168,192

 

economic issues. However, Dr. Koya points out
that there is much latitude in the last provision;
bad living conditions and anxieties over numerous children and over further unwanted pregnancies can depress health and can thus be
interpreted as justifying sterilization.

National Figures

Table 1 is based on figures prepared by the

Japanese Government from reports of the

above-mentioned “‘designated”’ doctors who are

expected to send in returns. It will be seen that,
in the period 1949-59, over 340,000 people were
thus sterilized. But Dr. Koya adds that three or
four times more un-notified sterilizations were
probably performed outside the provisions of the

Act. “Whatever the true figure,” he says,

**sterilizations are exerting considerable influence

on the reproductivity of the Japanese popula
tion”.

The following points will be noted:

1 The three reasons listed in columns 2-4 follow
the categories laid down in the above-quoted
Eugenic Protection Law. All are concerned
with health. But the difficulties of distinguishing
between the so-called medical reason (Col. 3:
threat to mother’s life) and the so-called health
reason (Col 4: lowering mother’s health) were
such that, in 1952 and 1953, the two categories
were combined under column 3.

2 Eugenic reasons and leprosy (Col. 2) consti
tuted a small minority (4-1 per cent) of the
total cases.
So-called health reasons (Col. 4) amounted to
just under half the total. If the relevant cases
classified in 1952-53 under Column 3 were
included, as in the other years, under Column 4,
the total would exceed half. Under this heading
are certainly comprised many people whose
real motive was socio-economic. (Dr. Koya
found in his special inquiry that, of 477 persons,
only 110 (26 per cent) were sterilized for
strictly medical reasons.)

4 There were sharp rises each year throughout
the period 1949-55. The rises (Col. 5) were
sharpest between 1949 and 1950, and between
1952 and 1953. Since 1956 there has been a
slight decline but in the five years 1955-59 the
yearly total has exceeded 40,000.

5 The percentage of males sterilized is small,
ranging from 1-1 per cent in 1950 to 4:2 per
cent in 1957.

wo

Dr. Koya’s Special Inquiry
But Dr. Koya tells us that these national figures
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION: TRANSITIONS THROUGHOUT THE WORLD

are unrealistic because the data had to be
adjusted to the three categories defined by the
Act of 1948. In particular, the reasons given for
seeking sterilization were unrealistic. In January
1958, therefore, Dr. Koya and his staff embarked
on the special inquiry above mentioned. Of the
812 respondents in the sample who had been
sterilized after 1948, 632 (78 per cent) were wives
and 180 (22 per cent) husbands. The proportion
of men was thus much higher than in the national
total (Table 1). The interviews were conducted
by doctors and midwives; the 812 respondents
were drawn from two prefectures (314 people)
and from four industrial enterprises involving
two mining companies, a steel and a shipbuilding company. Dr. Koya tells me that this
sample may not be representative, particularly
from the socio-economic standpoint, of the total

lized. The table gives the age and parity of these
180 women when their husbands were sterilized.
The following points may be noted:

1 The age-group most favoured by women for
sterilization (or the age-period most favoured
for their wives when men get sterilized) is
30-34; 43 per cent of the sample fell within this
age group; 75 per cent of the women were over
thirty. The 25 per cent under thirty may have
comprised medical cases in a strictly defined
sense. A sub-sample of 477 (of the 812 respondents in the sample) comprised 23 per cent of
such strictly medical cases.

2 The parity most favoured when sterilization is
performed is three: 325 people (40 per cent).
This is nearly twice the number of people
sterilized with two (21:3 per cent) or four
(20-5 per cent) live children. The suggestion is
that most women in the sample are sterilized
before they are in extremis through excessive
fertility.

TABLE 2 ©

JAPAN: NUMBER OF STERILIZED PERSONS (632 WOMEN AND 180 MEN)
BY NUMBER OF LIVING CHILDREN AND BY AGE OF MOTHERS

AGE OF MOTHER
at time of
operation on NUMBER OF CHILDREN
herself or PER
her husband 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 TOTAL CENT
20—24 4 9 2 1 16 2:0
25—29 1 8 63 89 20 3 1 185 22:8
30—34 8 80 160 73 25 5 351 43-2
35—39 6 19 67 59 56 13 6 226 8=627°8
40—44 2 6 8 3 2 1 22 2:7
45+ 1 5 2 1 2 1 12 1°5
TOTAL 1 26 173 325 166 89 20 10 2 812
PER CENT 0-1 3-2 212 400 205 11:5 25 12 0-2 100-0

sterilized population of Japan. The main objective of the inquiry was such that the sample
could not be very large: this because it was held
to be important that as many as possible of the
interviews be conducted by doctors (limited in
number and all busy men) on the staff of his
Institute. Their main object (and that of the
inquiry) was to throw light on the physical and
psychological effects of sterilization. The tables
which follow are based upon this sample of 812
respondents.

Ages and Number of Children

Table 2 covers 632 women who were themselves
sterilized and 180 whose husbands were steri
Neither of these findings suggest that sterilization is being abused in Japan, either by being
sought by very young people or by people
who have not had a reasonable quota of
children.

Sexual and Psychological Effects

The four main headings of Table 3 relate to
differing totals. We are told that the investigators “proceeded as carefully as possible,
omitting a fairly large number of cases who gave
ambiguous or vague answers.” The men numbered about a hundred so that percentages are
omitted.

It will be seen that, in their sexual reactions,

147
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE 3
SEXUAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF STERILIZATION

JAPAN:

    
  

 
   
     
   

PSYCHOLOGICAL

  
  

REACTION No. % REACTION No.
No change 300 68-0 | Favourable 333
Intensified 126 28°3 Unfavourable 37

TOTAL 442

over 96 per cent of the women and ninety-four
out of ninety-seven men experienced either no
change or an improvement. But in their psychological reactions women were less unanimous;
10 per cent regretted having been sterilized. Of
101 men all but four reported favourable
psychological reactions.

The improvement in the sexual reactions of
over a quarter (28-5 per cent) of the sample of
442 women, Dr. Koya attributes to the removal
of anxieties about undesired pregnancies.

Diffidence was shown as to the causes of
regret among thirty-seven women: “Our investigator asked why. Most of them did not answer,
but some said that they wanted another child
and others replied that their husbands began to
hold them in contempt, as if they were no
longer women.”

This regret on the part of 10 per cent of
women might be regarded as the most unfavourable finding of the special inquiry. The fraction
could doubtless be reduced by more careful
selection of cases. Dissatisfaction would be

  
  
 
  
  

 
    

PSYCHOLOGICAL
REACTION

  

%

 

 

     
 

  
   
 

    

90 | Nochange 92 | Favourable 97
10 | Intensified 2 {| Unfavourable 4
Diminished 3

  

TOTAL 101

especially liable to ensue in unstable women or
in those who were unhappily married in the
sense of feeling under-valued by their husbands.

Dr. Koya remarks that, before the operation,
some women had expressed fears that they would
become masculinized and some men that they
would be feminized. But these misconceptions
were easily dispelled.

Initiative in seeking Sterilization

Information was available of 564 women and
102 men. It will be seen (Table 4) that there were
some initial differences between husband and
wife.

There was concurrence from the start between
some 70 per cent of the couples (lines 1-3), the
figure (70-6 per cent) being slightly larger when
it was a question of agreement on the man being
sterilized than on the woman (69-3 per cent).

Initial differences were reported (lines 4 and
5); but there were fewer objections from the
candidate for sterilization than from his/her
spouse. Thus, of the 139 women as to whose

TABLE 4

JAPAN: SOURCE OF INITIATIVE FOR, AND DEGREE OF
CONCURRENCE ABOUT, STERILIZATION (666 CASES)

INITIATIVE TAKEN BY: STERILIZATION OF WOMAN STERILIZATION OF MAN
No. % No. We
1 Wife (husband agreeable) 163 28-9 8 78
2 Wife and husband together 127 22:5 19 18-6
3 Husband (wife agreeable) 101 17-9 45 44-2
391 69-3 72 70°6
4 Wife (husband not necessarily
agreeable at first) 85 15:1 6 59
5 Husband (wife not necessarily
agreeable at first) 54 9-6 24 23°5
139 24:7 30 29-4
6 Initiative taken through recommendation of others 34 6:0 —_ —_—
TOTAL 564 100 102 100

148
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION: TRANSITIONS THROUGHOUT THE WORLD

sterilization there were initial differences, eightyfive, who presumably wanted to be sterilized,
took the initiative, the husband later consenting;
and of the corresponding thirty men, twenty-four
took the initiative. It is interesting that, in the
remaining six cases of contemplated vasectomy
(line 4), the wife took the initiative. Some people
may wonder whether this could have happened
twenty-five years ago in Japan; and they may see
in this small figure an indication that Japanese
men are open to argument as to the advantages
of vasectomy.

Abortions before Sterilization

Information was available of the relevant histories of 720 wives (Table 5).

TABLE 5
JAPAN: NUMBER OF INDUCED ABORTIONS BEFORE
STERILIZATION
NUMBER OF INDUCED WIVES
ABORTIONS No. %
0 275 38-2
] 265 36°8
2 109 15:1
3 45 +445 6:3 $61°8
4 16 2:2
5 or more 10 1-4
TOTAL 720 100

It will be seen that over 60 per cent of the 720
wives had had one or more abortions before they
or their husbands were sterilized; and that
seventy-one of these women (nearly 10 per cent)
had had three or more abortions.

Dr. Koya remarks that these findings “show
us that sterilization is often resorted to as an
alternative to conception control or as a remedy
for induced abortion. This also suggests that if
induced abortion is strongly suppressed or prohibited at a place where facilities for conception
control are limited, people may incline to
become sterilized.”

* The views held by Indians on the value of sterilization in contributing to a solution of their country’s
population problem have changed in the last few years.
A valuable account of the position at the end of 1958 will
be found in the December 1958 number of the (Quarterly)
Journal of Family Welfare, (5, 2) of which the editor is
Mrs. Avabai Wadia, 1 Metropolitan House, Dadabhai
Naoroji Road, Bombay, 1.

t It has recently been shown that these methods are
far from being the most prevalently used in Britain.

Is this not a good thing?

It is not clear from this report to what extent
the Japanese authorities regard sterilization (as
they do contraception) as a desirable alternative
to abortion which, in Japan, has been the main
social instrument for keeping a rocketing population within bounds. Total annual numbers of
reported sterilizations in Japan have declined
slightly since 1956 (Table 1); and the Japanese
have not pressed the possibilities of vasectomy
as the Indians have recently done.

Conception control is the favoured alternative
to abortion; and progress is being made in the
change-over. Dr. Koya writes: “We have no
reason to encourage sterilization as an alternative to conception control in this country.”

5, INDIA*

Background

The story of India’s reactions to her population
problem is remarkable. As soon as their country
acquired independence in 1947 responsible
Indians began to think of the future. They
recognized that the raising of living standards
was impeded by the rapidity with which the
population was growing, and a population
policy was inaugurated in a manner which would
have been impossible under British colonial
rule.

After an unencouraging experiment with the
rhythm method and after the establishment of a
vigorous Family Planning Association, it came
to be felt that the provision of guidance on birth
control should primarily be a responsibility of
the health services. Appliance methods, used by
the female, such as were mainly advised in the
birth control clinics of western countries,t were
regarded as the method of choice.

But follow-up inquiries showed that these
methods were difficult for Indian women; and
doubts came to be felt as to whether they would
be effective in curbing the rate of population
growth. These doubts were confirmed by the
results of the 1961 census. The census showed
that the population problem was getting worse
instead of better. There had been an “unprecedented increase’ of about 18 per cent in the
preceding decade—from a total figure of 359 to
about 438 million. The last figure exceeded the
upper limit of all forecasts and was some 7

149
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

million more than the figure (431 million) on
which the third five-year plan had been based.

These two events—the realization that current
methods of birth control were largely impracticable by Indian couples and the shock of the
1961 census figures—provided the impetus to
inaugurate a sterilization policy.

At first this policy found little favour with the
Indian Family Planning Association, and the
Government naturally hesitated. But in 1959 the
Health Department committed itself. The most
noteworthy features of the ensuing story have
been the swing towards sterilizing males rather
than females, and the wide differences in the use
of sterilization made by the fifteen Indian States
(which are largely free to develop their own
health policies). The movement has been led by
the states of Madras and Maharashtra; and
among the most influential people in bringing
about the change have been Mr. R. A. Gopalaswami (Madras) and Dr. G. M. Phadke (Bombay). The present position is in the highest degree
transitional.

National Figures

The Health Department of the Government of
India publishes an illustrated monthly journal
Family Planning News, now in its third year.
Here have appeared figures of sterilizations
performed in India as a whole. I am indebted to
Colonel B. L. Raina for sending me the

TABLE 6
STERILIZATIONS PERFORMED IN INDIA AFTER 1955

YEAR MALES’ FEMALES TOTAL PERCENT
MALES
1956 2,333 5,490 7,823 29:9
1957 3,671 9,859 13,530 27:2
1958 9,072 16,801 25,873 35:0
1959 13,925 21,797 35,722 39-0
1960 31,067 15,198 46,265 67:1
1961 33,792 12, 821 46,613 72°5
1962* 3, 723 "376 4,099 90-8
TOTAL 97,583 82,342 179,925 54-2

* 1962: up to April; figures incomplete.

t Mr. Gopalaswami’s views are set out in two memoranda: Administrative Implementation of Family Planning
Policy, 1959, which was prepared for presentation to the
International Conference on Planned Parenthood held
in New Delhi in February 1959; and a Statement Presented to the Conference on Family Planning Research,
held in New York in October 1960. Both are printed by
the Controller of Stationery and Printing, Madras, on
behalf of the Government of Madras.

150

figures available as late as July 1962. They are
shown in Table 6.

It will be seen that, over the period 1956-61,
the annual figures rose sharply. The increases
were most pronounced between 1957 and 1960.
Especially noteworthy is the rise in the proportion of males sterilized during the period. The
percentage rose from twenty-seven in 1957 to
over seventy-two in 1961. Salpingectomies
reached a peak of over 21,000 in 1959.

Madras State

Madras State has taken a leading part in popularizing and organizing sterilization, the possibilities of which have been vigorously set forth
by Mr. R. A. Gopalaswami. This authority was
Registrar General of India when the 1951 census
was held; and he is now chairman of the Program Committee of the Family Planning
Board of Madras State.t Something will here be
said about an important follow-up inquiry of
women who had been given advice on contraception in Madras, about how Mr. Gopalaswami
thinks that a nation-wide sterilization policy
might help to solve India’s population problem
by curbing the rate of growth, and about the
numbers of men and women sterilized in Madras
State.

The Madras follow-up showed that, in a
substantial pilot inquiry involving nearly 40,000
women, a disappointingly small number (some
4 per cent) acted on contraceptive advice. I
quote at some length from paragraph 19 of Mr.
Gopalaswami’s important Statement (1960):

We had expected that it would be easy to get
family planning accepted in principle; and that
the real difficulties would arise in getting any very
sizeable proportion to practise it. This pilot experiment has confirmed that this is sober truth. This
may be illustrated from an analysis of detailed data
relating to the city of Madras for the first seven
months of 1959. During this period, intensive
instruction was provided for women who came
to any one of three large maternity hospitals
maintained by the State Government or any one
of forty-four Mother’s Information Centres
located in Child Welfare Centres maintained by
the Madras City Corporation.

Altogether 38,829 mothers were given instruction during the seven months period. Out of this
number, only 2,888 mothers (or eight out of 100)
disclaimed interest in family planning. All others
(that is ninety-two out of 100) were interested.
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION: TRANSITIONS THROUGHOUT THE WORLD

They indicated their desire to do something to

limit their families and received instruction

willingly. Subsequently, when a follow-up was
made, it was found that only 1,578 women (or
only four out of 100) had acted on the advice.

Later in the same memorandum (paras 20 and
21) Mr. Gopalaswami adds:

The desire to limit families is there. But it is not
keen enough to move the people to change their
conjugal habits . . . The lesson of Indian experience [is] that the reluctance to change over from
normal care-free conjugal habits is stronger than
the desire to avoid unwanted pregnancy.

It would indeed be interesting to know if the
reactions and behaviour of this quite massive
sample of Madras women were representative of
the country as a whole. If the feeble motives and
reluctance found in Madras were universal, the
policy of establishing numerous birth control
clinics could scarcely be expected to influence
population trends in the near future.

But Mr. Gopalaswami’s pessimism about
contraception is offset by optimism about the
possible effects of an intensified sterilization
policy, which, he thinks, could do for India what
its abortion policy has done for Japan.

In Japan the birth rate has halved in ten years.
Between 1947 and 1957 the rate has reduced from
thirty-four to seventeen per thousand. It is
contended that both contraception and abortion
were responsible for this reduction of seventeen
points: five of the seventeen points are attributable to contraception and the remaining twelve
to abortion. A comparable reduction of twelve
points could, it is argued, be more effectively and
humanely achieved by sterilization. Mr. Gopalaswami writes (para. 33 of 1960 memorandum):

The effect of every induced abortion, so far as
the birth-rate is concerned, is only the diminution
of the number of child-births by one. On the
other hand, a sterilization effected after three
children are born, and before the fourth is conceived, will diminish the total number of childbirths by at least three. In other words, the result
produced in Japan by a surgical abortion rate of
twelve per thousand can be produced in India if
the sterilization rate is stepped up to four per
thousand per annum. A sterilization rate of five
per thousand per annum should be ample, even
allowing for a less rapid growth in India than in
Japan of the use of contraceptive appliances.

In the numerous projects of India’s five-year
plans, that country’s planners erect “‘targets.”’

Hence the objective of population policy can be
described as a target. In this sense Mr. Gopalaswami speaks of a “‘sterilization target’’ and this
would be “for India as a whole, an annual output of about 2 million sterilizations.”’

The views of India’s former Registrar General
command respect. They may be summarized in
the two following passages (paras. 13 and 40 of
his memorandum of 1960):

There are [he says] very strong a priori grounds
for believing that a nationwide drive to instruct
people exclusively in the use of appliance methods
[of birth control] may peter out as a futility; and
therefore cause a grave set-back to the implementation of National policy. No Government can
afford to court a spectacular failure. _

The success of Government action in the next
few years will turn almost entirely on the rapidity
with which the people can be persuaded to resort
to sterilization as a method of family limitation.
In this respect, the outlook for Government
action in India is, at the moment, promising.
The following sterilizations have been done in

Madras State:
TABLE 7

STERILIZATIONS IN MADRAS STATE FROM
1 JANUARY 1956 To 31 MAY 1962

 

YEAR MALES’ FEMALES TOTAL PER CENT
MALE
1956 25 670 695 3-6
1957 231 1,573 1,804 12:8
1958 986 1,864 2,850 34-6
1959s «11,330 2,013 3,343 40-0
1960 5,184 2,672 7,856 60-0
1961 22,420 2,915 25,335 88:6
1962 (May) 12,377 ~—1,254 13,631 93-3
TOTAL 42,553 12,961 55,514 76-7

 

The trend is remarkable. Total sterilizations
have increased thirty-six fold in six years (from
just under 700 in 1956 to over 25,000 in 1961).
During the same period vasectomies have increased by over 896-fold (from twenty-five in
1956 to over 22,000 in 1961). If there are no setbacks the annual figures will rise further and
finally flatten out. Whether, in so doing, they
will attain to Mr. Gopalaswami’s “target” the
future will disclose.

Maharashtra

This State comprises between 10 and 11 per cent
of the area of India and contains between 9 and
10 per cent of its population. Its sterilization
policy is ambitious and its performance unique.

Ig
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Table 6 shows that in the three years 1958-60
over 100,000 people were sterilized in India. Of
these nearly 60 per cent were sterilized in
Maharashtra.

A report of the State’s activities was presented
in an opening address by its Minister of Health,
Shri Homi Taleyarkhan, to a seminar on
sterilization convened in Bombay during January
1962 by the Indian Family Planning Association.
The following are among the points of the
Minister’s speech: In the three years 1958-60
*‘we have done nearly 60,000 operations both on
the male and female in the State out of a little
more than one lakh [a hundred thousand] in the
entire country.”’ Most of the operations on males
were performed in what are known as vasectomy
camps. “Recently,” said the Minister, “we
organized the world’s record vasectomy camp at
Satara where 1,510 operations were performed in
four days .. . The number of persons desiring to
be operated on is increasing so fast that it is
difficult to cope with the rush.”’ The Government
of India favours these enterprises; it has
“appreciated our work and sanctioned liberal
amounts for the promotion of the cause.”

Safeguards are observed. The person concerned must have at least three children, one a
male heir at least eight years old; time is given
for emotional preparation so that the candidate
may “realize that it is an irrevocable decision of
his life” ; lastly no one under thirty, unless he has
had “fa number of children before that age,”
can be sterilized.

Maharashtra’s sensational performance, reported at the above-mentioned seminar, naturally provoked critical discussion, some of it
coming from members of India’s Family Planning Association. Are things being pushed too
fast? Voices enjoining caution were raised.*

* On the other hand it has been argued that, to attain
the “‘targets”’ for India, the current requirement that the
mother must be at least thirty years old and must have
had at least three children should be relaxed. This
argument is outlined by Dr. D. P. Dandekar in a paper
entitled A Standard for Sterilization in the National
Program of Fertility Control in India which appeared in
1961. This paper is a contribution to a comprehensive
study of the problems of mass sterilization now being
carried out by India’s Demographic and Research
Training Centre, Chembur, Bombay 71.

t+ Vasectomy: Sterilization of the Male. Journal of the
oe, _ Association, 1 September 1961, 37, 5,

152

Vasectomy: A Follow-up Inquiry

Important in India’s programme is the recognition of the possibilities of vasectomy. A prominent figure in this movement is Dr. G. M.
Phadke, Bombay. Indeed, it was an early paper
of Dr. Phadke’s which, by attracting the attention of Mr. Gopalaswami, started what might
now be called a chain reaction.

Dr. Phadke has published a follow-up study
of 655 of his vasectomized patients. This study,
though of narrower scope, has certain features in
common with that of Dr. Koya’s Japanese
follow-up mentioned above. In particular, Dr.
Phadke has shown that, after vasectomy,
fertility can sometimes be restored by reanastomosis of the vas. This is a valuable
pioneer study. If his relatively good results can
be reproduced by other surgeons, a much used
argument against vasectomy—that it is irreversible—will lose force.

Dr. Phadke has published some of the findings
of his follow-up.{ His tables fall into two groups,
those which describe the results of the operation,
and those which deal with some non-medical
features of his sample of men—the number of
their children, their monthly incomes, and their
ages. These last-mentioned tables show that his
655 subjects have had a full quota of children
(89 per cent had had three or more and 22 per
cent six or more); that according to Indian
standards they seem fairly well-to-do (80 per
cent had incomes of over 100 rupees a month
and 13 per cent over 500 a month); and that they
were by no means in the first flush of youth (95
per cent were over thirty, and 37 per cent over
forty). But these features depend upon the selection of cases according to objective criteria.

The probable after-effects of vasectomy on the
general health of the husband, on the general
health of the wife and on the sex act also depend
on one’s selection of cases. But here the necessary
assessments are less objective. Good results
would be likely to be shown when the husband
and wife are physically healthy, psychologically
stable and sexually well adjusted. If the health
of either partner is bad, if either is neurotic
(especially in the matter of anxieties about
health), or if the marriage is inharmonious, then
later troubles are apt to be attributed to the
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION: TRANSITIONS THROUGHOUT THE WORLD

TABLE 8

INDIA: EFFECTS OF VASECTOMY ON THE GENERAL HEALTH OF HUSBAND AND
WIFE AND ON THE SEX ACT (655 CASES)

 

 

NO CHANGE IMPROVED DETERIORATED
No. % No. % No. %
General Health of Husband 494 715-4 151 23-1 10 1-5
General Health of Wife 605 92-4 30 4-6 20 3-0
Sex Act of Husband 526 80-3 77 11-7 52 79
TABLE 9

INDIA: EFFECTS OF VASECTOMY DONE 5-25 YEARS EARLIER ON THE
GENERAL HEALTH OF HUSBAND AND WIFE AND ON THE SEX ACT
(337 CASES)

 

NO CHANGE IMPROVED DETERIORATED

No. o No. es No. o
General Health of Husband 253 75:0 82 24-3 2 0°6
General Health of Wife 312 92°8 17 5-0 8 2:3
Sex Act of Husband 288 85:5 32 9-5 17 5-0

 

operation and a follow-up is likely to show poor
results.

Tables 8 and 9 show the findings. It will be
seen that the first deals with the full sample of 655
sterilized men; the second deals with an interesting sub-sample of this group comprising 337
men who had been vasectomized from five to
twenty-five years before the inquiry. These
couples had had more time than the others to
assess the effects of the operation. Table 9 shows
that these effects are durable.

It will be seen from the larger sample (Table 8)
that three-quarters of the husbands reported no
change in health and that a little less than a
quarter reported improvement. The health of
over nine-tenths of the wives was unchanged and,
of the remainder, more reported changes for the
better than for the worse. Eight out of ten husbands reported no change in their sexual
reactions, and of the remainder more reported
favourable than adverse changes.

Time, according to Table 9, makes little
difference to these assessments. Deteriorations
were slightly fewer; and the sexual functions
seem to have settled down so that, in the smaller
sample, some 5 per cent more husbands than in
the larger reported no change.

These two tables, which differ little, show that
in substantial majorities of Dr. Phadke’s samples,

vasectomy produces no change in the health of
either partner or in the sex act; that it brings
about more changes for the better (especially in
the husband’s health) than for the worse; and
that these good results are durable.

Re-anastomosis of the vas was undertaken
either because the subject wished to re-marry or
because he had lost children. Dr. Phadke has
kindly sent me his figures up to May 1962. They
are shown in Table 10.

TABLE 10
RE-ANASTOMOSIS OF THE VAS
Re-anastomosis performed . . 32
Could not be followed up . . . 2
Operation unsuccessful . : . ae |
Sperm present after operation . ‘ . 29
Subsequent conception by wife ; . 20

It will be seen that, of the thirty men whose
histories after re-anastomosis were known,
twenty (66 per cent) had their fertility restored.
Weare told that seven men in the series had been
vasectomised from eight to twelve years before
the re-anastomosis: and Dr. Phadke writes that
a recently seen patient had been vasectomized
fifteen years before.

Though the numbers are small, the results
suggest that vasectomy may prove to be more
reversible than has hitherto been assumed.

153
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

6. THE UNITED STATES AND PUERTO RICO*

The spectrum mentioned at the beginning of this
article is most complete in the United States
where two simultaneous movements, one waning
the other waxing, are offsetting each other. The
first is a swing away from the compulsory
sterilization of mentally infirm people in State
institutions; the second is a swing towards the
voluntary sterilization of mentally normal people
on therapeutic and social grounds.

There is no over-riding Federal law. Instead
is a mosaic of State laws. Of the U.S.A.’s fifty
States, twenty-eight have now-operative statutes
which apply to mentally infirm people maintained in, or under the supervision of, State
institutions. The remaining twenty-two States
have no such laws.

Twenty-six of the twenty-eight State laws
make provision for compulsory sterilization. But
despite the rapid increase of the population of
the United States, fewer people are thus sterilized
each year.

Counter-balancing this decline is a growing
resort to voluntary sterilization on therapeutic
and socio-economic grounds. Indeed, an energetic voluntary organization, the Human Betterment Association of America (H.B.A.A.), which

* A valuable bibliography entitled Surgical Sterilization of Men and Women, containing 403 references, has
recently (1962) been produced by Christopher Tietze,
M.D., on behalf of the National Committee on Maternal
Health Inc. (Two East 103 Street, New York 29, New
York), Publication No. 11. The bibliography is primarily
concerned with medical literature. Legal, religious and
sectarian aspects are not considered.

t These are entitled Legal Bibliography on Sterilisation
(1957) by Samuel Highleyman and Richard C. Donelly,
both of Yale Law School; and a Supplement to the above
with the same title published in April 1960 by Bruce
Montgomery and R. C. Donelly. The first document,
which is the fuller, deals separately with eugenic, therapeutic and socio-economic sterilization to which are
added particulars of some important court decisions. Not
all of these are confined to the United States: the Bourne
Case (1938) is included. Both these summaries are
produced by, and obtainable from, the Human Betterment Association of America, Inc., 105 West 55th
Street, New York 19, U.S.A. (Secretary: Mrs. Ruth
Proskauer Smith.)

Another discussion of the legal issues, which makes
use of figures provided by the Human Betterment
Association, is a Catholic-sponsored memorandum,
Eugenic Sterilization (1956) by James B. O’Hara and T.
Howland Sanks (Georgetown Law Journal, 45, 1).

154

has no equivalent in Britain, exists to encourage
this movement. Its main object is to define and
explain the circumstances in which voluntary
sterilization may be profitably sought by the
public and safely practised by doctors. More.
What has been called the world’s population
explosion has opened a new perspective. It is
now being contended in the U.S.A. that voluntary sterilization might help to solve a world
population crisis.

In what follows, mention will be made of the
U.S.A.’s complicated legal mosaic, of the
diminishing practice of compulsory sterilization,
and of the movement for promoting voluntary
initiatives.

Legal Position
The legal issues differ according to whether
sterilization is compulsorily applied or voluntarily sought; they further differ in their bearings
on the three main uses of voluntary sterilization
—eugenic, therapeutic and socio-economic.
These issues have been concisely summarized in
two documents produced by the Human
Betterment Association above-mentioned.t

The State laws are mostly compulsory and
eugenic in purpose. Several have been amended
and in three States they have been abrogated so
that there are now no laws. In the course of
these vicissitudes, legal, administrative, humanitarian, and genetic issues have been vigorously
debated in a manner which has no parallel in
Britain. Some court pronouncements, again
without parallel in Britain, have also been widely
publicized.

Numbers and Categories of People Sterilized
under State Laws
The first of these State laws was passed during
1907 in Indiana. Of comparable laws since
passed in thirty States (including Indiana), two
have been declared unconstitutional. The States
concerned were New York where a law passed in
1912 was abrogated in 1918, and Washington
where a law passed in 1909 was abrogated in
1942. In a third State, Alabama, a law passed in
1919 is still on the books but has been inoperative since 1935.

It will be seen that mentally deficient people
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION: TRANSITIONS THROUGHOUT THE WORLD

TABLE 11

U.S.A.: STERILIZATIONS PERFORMED IN STATE INSTITUTIONS (30 STATES)
AND THROUGH EXTRA-MURAL PROVISIONS (8 STATES) FROM 1907 TO 31 DECEMBER 1960.*

CATEGORY MALES
Mentally Ill 12,076
Mentally Deficient 11,217
Others (including epileptics) 1,181

TOTAL 24,474

FEMALES TOTAL PER CENT PER CENT
MALES
15,516 Age 44-4 43-5
21,070 32,287 51-9 34-7
1,102 2,283 3°7 50:2
37,688 62,162 100 39-4

* Based on a compilation of the H.B.A.A. published in February 1961.

formed over half the total and that of the total
about four in ten were males.

The now-operative laws of twenty-seven States
authorize both voluntary and compulsory sterilization; but compulsory statutes heavily outnumber voluntary. In two States—Minnesota
and Vermont—the provisions are exclusively
voluntary; by the end of 1960, 2,597 people had
been sterilized in these two States. In three
States—Maine, North Carolina and North
Dakota—there are both voluntary and compulsory clauses. By the end of 1960, 6,927 people
had been either voluntarily or compulsorily
sterilized in these three States. I do not know how
the numbers were partitioned between these two
categories. Assuming that all were sterilized
voluntarily, a total of 9,524 out of 62,162 people
(15 per cent) would have been so sterilized. Thus
a minimum of 85 per cent of the total would have
been compulsorily sterilized.

But these institutional sterilizations under
State laws are becoming fewer. During the ten
years 1946-55 inclusive, 13,158 people were
thus sterilized, giving a yearly average of 1,316.
The peak year was 1950 when there were 1,526
operations. The numbers fell steadily till 1955
when the figure was 1,067—a third less.t By
1960 it had fallen to 622—less than half the
figure for 1950, ten years before. In seven of the
twenty-seven States with relevant statutes no
sterilizations had been performed during 1960
and in another nine States the numbers were
less than ten. Various causes have been sug
+ Figures given by James B. O’Hara and T. Howland
sas pone Sterilization, Georgetown Law Journal,
1956, 45, 1.

gested for this decline. They include the effects
of a report of the American Neurological
Association which, in 1936, maintained that
compulsion was unnecessary since voluntary
measures served as well; changed legal thinking—a growing reluctance to enforce laws
which deprive people of what is held to be the
fundamental right of procreation; and the
example of the Nazis.

The view of the American Neurological
Association (1936) that compulsion is unnecessary has doubtless spread widely in the United
States during the last twenty-six years as a result
of Nazi practices. Indeed, there may now be
many people who, on both ethical and practical
grounds, would like to see compulsion abolished
altogether.

It may, however, be that the consent of most
of those dealt with under nominally compulsory
laws is in fact obtained so that in practice
(though perhaps not in law) they are voluntarily
sterilized. This adjustment of procedure, if widespread, might make it seem unnecessary to alter
a law which is but nominally compulsory.

It might, however, accord with the spirit of the
times, and also encourage a recognition of the
benefits of voluntary sterilization, if, by the addition of a simply worded clause, all States with
exclusively compulsory laws were to bring their
legislation into line with that of Maine, North
Carolina and North Dakota where both compulsory and voluntary provisions exist. If compulsion were in practice scarcely ever used, they
might even go so far as to imitate Minnesota and
Vermont whose laws are exclusively voluntary.
But these possibilities have doubtless been

1O5
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

considered and weighed by the Human Betterment Association.*

Growth of Voluntary Sterilization

Many people have been voluntarily sterilized
outside the State laws, mainly for therapeutic
and socio-economic reasons. No one knows
exactly how many. According to an estimate by
the National Committee on Maternal Health,
quoted by the Hugh Moore Fund, “an average
of at least 75,000 persons of reproductive age
were sterilized annually in the U.S. for the
purpose of limiting offspring.” If this guess is

 

* Since writing the above, my attention has been drawn
to a very recent addition to the State Law of Virginia. An
Act was passed on March 31, 1962 supplementing with
voluntary provisions an already existing compulsory law.
The new law enables a surgeon, acting in consultation
with one or more colleagues, and responding to a request
in writing from the person concerned (who must be over
twenty-one) and from his/her spouse, to perform a
sterilizing operation. Thirty days must elapse between
the receipt of the request and the ensuing action which
must be intelligibly explained. There is a provision for
dealing with minors. Notification is not required.

An enlightened feature is that paediatric considerations,
relating to child welfare, dominate the recommendations
submitted by the fourteen sponsors of the Bill. Their
well-chosen words are worth quoting. Discussing the
hesitancies of surgeons, they say:

Where there is actually a disease of the reproductive
organs, surgical treatment of which will destroy the
ability to procreate, the physician’s right and duties
are clear. Similarly, if the bearing of children will
place the life of the potential mother in grave danger,
there is no problem. But when it is a question of the
effect of the production of children by persons who are
plainly not equal to the responsibilities of parenthood,
or of adding to the size of a family, where the
parents are unable physically or otherwise to provide
adequately for children they have already had, physicians and surgeons are much more hesitant in assenting
to the performance of such operations.

We believe that the principle in law which, in cases
involving children, indicates that the welfare of the
child is of paramount importance, should serve as a
guide in such cases. We therefore recommend that the
law be so changed as to make it clear that in cases
where the well-being of a child who might be conceived
or of children whom the parents may have already
produced is involved, the question of the performance
of sterilizing operations should be left to the discretion
of the individuals concerned, if adults, and the physicians or surgeons to whom the cases have been
committed for care.

The argument could scarcely be better expressed.
This initiative in expanding the scope of legislation,
which accords so well with the sentiments prevailing in
the mid-twentieth century, surely deserves careful consideration not only by other States of the U.S.A. but by
all countries with similar problems.

156

even approximately correct, the figure dwarfs
those for institutional sterilizations under State
laws. It was mentioned above that in the decade
1946-55 the annual average so sterilized was a
little over 1,300. Thus the ratio of institutional
sterilizations performed under the State laws to
those done outside those laws would be less
than one in fifty.

The Human Betterment Association of
America,{ from which we in Britain may learn
much, has as objectives to dissipate the prevalent
view that voluntary sterilization is illegal, to
compile lists of doctors in all areas to whom
applicants may be referred for consultation, and
to assist in various ways people wanting to be
sterilized, including the provision of financial
aid. It guides and helps married couples and it
enrols and advises doctors. The Association
reports an increasing demand for its services.t

The Hugh Moore Fund goes further. Mr.
Hugh Moore sees in voluntary sterilization the
same possibilities as do some Indians—that it
could make a contribution to the world’s population problem. This recently developed view has
been set out in a widely distributed pamphlet
with a self-explanatory title, commended by Dr.
Brock Chisholm, first director of the World
Health Organization. Its title is The Population
Bomb: Is Voluntary Human Sterilization the
Answer ? It can only be the answer if, as in India,
vasectomies (compared with salpingectomies)

 

t In 1949 The Human Betterment Association fell heir
to the pre-existing Human Betterment Foundation of
California. A later generation may have good reasons for
paying honour to two men prominently associated with
this Foundation: Mr. E. S. Gosney, its founder, and Dr.
R. L. Dickinson, well known as a gynaecologist, writer
and talented artist.

+ I am informed by Mr. A. R. Kaufman of Kitchener,
Ontario, Canada, that his Parents’ Information Bureau has
arranged for vasectomies (not salpingectomies) to be
performed by a small but expanding group of co-operative
doctors. By the end of 1961, 324 applicants had been
vasectomized by seven doctors. There are now ten doctors
in Canada who co-operate with the Bureau, and these
performed 250 vasectomies from January 1 to June 30
1962. There has been a continuous waiting list of about
200 applicants. Mr. Kaufman writes: “The vasectomies
could be done faster if we had more doctors. Voluntary
sterilization is legal in Canada but some doctors hesitate
because Medical Associations try to make them believe
the operation is illegal without quoting any authority for
their statement. The Bureau pays the doctors an honorarium of $25 if the doctor collects less than $25 from the
patient.”’
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION: TRANSITIONS THROUGHOUT THE WORLD

are being more widely sought and performed.
The experience of the Human Betterment Association suggests that this may be happening. Of
the operations they have arranged during the
last three years, the percentages of vasectomies
have been as follows: 1959: 35-9; 1960: 56:7;
1961: 58-3.

PUERTO RICO

The rapidly growing population of this island,
an American dependency, has provided a field
for numerous investigations. Efforts have been
made to popularize birth control. It seems that,
without special stress on its advantages, sterilization has emerged as the method of choice. In
his Family and Fertility in Puerto Rico (1955),
wherein is reported a study of the island’s lower
income group, Professor J. Mayone Stycos
writes (p. 224):
Sterilization is becoming so popular among the
lower [income] class that securing bed space for
it in the hospitals has become a plum dispensed
by local politicians. According to private information received, many officials have complained
that the demand far exceeds the supply of beds.
This author quotes as a finding of a sample
inquiry covering 3,000 people that 20 per cent of
wives had been sterilized. In another sample
described as representative, “16-7 per cent of the
married or consensually married women were
found to be sterilized, the incidence ranging from
6°5 per cent of the rural residents whose family
heads had no education, to 30 per cent of those
with nine or more years of education in both
rural and urban areas.” Sterilization seems to
attract when appliance methods of birth control
repel. Professor Stycos writes (p. 226): “It would
seem that sterilization has a particularly powerful ‘pull,’ whereas chemical and mechanical
methods have considerable ‘push’ towards other
methods or towards discontinuance.”

Dr. Alan Guttmacher* writes: “Sterilization
is extremely common in Puerto Rico, and every
fifth or sixth native woman between the ages of

* Puerperal Sterilization on the Private and Ward
Services of a Large Metropolitan Hospital. Fertility and
Sterility, 1957. 8, 6.

t I quote from a document dated October 1959 kindly
sent to me by Mr. Jan Tengwall of Stockholm entitled
Swedish Laws on Sterilization, Abortion and Castration.

fifteen and forty-five has been sterilized. Not
infrequently the Puerto Rican women whom we
refuse to sterilize at the Mount Sinai Hospital
(New York) return to Puerto Rico for “la
operacion” and return to our accident room to
have their post-operative dressings changed.”
The rush of Puerto-Rican women to be salpingectomized might be compared with the rush of
Indian men to be vasectomized, as described by
Shri Homi Taleyarkhan.

Some people discern in the preferences of
Puerto Ricans a miniature New World image of
what is now happening on a much larger scale
in such parts of the Old World as India. The
people are different and the social context is
different. Yet the human reactions are not
dissimilar.

Does Puerto Rico provide a demonstration
which, sooner or later, might be of interest in the
archipelagos of the East and West Indies and of
the Southern Pacific?

7. SWEDEN

Two Acts have been passed. The first, in 1934,
had both eugenic and social objectives. But it was
assumed that there was no need to include in the
scope of the Act people capable of giving valid
consents. There resulted much discrepancy in
local practice and the number of people sterilized
was small.

The second Act (1941) covers persons capable
of giving valid consents (legally competent
people). Numbers at once went up. In the sevenyear period 1935-41, 2,930 people were sterilized ;
in the ensuing seven years (1942-48) the figure
quadrupled to 12,659 (yearly average 1,795).
More women than men were sterilized. Over half
were mentally deficient, the next largest category
being women exhausted by child-bearing.

Under the Act of 1941 the Swedish National
Board of Health may authorize sterilization on
three grounds:t

a If there is reason to assume that the subject

would transmit to his or her offspring hereditary mental disease, imbecility, other serious
disease or a serious physical handicap (e.g.
blindness, deaf-mutism); i.e. for eugenic
reasons;

b If because of mental derangement or an asocial

way of life the subject is found obviously unable
to assume the legal and moral responsibility for

1$7
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the proper fostering of children; i.e. for social
reasons;

c If pregnancy would entail serious danger to a
woman’s life or health, due to illness, physical
defect or weakness; i.e. for medical reasons.

It will be noticed that the three reasons are
described as eugenic, social and medical. Of these
three the second, comprising social reasons, is
seemingly the broadest, admitting of the most
elastic interpretation. Slightly re-worded, — it
might almost be stretched to include the first and
third reasons; for both hereditary infirmities and
physical diseases impair a woman’s capacity for
properly fostering her children.

The consent of the candidate for sterilization
is required if he or she has “legal capacity.”” An
application for sterilization may be made in
seven ways other than by the candidate: three of
these are through social agencies (they include
the Child Welfare Board), and four are medical,
relating to doctors in various responsible
positions.

Sterilization is mostly authorized by the
Board of Health (92 per cent of the persons
sterilized in 1957), but two doctors (8 per cent of
patients) are legally entitled to authorize on their
own initiatives.

The following table* gives the latest available
figures:

TABLE 12
STERILIZATIONSINSWEDENIN 1959. 1,946 CASES

PER
INDICATIONS MALE FEMALE TOTAL CENT
Eugenic 38 72 110 5-7
Social 49 106 155 8-0
Medical (women only) — 1,673 1,673 85:8
Medical combined with
Abortion — 8 8 0-4
TOTAL 87 1,859 1,946 —
PER CENT 4°5 955 — 100

It will be seen that over 86 per cent of the

* Based on Table 23 (p. 137) of Allman Halso- Och
Sjukvdrd (1959). Stockholm. 1961.

Tt The following particulars have been kindly supplied
by Dr. Henrik Hoffmeyer, Head of the Psychiatric
Department of Copenhagen’s Mothers’ Aid Agency.
Figures for earlier years were given to the Eugenics
Society by Dr. Tage Kemp: Genetic-Hygienic Experiences in Denmark in Recent Years, THE EUGENICS
Review, April 1957, 49, 1.

158

sterilizations were performed on medical grounds
and (as is therefore to be expected) that all but a
small minority were of women. Eugenic and
social indications total about 14 per cent; and
of the subjects here concerned a third (87 out of
265) were men.

Sweden’s population having been about 7}
million at the 1961 census, the sterilization rate
(based on published figures) is a little under
twenty-seven per 100,000 of population. The
picture is one of a voluntary system bureaucratically controlled. The candidate applies when
she/he is legally competent, the National Board
of Health receives the application and authorizes
when it approves. Considerations of health,
loosely interpreted, predominate; and over 95
per cent of the subjects are women.

8. DENMARKt

In Denmark the current Sterilization Act is
being revised. The present Act concedes more
initiative to individual doctors than does the
Swedish Act. Sterilization can be obtained in
four ways.

It will be seen that nearly 80 per cent of the
sterilizations (all of women) were done on the
sole initiative of doctors.

It is noteworthy that many sterilizations are
arranged through Mothers’ Aid Agencies. These
are socio-medical institutions, staffed by doctors,
which provide legal financial and personal aid
to pregnant women (married and unmarried)
and to mothers of young children. According to
a social philosophy differing from our own,
Denmark’s abortion legislation is largely administered through these Mothers’ Aid Agencies
which may arrange for the woman to be sterilized
at the same time that her pregnancy is terminated. The delegation of responsibility for a
national abortion and sterilization policy to
Mothers’ Aid Agencies is an advanced expression
of a policy favouring family and child welfare.
One can presume that the decision thus to regularize the practice of abortion was the product
of several considerations, among them the
absence of serious religious opposition and a
recognition of the prevalence and harmfulness of
clandestine abortion. If such a policy could be
called ‘“‘advanced” Denmark is here more
advanced than we are in Britain.
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION: TRANSITIONS THROUGHOUT THE WORLD

TABLE 13

DENMARK: STERILIZATIONS* IN 1958 (2,550 CASES)

INDICATIONS AND CATEGORIES

1 Medical and Medico-social Indications
(decided by the doctors themselves)

2 Hereditary and Social Indications
(through Ministry of Justice)

3 Feeble-minded people if willing (Social
indications:through Ministry of Social

Affairs)
4 Hereditary Indications: sterilization
followed abortion
TOTAL
PER CENT

MEN WOMEN TOTAL PER CENT
— 2,030 2,030 79-6
63 279 342 13-4
34 60 94 3-7
— 84 84 3°3
97 2,453 2,550
3°8 96:2 100

* These are minimum figures obtained through a special investigation. Since there is no
central registration, the total figures for the country are not known.

In the absence of eugenic (hereditary) indications which come into category 4 of Table 13,
these doubly treated cases (women who are both
aborted and sterilized) are mostly included in
group | of the above table. Dr. Hoffmeyerf has
kindly given me the following particulars of
1,974 sterilizations performed through Mothers’
Aid Agencies during a slightly later period than
that covered by Table 13.

TABLE 14

DENMARK: STERILIZATIONS ARRANGED BY
MOTHERS’ AID AGENCIES FROM APRIL 1, 1958 TO
MARCH 31, 1959. 1,973 CASES

PER
STERILIZATION PERFORMED NUMBER CENT
In connection with abortion 1,360 68:9
During Puerperium (no abortion) 232 11-8
ver direct connection with
regnancy 331 168
By Vasectomy of Husband in the
presence of hereditary indications
affecting him or of surgical contraindications to salpingectomy 50 2°5
TOTAL 1,973 100

It will be seen that nearly 70 per cent of sterilizations obtained through Mothers’ Aid Agencies
were done at the same time as an abortion and
that over 80 per cent were done in connection
with a pregnancy; also that fifty men were
vasectomized through the initiative of these
agencies which are primarily concerned with
women.

t As above mentioned, Dr. Hoffmeyer is head of the
Fsychiatric Department in Copenhagen’s Mothers’ Aid
gency

The population of Denmark in 1959 was about
4,547,000. Hence the minimum sterilization rate
in 1958 was about 54 per 100,000 of population
—about twice that of Sweden’s in 1959. The
Danish picture is of a voluntary system controlled largely by doctors outside Ministries and by
social agencies. In Denmark the medical profession, autonomously following the standards laid
down by law, tends to replace the Swedish Board
of Health as the main authorizing agency. Since
the authorization of a Board of Health or a
Ministry is presumably given by doctors within
that Ministry appointed for the purpose, the

_effects of the two systems are doubtless much the

same from the standpoint of the individual concerned. Each system may be deemed to have
advantages. The fact that Mothers’ Aid Agencies
in Denmark play such a large part in the abortion
and sterilization programmes suggests that social
and humanitarian considerations, including
those of child welfare, are important features of
these programmes.

9. REVISED POLICY FOR BRITAIN
What can we in Britain learn from the trends and
transitions now taking place throughout the
world? .

Two questions arise: is there, in this country,
a need for sterilization and therefore for clarifying the legal obscurities so that doctors know
exactly where they stand? And if yes, what is the
best course to-day?

In considering the first question, let us not

159
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

forget the Brock Committee. Their well-presented
and complete report was favourably received
when it appeared in 1934. As described in an
earlier article, its recommendations were supported by a wide range of organizations some of
which, before 1934, had been hesitant. The needs
considered by this committee are the same now
as they were then. Its orientation was mainly
eugenic, but also social and paediatric.

The sort of law to which its recommendations
pointed would have had features in common
with both the Danish and Swedish laws above
considered. Compulsion would have been excluded; two independent medical recommendations would have been required as in Denmark;
the authorization of a central ministerial authority would have been needed as in Sweden; and this
authorization would have constituted a process
of notification thereby permitting the compilation of regular reports. These features would
have located the enactment near the “traditional” end of the spectrum (mentioned at the
beginning of this article) on which later transitions can be seen.

In these transitions the forensic issues which
were prominent thirty years ago and which then
seemed to call for legislation have receded in
importance. They have been largely ignored in
Asian countries where vasectomy is held to be
capable of making a contribution to the world’s
major population problems. But these possibilities and developments were unforeseeable
before 1934. They could scarcely have entered
the minds of the Brock Committee. More. The
two Counsel’s opinions (English and Scottish)
made known late in 1960, have focused this
country’s legal problems in a new perspective.

There has also been a move from a eugenic
towards a humanitarian and paediatric standpoint. Sterilization, it is now widely believed, can
help families. It can help mothers whose health is
suffering from the combined effects of malnutrition and of numerous unplanned pregnancies
—witness the numbers of puerperal sterilizations;
it can relieve the father of the cares depicted in
the films produced in under-developed countries
which contrast the home conditions resulting
from planned and unplanned parenthood; and it
favours the health and life-prospects of the first
two or three children. The well-being of children

160

already born or likely soon to be born (paediatric
considerations) supplement the welfare of a
remote posterity (eugenic considerations).

Indeed, we may now ask ourselves if legislation is necessary. Could not the issue be left to the
discretion of the medical profession? The
termination of a pregnancy is now so left despite
the fact that the law on abortion is precise and
prohibitive in a sense that the law on sterilization
is not. The tradition established by the Bourne
Case (1938: four years after the publication of
the Brock report) has a bearing. If a surgeon
who, in good faith, terminates a pregnancy on
therapeutic grounds can protect himself by
demanding a written request from the woman
and her husband and by obtaining a recommendation from a colleague, why should not
a surgeon asked to perform a vasectomy or
salpingectomy do the same? Risks attach to
the performance of even trivial operations—
such as the extraction of teeth—as is well known
to the readers of the reports of medical protection societies. Could not the massive Asian
experience of recent years be treated as an
unwitting pioneering experiment in forensic
medicine from which the collective medical
traditions of the world could be re-orientated ?

These are difficult questions. Two possibilities
seem to present themselves. The first would be to
secure some sort of enabling legislation, as was
done in Virginia in March of this year. If this
course were adopted, it would be wise to avoid
genetic issues, and to bring into the foreground
issues concerning the well-being of children and
the family. Sterilization of the wife or the husband would then be appropriate if it were
definitely to the interests of the parents and of
children already born that there should be no
more children. Genetic issues could here be
included with other more commonly occurring
social situations. The enactment could appropriately require that signed consents on prescribed
forms should be obtained from the two parents
concerned and also a supporting recommendation from a doctor other than the surgeon
concerned. Notification of some sort might be
required; or it could be dispensed with as in
Denmark and Virginia.

But the experiences of the inter-war years
strongly suggest that, unless a Government
VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION: TRANSITIONS THROUGHOUT THE WORLD

department takes the initiative, legal innovations
of this sort have little chance. Our own Ministry
of Health has refrained from acting on the
recommendations of the Royal Commission on
Population in the matter of providing facilities
for birth control on non-medical grounds. Are
the prospects better for a sterilization law, however modest?

If it were deemed that the prospects were too
poor to make the effort worth while, another
course would be open—to follow the precedent
of the American voluntary Association. The
aims and activities of the Human Betterment
Association have been described. This Association holds that voluntary sterilization is not
illegal. But it recognizes that irreversible sterilization is a delicate matter, especially when performed on people for reasons which could be
broadly classed as psychiatric. The follow-up
inquiries above described (sections 3-5) show
that a very small minority of sterilized people
later have regrets. These may be well or ill
founded. But they nevertheless occur and can be
expected in any large series, however careful the
selection of cases. The same applies to abortion.
Every psychiatrist will have come across women
who clamorously demanded abortion, sometimes threatening suicide, but who later have
regrets and remorse. Some of these may be
litigiously inclined. But if the surgeon has
exercised reasonable caution and has acted in
good faith on the recommendation of a colleague
also acting in good faith, the chances of litigation
are small and of the litigation being successful
negligible.

The above-named American Association
advises doctors who may have doubts about a
particular case. It has formed, in different
American States, panels of doctors to whom it
refers couples. A recent donation even enables it
to give financial help to needy couples. (A
comparable but smaller Canadian organization
now does the same.) The Association proceeds
cautiously in its advice to doctors and this
policy has been rewarded by an almost total
absence of vexatious litigation.

* This is essentially the policy which the far-seeing Dr.
Havelock Ellis (who strongly opposed any form of
legislation) propounded in 1934. The legal uncertainties

which then daunted the medical profession have, since
1960, been largely removed.

It will be recalled that at the end of 1960 two
medical defence unions, one in England and the
other in Scotland, sought counsel’s opinions.
Extracts from these reassuring opinions, which
have largely transformed the position, were
quoted in the first of these three articles and need
not be quoted again. But we would do well to
remind ourselves of a cautionary note sounded
by the English counsel.

Although confident that the courts would uphold
the legality of a sterilizing operation on therapeutic or well-founded eugenic grounds, counsel
are of the opinion that the risk of an adverse
finding increases as the reasons for the operation
are medically less well-founded.

This is simple common sense. But it raises the
question whether the establishment in Britain of
an organization like the American Human
Betterment Association might not be a reasonable precaution and a possible help to doctors.
Like its American counterpart, this body could
formulate and publish a few cautionary principles; and it could draw up forms of request to be
filled in by applicants for sterilization, and
perhaps also the form of a supporting medical
recommendation. It could likewise offer its
services in an advisory capacity to doctors who,
in particular cases, might be in doubt.*

The establishment of such an organization
would be a worthy task for the Eugenics Society
which, in the early thirties, set up a somewhat
comparable advisory body in connection with a
schedule for pre-marital examinations; or for the
Family Planning Association; or, perhaps best,
for a joint committee representing voluntary
organizations with cognate interests in this wide
field. Such was the constitution of the (British)
Joint Committee on Voluntary Sterilization
(1934-39) whose story was told in the second of
these articles. Indeed, this simple step could
appropriately be taken in any country in the
world where a strictly voluntary sterilization
policy found favour.

It is a pleasure to thank many persons who
have given valued and miscellaneous help.

The following have sent me useful suggestions:
Dr. Alan Guttmacher, Dr. Clarence Gamble,
Dr. Theodore W. Adams and Dr. Andrew
Ferber, all of the U.S.A., and Mrs. Shakuntala
Paranjpye of India. The following have read

161
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

early drafts of parts of the three articles, giving
helpful guidance: Dr. Martin Ekblad and Mr.
Jan Tengwall of Sweden; Dr. Colin Bertram.
Lord Brain, Dr. Eleanor Mears, Dr. Glanville
Williams and Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders,
all of Britain; Professor Yoshio Koya of Japan;
Mrs. Frances Ferguson and Mr. Tom Griessemer of the U.S.A. Colonel B. L. Raina (India)
kindly sent me the latest available figures for
Table 6. Dr. G. M. Phadke and Shri R. A.
Gopalaswami of India, Mrs. Ruth Proskauer
Smith of the U.S.A., Mr. A. R. Kaufman of

162

Canada and Dr. Henrik Hoffmeyer of Denmark
have not only read drafts of sections relating to
their countries; they have also provided me with
up-to-date figures. I am especially grateful to Dr.
Hoffmeyer.

I also thank Miss Sheila Kordik for retyping
heavily corrected material; and Miss Faith
Schenk for checking figures and typescript.

It is scarcely necessary to add that no one but
myself is to be held responsible for any feature
of the three articles.
