REVIEWS OF BOOKS

Robins, Lee N. Deviant Children Grown Up. A sociological and psychiatric study of sociopathic personality. Baltimore, 1966. Williams & Wilkins. Pp. xiv-+351. Price 92s. cloth;
68s. paper.

THERE IS A moral in the origins of this important study which might usefully be pondered
by many medical and social agencies in this country. The records of a defunct child guidance
clinic, after being stored for ten years, were to be burned. At the request of an unusually
farsighted psychiatrist, they were, instead, handed over to the Washington University
Medical School, which thus found itself in possession of detailed records of disturbed and
anti-social children, collected over a period of twenty-two years. A large number of these
cases were concerned with severely antisocial children seen at the clinic some thirty years
previously and a project was designed to establish whether severely antisocial children
would become equally antisocial adults, how they compared in maturity with those who
had been referred with non antisocial symptoms and how either group would compare
with a control group drawn at random from an elementary school in the clinic’s catchment
area.

Some 500 cases were selected and compared with a control group of 100. The thoroughness of the undertaking may be gauged from the fact that, after a period of thirty years, a
formidable 90 per cent of cases were traced and no less than 82 per cent of the clinic population were interviewed as adults. The special interest of the project was to isolate and study
sociopathic personalities, defined as “‘a gross repetitive failure to conform to societal norms
in many areas of life, in the absence of thought disturbance suggesting psychosis”, and the
aim was to test whether sociopathy is immutable and untreatable, yields with age and
diminishing energy or yields to concrete life experiences.

The results are fascinating and disturbing. Of particular significance are the findings
that the median age of onset of this condition is seven years for boys and that 35 per cent
of sociopaths began to show symptoms at ages 8-10 years. Also that antisocial behaviour
in the father was the only childhood variable which predicted that sociopathic persons
would not show a decrease in antisocial behaviour with ageing.

Remedial action (psychiatric and judicial) is shown to be largely ineffective and there is
a particularly interesting discussion of the vexed question of “‘spontaneous remission”’.
Many fondly nurtured criminological theories are called into question. Broken homes were
only significant when due to an antisocial father. A test of parental rejection showed,
surprisingly, that children reared by cold, stern parents had a particularly low rate of
sociopathy. In parental deprivation it was, again, the family history prior to deprivation
that proved to be more relevant. Also discounted are Sutherland’s theory of differential
association (antisocial children tending to seek each others company), many current
American gang theories (there was no evidence that the gang served to reinforce antisocial
behaviour patterns learned from a sociopathic father), and especially the low social class
variable (“The higher incidence of sociopathy in lower class children appears to depend on
more of them having the predictors, not on their having additional predictors or a different
set of predictors, nor to their being more susceptible to the effect of predictors’’).

The continuous emphasis on the psychiatric characteristics of the father naturally
raises the question of a genetically transmitted condition. But, as Professor Robins points
out, “If the etiological factor is genetic, it is still necessary to explain the high prevalence
of the disease in men as compared with women, the failure of the few women with the
disease to transmit it to their children in the absence of a similar problem in their husbands,
and the occurrence of the disease in some children without sociopathic fathers”’.

It is not possible, in the space of a brief review to do more than hint at the wealth of
material that is offered in this study, nor would one have to accept all the conclusions that

59
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

are put forward to appreciate its value. The important factors are that such an investigation
could and should be repeated in this country without delay and that we now have sufficient
evidence about the development of antisocial behaviour in children to justify a very much
greater concentration of effort and resources in our primary schools.

There are, in every decade, a handful of books destined to become landmarks in the
history of social science research. I believe that Dr. Robins’s book is one of them.

J. CARLEBACH
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH

Commoner, Barry. Science and Survival. London, 1966. Gollancz. Pp. 128. Price 21s.
Glass, Bentley. Science and Ethical Values. Chapel Hill, N.C., 1966. North Carolina University Press (London, Oxford University Press). Pp. ix+101. Price 28s. in U.K.

FOR MANY YEARS Professor Commoner has been surveying the directions in which
scientific research moves under the guidance of commercial interest, governmental finance,
and the predilection of scientists. The last is the least influential. Commoner has not been
content merely to survey and, as a rule, condemn, but has taken an active part in calling
public attention to the present state of affairs and in devising means of improvement—
notably through participation in the “Committee on Science in the Promotion of Human
Welfare’’ of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, in the St Louis
Committee for Nuclear Information, and in the Scientist’s Institute for Publication Information. The last co-ordinates the work of some twenty scientist’s information groups
throughout the United States. These groups are concerned with spreading information
that interested parties may hope will not become widely known, and are not to be confused
with the scientific cliques that are now appearing and that restrictively distribute prepublication accounts of their latest conclusions.

Hubris among scientists and technologists, and ignorance (or more seriously, ignorance
that they are ignorant) among politicians, are the primary themes of this book. It starts by
discussing the still unexplained power failure in November 1965 over 80,000 square miles
of Canada and USA. From this example of the quasi-epilepsy that can overtake a fully
automated power supply, he goes on to deal with the pollution of the environment with
motor exhaust fumes, detergents, insecticides and herbicides. He contends, not that all
these things should forthwith be stopped at source, but that there should be informed
discussion about the advantages and dangers arising from each potentially polluting
activity.

About half the book deals with two aspects of genetics. The less valid aspects of biochemistry are now conveniently grouped together under the title ““Molecular Biology” with
its cabbalistic symbol: spiral DNA. Commoner naturally does not dispute the significance
of DNA and RNA in the functioning of the cell; all cellular constituents are in varying
degrees significant. What he condemns is nucleic acid obsession and consequent neglect of
other aspects of metabolism. This leads to a spate of premature dogmatic generalization,
and the hubristic, or “nothing but” assumption that we now know the general shape of
phenomena and have only to fill in some details. I have suggested the term alethocleidic
for this pernicious attitude of mind.

The testing of nuclear bombs brings in the other aspect of genetics. It would be charitable to assume that the official experts, on both sides of the Atlantic, made a few honest
mistakes in their statements during the 1950s minimizing the hazards of nuclear testing.
But they cannot all have been mistakes for much of the information later used to reconcile
bomb enthusiasts to the “Test Ban Treaty” was generally available. I surveyed some of it
myself in 1957, and the St. Louis Committee was documenting the issue at the same time.

60
