HAEMOPHILIA IN THE ROYAL CASTE
By W. T. J. GUN, FERHIST.S., F.S.G.

reviewed elsewhere in the present issue
(p. 277), the formula for the inheritance
of this disease is stated : males only affected,
smission only through females or affected
males, but never in any eventuality from
¥ather to son. In the case of a female transmitter, it is an even chance that a son will
be affected, and an even chance that a
daughter will transmit. In the case of an
pifected son, no son of his will inherit, but
ut is again an even chance as to whether a
daughter of his will transmit. This transmission through affected sons has been
denied, but the weight of opinion is now on
the affirmative side.
+. The only known instance of an occurrence
bf hemophilia in the Royal Caste has taken
lace among the descendants of Queen
ictoria, who was quite evidently a transL itter. Of her four sons, however, one only,
he Duke of Albany, was affected. The other
Eb inburch Edward VII, the Duke of
burgh and the Duke of Connaught—all
aped and their descendants are therefore
fc une. The Duke of Albany could not
Rave transmitted to his son, the present
ke of Coburg, but through his daughter,
Yincess Alice, transmission took place to
ker son, Lord Trematon, who lost his life in
& motor accident. He died unmarried. As
Be was affected, it is unlikely, under the
ula, that his sister, Lady May Abel
im ith, will transmit.
» Of Queen Victoria’s daughters, Princess
EBouise had no children and the Empress
frederick and Princess Christian did not
fansmit, as none of their descendants have
een affected, except in one line from another
rection. Alice, Grand Duchess of Hesse,
* d Princess Beatrice have, however, transfitted. In the family of the former, the only
ion, the late Grand Duke of Hesse, escaped,
ind the Dowager Lady Milford Haven has
Kot transmitted. The Grand Duchess Serge

| N Dr. Carroll Birch’s work on hemophilia
;

had no children. It is understood that sons
of Princess Henry of Prussia, another
member of the Hesse family, have been
affected, but the only one who has married
has escaped. Finally, in the Hesse family,
the transmission through the late Czarina
to the Czarevitch was well known and
definitely influenced the course of history.
Some at least of his sisters must have been
potential transmitters but all have perished.

Of Princess Beatrice’s family, one son,
Leopold, was affected but died unmarried,
the other two sons escaped. The daughter,
the Queen of Spain, transmitted. Two of
her four sons have been affected : the eldest,
who has no children, and the youngest,
Prince Gonzalo, who, like Lord Trematon,
lost his life in a motor accident and similarly
from excessive loss of blood. Transmission
may well occur in this family through female
lines, but it is perhaps the only direction in
which danger now remains for the descendants of Queen Victoria.

There seems curiously enough to be no
evidence of the existence of this disease
among her collateral relatives. As her father,
the Duke of Kent, was not affected, transmission must have occurred through her
mother, the Duchess. By a former marriage,
this lady had two children, the Prince of
Leiningen and the Princess of Hohenlohe.
The Prince was not affected and there has
been no record of hzemophilia among the
Princess’s descendants.

This Duchess of Kent herself was one of a
large family, ten in all, five sons and five
daughters, and again there is no record of the
disease among the descendants of those of
her brothers and sisters who left issue. It
is to be noted, however, that of the above ten,
one left no children, two died young and one
was still-born, and it is possible that all these
would have been affected or potential transmitters. ,

Going back one more generation, we will

245
246

take the family of Augusta of Reuss, Duchess
of Coburg, the Duchess of Kent’s mother,
through whom the transmission must have
come, as the Duke of Coburg was not
affected. In the Reuss family, seven in all,
only two others besides Princess Augusta
left children, and there is no evidence of
hemophilia among their descendants. There
were, however, three others who died young,
besides one who had no family, and all these
may have been affected or potential transmitters.

It will be noted that in these generations
we arrive at the period in which many
children died young, and there can be little
doubt that the mortality would be greatest
among hzmophilic subjects. In fact, in
those days, the disease would tend to
extirpate itself quickly, whereas ‘under
modern conditions, extirpation, though probable in the end, tends to be much slower.

STATISTICAL
AND HUMAN

STUDIES

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

It will be remembered by some

that Mr. Laurence Housman, in one of%
Queen Victoria plays, discusses the ques a
of Prince Albert’s parentage, and picttd
English statesmen congratulating thg
selves on the “‘ information ”’ that Victeg
and Albert were not really first cousins,
that there would, therefore, be no possibiij
of a double chance of this hereditary diseaj
Actually, it is most unlikely that th
statesmen had any knowledge whatsoever¥
this disease in the family ; it was possi
hardly suspected by the family itself. In a¥
event, Prince Albert could not have b@
affected from the Coburg side, as even if §
father, the Duke of Coburg, had himself beg
a victim, there is no transmission frdj
father to son. In almost every respect,
totally false impression is given by this parg
cular play, which, it is interesting to noff
has rightly been excluded from the stage.

IN GENETICS
INHERITANCE

ANNALS OF EUGENICS

Edited by R. A. FISHER t
(Founded by K. PEARSON) it

Volume VIII, Part II, will contain articles by

J. B. HUTCHINSON and B. M. PUGH
H. JEFFREYS
A. D. LATHAM and T A. MUNRO

L. CSIK and K. MATHER
V. FRIEDENREICH

i

F

M. A. MacCONAILL |
D. MCGREGOR

J. A. FRASER ROBERTS, R. M. NORMAN and RUTH GRIFFITHS

Subscription, in advance, 50/- per volume.

Four quarterly parts

obtainable separately at 15/- each from Galton Laboratory, University
College, Gower Street, London, W.C.1.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIX, No. 4.
