A NOTE ON EUGENICS.

By DR. LANDAU, Professor of Anthropology at Berne.

{Reprinted and translated by kind permission of the author from the
Revue Anthropologique, July-August, 1916. ]

It is thought by many that a war is from time to time necessary for the
progress of humanity, but the author believes that it is always disastrous
and entails terrible consequences both for victor and vanquished. A
great good may, however, sometimes spring from a great evil, and at the |
present time this great good should consist in a moral - awakening, a
mental upheaval leading to the disappearance of the misunderstandings.
which divide the different classes of a nation, an awakening which should
rally all the people of a country in defence of the principles necessary to
maintain the mental vitality of the national character.

It may be said that the social point of view should cede to the
anthropological point of view. Biology has furnished us with a whole
series of laws which must be respected not only by naturalists, but also
by philosophers, writers, historians, legislators, pedagogues, and even by
the representatives of the Church.

The biological point of view is neither aggressive nor sentimental;
it is real. It says, “If you wish to preserve the national character of a
country, that country must maintain numerous representatives in good
moral and physical health.”

We are thus logically led to open up the question of eugenics—the
physical and moral hygiene of the race.

In order not to go astray on this point, we wish to emphasise the
cardinal principles which, as it were, give a meaning to the existence and
purpose of the human race.

Man, including, of course, both sexes, is above all things an animal,
zoon; he is also a gregarious animal, soon polittkon, and finally, an
animal capable of amassing material and intellectual riches, 200n
thesauropoion. Man as a goon requires nourishment, work and rest.
These conditions are ill-fulfilled by civilised man.

From birth the child does not receive its normal nourishment from
its mother for a multitude of reasons. The food of the adult man is
either insufficient or in excess, and often rendered worthless, or poisoned,
by a greater or smaller amount of alcohol. An insufficient diet is often
accompanied by excessive work, and lighter work by an excess of food—
both equally harmful to the health.

Because the animal life of man is not conducted according to physiological principles, all the tastes, desires, needs and abilities of an individual cease to be subject to a normal influence, and it is under these
peculiar conditions that man is called upon to fulfil his functions as
a s00n folitikon in relation to the family, to society, and to the nation;
it is indeed for the use of society that he is born, as is proved by the
faculty of language which is only acquired by contact with other men.

Finally, man is a goon thesauropoion. He is able to make use of the
material and moral riches of his ancestors, and he desires to employ them
and to hand them down with interest to his descendants. But in order to
attain this very important end he must strive against the evil and
jealousy which are inevitably aroused in him by those about him.

Having established these three cardinal points, we are naturally led
to enquire the nature of those forces which urge man to fulfil his purpose.
A NOTE ON EUGENICS. 51

Reflection and observation enable us to say that a man always obeys an
egotistic impulse, no matter whether his chatacter be altruistic or
egotistic.

What must I do to be happy? What must I do to fulfil the obligations which are imposed upon me by the ideals in which I believe? One
man thinks that he should refer everything to himself, a second only
experiences pleasure when referring everything to others, but the motive
remains the same in both cases, #.e., search for personal happiness. How
can this personal happiness be found ?

As a matter of fact in society as a rule, and particularly among
intellectual people, the idea prevails that life outside the family is
easier and more agreeable. From this follows a reduction in the number
of marriages and a terrible reduction in births. But to the champions of
this doctrine the moment inevitably arrives when they find themselves
unsatisfied. In their difficulty they ask what course of action they ought
to have pursued. To this biology answers, “ Return to nature, that is to
say, submit yourself to her laws and develop all those fine qualities she
has implanted in you.”

Nature has forced us to preserve our bodies, and we are obliged to
find the wherewithal by means of work. She has endowed us with
admiration for the beautiful, hence we are impelled to search for it. She
has given us the gift of pity and therefore we must seek to do good.

Nature has bestowed on us the gift of love and at certain moments
each one of us experiences the desire to join his life with that of another,
to found a family, and to devote his energy, his ability and his faculties
to the prosperity of that family; which is good both for society and the
State. And just as the love for art, for science and for country is natural
to a normal man, so are sexual, maternal and paternal love equally
natural phenomena.

With all animals, except domesticated animals, life takes place
naturally. With man it is largely influenced by civilisation. If Jean
Jacques Rousseau and Tolstoi demand that the human race should return
to a state of nature, in the strict sense of that word, anthropology demands
that man should observe the laws of biology in his search for happiness.

For the anthropologist, love is not an end, but only a lyric introduction, a prologue to life which is itself a serious matter, and one full of
cares to those who owe their existence to that love. From the point of
view of biology two people unite by a natural attraction to perpetuate the
species, and as species evolve they develop, according to their position in
the biological scale, a greater and greater love for the child. Every wild
animal remains faithful to its mate so long as the fruit of their union is
still partially dependent, and with man, whose feelings are incomparably
stronger, this love of the child is projected even to succeeding generations.

In man purely sexual love is in process of evolution. Whither. does
it tend? Does it change for the better or the worse? If for the better it
becomes a more exalted feeling; we worship the character of the one
woman who has become so dear to us until it seems impossible that
we should live without her. If, on the other hand, it is for the worse,
reverence for her personality diminishes, moments of intimate converse
become rare, and the child, the gift naturally desired by all normally constituted men, has already become a burden. The wife is no longer
reverenced as an individual or as mother and teacher of the children, but
is treated as a luxury, a point of view altogether foreign to biology. In
short, to demand that a woman should always remain young and to wish
to keep her merely as a source of pleasure is just as absurd as to wish
that a fruit tree should remain covered with flowers all the year round
without bearing fruit in autumn.

A natural point of view often becomes a pathological one. The
civilised man, in trying to look for happiness, imagines he has found it
52 EUGENICS REVIEW.

in the inversion of the values of natural law and phenomena. The
woman refuses to have children too often, for fear of losing her youth,
not knowing that a normal birth in hygienic conditions preserves the
strength and vitality of the body. The man, fearing to lose his liberty
and independence, remains unmarried, without knowing that a suitable
marriage would bring him happiness and peace of mind, and would proportionately reduce the necessary expenses of life. Both men and women
influenced by Malthusian and neo-Malthusian teaching either marry too
late, or with a fixed determination to have but a limited number of
children, usually one or two.

Without wishing to enter into details, we would merely indicate that,
according to an opinion given to us personally by one of the greatest
specialists in Europe, it is an established fact that most of the misunderstandings that arise between married couples proceed from a false interpretation of conjugal duties. Medical statistics show that a normal
woman can have at least four children without prejudicing her health,
and if we admit that there are cases where the family does not increase
naturally, in most of these cases this absence of children is voluntary.
What, then, are the motives which drive a man to abstain from a natural
desire? Without entering into the material side of the question—a very
vexed one—it is possible to mention a number of motives which seem to
us no less important. The problem of improving the family in any
civilised state is far too complicated for anyone to dream for a moment
of solving it completely by merely giving a pecuniary bonus to large
families only. It is a problem of eugenics and race hygiene which must
be discussed at the same time as those of heredity, alcoholism, syphilis,
prostitution and education. The problems of heredity, alcoholism and
syphilis have been sufficiently analysed already, and we would merely
remark that they are of the utmost importance to the institution of the
family, in order to preserve the children from the consequences which
they carry in their wake. Prostitution, so widely disseminated in all
civilised countries, has been debated at such length that we must quickly
pass it by, merely emphasising the fact that pornographic cinematographs
and the vulgarisation of the nude have reached such proportions at the
present day that they have considerably lowered the standard of morality
among the young.

Finally, we must add that though science has furnished man with a
method of preventing the inheritance of diseases in certain difficult cases,
and permits us to regulate the life of a delicate woman, these same
methods used for other ends have facilitated the reduction of the birthrate. Thus, at the present day, when life becomes more complicated and
more difficult, when marriage is contracted later, and when each child is
a new source of expense, and of every other difficulty, the desire for
children has become extinguished.

It cannot be repeated too often that the problem of the family should
be considered from a biological point of view, simply because it is a
question of biology, though greatly influenced by social problems.
Modern life with all its many temptations has distorted the normal conception of man’s happiness.

An improvement in the modern family is indeed a pressing need of
the nation. The whole education of the young of both sexes should have
a wider, a more moral and a healthier outlook. It should give the girl
more intellectual freedom and a more precise idea of her sacred duty to
her country, and the boy the knowledge that the woman does not merely
exist for his pleasure but to share with him the sorrows and the joys
of life. H. O.
