GERMAN EUGENICS IN PRACTICE
By ELIOT SLATER, M.3B., MRCP.

Deutsche Justiz in the July 1935 issue

of the EUGENICS REVIEW (page 90),
some 56,000 people were sterilized in Germany in the first twelve months after the
introduction of the sterilization law. If this
figure may be taken as correct, it does not
follow that the first year of sterilization will
be typical of the following ones, or that this
rate of sterilization will be kept up. The
operation of the law is likely with time to
improve in efficiency, leading one to expect
an increased number of sterilizations per
year. On the other hand, in the first year
the standing population of defectives, schizophrenics, etc., will be attacked, the operations of subsequent years being more
confined to the yearly increment. Could,
however, this figure of 56,000 be taken as a
probable yearly average, it would imply
about two per thousand of the fertile
population being sterilized every year, with
a total expectation of sterilization for the
average individual in the neighbourhood of
4 per cent. :

PUBLIC REACTION TO STERILIZATON
LAW

It is not easy to discover the reaction of
the population to this very definite attack
on their personal and physical liberty. My
information, from a well-informed source, is
that there is much resentment throughout
Germany among the common people, particularly directed against its compulsory
nature. Compulsion itself is not liked, andas
a police affair is doubly objectionable. The
nature of the operation does not improve
matters. An attack on the sexual organs is
calculated to arouse more resentment than
any operation of corresponding severity on
another part. Among women there is a
definite mortality, not entirely to be eliminated in any double laparotomy, and this
mortality tends to be exaggerated and

A CCORDING to figures quoted from

associated with both sexes. Lastly, the
nature of the operation is still misunderstood
and thought to have a castrating effect.
Some of these grounds for objection will
disappear in the course of time ; others will
always be felt.

Patients to be sterilized seldom protest ;
they know that if they did it would have no
effect. Physical resistance must be extremely
rare. The law provides for the use of direct
force, but this has not yet been necessary.
Resistance to sterilization by appeal is
statutory and frequent. There have indeed
been attempts to organize this resistance.
In Bavaria pamphlets were printed and
found in Catholic hands recommending all
patients to appeal in every case. This was,
of course, an attempt to make the law
unworkable. The pamphlet was seized and
destroyed. The frequency of appeal has
varied much from time to time and from
place to place, in some areas being as low as
I per cent., in others as high as two-thirds
of all cases where the order was made.

In many scientific and more liberal circles
there is a strong objection to the compulsory
aspect of the law, partly as a matter of
principle, partly based on reasoned argument. In support of this view are quoted
the calculations of Haldane and others,
which go to show that sterilization operates
extremely slowly towards the removal of
characteristics dependent on infrequent
recessive genes, and the findings of one
scientific worker, that practically all the
children of schizophrenics are born before
the manifestation of the disease. One
authority, with whom I discussed the matter,
was of the opinion that the law would
operate at least as well if sterilization were
made voluntary—that in fact one would get
as good results by propaganda as by compulsion. Against this one must put the
opinion of such a well-informed authority as
Sj6gren of Sweden, who told me that in

285
286

his opinion the reverse would be the case.
Apparently the experience in Sweden with
voluntary sterilization has been very disappointing, only a few hundreds having
been sterilized since the introduction of the
law a few years ago.

Practising doctors in general are inclined
to object to the law, and to the increase in
their duties, and to the increasedly police
nature of these duties which the law entails.
The doctor must notify all cases of the
hereditary disorders named in the law, as
far as these become known to him through
the practice of his profession. For instance,
were he, on a professional visit, to see the
patient’s brother have an epileptic fit, he
would not be bound to notify him, though
he could do so if he wished. If the patient
himself were to have the fit, and it could not
be referred to definite exogenous causes,
then he must notify. If, on the other hand,
the doctor passing casually along the street
were to see a patient of his having a fit, he
would not be bound to report him. Presumably, however, if he were to proceed to his
assistance, the duty to notify would reappear.

The keenness with which doctors carry
out their duties varies greatly from place to
place. In small country villages, with only
one doctor, he generally does it satisfactorily, because he neither loses nor gains by
it. In places with two or more doctors they
usually notify only where it is obviously
unavoidable. The doctor slackest in notifying will tend to profit at the expense of the
others. On the other hand in Thuringia and
Baden these duties were carried out with
the greatest enthusiasm. In the latter place,
the doctors seemed possessed of the notion
that the more cases they notified, the better
pleased would they be in high quarters. At
length a circular had to be sent round,
telling them that they were only to notify
cases properly capable of reproduction.

In clinics, the duty of notification is
carried out conscientiously, and proceeds
for the most part automatically. The chief
difficulties are those of diagnosis. The
diagnosis should be of such a degree of
certainty that the clinician would be

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

prepared to back it in a court of law, or
alternatively for the Professor to be able to
demonstrate the case as such to a class of
students. Many authorities find difficulty
in fitting their cases into the official scheme
of classification—particularly, for instance,
Kleist. According to Kleist’s classification
there are a number of separate syndromes,
for instance—motility and confusion psychoses, which would by most clinicians be
considered schizophrenic, but which he
treats as separate entities. As in these cases
his researches into the heredity have shown
no connection with schizophrenia, he does not
hold them to be schizophrenic, nor covered
by the law, nor in his clinic are they notified.

Difficulties of diagnosis must necessarily
occur, and may have unfortunate effects.
The following is such a case.

The daughter of a doctor had had in
childhood an obscure febrile complaint,
accompanied by some minor neurological
signs. At puberty she developed periodical
but rare and slight ‘absences’; but
with the years these increased in frequency and severity until they were major
epileptic fits. In the course of treatment
her father was informed she would have
to be notified for sterilization. He objected
very much, and took her from doctor to
doctor in the vain attempt to get her
recognized as a case of fits of exogenous
origin. At last she was seen by one of the
best-known neurological surgeons of the
country, who after an encephalography
operated on her and removed a large cyst
from the brain, with complete recovery
and cessation of the fits.

Such cases cannot be published, owing to
the disrepute into which they might bring
the law, if they were at all frequent.

In the first few months after the law was
passed, there was a considerable amount of
overcrowding in clinics and hospitals, because cases of recovery from schizophrenia
and manic-depressive psychosis had to be
held pending decision on the matter of
sterilization. This is the case no longer.
Once the case is notified, he may be
discharged and wait at home for the notice
GERMAN EUGENICS IN PRACTICE

of reception into a surgical clinic, or alternatively conduct his appeal before the court
from home. Only cases where the danger of
procreation is really serious, e.g. men in a
mild hypomanic state with much sexual
desire—should be held till the question of
sterilization is finally settled and they can
be directly transferred to the surgical clinic.
In all other cases it suffices for the law to
have been set in motion, and patients are
subjected to a minimum of delay and
inconvenience.

Cases for sterilization are notified to the
“‘ Bezirksarzt.’”’ He would correspond to
some degree to the English local medical
officer of health, though his activities are
being more and more confined to the operation of the eugenic laws. He draws up a
document, the ‘‘ Antrag,’’ which summarizes
all available data to enable a decision to be
reached as to sterilization or not. To obtain
sufficient information he is entitled to order
the patient’s admission to a psychiatric
clinic for a period not longer than six weeks
for examination and report. The “ Antrag ”’
is laid before the local eugenic court (“‘ Erbgesundheitsgericht ’’), which consists of a
jurist as president, a “ Bezirksarzt,’”’ and a
specialist in medical genetics, and they
reach the decision on sterilization. If the
patient is dissatisfied with the decision he
may appeal to a higher court, the ‘‘ Erbgesundheitsobergericht.”’

If the ‘‘ Bezirksarzt’’ is a Catholic,
difficulties of conscience are likely to appear.
Catholic general practitioners are allowed
by their Church to make the notification,
because it does not necessarily follow that
the patient will be sterilized. Also such
notifications have an unrelated statistical
significance. The actual order to sterilize is
another matter, and a Catholic ‘“‘ Bezirksarzt’’ is forbidden by his Church, and
compelled by the State, to make such
sterilization orders. In districts where there
are two such doctors, one of whom is a
Catholic, it has sometimes been arranged
that the Catholic hands over the whole of
these duties to his colleague. Presumably
the whole matter could be settled by an
agreement between Church and State.

287

The order for admission to a psychiatric
clinic for examination and report is made in
quite a fair proportion of cases where the
original notification has not been made from
such a clinic. The senior assistants at the
clinics make a very reasonable addition to
their small salaries out of the fees for these
reports. The admission to a clinic for this
purpose is specially likely to happen where
the patient has appealed against the order
for sterilization. The reports in these cases
are long, exhaustive and reasoned documents.
For instance, I saw a report on a case of
congenital syphilis and mental deficiency.
The family history, personal history, physical,
psychiatric, and psychological examinations
were given in detail. The difficult point of
whether the patient was mentally defective
because of the syphilis, or because of hereditary defect and only happened concurrently
to be syphilitic, was discussed in full on
general grounds and in the particular circumstances of the case; and finally judgment was given, in this case that the mental
deficiency was to be referred to exogenous
rather than endogenous causes.

Interesting here is the fact that a certainty
of congenital syphilis is not taken legally as
ipso facto precluding a diagnosis of hereditary mental defect. The patient is assured
of a full and unbiased consideration of his
case in any reputable clinic. Where the
doctor does not prefer to write out the report
in full, special forms are provided, which if
properly filled in ensure a thoroughgoing
anamnesis and examination from every
point of view.

Before the introduction of the sterilization
laws, Germany had no special laws for mental
defectives, and practically no special institutions. Hospitalization was much less
frequent than in England, and largely confined to idiots and the severer grades of
defect. Mental defectives, apart from such
special cases as the above, are judged
principally on social grounds, to a less degree
on school record and least of all on psychological tests. A special form is given for
the latter, which few English or I suppose
American psychologists would consider
satisfactory. It consists of questions on
288

orientation of the usual kind, on ‘‘ school
knowledge’ of the most elementary kind
(Who was Bismarck ? When is Christmas ?),
mathematical problems (simple interest on
300 marks at 3 per cent. for 3 years), general
questions of an almost philosophical kind
(Why do we have day and night? Why are
houses built higher in towns than in the
country? Why do children go to school ?),
differences (between ‘‘ mistake’ and “‘ lie,”
between ‘‘ Rechtsanwalt ’’ and “‘ Staatsanwalt ’’), composition of sentences (e.g. out of
“ soldier,” ‘‘ war,’’ “‘ fatherland ’’), the repetition of a story, the explanation of proverbs

“general moral ideas’? (Why does one.

learn? save money? What is truth ?),
memory and attention tests, and notes on
the behaviour during the testing.

It is no wonder that the German does not
place much reliance on such tests, considered
as tests of intelligence. The requirement on
which most importance is laid for a diagnosis
of mental defect is a persistent failure of
the person concerned to maintain any sort
of a position in life for himself and his
family ; if this is backed by an unsatisfactory school record—e.g. twice having to
stay on in the same class instead of being
promoted at the end of the year, or attendance at a special school (‘‘ Hilfsschule ’’)—
the diagnosis of mental defect may be made
almost regardless of the results of the
“intelligence test.”

One of the special problems of mental
deficiency is its ascertainment. Psychiatric
cases are got hold of largely through the
psychiatric clinics. A few mental defectives
will be discovered in the same way, if they
come into the clinics in a state of excitement,
or complaining of the depressive or hypochondriacal symptoms not infrequent in defectives; but these must be few. The majority
are discovered in other ways. In the country
the local ‘ Bezirksarzt ’’ is supposed to,
and generally does, know every single
family that lives in his district. He is
accordingly able to put his hands on the
local defectives, persistent low-grade misfits and failures at any time. In the towns
the matter is more difficult, and the defectives are got hold of largely accidentally,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

as they come to doctors or hospitals for
advice on entirely unrelated subjects—e.g.
for appendicitis—or as they appear as
candidates for financial or social assistance
at the offices of charity organizations,
church missions, public assistance offices,
etc. With the development of the marriageadvice centres and related scientific and
social institutions, there will be still further
ways of ascertainment, until this should
become in the end fairly complete.

APPEALS AGAINST STERILIZATION
Appeals from the order for sterilization
come before a special court. In many cases
there will have been a preliminary examination and report such as has been described.
However, many other points have arisen
than the question of diagnosis, and a
number of appeals have been reported and
discussed in a paper by Bostroem.
Bostroem, in his introduction, criticizes the
haphazard practice of doctors in regard to
notification. There is no point in worrying
the authorities with 60-year-old alcoholics
and 10-year-old idiots, when the really
dangerous—in regard to propagation—are
not being touched. The pressing cases are
the physically healthy men and women from
sixteen to forty, young schizophrenics and
manic-depressives in remissions, young subjects of hereditary blindness and deafness,
etc. It is important to make sure of the
capacity for procreation. It must not happen
in future that, after months of proceedings
costing a lot of money, it appears that the
case should never have been brought.
Further, everyone is entitled to be heard in
his own defence. If not capable of taking
steps himself, he must be represented. The
doctor must see to this. ,
The following are some of the more interesting cases :
1. Aman under guardianship for mental
defect was held by the court to be a
psychopath* and not sterilizable. The

* Both in German psychiatry and in the sterilization
law there is a sharp distinction between the psychopathic and the psychotic. Only the following conditions
render their subjects liable to sterilization: inborn
hereditary defect, schizophrenia, circular (manicdepressive) insanity, hereditary epilepsy, hereditary
GERMAN EUGENICS IN PRACTICE

difference between guardianship and sterilization laws is made clear. Guardianship
depends entirely on social irresponsibility.
Liability to sterilization is governed by
other, biological, considerations.

z. A woman at the menopause, last
period some months ago, still theoretically
capable of bearing children, but not likely
to. Sterilization not enforced. Compelling
grounds must be shown for necessity of
sterilization, not merely a_ theoretical
possibility.

3. A man, aged 50, wife at menopause.
Appellant has adult children. The theoretical possibility of producing children by
extramarital intercourse held not sufficient
to justify sterilization. There’are a number
of similar decisions.

4. A man, aged 57, is in an institution,
and usually allowed out only in company.
He has an interest in the other sex, but
only as an exhibitionist. He looks so
repulsive that it is inconceivable that any
woman should wish to have to do with
him. Sterilization was rejected on the
grounds that he was under adequate
supervision. His personal appearance was
held to be beside the point, and no grounds
for not enforcing the law.

5. A man, stupid, but a useful agricul-\
tural labourer. His brother, like himself,
attended a special school. Previous history shows early death of the mother and
a neglectful stepmother. He was held to
lie on the boundary between normal
stupidity (‘‘landlaufige Unbegabtheit ’’)
and deficiency. Sterilization not enforced.
The court wished to postpone decision for
a year. This is not permitted. On the
other hand it is allowed to reintroduce
proceedings at a later date if new facts,
e.g. altered behaviour, justify it.

6. Woman of limited intelligence, husband the same. Although it was to be
expected that only children of limited
intelligence would be the result of this

(Huntington’s) chorea, hereditary blindness, hereditary
deafness, severe hereditary physical | abnormality,
severe alcoholism. Under the term “ imbecile’’ is
understood in Germany a considerably wider range of
mental defect than in England.

289

union, the limitation was not held to
amount to mental defect. Sterilization
rejected.

7. Three imbecile males, 14, 15, 19
years. The court allowed the appeal,
because they can work on the land and
show themselves useful members of society.
The reduction in numbers of such people
is not socially desirable. Bostroem remarks that it is all very well to be tender
of ‘‘ primitive personalities,’ but if they
are imbecile they ought to be sterilized.

8. Female, aged 25, Normal school
career, could never do any useful work,
wanted to write stories and poems. In a
girls’ home was incapable even of finding
her place at table, if it was changed. The
court held mental defect proven on the
following grounds: (a) Development uniform and continuous from childhood up.
If she is mentally defective now, she was
so congenitally. (b) Father is a psychopath. (c) Mother was for ten years in an
asylum. Appeal dismissed.

9. Man. No proven mental defect, but
he is an habitual criminal and recidivist of
a bad type, guilty of crimes with violence.
The court held that his abnormal behaviour
justified the assumption of mental defect.

In commenting on the above cases one
notes, as indeed was to be expected, a certain

_lack of uniformity between court and court.

One sees three imbeciles, who are capable
of simple work on the land, encouraged to
propagate their kind, and a criminal psychopath sterilized for mental defect. One notes
the admission of irrelevant evidence. It is
no good evidence of hereditary mental
defect to show that the parents were
respectively psychopathic and insane. In
fact one is inclined to doubt the diagnosis of
mental defect here altogether. The child was
apparently normal in schooldays, and later
developed a progressive change simulating a
dementia. It seems not unlikely that this
was a schizophrenia of the simplex type. Of
course this also justifies sterilization, but it
is poor law to do the right thing on the wrong
grounds.

One may note also a difference of principle
290

between English criminal law and German
sterilization law. One completed trial does
not protect against a second charge for the
same ‘‘ offence.’’ In the case of the three
imbeciles, there may be grounds for assuming
the influence on social psychiatry of the
national-socialist Weltanschauung. Those
“guverlassige und treue Arbeitskrafte ”’
and useful members of the “ Volksgemeinschaft ’’ are perhaps members of the party,
and have demonstrated in that way their
social desirability and suitability for procreation. This is pure supposition, but would
at least be congruous. One notes that the
law in its operation is tender of the merely
stupid. Mental defect appears to have to
be of considerable degree before becoming
operative as a ground for sterilization. One
remembers political speeches in which intelligence is rudely decried, and the ideal for
the people is held out to be physical health
and a capacity for unquestioning, uncritical
obedience. For such a make-up, too high a
degree of intelligence would be, if anything,
a disadvantage. With this official attitude,
the whole attitude towards mental defect is
bound to undergo a change. Of the first
importance to the German Government is
that every citizen should be a good nationalsocialist. While no hereditary constitutional
tendency to national-socialism has yet been
demonstrated, one may hardly blame the
judges for attempting to estimate the value
of the individual as a whole. One case is
known to me where hospital authorities
arranged that an officer in the S.A. should
not be sterilized merely for a slight attack of
dementia przcox.

As far as my information goes, the operation of the sterilization law is likely to prove
costly. On.an average it costs per woman
1,000 marks (£80) and 100-200 marks
({8-£16) each for men, inclusive of operation
charges. In cases where there is an appeal,
or where the patient is held in a psychiatric
clinic for some weeks’ observation, the cost
would be considerably higher. The whole of
these charges are borne by the State, which
must mean, at the present rate of sterilization, a sum of about {2,000,000 a year. The
patient, even if wealthy, pays nothing himself.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Certain alterations are possible in the law.
Criminals are not covered by it. It is very
possible that a special law will be brought
into force to cover them, or certain classes
of them, which will be called by a different
name, be administered by different officers,
have a different procedure. Criminals were
purposely omitted from the present sterilization law, as far as possible to obviate the
idea that sterilization is a sort of punishment. There is no foundation for the idea,
sometimes found outside Germany, that the
law is administered in a partial way as a
punishment for political offenders.

There are other possible enlargements—
e.g. to include the children of two recessive
parents, and the monozygotic twin of a
person already ordered to be sterilized. This
could be taken as an improvement in the
justice of the law. The phenotypically
healthy twin is at least as dangerous eugenically as the sick twin. Further it is possible
that there may be a new clause allowing
voluntary sterilization to those individuals
who, according to current conceptions, would
be regarded as certainly heterozygotic, e.g.
the children of a schizophrenic. This is
hardly probable. The possibility that the
law, at this date, may be converted into a
law for voluntary sterilization altogether
may be disregarded. It does not lie in the
national-socialist philosophy to consider the
possibility of getting anything done by
voluntary effort.

Apart from possible changes in the law,
there is a possibility of a new orientation in
its application. The appeal cases show that
the law is not absolutely hard and fast, but
that its administrators tend to be governed
by other considerations than merely the
diagnosis and fertility of the person concerned. This is illustrated by the case of a
musician in Frankfurt-am-Main, a man of
unusual musical ability, who had an attack
of mania or depression and was ordered to be
sterilized. He appealed against the order,
and the appeal was allowed on the grounds
that unusual hereditary (here musical) talent
compensated, as it were, for the manicdepressive taint. This seems to me to
indicate an alteration of the official attitude,
GERMAN EUGENICS IN PRACTICE

le. the estimation of the individual as a
whole, and not merely as the bearer of one or
other particular hereditary taint.

STERILIZATION AND RESEARCH

There is no doubt that the sterilization law
and the whole social policy bound up with
it will have a profound effect on research
in Germany. Certain not entirely desirable
effects have shown themselves already. The
fear of being notified as a suitable case for
sterilization does operate as a cause of distrust and reluctance to give information
among the subjects of a psychiatric research.
In my own research in Munich, which was
into the relatives of manic-depressives, I
found an extraordinary willingness among
these people to come to the institute, often
at considerable personal inconvenience, for
examination, and an equally great readiness
to give full and sincere information about
their relatives. I am sure this could not be
paralleled in England. It is no doubt largely
due to much greater interest in and knowledge of this subject in Germany, and the
popular German conviction of its social
importance. Quite a number of the relatives
I saw brought family trees and documents
extending back over several generations.
Nevertheless there was quite a proportion of
my informants who required very persistent
and express reassurance that it was out of
the question that the information obtained
from them should be used in a way they
would not like. Of the motives that influenced those persons who would not reply
to any attempts to get in touch with them it
is impossible to speak.

The attitude of different research workers
in regard to this matter of research versus
sterilization varied greatly in different research institutions. In one place I found a
steadfast conviction among the more responsible workers that it was indeed undesirable
that the material obtained by research
should be used directly for extraneous ends,
or that the public should be allowed to get
the impression it could be so used. In another
place I found a very curious quibbling attitude, that while certain activities of the

291

institute were of the nature of pure research
and so the data obtained thereby would not
be used to provide sterilization notifications,
yet other activities were not so purely
research ones, and there this dispensation
would not hold. For example, were subjects
admitted to the institute for anthropological
and medical examination, and were they at
the same time to receive anything in the
nature of treatment (e.g. the continuation of
a diabetic diet) then a duty to notify could
not be evaded. The institute in question was
also intended to develop into the biologicalstatistical centre of its city, and into the local
matriage-advice bureau, and these activities
were regarded as being similarly not covered
by the term research. In other words there
was a definite determination among the
workers at this place to use their institute as
much as possible for the extraneous purpose
of providing candidates for sterilization.
When one learned that the material for these
anthropological and other investigations consisted practically solely of voluntary subjects who had been secured by the fair words
of sisters at clinics, social workers, etc., one
was left with a very disagreeable impression.
There are other important aspects of
German eugenics beside the sterilization law.
Eugenic qualifications are insisted on by the
government for applicants for appointment
to the State services—e.g. for the post office,
State bank, railways, etc., as well as for the
civil services proper, and for members of
the S.S. and S.A. These are briefly that
the applicant shall not be non-Aryan nor
hereditarily tainted (“‘ erblich belastet ’’).
The definition of what constitutes hereditary taint has not yet been clearly laid
down. Luxenburger has claimed that it
should be interpreted in its more strict
scientific sense, and only those persons
regarded as “ belastet ’’ who according to
present ideas must be the carriers of a pathogenic gene. These would then be only : those
showing the hereditary abnormality ; or the
monozygotic twin of such a one; the
children of parents one or both of whom have
shown a recessive abnormality ; the parents
of a child with such a recessive abnormality ;
in the case of sex-linked abnormalities all
292

children of an affected mother, the daughters
of an affected father.

Luxenburger has difficulty with the siblings of schizophrenics, and suggests that
only those who themselves are schizoid
psychopaths should be regarded as tainted,
not for instance those who are psychopaths
of a non-schizoid kind. The clinical distinction would be one of some difficulty. He
remarks that ‘‘ In principle even the hereditarily tainted [erbkrank] families are to be
encouraged, apart from those members who
are to be regarded as ‘ belastet.’ ’’ The whole
family with all its members may not be
regarded as ‘“‘belastet’’; the individual
members must be considered separately, to
see if they come under his rules. Luxenburger’s view, however, does not seem to be
the official one, at least in regard to the
administration of the marriage loan.

MARRIAGE LAWS

On October 19th, 1935, entered into force
the ‘‘ Gesetz zum Schutze der Erbgesundheit
des deutschen Volkes.’’ This expressly forbids marriages where one of the parties suffers
from an infectious disease, is under a form of
guardianship, suffers from a mental disorder,
or suffers from a hereditary disease in the
sense of the sterilization laws. Before marriage, certificates must be obtained from the
appropriate authority to the effect that no
hindrance exists on any of the above grounds.
Marriages which violate the law are null and
void, and the parties are liable to imprisonment, as also for attempting to get around
the law, for example by marrying abroad.
Marriages between “‘ Aryans ”’ and full Jews
are also forbidden. The full Jew may only
marry the full Jew. Half Jews, if they accept
the Jewish faith, are reckoned as full Jews.
Otherwise they may only marry half Jews.
Quarter Jews may not marry their like, but
only ‘‘ Aryans.”

The certificate allowing marriage has to be
obtained from the local health office (‘‘ Gesundheitsamt ’’). These are being set up all
over Germany in every district which does
not yet possess one. They correspond in
many ways with public health offices in England, but their activities principally consist

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in carrying out the new eugenic measures.
At every one of the offices a special office will
be set up for giving the certificates required
by the above law, and for the administration
of the marriage loan. At these clinics every
applicant for certificate or marriage loan will
receive a careful examination. For this an
official form is provided, in which besides an
ordinary medical examination the doctor has
to note anthropological measurements, type
of constitution according to Kretschmer,
racial type, twinship, all details of previous
illnesses with dates and notes of where
treated, so that more exact particulars can
be obtained if required. Further the whole
family history is gone into, and details are
obtained if possible of the great-grandparents,
in every case of the grandparents and all their
descendants, even, if possible, first cousins.
Finally a summary card is drawn up, in which
the above facts are summarized, and cross
references to data in the possession of other
social services are given, e.g. for venereal
diseases, cripples, tuberculosis, obstetrics and
infant welfare, insanity and psychopathy,
alcoholism, school medical service. Here also
the ‘‘ diagnosis ”’ is entered, e.g. non-Aryan,
insane, “‘ belastet,’”’ criminal, peculiarly
gifted, etc. The special gifts, which have to
be far above average to receive mention, are
mental—for mathematics, languages, organization, art, music, painting, drawing and
plastic art ; and practical—for manual and
technical occupations and sport. Similar
details are noted about all members of the
family.

On the basis of these findings a decision is
reached as to whether the applicant is to be
granted the marriage-enabling certificate,
and/or the marriage loan, or as to whether he
should be conditionally or unconditionally
advised against marriage. The following
must be disallowed the marriage loan :

I. Those who suffer or have suffered from
the following hereditary abnormalities : hereditary mental defect, schizophrenia, manicdepressive psychosis, idiopathic epilepsy,
Huntington’s chorea, hereditary blindness,
hereditary deafness, severe hereditary physical disability, severe psychopathy, severe
constitutional disorder. The deaf, blind and
GERMAN EUGENICS IN PRACTICE |

epileptic may only receive the loan when the
disorder is clearly to be traced to exogenous
causes, and where apart from this the
applicant can support a family. Physical
disability includes congenital dislocation of
the hip, congenital clubfoot, cleft palate, split
hand, spina bifida, hereditary narrowed pelvis
of such a degree that it is impossible for a
child to be born naturally, Friedreich’s
ataxy, myotonia, progressive muscular dystrophy, hereditary spastic paralysis, dwarfs
less than 130 cm. in height. Constitutional
disorder includes severe asthenia coupled
with other abnormalities or stigmata of
degeneration, juvenile diabetes, dystrophia
adiposogenitalis, early and severe otosclerosis,
severe lymphatism, hemophilia, myxcedema,
high-grade infantilism, severe goitre—in
regions with endemic goitre only those with
cardiac disorder. Among the severe psychopathies are included severe cases of hysteria,
homosexuality, alcoholism, drug-addiction,
asocial and antisocial psychopaths (presumably includes all at least habitual criminals),
and other types of psychopathy, which without being asocial or antisocial ‘‘ because of its
special kind and severity represents a great
hindrance in the way of work and pleasure
in life,’ where the said psychopathy shows
itself as hereditary. This includes conditions
with severe mood changes, depressions,
anxiety states, suicidal tendencies, and
compulsive symptoms.

II. Those who, without having suffered
themselves from any of the above conditions,
have families which show or have shown in
such a severe degree the presence of hereditary illness that the children of the applicant
may be regarded as materially more heavily
tainted than the average population. The
“ Belastung ’’ may be certain or highly
probable. Apart from special consideration
of the method of inheritance in a given case,
it may be assumed that the applicant is
“belastet ’’ when one parent, or two siblings, or more than a third of the remaining
relatives (grandparents, uncles and aunts),
or one sib and two grandparents, suffer from
severe and certain hereditary physical or
mental abnormality. By this estimation,
abnormalities of different kinds are to be

293

reckoned together. Even lesser degree of
hereditary taint is sufficient for the rejection
of the application, if the proposed partner
has a similar degree of tainting. Emphasis is
laid on the fact that it must be ascertained
that the abnormalities in question are in fact
hereditable ; mention is made of depressive
states and psychoses of short duration,
especially at advanced ages, where endocrine
disturbances should be thought of as an
alternative diagnosis to that of an endogenous psychosis, of symptomatic epilepsy, etc.

III. Those suffering from any infectious
disorder likely to affect the health of the
partner or the children. This is specially
directed against venereal diseases.

IV. Where one of the partners is sterile.

V. Severe alcoholism, where it is superimposed on a basis of “hereditary inferiority,’’ or has led to such destruction of
the personality that no satisfactory family
life can be expected.

At the end of the examination one of the
following certificates is issued: that the
applicant may marry; that he is permanently or temporarily unfit for marriage ;
that though the findings do not necessarily
prove him unsuitable for marriage, he has
been advised against the proposed union ;
that he is sterile and only to be recommended
to marry another sterile individual or the
subject of an hereditary abnormality ; that
he is the subject of hereditary disorder and
only to be recommended to marry a sterile
individual.

A number of points of great interest arise
from these paragraphs. Luxenburger’s definition of the scientific conception of ‘‘ Belastung ’’ goes by the board. Those are to be
considered “‘ belastet’’ who have a considerably greater chance than tlie average
of carrying a pathogenic gene, not only those
who theoretically must do so. Hence the
government is content to prevent a number
of healthy and normal people marrying and
propagating, if by so doing a number of
abnormal and undesirable people are also
prevented. In this connection it is only
rational that unlike abnormalities should be
reckoned together in determining “ Belastung.” The heaping up of such abnormalities
294
among the relatives obviously increases the
chance of developing some sort of an
abnormality, though for example the nephew
of a schizophrenic is no more likely to
develop schizophrenia for having a halfbrother with a cleft palate. It is possible,
however, that this not the basis of this
provision, but rather a belief in a general
hereditary degenerative diathesis. This view
receives support from the official use of such
terms as “‘ hereditary inferiority ’’ and such
ideas as constitutional asthenia with signs
of degeneration. |

The policy with regard to selective breeding seems to have been settled in favour of
attempting to keep abnormalities latent,
rather than breeding them out. This is shown
by the provision that those with a slight
degree of ‘‘ tainting ’’ may marry normal
persons but not those with a similar degree of
tainting. They are treated in the same way,
in fact, as quarter Jews.

It will be seen that the function of these
““ Eheberatungsstellen ”’ is a very important
one. There is first the immediate and
practical one of forbidding undesirable and
encouraging desirable unions. A secondary
duty will no doubt be notifying cases for
sterilization. Thirdly, and of increasing
importance with the passage of years, will
be the function of these clinics as record
offices. The summary cards already referred
to are kept in duplicate, one locally, the
other forwarded to a central office in Berlin,
and are definitely intended for statistical
research. If the examinations and records
are made even with only moderate care there
will soon be provided a complete and fairly
exhaustive family record of the whole
German people. Such records thrown open
to research will provide material of quite
incalculable value.

The marriage loan is of the value of 600
marks (£48). It is given to those certified
suitable by the marriage-advice bureaus, and
no interest is demanded for the first year.
The birth of a child automatically pays back
100 marks and gives another year of interestfree enjoyment of the remainder. It should
be a considerable inducement to marriage
and have a certain slight effect in promoting

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the birth of children. Much more effective
in this way should be the German incometax system. This is exceedingly complicated,
but it may be roughly stated that there is
a tax on single persons of about 15 per cent.
Marriage reduces the amount of tax slightly,
the birth of the first and subsequent children
very considerably. For poor and middleclass people the possession of four children
renders them almost tax-free. All reductions
of income tax for children are, unlike in the
English system, percentage reductions, so
that better-off people get a correspondingly
larger actual reduction in tax. From an
eugenic point of view this is a much better
system.

THE CITY AS GODPARENT

An interesting experiment has been introduced in the city of Berlin, the ‘‘ Ehrenpatenschaft.’’ Families with two or three
children may, if they decide to have a third
or fourth, go to a city office and declare their
intention. If within the term of two years
the child is born, the city will stand godparent. This implies a present of 30 marks
(48s.) a month until the end of the first year
and 20 marks (32s.) a month subsequently
until the end of the fourteenth year. If the
child himself or an elder brother or sister
dies, the fund ceases, but may be continued
again with the birth of an additional child.
Only legitimate children may receive the
gift. If twins or triplets are born, all are
covered. The gift is independent of the
financial position of the family. It is not a
form of social support, but a gift of honour.
For no official purpose, e.g. for calculation
of income tax, is it to be reckoned as part of
the income of the family. The family and the
child bear the honourable titles of ‘‘ Patenfamilie ’’ and ‘‘ Patenkind der Stadt Berlin.”
They receive precedence in applications for
flats and dwellings, for jobs and posts of
whatever kind where the influence of the
city authorities can make itself felt. The
city even pledges itself to use its influence
on their behalf in other parts of Germany,
should the family move. The family has
to be ‘of high biological value,’’ and the
conditions for this seem to be a slightly
GERMAN EUGENICS IN PRACTICE

stricter form of the conditions for the
marriage loan.

In considering all these eugenic measures,
particularly the sterilization and marriage
laws, one must not forget that their compulsory character is nothing strange to the
German people. These are but two of a
multitude of such laws. All the German’s
actions are governed and regulated. His
scheme of education, what views he may
express—even in the scientific world—what
wireless programme he may listen to, where
and what he may buy and eat and read,
how he may sign his letters and say good
morning to his friends, are governed by law
or by a form of persuasion resting on force.
The future development of the German
people has been decided, on theoretical and
philosophical grounds, by its leaders. The
German’s duty is to be moulded in the right
direction. Any leadership among the people,
apart from the disciplined and subordinate
leadership of the type of the non-commissioned officer, is rigidly suppressed. The
Fiihrer directs with a series of ukases.
With successive hammer-bluws the German

295

citizen is driven into a swastika-shaped
hole. The atmosphere of compulsion pervades the whole of his life. The fact that
he and his fellow men are now to be selected
and bred like a herd of cattle seems to him
hardly more distasteful than a hundred
other interferences in his daily life. There is
little doubt that these measures will have at
least a partial success. If commanded with
authority the German docilely obeys. The
command now is to breed.

REFERENCES.

“ Grundsdtze fiir die Einrichtung und Tdatighett der
Eheberatungsstellen fiir Erb- und Rassenpflege,’’ Reichsund Preussische Ministerium des Inneren.

“Einige fiir den Psychiater besonders wichtige
Bestimmungen des Gesetzes zur Verhiitung erbkranken
Nachwuchses,”’ H. Luxenburger, Nervenarzt, p. 437,
1934.
er Begriff der ‘ Belastung ’ in der Eheberatungstatigkeit des Arztes,”” H. Luxenburger, Evbarzt, 1935.

“ Wichtige Entscheidungen aus der Rechtsprechung
der Erbgesundheitsgerichte und Erbgesundheitsobergerichte,”’ A. Bostroem, Fortschritte der Neurologie und
Psychiatrie, July 1935.

“2 Jahre Erbgesundheitsgesetz—1} Jahre Erbgesundheitsgerichtsbarkeit,’’ B. Steinwallner, Psychtatrisch-Neurologische Wochenschrift, July 1935.

‘* Wer ist erbgesund und wer ist erbkrank?”’ Klein,
Verlag G. Fischer, Jena, 1935.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVII, No. 4.
