The Neuroses and Psychoses in relation to
Conscription and Eugenics.”

By Sir Frenerick Mort, K.B.E.,M.D.,L.L.D.,F.R.S.

Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen,

The title of my paper, ‘‘The Neuroses and Psychoses in Relation
to Conscription and Fugenics’’ might have been amphified by the
addition of calling it ‘‘Neuroses and War,’’ but I have purposely
avoided this, because there is no essential difference between the
Neuroses and Psychoses which affected the soldiers and the Neursoes
which are met with in the civil population. Again, I have purposely
omitted the term ‘‘Shel! Shock,’’ for it is generally agreed by all those
who are competent to speak on the subject, that it is a misnomer, and it
was unfortunate that it was ever introduced into the nomenclature of
the College of Physicians and adopted by the Army. The term could
have been applied to a very small percentage of cases in which there
was concussion or Cerebral commotion caused by the tremendous
forces generated in the air by the detonatiun of large amounts of high
explosives whether contained in large shells or mines. These forces
were most effective in producing cerebral commotion witheut any
evidence of injury or, contusion ot the body, when the explosion
occurred in closed spaces, such as deep ravines and dugouts where
percussion and repercussion effects upon the central nervous system
were more severe. It has been calculated that not more than 5%,
were due solely to commotion; 10 to 15 per cent. were combined
commotional and emotional, but the vast majority were purely emotional in origin. All kinds of neuroses and psychoses occurring in
soldiers have nevertheless been designated ‘‘Shell Sheck.’’ With this
brief statement I shall dismiss the term, yet in doing so, I must call
attention to the fact that in no previous war have such vast numbers of
men been subjected to such terrible experiences ; they were :-—

(1) Unprecedented exposure to the continuous physical effects
of high explosives and poison gas and to all the developments of scientific barbarism. Moreover, the periods to which men have heen exposed to the terrifying effects of modern trench warfare have exceeded
all previous records. Such conditions are quite different from a war
of movement.

(2) The conscripted army has included all sorts and conditions
of men, and we have now found out, by the immense number of soldiers
discharged from the service as permanently unfit, what a large proportion of the male population of a highly civilized country possesses a
neurotic or neuropathic predisposition. In 1917 it was calculated

* An address delivered to the Eugenics Education Society on January 17th,
1922, |
14 EUGENICS REVIEW.

that one-third of the unwounded and one-seventh of the total army
discharges, including the wounded, were permanently unfit on account
of functional nervous or mental diseases.

WAR IN RELATION TO NATURAL SELECTION AND
SURVIVAL OF THE FITTEST.

But before considering the suhjcct of Neuroses and Psychoses in
relation to Conscription and Eugenics. I would like briefly to refer to
‘War in Relation to Natural Selection and Survival of the Fittest.’’
The primal instincts cominon to men and animals are self-preservation,
propagation, and the instinct cf the herd. The great struggle for
existence is among animals of the same species and has its source in
these prima! instincts, to which man is no exception.

The great centres of civilization anc human progress have in the
past especially been built up in those regions of the earth where Nature
has provided a great store of energy which can readily be utilized and
converted into human energy, e.g., through ages and ages the Nile
provided by its fertilizmg agency food for millions of human beings.
The simple instinctive group mind of the herd developed in time into.
a highly complex social collective mind with its traditions, religions,
superstitions, usuages and customs, and all through History we find
the important part the character and quality of this group mind played
in wars and in the rise and fall of nations. But the fundamental
basis of war was and is over-population, and overflow into adjacent
countries to satisfy the primal instincts of self-presers ation and propagation especially by the capture of food or its equivalent in Nature’s
stores of energev.

In modern times the co-existence of coal and iron in a country has
enabled the population to multiply enormously beyond its capacity
fer growing the food required. Especially is this the case with Great
Britain, the population of which is five times as great as it would have
been able to maintain if it had to rely upon the food the land was
capable of producing. This great store of energy in the form of coal
and of iron constituting two great key industries, has not only enabled
a vast population to live in th2 British Isles, but has enabled it to.
over-flow into every part of the world.

But where with lavish hand Nature has thus provided the means
for unlimited individual lives, and therefore of almost unlimited:
propagation of the species, it has enforced a constant and severe
struggle for existence, by which (if Nature’s methods are not interfered
with), only those possessing such mental and bodily conditions suitable for the struggle, survive.

History repeats itself. The social organism like the individual
organism, has its period of birth, youth, manhood, old age, decay and
dissolution. When owing to political and religious strife and dissensions and to moral and physical decay, previous civilizations have
passed away, usually the disintegration and destruction have been
hastened by the invasion of a younger warlike race with less culture
and asimpler civilization. flood thirstiness, craftiness, and ferocious
courage combined with physical strength, vital resistance to injury
and disease were the endowments which led to surviva! of the fittest.
CONSCRIPTION AND EUGENICS. 15

in the struggle for existence in earlier wars. Pestilence, famine and
disease killed off the great majority of the weaker types that were not
massacred, leaving the warriors who survived to procreate, often with
the women of the conquered race, and form a new civilization which
sooner or later underwent the same process of decay. In the recent
Great War, courage, physical strength, and endurance were important
factors, but intelligence and inventive genius exercised even a more
decisive influence: for if we had not been able to destroy the submarine
we should have been starved out, if we had not been able to destroy the
Zeppelins the nation might have been terrorized into defeat, and if
we had not invented means of defence against poison gas, our armies
would have been overthrown. In all previous wars of this and all
other nations, except in the case of the Japanese in their war with
Russia, far greater numbers have perished from disease than from
battle casualties. The scourges of war, typhoid, dysentery, small
pox, malaria and typhus, have been successfully combated by the
R.A.M.C. in the late war by prophylactic and therapeutic measures.
Would that venereal disease had been likewise combated by successful
prophylaxis, on the contrary there has been a great increase and owing
to conscription it has penetrated into rural districts where it is almost
unknown. Its ultimate effects from a Eugenic point of view are much
more serious than the other diseases.

' PREVALENCE OF WAR NEUROSES AND PSYCHOSES
IN THE GREAT WAR AND CAUSES.

_ A striking fact about this war as compared with previous wars
was the number of cases of military disability, inefficiency , discharges,
and pensions due to war Neuroses and Psychoses. I will now try to
analyse the causes of this. The lirst and most obvious enquiry to
make is whether there was a difference in the incidence of War Neuroses
and Psychosces in the voluntary professional army and the later formed
eonseript army. Although isolated cases of she!] concussion occurred
in the Expeditionary Force, also numerous cases of neurasthenia from
the exhaustive stress and strain, yet hysterical paralysis, contractures,
mutisin, blindness and deafness, were comparatively rarely met with,
and this was in spite of the fact. that in the first and second battles of
Ypres the conditions in the trenches were awful, our men were outginned, and outmanned, but these neuroses and psychoses were not
prevalent and ‘‘Shell Shock’’ was as such, unrecognized, although
commotional shock without signs of injury on the body was known to
have occurred and even to have preved fatal. This would suggest that
the mental attitude towards War of the man who voluntarily enlists in
the army is different to that of the conscript, who in a large proportion
of cases is forced to serve against his inclination, and will endeavour
by every means possible to avoid military service. The conscripted
therefore in considerable numbers produced certificates of subjective
unfitness, where adequate objective evidence was wanting. Now,
how can any distinction be made between the man who does
not want to serve for selfish reasons, and the man who is
genuinely neuropotentially unfit for military service? Moreover,
the difficulty is increased by the fact that through contem16° 3 EUGENICS: REVIEW.

plative fear of being recruited, he may develop all the signs and symp
toms of Neurasthenia. It is urged that mental tests should be applied
to eliminate the imbecile, family and personal histories taken to avoid

recruiting neuropathic individuals. and Wassermann reactions in order
to reject syphilitics who might develop vascular or nervous disease.

The United States of America, having unlimited numbers of young men

to draw upon, instituted such a system, but the results showed that

they had relatively as large a proportion of cases of ‘‘Shell Shock,’’ and
Neuroses as we had. The principle adopted in our army was to con
script all who were not physically unfit, or who on account of epilepsy,

imbecility, or those known to have been certified insane, were a source
of danger if admitted into the army, This system of not rejecting
recruits on account of functional nervous disorders or potential neuro
paths or psychopaths, which if not economical as regards pensions,

was from a eugenic point of view sounder. Unfortunately, the

recruited epileptics, imbeciles, and Innatics are the very men who are
most likely to have epileptic, imbecile, criminal, or insane offspring ;
nevertheless from a military point of view they inust be exempted from

service. Experience shows however, that a large number of epileptics,

imveciles, and potential lunatics were conscripted, and were drafted

into, or transferred to the Labour Corps where they could not do much
harm. A man who is seen by a medical officer in an epileptic fit is at

once put down for discharge. It is not at all uncommon however, for
such men to re-enlist even three or four times. I have heard of an
epileptic who escaped from one of the London Asylums, after having

been an inmate for eleven years; he enlisted in the early days of the

war, and later returned with a pocketful of Prussian buttons. Cer
tain imbeciles, and ne’er do wells often make brave soldiers. About
18 to 2 per cent. of the admissions to military Mental Hospitals were
mental defectives, a small proportion of these were high grade imbeciles.
of the criminal type; the remainder were mentally and physically so.
inferior that although they had no criminal propensities, yet experience
has shown that they were quite useless in active service. Sometimes
they had proved dangerous to their comrades and were permitted to.
load their rifles only when an attack was made.

WAR IN RELATION TO THE PRODUCTION OF
EPILEPSY AND INSANITY.

I came to the conclusion that neither true epilepsy nor permanent
insanity were, except in a small percentage of cases, caused by military service at the front, and this opinion is shared by most authorities in this country and on the Continent. Certainly however, temporary exhaustion psychosis, called confusional insanity , did occur
fairly frequently, and even in neuropotentially sound individuals as a
result of a fever or exhaustion from prolonged stress. It 1s pretty
generally admitted however, that military service did not produce true
insanity, but only excited, revealed, or exaggerated it. In respect
to General Paralysis of the Insane, it is possible that the stress of war.
favoured the active development of the syphilitic organism and brought
the mental devay on at an earlier age; but military service was not
the causal factor. Indeed the war has shown that epilepsy and insanity
CONSCRIPTION AND' EUGENICS. 17

aré due in the great majority of instances to inborn germinal conditions. This important Eugenic fact is supported by a very reliable
German psychiatrist, Bonhéffer, who found only 5 insane men among
10,000 Serbian prisoners who had been subjected to everv form of
stress and strain of war, starvation, and epidemic diseases It might
be argued that among these Serbians survival of the fittest had occurred,

but in the women who fled from Galicia and East Prussia when those
countries were invaded by the Russians and in the civil ponulation of
the invaded territories of Northern France, no great increase of mental

disease occurred. I am therefore in agreement with Bonhdffer and

Aschaffenberg. two distinguished German alienists, that the acute
exhausting influences of malnutrition, lack of sleep and depressing

influences generally, do not of themselves lead to the development of:
psychoses. Even with regard to emotional causes, Bresler in 1914:
showed that the so-called mobilization psychoses were all either the
reaction in patients who had formerly suffered with mental] disease or
who were potential psychopaths. An interesting fact which I have ob
served in relation to insanity is this :— The number of cases of Dementia
Praecox (that is an incurable form of insanity coming on in adoles- |
cence}, admitted to the London Ayslums prior to the War was equal

in both sexes, but. during the period of the war the numher of cases of
Dementia Praecox in males admitted to the London County Asvlums
was reduced to one half. It may be presumed that about 70% of
these cases had been conscripted either before the disease was mani
fest, or in its early stages. Frequently the first evidence of the onset
of the mental affection was « series of minor delinouenices followed
by punishment which had no deterrent effect. Many of these cases
discharged from the Army as suffering with Shell Shock or Neurasthenia are now inthe Asvlums. It is calculated that 14%, of the soldiers who became insane suffered with this inborn germinal disease.

INBORN AND ACQUIRED EMOTIVITY A CAUSE OF
NEUROSES.

T have hitherto dealt with the psychoses and I have emphasized
the fact that the important causal factor was an inborn psychopathic
tendency. Likewise in the neuroses Hysteria and Neurasthenia
an inborn neuropathic tendency existed in a large proportion of the
cases, but there were other causes, and among these may be mentioned
an acyuired emotivity by men neuropotentially sound, as a result of
nervous exhaustion due to prolonged exposure in the trenches to shell
fire, to the nervous exhaustion of arsine gas poisoning, to the painful
discomfort of mustard gas, and the wearing of protective masks. All
these factors combined with the continuous infernal noise, the wet,
the mud, the vermin, and loss of sleep, and in officers also the constant
anxiety caused by responsibility for the lives of their men would sooner
or later lead to a nervous breakdown even among the best soldiers.

TRENCH WARFARE COMPARED IN ITS EFFECTS WITH
A WAR OF MOVEMENT.

Experience showed that the rank and file, as a general rule, sufferred with various forms of hysteria, while the officers suffered with:
18 | 7 '  ~BRUGENICS REVIEW.::

Neurasthenia or Anxiety Neurosis. There is a psychological explana- .
tion of this fact, and it is bound up with the primal instincts, viz.,
self-preservation, and the amour propre of the social instinct.

The natural defensive reaction of the gregarious animal to an:
enemy is either offensive or defensive, the former is associated with
the emotion of anger, so wonderfully described by Shakespeare in
Henry V, and quoted by Darwin in his **Expression of the Emotions,’
Now. in a war of movement an offensive reaction is the natural method
of self-preservation of the good soldier, hut the poor and timid soldier
would if he dared run away or fall down, and that reminds one of a
story of a British General who said that ten per cent. of a regiment
would follow you to the gates of hall, ten per cent. would fall down or
run away, and eighty per cent. would follow either. The army regulation of the death penalty for cowardice in face of the enemy is therefore
essential to avoid a panic. Discipline, morale and esprit de corps
are the great antidotes as we shall see to Shell Shock contagion.

HYSTERICAL MANIFESTATIONS.

A soldier who has an inborn or acquired emotivity will sooner or
later suffcr with a psychoneurosis. A shell bursts near him, he sees
the flash, is blinded by it, and remains functionally blind; or some
poison gas irritates his eyes and he is affected by a continuous blepharospasm (spasm of the evelids). He hears the explosion and is temporally deafened by the noise and remains deaf. He is blown up, and
perhaps falls heavily on the ground, or is buried with earth in a crater
or dug out, or a sandbag hits him. When he recovers consciousness he
may he affected with a spasmodic tie or convulsive movement of a
defensive nature, such as the dodging reflex; or he may be affected
with one of the many forms of hysterical tremor, paralysis or contracture. These varied and multiform hysterical manifestations are.
psychogenic in origin and due to emotional shock. They are curabie
by contra- suggestion.

The war has produced no new nervous disease; it is the same hysteria and neurasthenia which neurologists knew before the war and
‘which were curable by the same methods. A fact which has been
brought home to all those who have had the care of war psychoneuroses
is that the signs and symptoms of hysteria and neaurasthenia of men
who have been to the front and have been invalided home (except
those in which there has been definite evidence of cerebral or spinal
commotion or concussion, burial or gassing), in no way differ essentially from the signs and symptoms of hysteria and neurasthenia of
soldiers who have never been out of England.

I have secn both hysteria and neuasthenia arise from the fear of
conscription, or having been conscripted an hysterical crisis, contracture or paralysis has occurred when it becaine known that the conscript would be in a draft for general service abroad.

Innoculation against typhoid has been followed by hysterical
paralysis. As an illustration I may mention one case which was sent
to me. He was innoculated upon enlistment in March 1915, and a
quarter of an hour later he lost the use of his legs. He was sent to
various hospitals and brine baths and after two and a half years he
CONSCRIPTION AND EUGENICS. 19

was boarded out of the army with this functional disability and received a pension of £2 12s. per week for himself, his wife and family.
He was sent to me by the Chelsea I’ensions Board, arriving with
-erutches and a contracted knee. He was induced to walk in half an
hour and in a week was discharged cured.

In the later years of the war gas offensive was extensively used by
the enemy, especially mustard gas, which on account of its pungent
and irritating effects upon the skin and mucus membrane and conjunctiva of the eyes, produced disablement. ‘The aphonia due to laryngitis, and spasm of the evclids due to irritation of the eve, both defence
mechanisms, became a fixed idea in soldiers of a neurotic temperament,
consequently they lost their voice and became dumb, and the reflex
spasm of the eyelids persisted. Treatment of the throat and eyes by
gargles, eye washes and shades, only helped by suggestion to fix the
idea. Appropriate contra suggestion led to immediate or almost
immediate recovery. Five cases of gas mutism were sent to me. I
took the worst case first and told him that I never failed to restore the
voice, and he would not leave the recovery room until! he had spvken:
sometimes it took a few minutes, and sometimes an hour or more. In
a few minutes he was counting ten, and a few minutes later singing
*‘God save the King.’’ The “other four cases were rapidly cured.
An atmosphere of cure is an essential element of success in treat-.
ment. But one reason why all men who are not physically unfit
should be recruited is that a great number of cases of neurosis can be
prevented by proper training and selection of men for services fur which
they are best fitted, and by the establishment of morale.

INFLUENCE OF MORALE AND DISCIPLINE IN THE
PREVENTION OF NEUROSES.

Although inborn and acquired emotivity are potent causes cf
neuroses, there are other important factors, notably morale, for it has
been conclusively shown that regiments with good morale, discipline,
and esprit de corps, had comparatively few cases of so called Shell
Shock, and in using this term I am including all the cases of neurasthenia and hysteria. Now the morale of a regiment depends, not only
upon the quality of the soldiers and their previous experience in war,
and the time and character of their training, but also in no inconsiderable degree upon the personality of the Commanding Officer and the
Medical Officer, and the confidence they inspire by their efficiency and
by the interest they show in the welfare of the officers and men. Moreover, a good Quarter-Master, who as far as military exigences allow,
strives to obtain good well-cooked rations and comfortable billets,
exercises an important réle in maintaining efficiency and contentment.
Soldiers will put up with a good deal if they are properly fed.

‘TRENCH WARFARE MORE PRODUCTIVE OF NEUROSES
THAN A WAR OF MOVEMENT.

Another reason, other than conscription, why this war has produced such a great number of cases of neurosis, is doubtless due to the
fact that it has been largely a static war, by which the soldier is unable
to react to fear in a normal way, for he can neither fight, nor run away,
20 EUGENICS REVIEW.

and often never sees the enemy. All soldiers, even the bravest, experience the emotion of fear, and those who by reason of a nervous temperament, or an acquired nervous exhaustion, are unable to exercise selfcontrol were consequently lable to suffer with one or other of these
functional nervous diseases. The terrible noise and the sudden explosion of a shell near by, with the fear of being blown to pieces or buried,
or of being poisoned by gas, combined with the feeling of helpless inactivity, required either a high degree of self-control, or an insensitive
nature to withstand the prolonged nervous tension. It was not
surprising therefore that a conscript army with recruits often imperfectly trained and rushed to the front, should have a large number of
cases of Shell Shock. It may be remarked that in the later periods of
the war the shell fire had enormously intensified; the human sacrifice
was enormous and yet the war seemed no nearer its termination. These
terrifying and disheartening conditions of warfare no doubt was
responsible for a large increase in the number of cases of shell shock and
war neurosis.

Kixperience showed that many nervous men wko could not. stand
the monotunous inactivity of defensive trench warfare, made good in
the tanks or as aviators, where there was more scope for their intelligence and individuality. Asa general rule the public school boy, who
was good at sports and games made a good officer, but it not infrequently happened that an athlete was a poor leader and showed lack
of courage, whereas unexpectedly sometimes a weakly lad showed
remarkable courage and staying power. The test of military efficiency
can therefore only be discovered by conduct in war.

It was found that rest camps in France by the sea where there was
security and comfort, and with complete exemption from military
duties, Ied to comparativley rapid restoration of nervously exhausted
soldiers. But if they were returned to base hospitals, and still more,
was this the case, when they were evacuated to England, recovery was
retarded. A too ready misplaced sympathy on the part of the public
and the press fixed by suggestion the idea of disability, and reinfurced
the wish not to return to an intolerable situation. This failure to
diagnuse and cure these functional cases of which there were an enormous
number, was a great economical loss.

Compulsory military service to a nation has its advantages
as well as its disadvantages, for experience has shown that
many poorly nourished and ill developed youths in the course
of training have improved physically and mentally. It was the
general consensus of opinion of the witnesses who gave evidence before
the Shell Shock Commission that in case conscription were again necessary for National safety, the only exceptions which should be made in
respect to ncurotics or psychotics should be in the case of epileyjtics,
imbeciles, and men whu had been certified insane. It was urged that
in the course of training, provided it was efficiently and judiciously
carried out, those who were likely to be of no use in any military
capacity at home or in general service, could after trial be discharged
as unfit. Much legitimate discontent among ex-service men has been
aroused by the fact that many men exempted from military service
were able to earn high wages, lead a pleasant life, and save money.
CONSCRIPTION AND EUGENICS. ‘21

NEUROSES AND EUGENICS.

It is an acknowledged fact that a nervous temperament and lack
_of self-control as manifested by the existence of neuroses and psychoses.
is liable to be transmitted to the offspring. Having regard to the great
number of cases of functional nervous disease which occurred in our
army, it appears at first. sight an alarming fact for eugenists to contemplate. I say, at first sight, because upon reflection consideration must
be given to the following facts which show that it is not so serious as it
would appear.

(1) These neuroses and psychoses are met with in all races of men,
even primitive people. The other nations with conscript armies
engaged in the Great War also had similarly great numbers of cases of
war neurosis.

(2) In our previous wars shell shock and functional neuroses were
almost unknown or unrecognised as such in our armies, but this may be
explained by the fact that they were professionally trained and there
was not the prolonged stress and terrifying conditions of trench warfare
causing an unprecedented strain upon the nervous system.

(3) As T have already indicated a large proportion of the cases of
war neurosis could have been prevented had the Army authorities and
medical profession known as much as they do now of the important
influence of suggestion and contagion in the production of hysteria in its
multiform manifestations, and their ready cure and prevention by
appropriate methods of contra suggestion. Moreover, the prevention
of numbers of cases of neurasthenia could have been effected by timely
removal to rest camps where there was security, comfort and freedom
from all military exercises and duties when the early signs and symptoms of nervous exhaustion and irritability showed themselves.

FOOD AND FUEL IN RELATION TO EUGENICS.

In countries where an insufficiency of food and fuel led to disease
and death of those with a low vital resistance, particularly children and
old people, it may be presumed that a natural selection and survival of
the strongest occurred. The children born during the war in these
countries, unless constitutionally strong, died , the remainder suffered
from impaired nutrition, and growth was interfered with, but according
to my investigations, the germ cells of the male at any rate, are protected in an extraordinary manner in disease, and I shou!d be surprised
if the epidemic discases, with the exception of syphilis, have any
marked effect upon the next generation.

Moreover, there is always the tendency to return to the normal
average of the race in growth and stature.

In this country insufficient foud, and especially a deficiency in
animal fats and fuel, was not nearly so great as in the enemy countries,
consequently did not play such an important part in devitalizing the
nation and in killing off weak types with a low vital resistance. But
that it did so, was shown by the very high mortality in the lunatic
asylums of this country, where the death rate in the last year of the
war was in a great many instances three ur four times as great as that
In pre-war times.

The predatory instinct of man, spurred on by over-population,
22 EUGENICS REVIEW.

will not be abolished by conferences of Nations and it is too much to
‘hope that jealousies end rivalries will not arise in any League of Nations
that may be constituted against barbaric methods of warfare. What
is to hinder a nation then with a secretly prepared fleet of aeroplanes
manned by specially trained crews loaded with high explosives and
poison gas, disregarding conventions, and launching a war without
any notice? Within twenty-four hours such widespread death and
destruction in crowded cities could occur that further resistance would
be impossible. There would be no question of Natural Selection and
Survival of the Fittest, the weak and the strong, the fit and the unfit,

would alike perish.
