THE DEVELOPMENT AND USE OF
ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION
By G. W. BARTHOLOMEW

University of Tasmania

of the practice of artificial insemination,

as evidenced by the rapidly accumulating literature on the subject, has disclosed
many of the problems which are inevitably
associated with the increasingly widespread
use of the technique. In order fully to
understand these it is necessary to examine
the practice from all aspects, and it is
submitted that one task is to establish some
sort of historical and statistical perspective
or background against which the practice
must be viewed. .

This is neither the time nor the place to
attempt a comprehensive history of the
practice. The history of artificial insemination has yet to be written, and the following
summary is intended to do no more than to
indicate that its history is rather more
extensive and certainly more continuous
than is sometimes suggested.

Tore growing interest in the implications

Early Experiments

Most writers refer to the legend that the
first instance of the practice is to be found
amongst the Arabs of the fourteenth century.
The source of this legend, at least for the
purposes of contemporary discussion, would
appear to be a work published by Rohleder
in 1934,? in which he refers to “an Arabic
book,”’ which appeared, he says about A.D.
1332. Since no references are given further
investigation of this legend does not appear
to be possible.2 More recently an even
earlier instance has been claimed, however,
by Kardimon‘ and Kleegman® who refer to
a discussion of the problem in the Talmudic
literature, although in point of fact the
problem to which they refer would appear
to be that of “accidental” rather then
“ artificial ’’ insemination.

187

As far as Europe was concerned artificial
insemination was attempted experimentally
on animals from time to time, the first
successful case being that of Jacobi whose
work was published in 1765, and who
succeeded in performing an artificial insemination using fish eggs.* Shortly after, in
1786, Spallanzani successfully performed an
artificial insemination with dogs.” It is
interesting to note, in this connection, that
Glover records Bonnet as writing to Spallanzani, at the time, in the following terms:®

Je sais méme si ce que vous venez de décourir,
n’aura pas quelque jour dans l’espéce humaine
des applications auxquelles nous ne songeons
point et dont les suites ne seront pas legérés.

Human Artificial Insemination —.

In point of fact the first application of the
practice to the human species occurred
within a very few years, being performed by
John Hunter in about 1790, although a
report was not published until 1799, and then
not by Hunter himself but by his brotherin-law, Sir Everard Home.® It is perhaps
worth remarking that Roubaud did not
accept Hunter’s work as being of scientific
value, on the ground that, “operation a
été faite par le mari et par conséquent en
dehors de tout contréle scientifique.’’"?® The
report of the insemination, as it appears in
the Philosophical Transactions, does not in
fact make it clear by whom it was actually
carried out, but whether it was carried out
by Hunter, the husband, or a third party,
the fact remains that it was a case of successful artificial insemination and the first which
appears in the literature.

Many writers would appear to regard the
next contribution to the subject as being
that of Sims in 1866.12 It would appear,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1958. 49, 4.”
188

however, that this ignores the development
of the subject on the Continent, particularly
in France. Thus, for example, Gigon claimed,
in an article written in 1867, to have performed artificial inseminations since 1846,"
whilst Girault, in the following year, reported
ten cases, the earliest of which dated back
to 1838.14 Another French contribution to
the subject which is earlier than that of
Sims, is the work of Dehaut, whose book was
published in 1865.15

Davis!* refers to an article by Hamilton,
published in 1g09, in which yet another
claim to work earlier than that of Sims is
put forward.17 Hamilton makes this claim
on behalf of Bedford, whom, he alleged,
recommended artificial insemination for
many years before its use by Sims. As no
references are given it is impossible to trace
this claim further. Sims himself, however,
refers to earlier work by Dr. Harley1* who
apparently informed Sims that he had,
“repeatedly performed the experiment of
injecting the semen into the cavity of the
uterus but with no result.”

Sims himself recorded six cases of artificial
insemination from only one of which pregnancy resulted, and even this failed to
terminate successfully. In a review of his
book the Medical Times and Gazette’® greeted
Sims’ s results with the pronouncement that

“ this dabbling 1 in that canal with a speculum
and syringe’? was not compatible with
decency and self-respect, and with surprising
vulgarity they referred to “this squirt
begotten embryo.”” Sims, who was by any
standards a great gynaecologist, was undoubtedly disturbed by the virulence of the
criticism.?° In 1868, in a paper read to the
British Association, he replied to his critics
saying,”

For myself I see no indelicacy or impropriety
_ in taking mucus from the vagina and uterus for
_ microscopic examination. It is no more indeli-.cate, no more. impure than to investigate the
character and: properties of saliva, or bile, or
urine, or faeces.
Subsequently, however, he abandoned the
practice, and in the third edition of his book
ne wrote,??

-T have given up the practice altogether and
oO ae not expect to return to it again; but as others

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

may feel disposed to try further experiments in

this direction I shall here give them the advan
tage of my experience.

Within a few years, however, it would
appear that the practice of artificial insemination had become, in France at any rate,
accepted as a normal method for the treatment of sterility in those cases in which, no
other remedy appeared effective. Courty,
in the second edition of his work which was
published in 1872 wrote,?%

Que si la difficulté d’arriver a établir la
direction rectiligne du canal utérin inspirait a
quelqu’un de nos confréres la pensée d’essayer
la fécondation artificelle je vais lui indiquer le
procédé le meilleur pour conserver au sperme
sa vitalité et aux spermatozoides leur mouvements propres, en méme temps que sauvegarder
les lois de la pudeur et toutes les convenances.

In 1881 Eustache stated,4

Quand tous les moyens ont échoué il y aura
lieu de songer a la fécondation artificielle. Cette
intervention ultime ultima ratio n’est condamnée
ni par la morale ni par la religion; elle est justifiée
par le désir, légitime et essentiellement moral,
d’avoir des enfants et aussi par un certain
nombre des succés incontestables.

Finally in 1884 de Sinéty wrote,

Enfin quand tous les moyens ont échoué, que
le liquide spermatique du mari présente toutes
les conditions en apparence normales, on est en
droit de pratiquer la fécondation artificielle, dans
des cas determinés, et lorsque les époux le
desirent . . . Quoi qu’il en soit et malgré les
quelques resultats positifs deja obtenus nous
reservons la fécondation artificielle pour un trés
petit nombre de sujets nous ne la considerons
que comme l’ultima ratio du traitement de la
sterilité.

It would seem reasonable to assume that
these views do not represent merely theoretical opinions, but that behind them lies
the actual practice of artificial insemination.
That this is the case would appear to be
supported by the fact that as early as 1887
the question as to whether the artificial
fecundation of women was permissible was
put to the Sacred Congregation of the Holy
Office. The reply was a non licere,*® but one
may surely presume that a practice must
have become fairly widespread before questions would be submitted to the Sacred
Congregation. Unfortunately it does not
appear possible to discover how widespread,
THE DEVELOPMENT AND USE OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION

for there are no published statistics, and it is
therefore impossible to fill Eustache’s
“certain nombre des succés”’ or de Sinéty’s
“resultats positifs’’ with any statistical
content.

The idea, however, gained ground and in
Russia, for example, it was extensively
developed by Ivanov for veterinary purposes. He appears to have begun work about
1890, although his monograph on the subject
was not published until 1907.27 Since that
date progress in Russia, at least in the
veterinary field, appears to have been very
marked indeed.?®

The First Hetrologous Insemination

To return to artificial human insemination,
it appears that it is to the late nineteenth
century that we must look for the first
authenticated report of A.I.D.—for all
previous discussion had been confined to
A.I.H. The first hetrologous insemination
(A.I.D.) is recorded by Hard as having been
performed by Professor Pancoast in 1884.
Thus in 1909 Hard wrote,?® “ It is twentyfive years since Professor Pancoast .. .
performed the first artificial insemination of
a woman,” and the report which follows
leaves no doubt that the case was one of
hetrologous insemination. It may be remarked that the publication of Hard’s
article gave rise to considerable discussion
in the columns of the Medical World, most
of the comment being unfavourable.

The Twentieth Century

Attempts to trace the development of the
practice of artificial insemination after the
turn of the century become a matter of some
difficulty, and there are a large number of
conflicting claims as to priorities. Thus
Halbrecht®® claims that, after Sims, it was
Doederlin who introduced artificial insemination into medical practice. Hiihner,
writing in 19377! claims to have begun
extensive use of the practice in 1915, whilst
Hamilton,** writing in 1909, claimed to have
used artificial insemination for fifteen years,
‘‘ without a single failure.’’

In our submission, however, since there is
reasonable evidence of continuity of practice

‘r8qQ

going back over many years, the question of
the existence of priorities in the twentieth
century ceases: to be a matter of great
significance, consequently emphasis will-‘now
be laid on the statistical rather than | ‘the
historical aspect of the problem.

The development of. the practice would
appear to have been relatively slow. In 1924
Rohleder,?? in a survey: of the world’s
literature was able to find only 123 cases
reported, whilst in 1928 Engleman,* in a
further survey was only able to increase this
figure to 185, of which sixty-five had been
successful. There does not appear to have
been any comprehensive survey of the
statistics made since that date, and this is
neither the time nor the place to attempt
such a survey, even assuming we had. the
facilities and the ability to do.so. It may
however be emphasised that the collection
of statistics in this subject is a matter of
considerable difficulty, for in many cases the
references are very vague and do little more
than indicate that the practice is more widespread than the published statistics suggest.
Thus Greenhill, in his closing contribution
to a symposium on the subject, as reported
in the American Practitioner, stated,*> . :

I have been doing artificial insemination. for
many years. I mentioned the fact that my. first
successful case took place in 1923... . 1 continued
to do more artificial inseminations, and as time

went on I performed more and more of them,
but I never wrote a paper on this subject.

Artificial Insemination in the U.S.A.

It is against this background that one
must attempt to assess the figures published
by Seymour and Koerner in 1941 to the
effect that, in the United States by that
date, 9,489 women had been successfully
impregnated, and that 97 per cent of the
pregnancies had terminated successfully.*¢
These figures were compiled on the basis of
answers to a questionnaire on the subject.
This had been sent to 30,000 doctors, of
whom 7,643 replied, and of these 4,049
reported that they had carried out successful
impregnations, 1,115 reported that they had
been unsuccessful i in obtaining any pregnancies, whilst 2,478 reported that they never
used the practice. Finally, it should be
190

noted that of the women who had had at
least one successful pregnancy as a result
of the insemination, many returned for
further inseminations, and of these 1,357
had been successful in obtaining a , durther
pregnancy.

These figures, when compared with the
number of cases reported in the medical
literature, are doubtless startling. Clearly
it is only reasonable to suppose that there
would in fact be a considerable discrepancy
between the two. The number of busy
practitioners who would bother to write up
cases of artificial insemination unless there
were some aspect of a case which made it of
more than usual interest must be relatively
small. One would therefore expect that the
total number of inseminations undertaken,
assuming the number to be obtainable,
would be considerably higher than the
number of cases recorded in the medical
literature. Nevertheless the discrepancy
between: the medical statistics and the
figures obtained by Seymour and Koerner
was much greater than many people had
expected and they have not passed
unchallenged.

They were subjected to criticism, usually
described as “‘ trenchant,’ by Drs. Tuckerman and Cook, which was reported by
Folsome in the Journal of the American
Gynaecological Society.27 This criticism is
quoted by Sullivan in his contribution to the
conference held under the auspices of the
Public Morality Council. He refers to it as
an analysis of the figures by the American
Gynaecological Society, and states, with
presumably unconscious humour, that their
conclusion was that “ the figures of these two
ladies did not stand analysis ’’ and he adds,

‘showing, in other words, that the extra- .

ordinary successes they claimed were
invalid.’’38

It is submitted that this interpretation of
the criticism cannot be sustained, for the
criticism applies not so much to the actual
figures obtained, but to the mathematical
analysis to which they were subjected. It
seems clear that neither Seymour nor Koerner
are mathematicians, and their handling of

the figures is obviously open to mathematical

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

criticism, yet the fact that of the doctors
who replied to their questionnaire 4,049
reported that they had carried out 9,489
successful impregnations remains unaffected.
There is surely no reason to believe that the
doctors were deliberately falsifying their
returns,?® and if Seymour and Koerner’s
investigation is not mathematically beyond
reproach the fact surely remains that their
results indicate that the practice is very
much more widespread than had been
expected.

Further evidence as to the extent of the
practice in the United States is the statement
made by Ploscowe to the effect that by 1951
the number of children born as a result of
artificial insemination had risen to 20,000.1°
We have been unable to ascertain the basis
upon which this figure was reached, but if it
has any basis at all—and there is no reason
to think that it represents purely the
product of imagination—it would seem
reasonable to suppose that the prevalence of
the practice is growing very fast in the
United States.

This suggestion is certainly supported by
the figures quoted by Lo Gatto.*! He quotes
a writer in the New York Post who, in 1955,
estimated that the number of children conceived in the United States, by that date,
to be about 50,000. He also quotes Lang
who, writing in the same year, estimated the
annual increase in America to be between
1,000 and 1,200. It will be observed that if
the above figures for the total number of
children conceived by artificial insemination
are accepted, then the figure given by Lang
for the annual increase, must be too low.
Thus if Seymour and Koerner’s figures and
those of Ploscowe are accepted as relating to
the years 1941 and 1951 respectively, then,
admittedly, this gives an average annual
increase of about 1,000 per year, but if the
figure given in the New York Post for 1955
is correct, or even only fairly accurate, then
the average annual increase between 1951
and 1955 must be of the order of 6,000 per
year.

Clearly it is only reasonable to expect that
the rate of increase as well as the total figure
is increasing, yet it is clear that the American
THE DEVELOPMENT AND USE OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION

figures are, at the moment, too incomplete
and unsubstantiated to give more than a
very general idea of the prevalence of the
practice.

Artificial Insemination in Great Britain

Very much is true of the figures for Great
Britain. The only reported series of cases
that we have been able to trace is that of
Barton eé al,*2 who reported, in a first series
of thirty cases, in which homologous insemination was used, nine pregnancies of which
four terminated successfully, and in a second
series of fifteen cases in which hetrologous
insemination was used, ten pregnancies of
which eight terminated successfully. Dr.
Margaret Jackson** reported to the Archbishop’s Commission, in a series of thirtyfour cases, seventeen pregnancies of which
thirteen terminated successfully.

The statements made before the inquiry
held under the auspices of the Public
Morality Council, however, appear to indicate
much higher figures than those given above.
Dr. Mary Barton stated that over a period
of five years about 300 children had been
conceived as a result of artificial insemination and in answer to a question she stated
that this figure related to hetrologous
insemination, adding, “‘ If I had been speaking
of A.I.H. there would have been thousands
of cases from which to quote.’’44 Again, in
Lane-Roberts’s book, to which Dr. Barton
was a contributor, it is stated, ‘‘ We have
employed donated semen in several hundred
cases,’’45

Social Implications

Two conclusions can be drawn, it is
submitted, from a consideration of the above
facts. First, that although the widespread

use of artificial insemination is fairly recent,

the technique itself cannot be dismissed as
merely another manifestation of the modern
technological approach to life. It has a long
and not undistinguished history. Second, the
practice has to-day become sufficiently
widespread for discussion of its implications
to be more than a matter of academic
interest.

In considering these problems however,
not only the historical perspective, but also

IgI

the structure of contemporary society, into
which the technique has to be fitted, must
be carefully considered. It is not possible
here to discuss the many and complex
problems which arise, particularly those
associated with the medical aspects of the
problem, for if, as Guttmacher has stated,
“there is more drivel and rot published
about it [artificial insemination] than almost
anything else in the whole gamut of
medicine,’’4* then it is clearly not for the
unqualified even to attempt to enunciate the
problems. There is, however, one point
which it is necessary to emphasise strongly,
namely the fact that artificial insemination
is, medically, only an indicated procedure
in a relatively small number of cases. Lack
of appreciation of this point is responsible
for most of the confusion which appears in
the literature, much of which seems to be
based on the assumption that almost any
woman, under almost any circumstances
could obtain insemination if she wished.
This is clearly not so.

In the first place medical opinion is

unanimous that insemination would never

be carried out by any reputable practitioner
unless both husband and wife consented.
For practical purposes, therefore, we may,
as Binney has suggested,*’
disregard such melodramatic but impossible
characters as the Machiavellian doctor who
artificially inseminates a woman against her
will, and the unscrupulous adventuress who has
herself artificially inseminated in order to bring
false charges against some man.
It is perfectly true that the melodramatic
does on occasion occur, yet in a subject such
as the present, in which we are searching for
fundamental principles, it is surely advisable,

initially at any rate, to confine our attention

to situations which are reasonably likely to
occur in practice.

Having, for the moment at any rate,
disposed of the two types of cases mentioned
above, the second point which needs emphasis is that insemination is clearly only an
indicated procedure in those cases in which
the marriage is established to be involuntarily childless. Again the medical literature
is unanimous that there is no justification
for resort to the procedure unless the
192

marriage falls into this category. In order to
establish a statistical perspective in this
matter it may be pointed out that the
authorities seem to be agreed that approximately 10 per cent of all marriages do fall
into this category. Different authorities
vary slightly in their estimates of this figure,
but it would appear generally to be agreed
that it is not lower than about 7 per cent,
nor higher than 17 per cent.48

It should further be emphasised that even
within this category it would appear that
medical opinion only regards artificial insemination as an indicated procedure in a
small percentage of cases. Opinion is
divided however as to what the indications
are and different authorities classify the
indications in different ways, but in considering these it is submitted that it is well
to bear in mind the opinion voiced by
Meaker when he wrote:*®

In the great majority of cases of human
- infertility the cause of the defect is not some
single abnormality but rather the summation or
totality of several factors. . . . Seventy per cent
of the couples who apply for the relief of childlessness show no single condition which would
account for their difficulty. They do show,
without exception, a group of causative factors
of which each one lowers their fertility to some
extent and of which the sum total depresses
that fertility below the threshold of conception.
However, it is worth emphasising, in this
context, as Guttmacher has pointed out,5°
that in two of the longest series that have
been written up, Schultz5 used insemination
in only 102 cases out of 2,000 (i.e. approximately 5 per cent),5? whilst Shorohowa
resorted to the practice in fifty out of 586
cases (i.e. approximately g per cent). If
this figure be combined with the figure for
the number of childless marriages it would
appear to follow that in under 1 per cent of
all marriages could artificial insemination be
an indicated procedure.

The inescapable conclusion, it is submitted,
is that there is no evidence to suggest that
current medical practice supports
unrestrained or indiscriminate use of the
technique, such as seems to be evisaged by
some non-medical writers. The extent to
which resort to the practice is justified is
summarised by Siegler as follows: 8

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

' Artificial insemination should be the last
resort in the treatment of infertility, indicated
only where there has been found an unremedial
and absolute barrier to the function of reproduction in the male or female, or to the performance
of the act of copulation.
Guttmacher insists that insemination
should never be “‘ an assembly line kind of
medical treatment ’”’ and adds, “Only a
small percentage of patients who apply
qualify for so radical a procedure.’’*4
One final point should be emphasised.
Artificial insemination is not simply another
new technique the novelty of which attracts
certain warped minds. It is not a mere
fashion like face lifting. It is a serious
attempt to deal with a very real problem,
that of the childless marriage. As one
learned writer has put it:55
The involuntarily barren marriage continues,
as it has done for ages, to present an important
medical, economic and psychological problem.
The oft-quoted statement that from Io per cent
to 15 per cent of marriages in the United States
are involuntarily barren, whilst coldly accurate,
does not sufficiently express the appalling degree
of marital insecurity and deep unhappiness
which lie submerged in the statistics.

The degree of marital instability which
results from a childless marriage is well
illustrated by Lamson é al.5* They quote
Durkheim5’? who wrote that he found
Suicide was twice as common amongst childless couples as amongst those with children.
They also quote various analyses of divorce
statistics which would appear to indicate
that the divorce rate is nearly twice as great
amongst childless couples as amongst those
with children.5* The greater instability of
childless marriages surely needs no further
emphasis.

It is sometimes objected, however, that the
problems of the childless marriage can be
remedied by adoption, without resorting to
a procedure which many people undoubtedly
feel to be so repugnant that nothing could
justify resort thereto. It would appear that
this is essentially a male attitude. A woman’s
natural desire, it appears, is to bear a child,
not merely to raise one. This point was

strongly emphasised by both Mary Barton

and Joan Malleson in their contributions to
the conference held under the auspices of the
THE DEVELOPMENT AND USE OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION

Public The former

stated: 5
There is no stronger urge in the developed
woman, in my experience, than that of bearing
children, to experience maternity, and to have

a child of her own. Adoption, therefore, even

if enough children could be provided to go

round, would not meet the case.
She suggested that adoption would only
be a satisfactory remedy in about 30 per cent
of childless marriages.

Finally we may refer to the suggestion
made by Kleegman®® to the effect that the
practice should be referred to as therapeutic
rather than artificial insemination. That is
what, at least as far as current British
medical practice would appear to be, it 1s.
It is no more artificial than blood trans
Morality Council.

fusion, plastic surgery or corneal trans
plantation. This view it may be mentioned
appears to be implicit in the opinion of
Mantegazza® to the effect that if it is a sin
to assist the uterus to conceive by artificial
means then it must also be a sin to assist the
digestion by pepsin.

It is respectfully submitted that in discussions concerning artificial insemination
there are two issues which should be kept
distinct. First, there are the problems
arising from the present practice. Second,
there are the problems relating to what the
limits of the practice should be.

We have endeavoured to draw attention
to what appear to be the limits of the present
practice as voluntarily imposed by the
medical profession. The discussion of the
problems which arise from the present
practice, limited as it would appear to be, is
a matter not only of great interest, but also
of some urgency, for, in the words of a leading article in the British Medical Journal,®

The medical practitioner desires to help his
patients in every possible way, and evidence is
not lacking that in a number of cases he can
give substantial help by artificial insemination.

It is neither just nor desirable that he should do

so at such a risk as the recent discussions have

disclosed. He has a right to statutory guidance
and protection.

Quite apart from discussions of the
problems arising from the present therapeutically limited practice of the technique
there is the problem of what in fact the

193

limits of the practice ought to be, and how
to confine the practice within those limits,
whatever they may be. There are not
wanting those who urge that artificial
insemination should not be merely a therapeutic technique to be used in a limited
number of cases, but should be actively
encouraged either for eugenic purposes as
conceived by Julian Huxley® or Brewer, ®
for the purposes of sustaining a falling
demographic curve, or for fulfilling the
objects of the League of Bachelor Mothers.

A discussion of these issues is beyond the
limits of this paper, and we would conclude
by emphasising that artificial insemination
is a scientific technique, and to it, and its
consequences, society must adjust itself.
Like all techniques it raises many problems
and difficulties. It is, of course, capable of
abuse, it 1s equally capable of conferring
many benefits. To seek legislation to make
hetrologous insemination criminal, as recommended by the Archbishop’s Commission is,
in our opinion, to evade the issue. This is
merely to turn one’s back on the benefits
that the technique is capable of conferring.
Controlled the practice must be, and the
problems that it raises must be squarely
faced, but this cannot be done by unconditional prohibition of that form of the practice
which seems to be the one which, medically
speaking, is the most successful. ®5

Jacobits has written that:%
Such human stud farming exposes society to
the gravest dangers which can never be outweighed by the benefits that may accrue in
individual cases. |
Implicit in this opinion seems to be the
assumption that there is no alternative
between uncontrolled insemination and
absolute prohibition. It is submitted that
the obvious dangers to society stem from the
uncontrolled use of the practice, and that
these can adequately be avoided by suitable
control without depriving individuals of the
undoubted benefits that ensue in those cases
in which insemination is an_ indicated
procedure. :

It may well be that the revolution effected
by the introduction of this technique will
require a more searching reappraisal ' of
fundamental principles. The first step in any
194

such re-thinking must be a consideration of
the relationship between the technique and
the existing structure of society, and it will
only be after much discussion of all the
problems from all points of view, medical,
legal, social and psychological, that any
proposals for legislation can usefully be
formulated. All that has been attempted
here is briefly to indicate some of the factors
relevant to the historical background and
medical context of the technique and some
of the limits of its present practice.®

_ Insemination of Human _ Beings.”

. Artificial Insemination

REFERENCES

. The best account yet published is that contained

in Glover, Artificial Insemination in Human
Beings. 1948. See also Marescal: Artificial Insemination: an Historical Review. 1932. EE! Siglo
Medico, 90, 57.

. Test-tube Babies. 1934. Panurge Press. This work

carries as its sub-title “‘ A History of the Artificial
See also
Rohleder: Artificial Fecundation in Man. 1914.
Urol. & Cutan. Rev. Tech. Supp., 335.

. Since I have been unable to obtain a copy of

Rohleder’s book I have relied on Glover’s comments
thereon.

in the Talmud. 1942.
Hebrew Med. J., 2, 164.

5. Therapeutic Donor Insemination. 1954. Fertil. &

To.

If.

12,
13.
14.

15.

16.

Steril., 5, 11.

. His work was printed in Hannovershen Magazin,

as quoted by Rohleder, op. cit., p. 31.

. Expériences pour serviy a l’histoive de la génération

des animaux et des plantes. (1786). Geneva.

. Op. cit at p. 3.
. Account of the dissection of an hermaphrodite dog.
“1799. Phil. Trans., 18, 162.

According to some
writers, however, Hunter’s work actually preceded
that of Spallanzani.

Traité de ’imputssance et de la stertlité chez l’ homme
et chez la femme. 3rd ed., 1876, p. 779. The remark
does not seem to appear in the earlier editions of
this work.

Koerner, Medico-Legal Considerations in Artificial
Insemination. 1948. La. L. R., 8, 484 at p. 487
refers to an _ earlier instance attributed to
Eustachius. Bartolommeo Eustachi, after whom
the Eustachian tube is named is probably best
known for his Tabulae Anatomicae which he drew
Cc. 1552 but which were not published until 1714
by Lancisi. We have been unable to discover any
reference to substantiate Koerner’s claim.

Clinical Notes on Uterine Surgery. 1866.

1867. Reforme Medicale, 37.

Etude sur la génération artificielle dans l’éspece
humaine. 1868. Abeille Medicale, 25, 409.

De la fécondation artificielle dans l’éspece humaine
comme moyen de vemédier a certaines causes de
sterilité chez Vhomme et chez la femme. 1865.
Impotence, Sterility and Artificial Impregnation.

1923. Pp. 131.

. 1909. Med. World, 27,
. Op. cit. at p. 365.

19.

20,

21.
22.
23.
24.

25.

26.
27.

28.

29.
30.
31.
32.
33
34.

3536.

3738.

39.

40.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The Cure of Barrenness. 1866. Med. Times &
Gazette,1, 148 and 493.

Quite apart from his work on artificial insemination
Sims is probably best known as the inventor of the
Sims speculum and for his work on the operation
for vesico-vaginal fistula.

Illustrations of the Value of the Microscope in the
Treatment of the Sterile Condition. 1868. B.M./.,
2, 465 and 492.

At p. 365.

Tratté pratique des maladies de l’uterus.
1872. p. 1164.

Manuel pratique des maladies des femmes.
P. 732.

Traité pratique de gynecologie. 1884. p. 896. See
also Lutaud, Précis des maladies des femmes. 1883.
Gerard, Nouvelle causes de stertlité dans les deux sexes:
fécondation artificielle comme moyen ultime de
traitement. 1888, and Pajot, Des obstacles a la
fécondation dans l’éspece humaine. 1886.

See Glover, op. cit. p. 63.

De la fécondation artificielle chez les mammifeéres.
1907. Arkh. biologischeskikh nauk., 12, 377. See
also Ivanov, Use of Artificial Insemination for
Zootechnical Purposes in Russia. 1922. j. Agric.
Soc. 2441, and Artificial Insemination in Mammals:
Scientific and Zootechnical Methods. 1930. | Vet.
Rec., 10, 25; Walton, Technique of Artificial
Insemination, 1933, and Lambert and McKenzie.
Artificial Insemination in Livestock Breeding. 1940,
circ. 567., U.S. Dept. Agric.

Thus Moscovits, 1934. Int. Rev. Agric., 25, 105,
quoting the figures of the Moscow Experimental
Station up to 1932 gives the following figures asto
the numbers of animals which had been inseminated;
EWes, 3,000,000; COWS, 2,000,000; mares, 650,000;
sows, 200,000. The use of the practice for veterinary purposes in Great Britain is controlled by the
Agriculture (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1937,
s. 17 and the Artificial Insemination (Cattle)
(England and Wales) Regulations, 1943 made
thereunder, and the Agriculture (Artificial Insemination) Act, 1946.

2nd ed.

1881.

Artificial Impregnation. 1909. Med. World, 27,
163.

Artificial Insemination. 1944. J. Obst. & Gynec.
B. E., 526.

Sexual Disorders. 1937. Pp. 45.

1909. Med. World, 27.

Normale, Patologische und Kunstliche Befruchtung
beim Menschen. 1924. 204.

Sterilitat in Handbuch der Gyndkologie (eds. Veit
and Stoekel) and Neuere Erfahrungen uber die
Bekaémpfung der Sterilitat. 1928. Klinische
Wochenschrift, 7, 1563.

Artificial Insemination: Its Medico-Legal Implications. 1947. Am. Pract., 1, 241.

Artificial Insemination: Present Status in U.S. as
shown by a Recent Survey. 1941. J.A.M.A., 116,
2747-—

Status of Artificial Insemination. 1943. Am. J.
Obst. & Gynec., 45, 915.

At p. 67. Report of Conference, Artificial Human
Insemination was published in 1947.

It is however unfortunate that, as Guttmacher
records (Physicians Credo for Artificial Insemination. 1942. West. J. Surg., 50, 357), Seymour will
not allow inspection of the papers.

Sex and the Law. 1951. p. 113.
41.
42.
43
44.

45. Artificial Insemination in Sterility.

47.

48.

49.
50.

51.

52.

5354.

THE DEVELOPMENT AND USE OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION

Artificial Insemination: Legal Aspects. 1955.
Cath. Law., 1, 172.

Artificial Insemination. 1945. B.M.J., 1, 40.

At p. 13; Report of the Commission, Artificial
Human Insemination was published in 1948 and
reprinted in 1952.

Op. cit., at p. 45.

Sterility and Impaired Fertility. 1939. p. 341.

1943. Proc.
Interst. Postgrad. Med. Assoc., 56.

Legal and Social Implications of Artificial Insemination. 1949. Eugenics Rev., 40.

The Royal Commission on Population for England
and Wales (1949), gives the figure as being between
5 per cent and 8 per cent. As the learned editors of
Postgraduate Obstetrics and Gynaecology 2nd ed.
1955, point out, however, this figure must be too
low. The Registrar-General’s returns for 1939
show that of the 77,843 married women who died
in that year 13,337 (i.e. 17 per cent)were childless.
It is unlikely that this figure would be substantially
reduced even when allowance has been made for
voluntary childlessness. For the American figures
see Pearl, The Natural History of Population, 1939
and Lotka, Sterility in American Marriages. 1928.
Proc. Nat. Acad. Med. Soc., 14, 99.
Gynecologic Aspects of Human Sterility.
J.A.M.A., 107, 1847.

The Role of Artificial Insemination in the Treatment of Sterility. 1942. J.A.M.A., 120, 442.
Kunstliche Befruchtung: Ihre Stellung in
Gezamtrahmen der Sterilitats-behandlung. 1941.
Zentralbl. f. Gyndk., 65, 988.

La fécondation artificielle dans l’éspece humaine.
1927. Gynec. et Obst., 15, 132. Folsome, op. cit.,
gives Shorohowa’s figure as 88. This however was
Shorohowa’s estimate as to the total number of
cases reported in the literature and not the number
undertaken by Shorohowa himself.

Fertility in Women. 1945. Pp. 401.
1943. Bull. N.Y. Acad., Med., 19, 573.

1936.

35:

56.

57:
58.

59.
60.
61.

62.
. The Uniqueness of Man, quoted by the report. of

64.
65.

66.
67.

195

Israeli: The Scope of Artificial Insemination in
the Barren Marriage. 1941. Am. J. Med. Sct., 202,

92.
Sociologic and Psychologic Aspects of Artificial
Insemination. 1951. /.A.M.A., 145, 1062.

Le Suicide. 1930.

The learned authors quote Cohen, Siatistical
Analysis of American Divorce (1932), whose figures
were that 71 per cent of childless marriages end in
divorce whilst only 8 per cent of those with
children do. These figures were doubted by
Popenoe, Infertility and the Stability of Marriage.
1948 West. J. Surg., 56, 309. Lamson citesJaconsen
(1950). Am. Soc. Rev., 15, 235, as being more
reliable. His figures showed that of the 421,000
divorces and annullments granted in America in
1948 nearly three-fifths concerned childless marriages. He computed that the divorce rate for
childless couples was 15°3 per thousand compared
with 8°8 for couples with children. Lamson also
quotes evidence to show that these figures are not
unique for the U.S., see, van Zanten and van den
Brink, Population Phenomena in Amsterdam
Population. 1938. J. Internat. Union. Sc. Invest.
Pop. Prob., 2, 30 and Quesnel, Frequency of
Divorce with Special Regard to the Number of
Children. 1938. Annex No. 6, Stat. Inst., Lund. 
Op. cit., Pp. 42.

Op. cit., p. II.

Note sulla fecondazione artificele nella donna.
1887. Gazzetta deglt ospedali e delle clinche, 8, 81.

1949. B.M.J. (May 3rd.)

the Archbishop’s Commission, p. 8.

Eutelegenesis. 1935. Eugenics Rev., 27, 121.

The medical statistics would appear to indicate
that the percentage of successful inseminations is
very much higher for A.I.D. than for A.I.H. See
Lane-Roberts, op. cit.

Problems of Jewish Family Life. p. 14.

I gratefully acknowledge the help given to me by
the Librarian of Royal Society of Medicine in granting me the facilities of the Society’s Library whilst
I was writing this article.
