EUGENIC IDEALS FOR WOMANHOOD

By ALICE RAVENHILL

IT is not so long ago that the monarch of a neighbouring nation
aroused considerable indignation in the minds of a proportion of
the female population of which he is the titular head, by the
announcement that, in his opinion, the sphere of feminine
influence is and must be to all time circumscribed by a quadrangle:
of ‘‘Ks.’’ These he defined as ‘‘ Kirche, Kiiche, Kinder and
Kleider” ; inferring that, by meek submission to authority, by
absorbed concentration on housewifely duties, and by perpetual
self-sacrifice in the interests of her children, a woman fulfils her:
life mission, and must confine her intellectual aspirations within
these limits. Upon reflection there is after all in this definition
more truth and less intention to restrict than at first sight appears..
The boundaries of this quadrangle may legitimately be recognised
as of such extent that they are virtually commensurate with the
whole conceivable range of female activities. Thus these cir-.
cumscribing ‘‘ Ks,”’ or—when put into English—these circum-scribing ‘‘ Cs,” are actually characterised by an elasticity
sufficient to embrace all that exercises the intellect, as well as all
that enriches and ennobles life under any aspect or in any of its.
phases.

To elevate and maintain a high standard of morality; tosecure to every human being a full share of health, efficiency and
happiness by wise attention to and intelligent gratification of the:
physical demands of mankind; to utilise in the right production
and rearing of children all the knowledge, economic, scientific,
and social, now at our disposal for the purpose;:to cultivate and
refine, without enervating, the zsthetic qualities and potentialities
which make for physical, intellectual and moral progress—thesepurposes represent,.in general terms, the influential, exacting and.
responsible duties entrusted to the women of the world, when.
266 A. Ravenhill:

the imperial fiat goes forth that womanhood is to confine its
energies to a sphere of duty bounded by church, by children,
by cooking, and, by clothes ; provided only that in this alliterative
catalogue are included the clothing of the home as well as of the
family, and the keeping of this same home in a condition which
permits of life being both wholesome and cleanly.

When, therefore, the thoughtful woman, accepting the share
assigned to her in the world’s work, perceives herself to be
invested with a mantle of responsibility so weighty and
voluminous that she is disposed to feel leniently towards those
of her sex who in the past have failed to appreciate the amplitude
of its folds—when she realises that upon womanhood largely
depends the standard attained by the world’s ethical code, then
it is that she sees the necessity of gaining some insight into the
bases of ethics, religious and moral; of studying the influences
which promote or prejudice their consistent practice or which
menace their acceptance; and of not remaining ignorant of the
true relation of morality to efficiency and hygiene—a relation
constantly ignored from want of knowledge, or may I add by
false modesty. When again she perceives that to her is entrusted
the greatest of all human assets, the child, during those impressionable years, consecrated to character formation and physical
development, she at once becomes alive to the fact that its
immaturity calls for intelligent recognition, and its dependence
demands skilful guidance. How few women have hitherto acted
as if aware that in their hands they hold the health of the
community; not only as regards the food consumed and the
domestic cleanliness enjoyed, but because of the enormous
influence they exercise on young and old alike in respect of the
right regulation of rest and the quality, restorative or pernicious,
of the recreations sanctioned by, and popular with, the community. That the significance of the part played by woman in
matters economic and esthetic is frequently overlooked is largely
the result of woman’s own failure to recognise her position as the
greatest spender in the community, and the purchaser by whose
demands is strictly regulated the supply of goods necessary to the
equipment of the home and the wearing apparel of the family.
The standard of provisions, the design of furniture and wall
EUGENIC IDEALS FOR WOMANHOOD 267

decorations, the shades and textures of stuffs, afford but a few
illustrations of the influence of woman upon the markets of the
world and the intricate machinery of production by which these
markets are furnished.

Does it then savour of exaggeration or of unbalanced
enthusiasm to perceive in the above definition of a woman's
duties no humiliating limitation to her progressive development, no retrogression in the sphere of her influence, no
banishment from the intellectual life which sweetens labour
and stimulates to the application of knowledge systematically
acquired? Is it not rather a trumpet call to awaken woman to
her weighty obligations, as much imperial as domestic or social,
and to arouse her to the imperative necessity of preparation,
intelligent and sustained, for their fulfilment ?

But, it may be asked, what has all this to do with the subject
chosen for this paper? Itrace the connection thus: There is no
question but that, at the present time, woman exercises a farreaching influence upon human life, its quality, its customs and
its conduct. She must be, therefore, a eugenist, or she betrays
her trust. Sir Francis Galton has defined eugenics as “the
science which deals] with all the influences that improve the
inborn qualities of a race; also with those that develop them to
the utmost advantage.” To exercise or even to comprehend
these influences calls for the careful study of morals, hygiene
and education. ‘“‘ The aim of eugenics,” continues Sir Francis,
‘is to represent each class or sect by its best specimens”; a
demand which opens up the whole question of marriage and
parenthood. “Its practice,” he says, “ would result in a generally
higher tone of domestic, social and political life.” Is it not
generally admitted that the web of civilised life is woven largely
by women? “ The race as a whole would then be less foolish,
less frivolous, less excitable, and politically more provident than
now”; . . . “finally,” writes the Father of Eugenics, “ we
should be better fitted to fulfil our vast imperial responsibilities.”
Surely these words, at one and the same time, summarise my
subject, ‘‘ Eugenic Ideals for Womanhood,” for what woman
would not aspire to advance racial progress, and epitomise my
attempt to indicate the full eugenic significance of a sphere,
268 | A. Ravenhill :

thoughtlessly characterised as petty, powerless, unfruitful and
restricted.

It remains to consider why these ideals remain unfulfilled ;
nay, more, why they lie unrecognised by many women, and
to suggest means which would promote their recognition and
realisation.

Unquestionably a review of human struggles towards civilisation would, if I could here undertake the task, afford many
illustrations of the partial realisation of these eugenic ideals
by women, whether as mothers, or as single women whose
maternal instincts have found free outlets in the service of
others. In addition to these few brilliant examples there
has been also a mass of unpretending, yet valuable work
done and quiet influence exercised by women whose names
are unknown to the historian and the biographer. On the
other hand, there are thousands of women whose obligations
and opportunities have remained unutilised; either they have
fluttered through life as irresponsible butterflies, or they have
subsisted as sheltered pets; while in the case of others, the
deadly weariness of their daily lives has completely eclipsed
these ideals, which would at least have served to illuminate the
fog of harassing cares and unintelligent drudgery that too often
obscured their horizon. There is also a third group of women,
penetrated with enthusiasm for humanity, zealous to fulfil eugenic
ideals, but who have also failed of their attainment, because their
perspective has been inaccurate and their point of view ill-chosen ;
not from intention, but probably for some of the same reasons
which have underlain the indifference or the inertia of those
already mentioned. Of these reasons, among the most important
has been the absence of that leaven in the lump of educational
provender which works to elevate ideals and to lighten duty, by
indicating the object of all study, namely, the betterment of
human life. Such an influence would stimulate pupils to apply
their knowledge to the solution of vital problems and would
incite them to dedicate the accumulated experience of the
race to the service of mankind. This educational shortcoming
is closely associated also with failure to direct attention at
the right time to the social and imperial, as well as to the
EUGENIC IDEALS FOR WOMANHOOD 269

purely personal, responsibilities of each unit of the population,
whatever may be his or her present position, future interests.
and prospective career. In truth, the accurate adjustment in
the scale of duty of the personal and the imperial and the
reasons for preserving equilibrium have been constantly overlooked in the training of our young people. Faulty methods
of education constitute, therefore, a potent cause for woman’s
blindness to her comprehensive opportunities and remarkable
influence, and in their revision lies one means of concentrating:
her energies on eugenic practice. Perhaps, too, women’s often
self-imposed limitations are also a source of low aims and
restricted ideals.

I am not competent to analyse the numerous factors, social,
industrial and political, which gradually reduced the capable,
expert and educated woman of the Middle Ages to the effeminate:
toy of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The fact only
concerns us here. Where man was quick to seize upon each new
discovery and invention and adapt it to his professional or
commercial advancement, woman lagged behind, bewildered
apparently by the rapid changes in her economic environment,
too conservative to apply to the problems of kitchen, storeroom,
and nursery the methods which were lightening labour and promoting health in the industrial world, content to carry out by
the light of empiricism the procedure originated in the baronial
or manorial halls of past centuries, and accepting with pathetic
inertia or perpetuating with ignorant indolence deviations from
health and restrictions on efficiency long since surmounted by
the gardener, farmer and stockbreeder. The intimate connection between home life and national prosperity was hardly
perceived sixty years ago; the menace to the country of
continued infant mortality, unchecked disease, and premature
labour for children, only secured tardy attention much nearer
our own time. The crime of perpetuating ignorance among
young people, as well as their elders, on the subject of the transmission of debilitated or tainted constitutions, of failing to give
timely instruction upon the influence of ante-natal conditions on
the offspring, or of drawing attention to the immense importance

of the early post-natal years, is still committed, and is palliated
4
270 A. Ravenhill :

by widely accepted excuses. Systematic instruction in the right
conduct of physical life has hardly yet found a footing, and is in
many respects inadequate and incomplete. Should not women
have seen to it long ago that these blots on our civilisation were
removed, and that these standing menaces to moral as well as to
material prosperity ceased to prejudice progress? No sudden
movement, no exaggerated actions will effect deep-seated
reforms. For this purpose prolonged, quiet, intelligent methods
of character formation and health promotion in family and institution life are needed, supplemented by wise, well-considered action
in professional and philanthropic work. By such means influence
of a sustained, far-reaching kind is exercised upon the national
life. |

The eugenic ideals for us women to-day may, it seems to
me, be formulated as follows:

(1) Toprocure for boys and girls alike more general instruction in subjects hitherto accorded insufficient prominence in their
home and school training. For instance, more systematic as well
as well-organised and judicious suggestions are necessary upon
the duty and advantages of applying to the betterment of the
conditions of daily life the knowledge gained at school and college,
associating this direct guidance in the practical utilisation of human
experience with a careful inculcation of high standards grounded
on religion and ethics. This will require of those responsible for
the education of children, that is to say of parents and teachers,
so sound a knowledge of hygiene and its operations, of morals and
their application, that at the right time and in the right place they
may season mental provender and manual activities with these
eugenic salts. The enormous influence of women can only be
rightly exercised with the support of and in co-operation with
men ; therefore, this fundamental training must be given to boys
as well as girls; though, naturally, the selection of the material
and subjects for application would not be identical in the two
cases.

(2) For all young people, women must also secure suited
instruction on the greatest power entrusted to mankind, and
the considerations which make of marriage and parenthood
intensely great responsibilities. ‘The mystery of the transmission
EUGENIC IDEALS FOR WOMANHOOD 271

of life and its sacred character, the marvels of development and
the dependence of immaturity, should be gradually and imperceptibly absorbed during childhood; but further than this, at
adolescence every young person has a right to be enlightened
upon the eugenic aspects of parenthood, the significance of
infancy, the educational demands of early life, the weighty
doctrine of ‘“‘ deferred results,” as well as the influences, economic
and otherwise, which bear upon healthful maternity. Even the
bald enumeration of these points suffices to suggest their
overpowering significance—to define the method of their
presentation is at present beside my mark.

(3) In addition to the broad curriculum of general subjects
provided for all girls and to the opportunities for advanced study
which such women who adopt professions will pursue, special
provision should also be made for the preparation of women in
the care of childhood and home. This means much more than
technical classes in the domestic arts or than skilful correlated
courses between these and the science work in schools. Man
does not live by bread alone, important as bread—and particularly clean bread—is to efficient life. There should be what
King’s College and one or two other colleges are now attempting
to provide, opportunities for able and skilful women to solve
domestic enigmas by patient research; to follow up economic
developments to their sources; to trace connections between
social and industrial, even imperial, problems, and home or
parental methods. Most urgent of all, the girl growing to
womanhood, whether in the humblest or most exalted sphere of
life, should study the needs of infancy and the art of the right
rearing of children. Education begins, as Oliver Wendell
Holmes has said, a hundred years before birth; the woman of
to-day has a right to know the ancestry of both her child’s
parents, she must exact a health standard as well as a moral
one ; she must equip herself to be the mother or the guardian of
healthy children, not only by skill in handling baby and alas!
bottle, nor by art in stitching dainty and appropriate garments ;
but by acquainting herself with the nature of this bundle of
possibilities; by studying the influence upon it of environment
and the necessity of suitable stimulus. She should be aware that
272 | A. Ravenhill :

educability is present from the hour of birth, that the exquisite
plasticity of early life ensures a ready response to good management; she should understand also the enduring influence of
early surroundings. Maternity is not the privilege of all women,
but a knowledge of the needs of childhood and youth is indispensable to all; certainly it is to the maiden aunt, and also to
the worker who is concerned with the preparation of food,
clothing, toys or utensils; to the Inspector under any authority
for whatever purpose ; to the heads and subordinates in every
institution, public or private; to nurse and teacher ; to professional woman or philanthropist. In a greater or less degree,
adapted to position, to prospective calling in life, and to standard
of education, up-to-date knowledge on these points is essential
to every woman. My experience is that on the one hand absence
of education does not make for the intelligent care of children, and
on the other hand that the possession of an Honours’ Degree
does not carry this knowledge with it.

(4) Another ideal to be firmly held until it is realised is
the far more general employment of trained women as elected
members of local governing bodies and their committees, or as
officials of departments in every type of institution, but especially
in those of which women, girls and children constitute a portion
of the population. It is a grievous reflection on women that they
have not yet convinced society of this necessity. As sick nurses
and inspectors in some departments they have secured a footing,
and of course as teachers; but in orphanages, asylums, prisons,
schools, workhouses and elsewhere, trained women are rarely to be
found, either in authority or as subordinates, though thousands
of children and women of all ages suffer seriously from this
defect. Is this due to woman’s inefficiency or to her inertia and
indifference ?

(5) To influence for good the art, the literature and the
recreations of her country—to train young people in the wise and
fitting use of leisure, are other prominent eugenic ideals for
every thinking woman; she has great opportunities for teaching
the uses of civilisation ; of showing how to enjoy its gifts so that
they may refine, without emasculating; and how they may
refresh and cheer without tending to license or excess.
EUGENIC IDEALS FOR WOMANHOOD 273

Space fails me to make more than passing mention of other
most important eugenic ideals for women ; such as, for instance,
the permanent care of the feeble-minded ; the detention of those
men or women who suffer from recurring insanity so that they
shall not become parents in the intervals of emancipation from
asylum care; the determined tracing of paternity in cases of
illegitimate birth ; the adoption of more varied, and, may I say,
of more intelligent, methods of reformation in Rescue Homes;
the exercise of more sustained efforts to stamp out the cruellest
disease in the world, which, unchecked, blights innocent lives ;
last, but not least, the training of young people to be at least as
provident as birds before rushing into marriage.

To turn to yet another type of eugenic ideal, women should
interest themselves in all that promotes the health of the
people; they should concern themselves in the plans and
erection of buildings—whether houses, schools, shops or
offices, in their convenience, their decoration and laboursaving devices, in order to husband the energy and to increase the strength of their occupants. They should investigate
the conditions under which food-stuffs are produced, packed,
transported, distributed and cooked in order to control dirt
and to check preventible disease. How many women ever
dream of visiting the laundry to which they consign clothes
to be washed, or the farm from which the milk for their
household is supplied, or the workrooms where their garments
are made. Yet such details have eugenic significance, are only
perceived by trained eyes, and call, in many instances, for much
courage and tact on the part of the visitor, whose sensibilities,
be it said, would occasionally receive an unwelcome shock in the
course of her investigations.

Obviously, there is no lack of eugenic ideals for womanhood ;
neither is there any risk of restricting woman's intellectual
development or influential work by confining them to the Kaiser’s
classical ‘‘ Ks.’’ Recognising, as we must, that it is the concern
of woman to advance the happiness and to maintain the health
of every human being; that upon her standard depends to a
great degree the manners and morals of her country; that it is
her privilege to raise the tone of life in all its relations and to
274 A. Ravenhill :

endeavour by every legitimate means to reduce crime and misery
and to promote progress, is it not manifest that the more
adequately she fits herself for this comprehensive sphere, the
more completely will she fulfil the function and duties of an
active eugenist ?
