DIFFERENTIAL CLASS FERTILITY

A Further Report of the Merseyside Social Survey
By D. CARADOG JONES

(From the University of Liverpool School of Social Sciences and Administration.)

| N the course of the Merseyside Survey

an attempt has been made to collect in
formation as to the fertility of various
groups of families, differing as to social
class, economic position, health of family,
presence or absence of certain defects. By
fertility is meant, throughout, the actual,
not the potential production of children.
Social class and economic position are in
themselves vague terms, but precision has
been given to them by a determination of
the position of each family relative to a
defined poverty line and by grading heads
of families according to type and regularity
of occupation. Consideration has been given
also to such factors as the kind of district
and home in which the family lives,
whether poor and overcrowded or otherwise.
Different and quite independent samples
have been used in the investigation, namely :

1. A large random sample of the ordinary
working class population, obtained by visiting every thirtieth house in every street
throughout the area of investigation, and
getting, wherever possible, particulars of
the family if it was of the class, broadly
speaking, would come within the orbit of
national insurance. The investigators succeeded in getting fairly full information of
the type indicated above, including particulars as to earnings and other sources of
income, from nearly 7,000 families on
Merseyside (over 4,000 in Liverpool alone)
—more than go per cent. of those concerned.
This group will be identified by the letters
H.c., standing for Household Census. In
some tables the Merseyside figures will be
used, in others the Liverpool figures, the
difference between them being only slight.

2. Another sample, of smaller size, drawn
from households of all classes, but necessarily containing mothers who had not
passed the reproductive period, was obtained

by visits paid to families in which a birth
occurred any time during the first fortnight
of February 1930. This group, numbering
in all 700 families, will be identified by the
label 1.w. (i), the letters standing for Infant
Welfare, because the main object of this
particular inquiry was to determine the influence of various social factors upon the
health and progress of the infant, though
some of the results are used in the present
paper for another purpose. No attempt was
made to ascertain the incomes of these
families.

3. A third random sample of a special
class labelled I.w. (ii) was obtained by visiting the relatively small class of mothers
giving birth to infants during the period
February to August, 1930, who did not
come under the care or attention of the
official Health Visitors directed by the Local
Authority.

4. Other samples were obtained as the
result of a special investigation of various
sub-normal types in the community, families containing individuals suffering from
some defect, congenital or acquired, such as
deafness, blindness, or mental deficiency,
and others containing persons who had been
in receipt of Public Assistance over a long
period of time. Here the data required were
generally copied from case-paper records
kept by the official or voluntary agency
charged with the supervision or care of these
particular classes.

OCCUPATIONAL CLASS DIFFERENCES

Some idea of the difference in class between the populations from which the first
three of the samples mentioned were drawn
can be obtained from Table 1 where households with male heads in them are classified
according to the grades of occupation followed by these males.

175
176

TABLE 1. DISTRIBUTION BY OCCUPATIONAL
GRADE OF HEADS OF FAMILIES IN THE
CLASSES FROM WHICH RANDOM SAMPLES
WERE DRAWN

Occupational | Percentage of Total Sample in each
Grade of Head Occupational Grade
(1) (2) (3) (4)

 

 

The following brief description of the grades, as
numbered in the table, will indicate the basis of the
classification :

Grade 1—The highest professional and administra
tive posts.

»  2—Teachers of all kinds.

»»  3-—Responsible commercial posts, specialized
clerks.

»  4-—Ordinary clerks.

»  5—Shop assistants, insurance and other agents.

»  6—Skilled manual workers.

»  J-—semi-skilled manual workers.

»  8—Unskilled manual workers.

-The figures in Table 1 show that the H.c.
sample is made up broadly of working-class
families, including about 10 per cent. where
the head falls into occupational grade 3, 4,
or 5. The 1.w. (i) sample is interesting in
the indication it gives of the relative contributions of different classes to the population.

Not far short of one-half the births in
the particular fortnight selected occurred in
families where the head belonged to the unskilled labouring class. In nearly a quarter
the head was only semi-skilled. Skilled
attisans and the non-manual working classes
were about equally represented among the
heads of the remaining families.

Bearing in mind that the aim in the choice
of the H.c. sample was only to include
classes with a limited income, whereas a
birth may occur in any class, a comparison
of the figures in Columns (1) and (2) makes
it clear that Occupational Grade 8 is contributing more than its full share to the rising
generation. ‘The same is probably true in
less degree of Grade 7, whereas other grades
are almost certainly not contributing as they

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

might. For example, less than 1 per cent.
of the births in this particular fortnight
occurred in families where the head was of
Grade 1 or 2. That this small proportion
was not exceptional was confirmed by an
examination of the occupational grades of
the heads of families in which births were
notified over a period of twelve months.

The second INFANT WELFARE sample,
drawn from households not visited by the
official representatives of the Public Health
Department, is heavily weighted, as is
natural, by families in which the head is of
Occupational Grades 1, 2, and 3, 60 per
cent. of the total coming from one of these
grades. Surprise may be expressed that so
high a proportion of manual workers should
appear in this sample. It is highly probable, however, that some were not visited
on account of the distance at which they
resided from the centre of the city, while
others may have indicated that they did not
wish the Health Visitors to call.

OCCUPATIONAL GRADE AND EMPLOYMENT

The main groups sampled have been compared as to the occupational grade of the
head of the family, and it is worth while
noting here how regularity of employment
is associated with occupational grade, as
judged by the HousEHoLp CENSUS random
sample of over 4,000 families.

TABLE 2. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN OCCUPA
TIONAL GRADE AND DEGREE OF EMPLOYMENT EXPERIENCED (H.C. Sample)

Percentage of Employment in Week

Occupational of Enquiry
Grade of = |__|
Adult Males
Full-time | Part-time |Unemployed
I, 2, 3 92°7 4°2
4, 5 80:8 I0+I
6 84:8 10°7
7 79°2 14°9
8 56°7 23°3
All 72°0 16-6

 

Table 2 shows that unemployment rises
steadily as the occupational grade falls;
but while Grades 4 and 5 are practically
level with Grade 6 in proportion of unemDIFFERENTIAL CLASS FERTILITY

ployment, there was in addition more parttime work experienced in the two former
grades than in either Grade 6 or Grade 7.
Grade 8 families were easily in the worst
plight as regards unemployment and parttime. We infer—what seems eminently
reasonable—that it is the least skilled man,
whether he belongs to the manual workingclass or to the black-coated class, who is
most liable in a time of industrial stress to
lose his job.

OCCUPATION AND ECONOMIC POSITION

When the head of the house is unemployed or only partially employed the
financial outlook for the family becomes
precarious. This is reflected in Table 3
(based also on HOUSEHOLD CENSUS returns)
where a close relationship is found to exist
between the occupational grade of the
chief earner and the economic position of
the family measured by a poverty line standard*—-precisely what was to be expected in
view of the conclusion reached in the preceding paragraph. As the occupational grade
falls, the percentage of families below the
poverty line rises, and again we find Grade
8 families in the most serious position, while
those in Grade 5 are worse off than those in
Grade 6.

FAMILIES RECEIVING SOCIAL INCOME

The majority of families which are below
the poverty line and many of those which
are above, are in receipt of unemployment
benefit, public assistance, or some other
form of social income, such as a war pension or a widow’s pension. An analysis (see
Table 4) of a large random sample of nearly
7,000 working-class households on Merseyside brings out the point that the families
which get most, and presumably those which
need most, assistance from public sources
are : (1) those without an adult male earner,

* The measurement was made by comparing the
net income of each family, from all sources exclusive of public assistance (after subtracting what was
spent on rent, national insurance, and travel to and
from work), with the sum needed to obtain a defined minimum level of subsistence. (See Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society, Vol. XCIII, Pt. IV,

1930, pp. 563-4.)

177

and (2) those where the chief earner is either
unemployed or only casually employed.

TABLE 3. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN OCCUPATIONAL GRADE AND ECONOMIC POSITION
OF FAMILY AS MEASURED BY A POVERTY
LINE STANDARD (H.C. Sample)

Occupational Grade of Percentage of Families

 

 

Chief Earner below the Poverty Line

I, 2, 3 3°7

4 6-6

5 9°2

6 7:0

7 II°3

8 19°6

All 17°0

TABLE 4. PERCENTAGE OF FAMILIES OF VARIOUS

ECONOMIC TYPES IN RECEIPT OF (1) SOME
FORM OF SOCIAL INCOME, (2) PUBLIC
ASSISTANCE (H.C. Sample)
Percentage of Families of
each type benefiting
ramil 2 eit The Chief Earner me
amilies in = 2 3 ypes
receipt of 4 E 33° ze - & of *
og (x a 34 3A, a Family
<7 ieeh | Be g
S |Sage | SA 8

ey aera en ee

1.Some Form of

Social Income...| 65 19 47 84 36
2. Public Assist
ance .

Now the majority of families in the main
Infant Welfare sample, 1.w. (i), seeing that
the mother has recently been confined, will
contain an adult male as a potential, if not
an actual earner. It follows that if we were
looking for some criterion of economic status
in this group, where incomes can only be
very roughly estimated, we should look for
one related to lack of employment, since
that would appear to be the main cause for
such families seeking public support.

Thus, whereas rather over a third of all
the families sampled in Table 4 enjoyed
some form of social income, in families with
the chief earner unemployed the proportion
rose to over 80 per cent. Also, the same
group of families showed a proportion in
receipt of public assistance nearly four times
as high as that for the whole sample. But
178

one of the chief forms of social income, certainly for families experiencing unemployment, is insurance benefit or transitional
payment. And when those who are without
work are disqualified from such assistance
—and sometimes when they are not—they
are obliged to fall back upon poor relief or
the charity of their friends and relations if
they have no other means of support. We
shall not be far wrong, therefore, if we
take dependence on public assistance by any
family as an indication that the family in
question is somewhere near the bottom of
the social and economic scale ; while families
which are frequently dependent on unemployment benefit, but not in receipt of public
assistance, may be regarded as occupying a
stage above the first group.

CLASS OF INFANT WELFARE SAMPLE
In the light of the preceding discussion we
can now proceed to a social classification of
the INFANT WELFARE family samples. In
principle it is much the same as that adopted
by Charles Booth and revised by Professor
Bowley for use in the New London Survey.
It takes into account the character of the
street in which the family lived, the nature
of the father’s occupation, unemployment,
destitution, and any other relevant information supplied by the visitor. The broad lines
of division were as follows, but they are to
be regarded as descriptive of type rather
than as representing in every case a rigid
assessment :
Social Classes Description
A The Lowest Class of Slum-Dweller, frequently living in a one-room tenement
and in receipt of Public Assistance.
B The Very Poor. Casual workers and
others with income, for a normal

family, of less than 34s. All in receipt
of Public Assistance not in Class A.
Two classes distinguished by Charles
Booth are here combined forming
The Poor. Casual workers and others
with a family income of 34s. to 40s.
All in receipt of unemployment benefit or transitional payment not in Class
A or B

Ordinary Labour above the poverty
line. Income 4os. to 60s.

Higher Class Labour. Income £3 to £5.
Lower Middle Class. Income £5 to £10.
Upper Middle Class. Income £10 upwards.

CD

mam

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Classes A, B, CD are in this paper frequently grouped together and referred to as
the lower social classes, while E, F, G, H
are also grouped together and referred to as
the higher social classes. The terms higher
and lower are not entirely happy, but it is
not easy to find more appropriate ones.
Their use must not be taken to imply any
preconceived derogatory judgment of one
class as opposed to another.

It is necessary to point out here that this
classification differs from one based simply
on the nature of the occupation of the head
of the family, in that it takes into account
other factors also of some importance in the
assessment of the social standing of the
family. At the same time, since occupational grade is in itself one of the most
helpful indicators of class, there should be-a
high correlation between social class as defined above and occupational grade. ‘That
this is so is apparent from Table 5.

Attention has already been drawn to the
high proportion of births, nearly 70 per
cent., occurring in families of Occupational
Grade 7 or 8. It is interesting to observe,
further, that rather over half of them were
in the lower social classes. Very roughly,
they fall into four nearly equal groups in
Classes A, B;CD;E, F, G, H.

FERTILITY IN DIFFERENT SAMPLES

We are now in a position to go on to
examine the difference in average fertility
shown by various groups of families,
distinguished by social class or occupational
grade.

In the INFANT WELFARE inquiry a separate card was provided for each infant born
in the selected fortnight of February 1930.
On this card were recorded particulars ascertained by the visitor as to the health and
progress of the child, the health and
genetical history of the mother, the nature
of the occupation of the father, home conditions and type of neighbourhood where the
family lived, etc. An analysis was then
made of this material with a view to discovering the association betwen various factors and the progress of the infant over a
DIFFERENTIAL CLASS FERTILITY

179

TABLE 5. CORRELATION BETWEEN BOCA es OF FAMILY AND GRADE OF FATHER’S OCCUPATION.

AMPLE I.W. (i)

Number of Families of Each Social Class

Grade of
Occupation
A B CD E F G H Total Per cent
of Sample
I, 2, 3 — — — — 8 37 3 48 7
4,5 — 3 8 6 38 9 _ 64 9
6 _— 3 24 22 51 2 —_— 102 15
7 5 30 41 78 5 — — 159 23
8 52 93 107 64 — — — 316 46
Total 57 129 180 170 102 48 3 689 100
Per cent of Sample 8 19 26 25 15 7 oO 100

 

period of two years.

The results of the TABLE 6.

analysis will be published separately.

Along with other information to be given
on the card, the visitors were asked to state
the number of children living and the number of children dead to each family. If
figures were not given under either of these
heads—e.g. number dead—the family in
question was not included in the determination of the mean number dead for the group.
The mean number of children born for any
group was obtained by adding together the
mean number living and the mean number
dead. Still-births were counted both as
births and deaths.

Although the HousEHoLD CENSUS sample
and the INFANT WELFARE sample were
obtained quite independently, and do not
relate, as has been explained, to precisely
the same social class of families, it will be
instructive to compare the fertility figures
wherever possible.

The mean number of births in the 1.w. (1)
group is somewhat less than in the H.c.
group for two reasons: the latter, on the
average, contains more completed families
than the former; the H.c. group also contains relatively fewer families in the higher
occupational grades, where the size of

AVERAGE SIZE OF FAMILY IN
DIFFERENT SAMPLES

Mean Number of Children per

Number of Family
Group| Families
Sampled
orn Dead Living
H.C 4,379 3°92 0°95 2°97
I.W.(i 700 3°49 0:53 2°96
I.W. (ii) 157 1°97 0-10 1:87

family is believed to be more severely
limited. On the other hand, by the method
of selection adopted, sterile matings are included in the H.c. group, but not in the I.w.
group and this factor acts in the opposite
direction and tends to equalize the figures.
Owing to the death rate being higher in the
one group than the other—the average age
in the H.c. families being higher—the net
number of children left alive in both groups
is practically the same. It is estimated that
if sterile matings were excluded from the
H.c. sample the mean number of living
children would be increased by about onethird of a child per family.

The very pronounced fall both in the
number of births and in the number of
180

deaths per family as we pass to Group
I.w. (ii)—which, it may be added, contains
only families in the highest social classes,
F, G, or H—is striking. As judged by these
samples, in the working-class population
there are on the average nearly 4 children
born to each family; in the general population (selected to the extent already defined), the number born is about 3°5; in
that social class which is beyond the reach
of the Public Health Visitor (partially
selected, as in the previous case), the number born is less than 2 per family. Furthermore, there is about one death in every
family among the working classes; there is
one death in every two families in the general population ; while there is only 1 death
in every 10 families in the highest social
classes. But, owing to the method of selection, while the comparison between the two
INFANT WELFARE groups is justifiable, that
between them and the H.c. group is not quite
on the same footing for reasons already indicated. It would be better if we could in all
cases compare completed families and include in all cases sterile matings. By omitting sterile matings from the H.c. Group,
the number of living children per family is
increased by about ‘33 and the number of
dead by ‘ro.

SIZE OF FAMILY, GRADE, AND WORK

In Table 7 the Merseyside H.c. sample
and the I.w. (i) sample are each broken up
into four sub-groups, according to the occupation of the male head of the household,
where there is a male head whose occupation
is known ; and the mean number of children,
living and dead, is given for each subgroup. As many other investigations have
shown, there is a well-marked increase in
size of family as we pass down the occupational scale from Grades 1-5 to Grade 8, so
that nearly two more children are born to
the family in the unskilled manual workers’
class as compared with all the black-coated
classes combined.* The mean number of

* But it is interesting to note that the mean number of children alive per family in Grades 4, 5
(clerks, shop-assistants, small agents) is slightly
less than in Grades 1 2, 3 (the professions and
higher business and administrative posts).

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

deaths in Grade 8 is at least three times
that in Grades 1-5. The net result is an
excess in the lowest grade over the others of
1 to 1'5 children per family. In each grade,
except those born in Grade 8, the mean numbers of children born and dead in the 1.w. (1)
group come out less than the corresponding
numbers in the H.c. group. Reasons for this
have already been submitted in discussing
the last table, and they need not be recapitulated. The second reason does not apply
when a comparison can be made between individual grades (e.g. 6, 7, and 8 here) in the
two groups.

According to the larger sample in Table
7a the size of family definitely increases as
the chances of employment become more precarious, but the gap in the mean number of
children living between families where the
head is regularly employed and where he is
unemployed is less than the gap in the mean
number of children born between the same
families, because the mean number of children who die is twice as great in the latter
group as in the former. In the smaller
1.w. (i) sample the figures for different
employment groups are more equal and less
regular, the net effect being to give families
when the head is regularly employed the
highest mean number of living children.
But it is to be observed that here all the
figures relate to unskilled workers. If this
result were confirmed by further research
it would be of some importance as indicating
that although unskilled workers may have
large families as compared with skilled
workers, these large families are more frequently to be found, on the whole, among
the unskilled who are in regular employment.

SIZE OF FAMILY AND SOCIAL CLASS

In Table 5 we considered the number of
births registered in each social class in
Liverpool in a particular fortnight of the
year. We shall now proceed to examine
whether the families in which births were
registered were large or small. In other
words, the relation of size of family to social
class will be considered.

The figures are given in Table 8. They
DIFFERENTIAL CLASS FERTILITY

181

TABLE 7. SIZE OF FAMILY IN RELATION TO OCCUPATIONAL GRADE OF FATHER

 

 

 

    

Grade Number of : :
of Families Mean Size of Family
Occupation Sampled
I, 2,3 114
4,5 345
6 1,369
7 1,377
8 2,076

 

H.C. Group—Merseyside

 
   
  

I.W. (z) Group

   
 

Number of

            
  
 
   
   

Families Mean Size of Family

Sampled Born  thesq Living
2° 36 o°16 2°20
eb O-15 2°O1
2°95 O° 36 2°59
3 °12 O° 40 2: 92
4°33 o-81 3°52

 

  
 
   
   

  
   

H.C. Group

Number of Mean size of Family

Families
Sampled

Male Head

Regularly
Employed

Casually
Employed

Unemployed

   
       
    
    
  
 
 
 
  

 

I.W. (x) Group

Number of (Unskilled Workers only)
Families Mean size of Family
Sampled

Born Dead Living
76 4°44 0°73 3°71
103 4°20 0°79 3°41
137 4°36 0-86 3°50

TABLE 8. RELATION OF SIZE OF FAMILY TO SOCIAL CLASS

Social Class Number of Families

Mean Number of Children

Sampled Born Dead Living
LOWER
A 59 0*90 3°00
B 134 O'QI -0°74 3°33 73°38
cD 183 0°56 3°50
HIGHER
E 0+ 36 2:78
FE 0°26 >0-29 2°29 »2°52
G, H 0-15 1°94
All Classes 0°53 2°96

reveal a considerable difference between the
lower and the higher social classes, amounting roughly to about one more birth to every
family and one more death to every two
families in the lower group. The sharp drop
in crossing the line of division is striking.
There is also a consistent fall in the mean
number of births and deaths as we ascend
the social scale within the higher group of
families, but this is not true of the lower
group. There we find most births in Class
B and most living in Class CD, though the
differences are sometimes slight and may not
be significant.

 

It is worth while to group the classes in
Table 8 on a slightly different basis,
as in Table 9, where all families with the
father earning probably under £3 a week
are assembled together (Classes A to E) and
contrasted with Classes F, G, which include
families of the better-type artisan who earns
over £3 a week and the lower middle class
families, Cases visited by the Survey have
been taken out of the latter group, so that
it includes only the Public Health Department cases. A further contrast is obtained
in the figures for the 1.w. (11) sample which
are shown in the same table. This last
182

group of families, it will be remembered,
were those of a somewhat superior class upon whom the Health Visitors did not call.
It only included families classed as F, G, or
H, and between these three classes there
appeared to be no significant difference in
the number of children born or living.

TABLE 9. CONTRAST IN SIZE OF FAMILY

BETWEEN CERTAIN GROUPED SOCIAL
CLASSES

No. of | Mean Number of Children

Group Families
Sampled} ~
Born Dead | Living

I.W.(i) :

Classes A to E 551 3°89 0-62 3°27

Classes F, G 120 2°46 0-24 2°22
I. W. (ii) :

Classes F, G, H 157 1°97 0-10 1+87

Again we note a definite fall in the mean
number of children born and dead as we pass
up the social scale. ‘These figures can be
explained on the hypothesis that not only
the professional classes, but also the better
type of commercial worker and artisan are
limiting the size of their families, while the
poorer classes, if they are doing so at all,
cannot be doing so to the same extent.

SIZE OF FAMILY IN RELATION TO AGE OF
MOTHER AND DURATION OF MARRIAGE

There is a tendency perhaps in these days
to lay over-much stress on artificial methods
for the prevention of conception, as if they
were the one and only explanation of all
fertility differences to be found in human
kind. They possibly are the most effective
of the forces at work in that direction, but
in concentrating attention upon them too
narrowly there is a danger of overlooking
others which are not unimportant. It has
been suggested that the formation of new
habits accounts for more than we generally
imagine—e.g. the twin-bed habit—and it is
not improbable that further research into the
physiology of human conception—the how
and the when and the why of it—might incidentally throw light upon the subject of
differential fertility.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

I am straying, however, into a field which
is outside the intended range of this paper.
Let us return to a more amenable factor
about which enough is known for it to be
measurable, I mean age at marriage and
duration of marriage which have, I think,
played some part in producing the results
shown in Table 9. That this is so is suggested by the fact that the percentage of first
babies in Classes A to E was 21°5, whereas
in each of the other groups in the table it
was over 40. We can partially eliminate this
complicating element from the figures by
relating the size of family, as in Tables 10
and 11, in turn to the age of the mother and
to the duration of marriage.

These tables are complementary. In
general, the older the mother, the longer is
the duration of marriage ; but, theoretically,
it would be possible for all married women
at present of age 25-34 (say) in the higher
class to have married so late in life that
their duration of marriage would only equal
that of married women at present of age 1624 in the lower class. This kind of thing
does in fact happen, though not in the
extreme form here suggested. Hence the
necessity for the two tables. Had the sample
been large enough it would have been better
still to take into account age of mother and
duration of marriage simultaneously.

When allowance is made for them independently, it is evident that fertility in the
lower classes still very appreciably exceeds
that in the higher social classes. Although
these tables are only based on the total of
families for which the facts were ascertained
and not on the complete sample, the closeness of agreement between this partial sample
and the full sample in the mean number of
children born (when calculated irrespective
of the age of the mother or the duration of
marriage) suggests that the part may be
regarded as reasonably representative of the
whole. It may be mentioned incidentally
that 81 per cent. of the marriages in the
higher social classes were of less than ten
years’ duration, whereas this was true of
only 62 per cent. of those in the lower social
classes. Also about one-third of the infants
were first-born in the former group and only
DIFFERENTIAL CLASS FERTILITY

183

TABLE 10. RELATION OF SIZE OF FAMILY TO AGE OF MOTHER IN CERTAIN SOCIAL CLASSES

 

 

Number of Families Sampled

RR | |

——————— | er

GROUP Age of Mother
LW. (i) |
Lower Social Classes (A to D) gI 173
Higher Social Classes (E to H) 69 181
I.W. (ii)
Classes (F to H) 18 IOI

Mean Number of Children Born

| Age of Mother

35+ 16-24 | 25-34 | 35+ All Ages
[oh
100 1°75 3:67 7*O2 4°12
60 1°73 2°58 4°61 2°81
36 1°16 | 1°75 3°05 I*99

 

TABLE 11. RELATION OF SIZE OF FAMILY TO DURATION OF MARRIAGE IN CERTAIN SOCIAL CLASSES

oa eee ee 2 —  ——Eey_

|

| Number of Families Sampled |

|
Mean Number of Children Born

 

 

GROUP -_—
| Duration of Marriage | Duration of Marriage : All
- 0-5 5-10 | 10 4. | 0-5 | 5-10 | 10-4 | Durations
ee — —— |
LW. (i) ) | ! | |
Lower Social Classes (A to D) 61 48 66 | T7959 5 47020 | 7°15 4°49
Higher Social Classes (E to H) 72 55 30 ' +58 | 2-92 | 5°83 | 2°80
I.W. (ii) |
Classes (F to H) 63 | 46 | 24 | I-17 ! 2°39 | 3°41 | 2°00
| |
Se eiaelaaSaEeeEGeenanisiiilimsemE
about one-fifth in the latter. This goes to TABLE Ila. PERCENTAGE OF MOTHERS IN

confirm the later age at marriage in the
higher class.

One consequence of the earlier age at marriage of the lower social classes is that children follow each other in quicker succession
in this group as compared with the higher
social classes, because the younger the wife
the greater in general is the chance of a birth
occurring. During the period of the INFANT
WELFARE inquiry, when 652 families were
visited periodically over a space of 18 months
to two years, 108 mothers had each had 2
infants born to them (one had twins and
another had a total of 3 infants in the two
years). Table 11a shows the proportion of
families in certain grouped classes in which
another infant was born. It appears that the
percentage of mothers in the lower social
classes who gave birth to a second infant
within two years of the first was nearly
double that in the higher social classes, and
it is significant that a large proportion of
these more prolific families were in receipt

of public assistance or unemployment
benefit.

CERTAIN SOCIAL CLASSES TO WHOM TWO
CHILDREN WERE BORN IN TWO YEARS

 

Lower Social Classes Higher Social Classes

A.B. C.D. E.F. G.H.
25 18 13 oO

 

21°5 II+5

 

FERTILITY OF THE LOWEST CLASS

From the description given on page 178
of the different social classes it will be seen
that all families in receipt of public assistance would be in one or other of the two
lowest classes, A or B, while families in
receipt of unemployment benefit or transitional payment, but not of public assistance,
would be in class CD. ‘These families
would have a relatively low standard of living and the majority of them might be
expected to be below the poverty line. We
shall, therefore, go on now to compare with
the figures previously given the size of
family as shown by the HouSEHOLD CENSUS
sample, in three groups of households—those
subsisting on poor relief, and those living
below and those above a defined poverty line.
184

TABLE 12. AVERAGE SIZE OF FAMILY IN
CERTAIN CONTRASTED HOUSEHOLDS

Mean No. of Children

Description of met per Family
Household Saenrcled
P Born | Dead | Living
Lower Social Classes
(1.W. (i)) .. 376 | 4°12 | 0°74 | 3°38
In receipt of Public
Assistance (H.C.)... 216 | 4°54 1°37 | 3°17
Below the Poverty
Line (H.C.) es 751 | 4°70 I-42 | 3:28
Above the Poverty
Line (H.C.) ..| 3,628 3°76} 0°85 2°91
Higher Social Classes
(I. W.(ii)) . | 324] 2°81 | o-29 | 2°52

In the first place it may be noted
that the mean number of children born
and the mean number dead in_ the
INFANT WELFARE group of families (lower
social classes) are appreciably less than
the corresponding figures in the two
groups of HousEHOLD CENSUS families,
those in receipt of public assistance and
those below the poverty line, for the reasons
already given in comparing the normal
I1.w. (i) and H.c. samples. In the second
place, a difference in the size of families
below and above the poverty line is discovered of roughly the same order as was
found between families in the lower and the
higher social classes, namely, two more
births and one more death in every two
families. And, in the third place, the size
of family in the lowest group of all, the
Public Assistance group, is not quite so
large as in the group below the poverty line,
which may be regarded as slightly superior
to the other. This is in line with the figures
in Table 8, where the mean number of children living in the CD group rather exceeded
the mean number living in the A, B group.
A similar result emerged, it will be remembered, in the discussion of Table 7a.

OVERCROWDING AND SIZE OF FAMILY
Where families are larger than the average and where large families are at the same
time associated with poor economic conditions, as is the case in the groups we have
been considering—the lower social classes,
those below the poverty line, and those in

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

receipt of public assistance—we should expect also to find bad housing conditions. It
is not surprising, therefore, to find, as in
Table 13, that overcrowded families are in
general above the average in size. It should
be explained that it was possible to apply a
more exact standard of overcrowding in the
HovusEHoLD CrENsus than in the INFANT
WELFARE inquiry where the visitor had
usually to judge the position from general
considerations.* In the former 11 per cent.,
while in the latter 17 per cent., of all the
families sampled were overcrowded, but the
various districts of Liverpool come in much
the same order under both standards.

 

 

TABLE 13. ASSOCIATION BETWEEN OVERCROWDING AND SIZE OF FAMILY
No. of | Mean No. of Children
Group Families
Sampled
Born Dead Living
Overcrowded Families
H.C... 397 6°06 1°50 4:56
I.W.(i) ... ---| I2I 5°61 IG 4°45
IW. (i) with
both parents in
poor health. 60 6°15 1°45 4°70

The number of children born per family
in these overcrowded groups are among the
highest that we have so far met, and the
mean number of children dead per family is
also unusually high (the figures for the main
I.w. sample being, as before, rather less
than those for the H.c. sample). The reason
is not far to seek. It is obviously the very
large families, unable to afford to move into
a more commodious home, which are the
most likely to be overcrowded. When, in
addition, poor health on the part of the
parents is associated with overcrowding, the
number of living and dead children per
family tends still further to increase. This
also is natural, since the conditions which
give rise to poor health in the parents are

* See Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Vol.
XCIII, Part IV, pp. 502-3. Although largeness of
family i is conducive to overcrowding, it is important
to note that according to the Liverpool standard
quite a small family may be overcrowded, e. g. husband, wife, and grown-up daughter living in one
room.
DIFFERENTIAL CLASS FERTILITY

equally unfavourable to the children, and
when the parents are weakly they can
scarcely be expected to produce robust offspring.

SIZE OF FAMILY AND HEALTH

One of the unexpected results of this survey of differential fertility has been the
discovery of the large families born in homes
where there is a record of poor health in the
parents or in the children. The figures
obtained in the HoUSEHOLD CENSUS and in
the INFANT WELFARE inquiry are not
strictly comparable, but it is convenient to
consider them together in Table 14. In the
HovusEHOLD Census the record relates to the
state of health of parents and children in the
week of inquiry. If the indisposition seemed
to be only of a temporary character, it was
classed as ‘‘ sickness ’’; if it were of relatively long standing, or likely to be so, it
was classed as ‘‘ chronic illness,’’ except
that ‘‘ crippled or tubercular ”’’ persons were
described as such.

In the INFANT WELFARE inquiry the
general state of health of the parents was
assessed on their past record as ascertained
by the visitors. In three out of every four
of these families in the sample the health of
both parents was stated to be satisfactory
and in only 1°5 per cent of the total were
both parents said to have poor health, which

185

suggests that the standard of assessment
was not very stringent.

The reader will be struck, on examining
the H.c. groups, by the difference in the
mean number born between families of
afflicted children and families of afflicted
parents. This is essentially a statistical
effect due to the fact that, in considering
families of afflicted parents, sterile matings
are included, but every family of afflicted
children must have had at least one afflicted
child. Moreover, in a large family there is

‘in general a greater chance of at least one

afflicted child appearing than in a small
family, and, the larger the family, the
greater the chance. Hence, by selecting
families containing an afflicted child there
is a simultaneous bias in favour of the selection of families containing several children.
For this reason when we select for afflicted
parents the figures are not really on the
same footing as those obtained when we
select for afflicted children.

On the same principle, when in the I.w.
group we select families containing at least
one dead child, we rule out of the calculation families containing fewer than two
children, namely the dead child and the
infant that was the centre figure of the
inquiry; also, as before, death is more
likely to strike a large family than a small,
because there are more children at risk of

 

TABLE 14. ASSOCIATION BETWEEN HEALTH OF PARENTS AND SIZE OF FAMILY

Mean Number of Children |

 

Number per Family
GROUP Families

Sampled | Born Dead | Living
H.C.
Children with one or both Parents Sick a 72 5°3 +2 4°I
Families containing one or more Sick Children “ wes 55 6°6 I*4 5:2
Children with one or both Parents suffering from Chronic Illness wee 92 4°7 I°7 3:0
Familes containing one or more Children suffering from Chronic Illness 80 5°9 I°2 4°7
Children with one or both Parents Crippled or Tubercular ... = | 32 4°4 I°5 2°9
Families containing one or more Children Crippled or Tubercular..... 37 6°5 2°2 4°3
ILW. (z)
Health of Parents Good . . 517 3:22 0°43 2°79
Health of Parents Fair or Poor | ae 183 4°29 0-81 3°48
Health of Parents Good and no Child ‘dead sea ewe 375 2°38 — 2-38
Health of Parents Fair or Poor but no Child dead ... 113 2°90 — 2°90
Health of Parents Good but at least one Child dead sw 142 5°47 1°45 4°02
Health of Parents Fair or Poor and at least one Child dead was 7O 6°54 2°12 4°42

 
186

death. Hence the first two groups in the
I.w. (i) set are comparable with each other,
and the second pair and the last pair are
also comparable with each other, but the
members of one pair are not comparable
with those of another pair.

But, granted the explanation given as to
why some of the figures are high, it must
be observed that it only helps to explain
them: it does not explain them away. It
still remains true that the number of children born to every group where either parents
or children have poor health is significantly
high in comparison with the number born
in families enjoying good health. Also,
death more readily strikes children in families which have a poor health record.

GENETICAL HISTORY OF THE MOTHER

Weakness, and probably early death,
may, however, be the heritage of the infant
as the result of the genetical constitution,
rather than the ill-health, of the mother.
Hence it is of interest to see if there is any
association between size of family and the
mother’s genetical history. This was
classed as ‘‘ good ’’ if there were no records
of miscarriages, still- or premature births,
and if the infant was breast-fed. It was
classed as ‘‘ fair ’’ if there was one adverse
record under any of these heads, and as
‘‘ poor ’’ if there were two or more such
records. No information of this kind was
collected in the HouSEHOLD CENSUS, so
that only the results of the INFANT WELFARE
inquiry are available and these are given
in Table 15.

A rather bigger percentage of the mothers
sampled was recorded as having made only
fair progress, but a smaller percentage was
said to have made poor progress, in the
higher as compared with the lower social
classes. For each grade the size of family is
less in the higher group than the other, but
in both it definitely falls, i.e. irrespective
of class, as the genetical history of the
mother improves. ‘There is no doubt that
here again the fall can be largely explained by the greater chance which the
larger family runs of experiencing an
adverse genetical record, but the fact

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE 15. SIZE OF FAMILY IN RELATION TO
GENETICAL HISTORY OF THE MOTHER

 

Lower Social Classes/Higher Social Classes

 
   
 

Genetical {
History | Number| Mean | Number! Mean
of Number of of Number of

Families | Children | Families | Children

Sampled| Born | Sampled| Born
Per cent.

Good 3°79 6 2°54
Fair 4°55 29 3°22
Poor 5°22 5 3°87

 

remains that the large family must exist to
run such a chance.

EMERGENCE OF A SUB-NORMAL TYPE

We have seen how size of family is
related to social class, and we have defined
class by a consideration of the occupational
grade of the head of the household, the
stability of his employment, economic position as measured by the relation of the income to a poverty-line standard of needs,
dependence for a living on unemployment
benefit or public assistance. We have also
discussed the bearing of housing conditions
(taking into account overcrowding) and the
health of the family upon the number of
children who are born and who die.

In every case, without exception, the
worse the conditions, however defined, the
larger, on the average, is the family. It is
difficult to escape the conclusion that these
different phenomena are inter-related. In
short, the simplest explanation of the consistently large number of births and deaths
to be found in certain groups of families is
that they contain a foundation of families
of a poor type in common, and possibly a
superstructure of others closely akin to
them but not the same families in every
group.

The lower social classes are made up
largely of a type that is fairly clearly defined, whose heads are of low occupational
grade, who are lacking in stability of employment, who fall frequently below the
poverty line and become dependent on unemployment pay or public assistance. Many
of these self-same families, too, are to be
DIFFERENTIAL CLASS FERTILITY

found living in overcrowded conditions,
they have a high rate of infant mortality,
and the health of the parents and children
is decidedly below the average. We might,
indeed, describe the type of family which
emerges as the common element responsible
for the high fertility figures in the tables,
as generally sub-normal in characteristics
which are vital to the achievement of
personal well-being and successful social
adaptation.

Clear evidence of this recurrent sub-normality and its association with high fertility
is presented in Table 16, where (i) the families comprising the two lowest social classes
(A, B) in the INFANT WELFARE sample, and
also (2) those families in receipt of public
assistance, are contrasted with (3) the whole
sample as to their record of low skill, unemployment, public assistance, overcrowding,
poor health, and fertility. The position in
relation to the poverty line cannot be
exactly determined for these subnormal
families, but it may be observed that the
majority, if not all, of them are likely to be
below the line judging from the evidence
available. In nearly 80 per cent. of them
the head of the family is an unskilled
labourer and unemployment is more than
double that experienced in ordinary families. Over 40 per cent. are living in overcrowded conditions; in about half, the
parents have poor health and in nearly
three-quarters the same is true of the children. Yet almost 50 to 60 per cent of these

187

families have had four or more children
and from 20 to 30 per cent. of the
mothers gave birth to a second infant within the two-year period covered by the
inquiry. All these figures are in striking
contrast to those for normal families shown

in the same table.

CLASS CONTRIBUTION OF CHILDREN

The result of our study, therefore, is to
show that the sub-normal group generally
is contributing considerably more than its
fair share to the future population, whereas
if we estimate its cost to the community
and its worth on any reasonable valuation,
it would probably be agreed that so large a
contribution in relation to other classes
ought by some means to be checked. ‘The
position is summarized in Tables 17 and 18.

Table 17 shows that half the families in
the Lower Social Classes, but less than a
quarter of those in the Upper Social
Classes, contain four or more children.

When we analyze, as in Table 18, the
households in which births occurred during
the selected fortnight, it appears that while
families of the lower social classes represented just over half the total sample, the
children born to them made up 63 per cent.
of the total births. The death rate is still
higher in these classes, being 74 per cent.
of the total deaths, so that their net contribution in living children is reduced to 61
per cent. of the total in the sample. The
majority of these families, it should be

TABLE 16. PERCENTAGE OF (1) FAMILIES ON PUBLIC ASSISTANCE ; (2) FAMILIES IN THE LOWEST SOCIAL
CLASSES ; AND (8) ALL FAMILIES SAMPLED RECORDING CERTAIN FACTORS ADVERSE TO PROGRESS

  
   
  

No.
of
GROUP Families
Sampled
1.In receipt of
Public Assistance ice 77
2. Social
Classes A, B 196

 

3. All Families
(I.W. (i))

 
 

   

(4) (5) (6) (7) | (8)
Over- | Parents’ |Childrens’} Families | Families
crowded | Health | Health | of 4 or | with 2
Poor Poor more Births in

  
 
  
 
 
 
 
    
 
 

Children | 2 Years

58 30

22

  

*Only 13 per cent. of the heads of families in Classes A, B were in regular work. Liverpool is unhappily notorious

as a centre of casual labour, especially at the docks.
188

TABLE 17.

PERCENTAGE OF FAMILIES OF
DIFFERENT SIZE IN THE
HIGHER SOCIAL CLASSES

LOWER AND

Percentage of Families
with number of Births as
shown below

Group (1) (2) (3) | (4) (5) (64)

Total

Lower Social Classes} 19 I5 16/15 9Q 261] I00
——— Yee
5° 50

Higher Social Classes} 32 25 19{ 7 5 121} 100

76 24

remembered, are existing on unemployment
benefit and public assistance.

An interesting comparison can also be
made between the two groups of families
immediately above and below the line which
separates the lower and the higher social
groups. From Table 8 we found the mean
number of births in Classes CD to be
four, while in Class E it dropped to about
three. From Table 17 it further appears
that Classes CD together contribute the
largest percentage of children to the sample,
and Class B contributes about the same proportion as Class E, although the former
class is distinctly smaller in our sample
than the latter.

It is believed that even the skilled artisan
is following the example of the professional
classes and failing to maintain his numerical
importance in relation to other classes in
the population. Our figures seem to bear
this out. Class E consists chiefly of families

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

where the father is in unskilled or semiskilled work, earning £2 to £3 a week,
while Class F consists of artisans, shopassistants, and clerical workers earning
from £3 to £5 a week. This latter group
represented 15 per cent. of the total sample
which registered any births at all during
the chosen fortnight, and it contributed
only 11 per cent. to the total of children
living, the mean number of children born to
the group being about 2°5 per family.

GRAVER SUB-NORMAL TYPES OF FAMILY
There remain other samples of families
to which reference was made at the beginning of this paper as group (4). Nothing
has so far been said about them, and it is not
proposed here to do more than call attention
to their fertility. They can, perhaps, be
called sub-normal with stronger justification
than the types of family to which that term
has already been applied, because they
either contain one or more individuals
suffering from some rather severe physical
or mental disability, such as blindness, deafness, epilepsy, mental defect, or some congenital or acquired deformity, or they have
experienced chronic destitution and been in
receipt of public assistance more or less continuously for a period of at least two years.
In a previous article* the writer has shown
that certain of these types have families
which are distinctly larger than the average, or that they are themselves members
* KuGENICS REVIEW, July 1932, Vol. XXIV, No. 2,

PP. 97-105. See note, ‘‘ Differential Class Fertility,”
on p. 210.

 

TABLE 18. PERCENTAGE OF CHILDREN CONTRIBUTED BY DIFFERENT SOCIAL CLASSES

 

 

Percentage of Total
Families Sampled

A 8°5
B 18-5 >53°0
CD 26-0

EO 24°5
F 15°O >47°0
GH

 

Lower Social Classes

Higher Social Classes
7°5

100-0

 

Percentage of Children

Born Dead Living
9°5 14 8:5
23°0 763 33 774 21-5 p6r
30°5 27 31
22°5 17 23°5
10-5 >37 7 726 II 39
4°90 2 4-5
100°0 100-0 100°0

 
DIFFERENTIAL CLASS FERTILITY

of large families. It will be convenient to
assemble here in a single table figures,
obtained in the course of the Merseyside
Survey, showing the mean number of children, born, dead, and living, in these and
other families, as well as in most of those
which have been the subject of the main discussion in this paper. Comparison can then
be readily made between them.

ARE THERE CONNECTING LINKS ?

From our main discussion a sub-normal
type of family emerged as the ‘ villain of
the piece,’ parading under one or more disguises, sometimes under the cloak of unemployment, sometimes dependent on public
assistance, sometimes living in overcrowded
conditions—the chance of the moment probably determining the nature of the appearance of any particular family of the type—
but all alike above the average in fertility.
So consistent were they in this last respect
that high fertility might almost be taken as
a criterion of the type, enabling us to penetrate behind their differences.

In the last section of Table 19 several
other groups of families are found also

189

registering high fertility. It is tempting
to bridge the gap and to conclude that these
families, too, fall in certain respects into
the same broad classification as the milder
sub-normal types already considered. In the
article mentioned above, the writer has discussed the particular case of mental deficiency, the higher grades of which are
believed to appear with much greater frequency in what is now termed the ‘ social
problem group ’ than in the general population. Now the social problem group is precisely that which possesses some or all of the
characteristics defining our milder subnormal types—I mean those not necessarily
containing an individual suffering from a
gross physical or mental disability—and the
question I wish to raise is whether the same
term can be stretched to embrace the
majority of the types which have been shown
in this paper to possess the common criterion
of high fertility.

I do not wish to be misunderstood. I am
far from suggesting that all cases of disability have a common origin, or that high
fertility can be taken as a basis for their
scientific classification. High fertility itself
is as much an effect as a cause, and where

 

TABLE 19. ASSOCIATION BETWEEN SUB-NORMALITY AND FERTILITY

 

 

Definition of Group

Mean Number of

 

Number Children
Pamltes HOUSEHOLD CENSUS Born | Dead | Living
4,379 | Random Sample of Working-Class Familtes ... 3°92 | 0°95 | 2:97
3,628 | Families Above the Poverty Line . 3°76 | 0°85] 2:91
751 » Below the Poverty Line 4°70 1°42 |] 3°28
216 | Male Head 1m Receipt of Public Assistance 4°54 1°37 | 3°17
397 | Families Overcrowded 6-06 1°50 | 4°56
114 | Families according to descending Occupational Grade of Head, I, 2, 3. 2°49 | 0°33] 2:16
345 a” ”» ” ” a3 a9 29 a” 4; 5 2°41 0-36 2°05
1,369 ”» ” ” ”» a » ry ” 6. 3°28 0:56 2°72
1,377 a” >» ”» a” ” a9 ” ” 7: 3°51 0:68 2-83
2,076 a” a ” ” a? ? ” ” 8. a eee 4°16 1-06 3°10
2,244 | Families according to Economic Class: Male Head in Regular Employment | 3°31 0:62 2°69
597 > »9 ”» ” as a» a” , Casual a9 4° Io 1°22 2-88
360 x “8 Unemployed s 4°35 1°23 3°12
234 Children of Men Unemployed for some time eee 4°34 | I-21 3°13
189 | Families containing Men Unemployed i for some time 6:74 | 1°88 | 4°86
72 | Children of Sick Parents . eee . 5°3 I-2 4°1
55 | Families containing Sick Children . 6:6 1°4 5°2
92 | Children of Parents suffering from Chronic I liness . 4°7 1°7 3°0
80 | Families containing Children suffering from Chronic I liness 5:9 I°2 4°7
32 | Children of Parents Crippled or Tubercular ... ws ‘ 4°4 I°5 2°9
37. | Families containing Children Crippled or Tubercular 6°5 22 4°3

Continued overleaf
190

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE 19. ASSOCIATION BETWEEN SUB-NORMALITY AND FERTILITY—Continued

 

Mean Number of

Definition of Group
—_ Children

Children .
INFANT WELFARE GROUP Born | Dead | Living
7oo | Random Sample of Families with Young Infant 3°49 2°96
157 » » » » Superior Class .| 1°97 1°87
324 i 4 3 ,, Of Higher Social Class (E, F, G, H) 2°81 2°52
376 » » » », Of Lower Social Class (A, B,C, D)} 4°12 3°38
I2I » »,  Overcrowded Families 5°61 4°45
48 » », according to descending Occupational Grade I, 2, 3. 2°36 2°20
64 33 a3 23 23 23 393 as 4, 5: 2:16 2°Or
102 a? 93 a? a) 2? a3 a? 6. eee 2°95 2°59
159 ” ” ” ” 92 a a? 7: 3°12 2°72
316 a? a3 a? a) a? os a? 8. 4°33 3°52
517 » Health of Parents, good. 3°22 2°79
183 i rr - su fair or poor. 4°29 3°48
142 » » ” » good but 1 or more ‘children dead 5°47 4°02
70 » » » » fair or poor and 1 or more children dead 6°54 4°42

SUB-NORMAL TYPES INVESTIGATION
Famulies containing 1 or more Defective Children, A ged 5-22:

ees

1,115 | Mental Defect 7°2 4°7
86 | Blindness . _ — 4°9
186 | Deafness ... 7 — 4°6
52 | Epilepsy oe — 4°5
247 | Physical Defect ( Congenital Deformity, Heart, Paralysis) sa 5:0 3°9
351 ‘a » (Acquired Rickets, Tubercular Joints or Glands) .. 6:1 4°6
56 7 7 (Miscellaneous—Rheumatic, Hearts, etc.) se 6°7 4°6
Famultes in veceipt of Public Assistance for two years or more :

61 | Male Head unemployed, under 50, Occupational Grade 1-6. 4°5 3°7
148 a3 a? as a ” ” a” 7: 4°2 3°4
479 2 a» ” >? »» ” a 8. 4°4 3°4

65 | Widow, under 50, Occupational Grade of late Husband 1-6. 3°6 3°1

9g! a9 ” ” 9 ” a9 ” a” 7- 4°3 3°5
158 o? a ” »9 a? ” ” ” 8. 4°5 3°6

34 | Deserted Wife, under 50, Occupational Grade of Husband 1-6. 3°2 2°8
160 ” a os ” 1” MD ” 7: 3°9 3°1

86 ” a” ” a ” ” ” a) 8. 3°8 3°1

high fertility is common to certain groups it
is probably because they have other factors
in common of a kind conducive to high
fertility. I merely throw out the suggestion that there appears to be close relationship between the milder sub-normal types of
family (synonymous with the social problem group) and some again between them
and the types of family which from time to
time produce feeble-minded offspring. May
there not possibly be links connecting them
also with other serious types of disability ?
But, whether or not that be so, if it can

 

be taken as proved that high fertility is
closely associated with most types of subnormality, both mild and grave, we must
face the fact as constituting a social problem
of peculiar gravity. I personally do not
regard it as an intractable problem ; but this
is not the place in which to offer any suggestions for its solution.

My grateful thanks are due to.Miss J. E.
McCrindell for considerable help in the collection and analysis of the Infant Welfare
material for this paper. ~

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 3.
210

erbliche Einfliisse. ~The Decline of the Birth
Rate explained by Heredity.] Monograph VI of
the Eugenics Research Association, New York,
1931.
4. Uber die Ursachen des Geburtenriickganges
beim deutschen Adel. [The Decline in the Birth
Rate of the German Nobility and its Causes. ]
Archiv fir Sociale Hygiene und Demographie,
VI, 5. 1931.

5. Die Fruchtbarkeit der Danziger Bevdélkerung im 18ten Jahrhundert. [The Fertility of the
Population of Danzig in the 18th Century.]

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

 
    
       
  
 

Mitteilungen des West-preussischen Geschl
vereins, XXXI, 1. —

6. Die Wandlungen der Fruchtbarkeit 3
deutschen Adels im i19ten Jahrhundert. ff
Fluctuations in the Fertility of the Gerg
Nobility in the 19th Century.] Archiv fir Rasq
hygiene, XXV, 2, 1932. e

7. Zahlenmdssiger Nachweis des Einflusses.
Erbmasse auf die Kinderzahlen des Hochadg
[Statistical Proof of the Influence of Heredity%
the Number of Children of the Higher Nobi
Eugenik, 1932.

DIFFERENTIAL CLASS FERTILITY

(See footnote on p. 188. D. Caradog Jones’s article.)

To prevent any possible misunderstanding of the
fertility figures in this first paper it is perhaps well
to explain here that we were not seeking to find
out how many children families containing an
ament could produce if they tried, nor how many
they would produce by the time their families were
completed, but simply how many children on the
average they had produced per family at the time
of investigation. The result came out large in com
arison with the average number of children per
amily in a random sample of the working-class
population, where also the families were not necessarily completed. It might not have appeared so
large had we adopted some other standard for comparison. We took the most general standard available, but it may be argued that it would have been
more appropriate to take a random sample of families containing at least one child of school age,
since (1) a family cannot have a feeble-minded
child if it has no child at all, and (2) feeblemindedness may not be detected till a child reaches
school-age. But our object was to compare the
mean accomplished fertility of families containing
an ament with the mean accomplished fertility of
families in general, and the latter group contains,
among others, families which, by their own wish
or otherwise, produce no children and families
whose children die before they reach school age.
Both these classes ought to be adequately represented in their failure to contribute to the general
population, but they would be ignored if we took
as our norm families containing at least one school

child. Moreover, if the standard adopted weg
limited at one end, it ought for consistency to ¥
limited at the other end also. One would therefor
be driven to take a random sample of families cot
taining at least one child between the ages of §
and 22, since all the ament families contained
least one ament between these ages. To rule ow
families with no child over 5 would tend to raisf
the accomplished fertility in comparison with thq
of families in general (the standard actual
adopted), but to rule out families with no chil
under 22 would tend in just the opposite directiosy
and these two tendencies would go some way t
cancel each other out.

There is another important point to which attem
tion should be drawn. Quite apart from any otheg
forces at work in that direction, there is
doubtedly a higher probability of an ament beingj
found in a large family than in a small family
just as there is a higher probability of finding @
genius in a large family—simply because there are
more children available to be genius or amentz
Some readers may be interested to inquire what thej
influence of this factor is upon the figures. I haveJ
discussed the question with two ‘listinguished’
statisticians and they estimate that it would raise¥
the average size of family by one chiid to a child
and-a-half. Consequently, an allowence of about)
that amount might be made in readinz the relevant;
tables if it be desired to determine “he effect npad}
them of other factors independently of this one. -;

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 3. :

is

  
   
     
  
