EDITORIAL COMMENT ON Mr. MUDGE'S
ARTICLE.

THE Editorial Committee have learnt with great regret that in certain
quarters Mr. Mudge’s article has been regarded as a direct attack on the
Jewish race, the main accusations resented being that of cowardice
and want of patriotism. Had the Committee realised that this article
would have been thus interpreted they would never have permitted its
publication. They wish in the first place to make it clear that all articles
published in the REVIEW are merely held to express the author’s own
opinions, and that the statements made by Mr. Mudge are not endorsed by
the Society. The policy of allowing very divergent expressions of opinion
to appear in the REVIEW has been adopted in the belief that such a policy
is as a rule in the interests both of education and of truth.

As to immigramts who have lived for but a few years in England, it is
perhaps not surprising that they should be unwilling to fight for their new
country. This fact, if it be one, may be used as an argument against
allowing a too rapid inflow of immigrants, rather than as affording an
indication of racial] inferiority.

The English Jews have unquestionably done great things for their
country in science, in art, in politics, and in commerce. As regards their
social virtues, their sobriety and their care for their children is universally
recognised. As to their war services, no member of Council has far to
look in order to find examples amongst his Jewish friends of devoted selfsacrifice both within and without the danger zone. In this connection the
words of Lord Reading may well be quoted (Tzmes, January 24th, 1920).
He said that “it was computed that the Jewish community in the United
Kingdom numbered altogether 275,000 men, women, and children. To
that number might be added 145,000 Jews in the British Dominions,
Colonies and Possessions, making a total of 420,000 in the Empire. Of
that number just over 50,000 belonged to some branch of His Majesty’s
Forces. Those who died, died gladly for a cause which was worthy of
them. Of those who served, five won the V.C., 50 obtained the D.S.O.,
240 the M.C.,” with a proportionate number of other awards. To send
more than 10 per cent. of their total number to serve their country will
be regarded by military experts as a contribution to the cause of liberty
with which any section of the community might well be satisfied. It is in
view of these facts, especially, that the Executive Committee desire formally to express their sincere regret that statements have been made in the
REVIEW which have caused the Jews of England to feel that their honour
has been affected.

We quote below an expression of opinion by Professor Seligman on
certain of the anthropological aspects of Mr. Mudge’s article (#.e., those
mot specifically Jewish), his object being to emphasise the fact that there
is no such thing as an English race. Certainly three great racial streams
have been mingled together in the composition of the population of these
islands. We ourselves have used the expression Jewish race, though we
EDITORIAL COMMENT ON MR. MUDGE’S ARTICLE. 39

have grave doubts whether it is in any degree more scientifically justifiable than the term “ English race.” Where physical differences exist
between two sections of a population, as those between Jews and nonJews, this fact in no way proves the homogeneity of either section. No
doubt the traditions of the Jews have generally made them umwilling to
marry outside their own communities; but in spite of this impediment,
there must always have been some intermingling of their blood with that
of their fellow countrymen during the course of the last twenty centuries,
with the result that there must now be material racial differences between
the Jews of different parts of Europe and Asia. The loyalty which exists
amongst the Jews has, we suspect, led them to greatly underrate the
differences in the racial strains which they include within their ranks.

Every race, however pure, covers a wide range of differences of innate
personal qualities, both mental and physical. Those who wish to keep
the racial qualities of these islands at as high a level as possible, and
who would therefore strengthen the laws in regard to the exclusion of
undesirable aliens, ought to consider both personal and racial differentiation. Moreover in view of the practical difficulties connected with framing
administrative regulations dealing with minor racial differences, and the
greater ease with which personal defects can be indicated, it may be urged
that the immigration laws should be mainly based not on race, but on
personal qualities.

The following notes, dealing with Mr. Mudge’s paper in so far as it
refers to European ethnology, have been sent to us by Dr. C. G. Seligman,
F.R.S., Professor of Ethnology in the University of London :—

It will be seen that Mr. Mudge’s paper contains at least two basic
assumptions, each erroneous yet presenting a certain plausibility for those
who have not studied the received tenets and facts of ethnology. In
support of this statement, certain passages may be cited from the last
edition (1920) of a recognised English text-book on the subject, namely,
Man, Past and Present, by A. H. Keane, revised and brought up to date by
Mrs. A. Hingston Quiggin and Dr. A. C. Haddon, the latter reader in
Ethnology, Cambridge. Mr. Mudge seems to lay a good deal of stress on
the term Caucasian and on the non-Caucasian nature of the Jew (p. 210,
1. 11); for he speaks of ‘“‘two categories, the Caucasian group and the
Asiatic or Oriental ” (making clear that by latter he means Jews), and he
proceeds to give his own definition of Caucasian, i.e., that the term is to
“ include the three great European races, i.e., Nordic, Mediterranean and
‘Alpine ” (p. 210, 1. 11; p. 210, f.n.). On this point Keane writes :—‘‘ But no
really satisfactory substitute for ‘ Caucasic’ has yet been suggested, and it
is doubtful if any name could be found sufficiently comprehensive to include
all the races, long-headed and short-headed, fair and dark, tall and short,
that we are at present content to group under this non-committal heading.
Undoubtedly the term ‘ Caucasic’ cannot be defended on ethnical grounds.
Nowhere else in the world probably is so heterogeneous a lot of people,
languages and religions gathered together in one place as along the chain
of the Caucasus mountains.” But we are no more called upon to believe
that the “ Caucasic” peoples originated in the Caucasus, than that the
40 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Semites are all descendants of Shem or Hamites of Ham. ‘“‘ Caucasic ”
has one claim that can never be disputed, that of priority, and it would be
well if innovators in these matters were to take to heart the sober language
of Ehrenreich, who reminds us that the accepted names are, what they
ought to be, ‘“ purely conventional,” and “ historically justified,” and
** should be held as valid until something better can be found to take their
place.” It was considerations such as these, weighing so strongly in
favour of current usage, that induced me stare per vias antiguas in the
Ethnology, and consequently also in the present work. Hence, here as
there, the Caucasic Division retains its title, together with those of its
main subdivisions—Hamitic, Semitic, Keltic, Slavic, Hellenic, Teutonic,
Iranic, Gallic and so on.”

It follows that the Jews are members of the Caucasic group of
peoples, a fact that has not, as far as I know, been doubted by any competent anthropologist.

Mr. Mudge makes considerable play with “the English race” (é.g.,
p. 211, 1. 12), but, though there is an English nation and language, surely
there is no one English race. Does he zeally think the short, dark, longheaded Devon man is racially one with the tall, long-headed blonde of the
Eastern counties? Does he consider the round-headed type one with
either or both, and if not, why does he erect his supposititious English
race? On this point I will again refer to Keane (pp. 516-524), whose conclusions may in the main I think be fairly summarised, as far as the
present argument is affected, as follows:—-The Neolithic inhabitants of
Britain were predominantly short, dark, dolichocephals of the Mediterranean type. A brachycephalic race, or probably two brachycephalic races,
came into the country next, during the Stone and Bronze Age. The
characters of one of these groups ‘connect this type closely with the
Alpine type on the continent.” Then came the invasions of the Teutonic
tribes, for the most part historical. But as the statement and discussion in
Keane is of considerable length and complexity, I will in addition quote
the synopsis of the inhabitants of the British Isles given by Haddon in
The Races of Man (20th Century Science Series), p. 41.

“ British Isles.—Mainly inhabited by members of the Northern and
Mediterranean Races, with traces of Alpine Race.... The Northern
elements are more pronounced on north and east of Britain, with fair
colouring and tall stature. The Mediterranean elements persist in Invermess, Argyle, Wales, Cornwall, an area north of London, the Fen
country, and largely in Ireland, with darker colouring and shorter stature.”

So much for what seems to me to be the two main fallacies concerning Europe from the anthropological point of view in Mr. Mudge’s paper.
But a protest may perhaps be permitted against the extreme form of the
glorification of the Nordic stock in which Mr. Mudge indulges, as being
all too near akin to the Prussian glorification of the “ blonde beast.” Can
Mr. Mudge produce evidence that Drake and the band of Devon men who
did so much for England, and who surely were the very exemplars of his
adventurous Englishmen, were Nordics? Considering the predominance
of the Mediterranean type in Devon, the presumption is so strongly
against this that only definite evidence can upset the presumption.
