PERIODIC FLUCTUATIONS IN THE
NATURAL INCREASE OF MAN.’

L. H. DupLEY Buxton, M.A.
(Department of Human Anatomy, University Museum, Oxford).

INTRODUCTION.

The occurrence of periodicities in human life has been a subject of
considerable study, both in ancient and modern times. The seasonal
increase and decrease of births and deaths, for instance, has attracted
much attention and possesses a literature of its own. Further, the
economic and social effects of fluctuations in the climate over periods of
longer duration than a single year upon both primitive and civilized
peoples have been carefully analysed. To Ellsworth Huntingdon and
his school is especially due the theory of the effect of long period
fluctuations on humanity, and human culture. In the Pulse of
Asia and Climate and Civilization, to name only two books, Huntingdon
has adduced much evidence to shew that the long period variations in
climatic conditions bear a close correlation with the observed facts of
history. Certain types of climate make for progress, others for stagnation in human affairs; even such essentially artificial affairs as the New
York Stock Exchange cannot escape the control of changing climate.

But while considerable attention has been drawn by geographers to
these social factors the biological side of the question seems to have been
comparatively neglected. By biological I mean those aspects of
human life in which man’s physical nature is paramount, and for my
present purpose I propose to limit the study to periodic increase and
decrease in numbers. Even this however is too wide a field for a short
paper and it is proposed therefore to limit the discussion to periodic
fluctuations of a phase greater than one year and not greater than forty
years, that is what may be described as short period variables in terms
of years. Although it was found necessary to set the forty year term as
the upper limit for reasons which will appear later, most attention has
been concentrated on periods of a few years. The reason for this is
that it is clearly necessary to limit the field. Secondly, the study of
periodicities needs data which cover a long period of years. But in
most countries the annual increase or decrease in the population has
only been recorded for a very short period. Mark Jefferson (Geographical Review, XV. 1925, 178) has drawn attention to the fact that

* I should like to express my great indebtedness in the preparation of this
paper to Mr. C.S. Elton, who has discussed the whole matter with me and has lent
me some of his unpublished diagrams; to Mr. Henry Balfour, F.R.S., who read
through the first draft, and to Mr. H. O. Beckit and the staff of the Geography
School in Oxford, who devoted much time and trouble to helping me in my search for
statistical material. Mr. Ford, Assistant Librarian in the Radcliffe Library, and
his staff have placed me still further in their debt with their ready helpfulness.
148 EUGENICS REVIEW.

only eight countries date their census back as far as 1800 and only
sixteen as far back as 1850. Many of the earlier figures are not absolutely reliable, and in some instances, even in modern times, the
methods of registration make it rather difficult to be certain that the
figures are strictly comparable over the period which the statistics
cover.

It has been necessary therefore to limit the field very considerably
and to work within narrow limits. Even’so, however, the student of
human periodicities is better situated than the comparative biologist,
who in studying fluctuations in the number of animals has to depend on
still more unsatisfactory data, from the statistical point of view.

Elton* in a recent paper has drawn attention to the biological
significance of short period variables in relation to animals. He has
shewn that there is a close correlation between climatic variations and
numbers, although the relationship is different in different groups.
The carnivores for the most part lag to some extent behind the
herbivores in the increase in numbers; thus among the smaller animals
the foxes increase subsequently to the lemmings. There appears also
to be evidence that the larger carnivora increase in response to an
increase in the numbers of their prey, but in this case owing to the
smaller number in a litter and the longer period of gestation the lag is
greater. In man the matter is still more complicated because this
response, if it occurs, will vary not only according to his size, as an
animal, but also according to the state of his culture and the type of
food which he prefers. In very broad terms the animals in northern
America and those in Europe are independent of one another and if we
find that in one year there is an increase in both, this increase must be
the result of world conditions which affect them both. Man in the
lower phases of his culture is similarly affected by local conditions. In
the higher phases of culture both food and bacteria can be rapidly transported over a wide area. It is practically certain that among the
animals at least an increase in the food supply causes an increase in
numbers, while the effect of epidemics is too well known to need discussion. In what follows an attempt will be made to compare the
fluctuations in the numbers of animals with those in man.

In general terms it is usually accepted that, except under special
circumstances, the numbers of any animal in a given area remain
fairly constant, if an average is taken over a period of years. But over
very long periods there are undoubted changes, leading to the ultimate
extinction, or dominance of a certain species; in shorter periods there
are ‘plagues of Egypt’ in which a certain animal increases excessively,
and there are ‘‘bad years’’ in which the hunters can find little game.
Carr Saunders (Population. 1925. P.12) has shewn that man follows
a similar law. ‘‘If we take a long view,’’ he says, ‘‘and study the
human race from the earliest times, we must regard an increasing
population as less usual than a stationary population.’’ The same
biological principles may be applied to man as to the other animals.
With the approach of industrialism however a great increase in the

* Periodic Fluctuations in the numbers of animals; their causes and effects.
(British Journ. of Experimental] Biology, IT., 1924, 119-163).
FLUCTUATIONS IN NATURAL INCREASE IN MAN. 149
human population has occurred and this as we shall see is apparently
accompanied by a dying out, either permanently or temporarily, of the
periodicity which occurs at other times. It is the more unfortunate
that it is difficult to find accurate figures of the natural increase of mankind for a period of any length previous to the damping out of the
waves of variation. For uncivilised man accurate figures are impossible to obtain, and I have therefore concentrated on certain long
periods where figures are available.

The fact that the industrialism of the last generation before the war
shews very clearly an increased damping effect over previous generations is at least suggestive that primitive man experienced even greater
periodic fluctuations in population than did the countries of Europe in
the XVITI and XIX centuries. We know that such fluctuations have
occurred over a great part of Asia both in long and short periods. It
would therefore seem that the analogy between civilised man and
savage is likely to be of importance, the savage behaving more like the
animals, in closer relation to his surroundngs, industrialised man being
less subject to any temporary change in his immediate habitat but
responding to influences which affect the whole world. .

But the differences between man in any state of culture and the
animals is so marked as to need special elaboration. Man as we know
him is organised, even in his most primitive condition, into groups,
which are for the most part endogamous.* Although no doubt mating
does take place beyond the group or tribe, such mating is rare and is not
infrequently severely penalized. The group represents a biological
entity. Most groups are, in a savage state, close to the margin of
safety in numbers and any decrease or increase has serious effects. A
large group, such as are the modern nations, can make up losses in one
direction by gains in another. A small group cannot do this. If the
group, and possibly their animals, become too numerous there arises a
quarrel ‘‘between Abraham’s servants and Lot’s servants’* and the
tribe splits into two. If the numbers fall too low then the group
becomes too weak to exist as a unit. Between these two extremes the
margin is not great.

Among the animals, as far as we know, the limits of mating are
rather geographical] than sociological. The effect of an increase or
decrease of numbers may perhaps not be so severely felt unless a whole
region is affected, in which case the effects will be analogous to man.
Generally then among the animals it is the geographical region, in the
smaller sense, which limits the unit ; in man the unit is formed by the
social group.

As culture develops the unit becomes larger, this increase being
not infrequently accompanied by a wider license in the choice of mates.
Civilised man therefore differs considerably from both the animals and
savage man in that a lack in one area may more easily be counterbalanced by an excess in another. Similarly the increase of economic

* The terms endogamous and exogamous are open to a misunderstanding. Those
tribes which practice ‘‘exogamy’’ are only exogamous in relation to certain divisions
of the tribe, but they are endogamous in relation to all other tribes. It is possible
therefore that a tribe which practices so-called ‘‘exogamy’’ may really be
extremely inbred. :
150 EUGENICS REVIEW.

relations tends to stabilize the varying local geographic conditions..
Finally industrialism brings a further biological unification, a discussion of which is beyond the scope of this paper.

My attention was first drawn to the importance of short period’
variations in relation to semi-civilised peoples by Mr. Rustad, of
Kalgan. He told me that there appeared to be a relationship between
the amount of snow on the plateau of southern Inner Mongolia and the.
number of babies born to the Mongols in the following year. He
ascribed this interesting phenomenon, which he admitted must be
accepted with a good deal of reserve, to the fact that after there was a
snowy winter, conditions favoured an increase first in the herds, and
subsequently inthe men. At that time I was unable to enquire further
into the matter and have no details for Mongolia.*

It becomes clear, however, that if we analyse population tables:
until the industrial revolution, numbers remain more or less constant,
but big variations do occur. Secondly, Europe in the last century
has experienced a tremendous increase in population and thirdly, in
recent times there has been a marked fall in the birthrate and deathrate
of most of those countries which keep accurate statistics. There
appear to have been increases in the population at various periods as
far back as history can be traced, often with catastrophic effects on
mankind. These long period variables (one of which, having a period.
of about 400 years appears to have the greatest amplitude), are probably intimately concerned with the history of migrations ; they must
however be reserved for a future paper. There remain the shorter:
periods.

METHODS OF ANALYSIS.

If any series of figures be examined in which time represents one of
the co-ordinates it will frequently happen that a number of periodicities
will be found to occur. Some appear often to be rather inexplicable,
others again clearly represent a real periodicity in the series under
examination.

In studying any such series of numbers, say the birthrate, we may
examine the figures one by one or we may divide them up in groups of
years. In this paper I have used both methods. It is clear that if we
have a series of figures, like 1 2 8 45 43 21, which goes on repeating
itself in that order, and if we arrange this series as it repeats in sets of
nine so that 1 is under 1, and 2 under 2, and so on and then take the
average of any number of repetitions, this average will be the same as.
any single set of the series, because the same number will necessarily
fall under the same number in each repetition. If however we arrange
them in any other way, say in sixes, thus

123 4 5 4

8 2 1 1 2 8
if our series is sufficiently long, the sums will be equal and if averaged
will each be equal to the average of the series, in this case 25/9. This
equality will be reached when the number of rows is equal to the actual

* For long period variables in this area see my papers: Geogr. Jour. LXI.
1923. 3898. Geographical Teacher. XIII. 1925. 42.
FLUCTUATIONS IN NATURAL INCREASE IN MAN. 151

periodicity. In this case we should have to repeat the series nine
times. During this repetition each figure in the series would appear
once in each column and the difference between them would be cancelled out. A few trials will shew those not conversant with these
methods that the nearer the actual periodicity is to that chosen the more
closely will the average of the columns approach the actual amplitude
of the figures. Where we have not got clear cut variables, as we have
in the example given above, it is useful to use the amplitude as a
measure of the exactness of our arrangement ofthe series. Wherever
the material was sufficiently long I have arranged my figures in chapters
of five and taken the average. The next set of five can be compared
with the first and the value of the periodicity selected conveniently
checked. Unfortunately few series are sufficiently long for this
method, especially where the period is fairly long and in many cases I
have had to be contented with taking the average of three rows. I
have also used the methods of harmonic analysis, especially for exploratory work.

In selecting material I have tried to cover as wide a range as
possible, but owing to the dearth of suitable statistics it was necessary
to limit myself to the White race and to certain other groups who,
owing to their association with the Whites, have been accurately
registered.

The series examined include Finland, Brandenburg, Australia,
British India, Bermuda (White and Coloured), Switzerland. The
two first were selected partly because long series could be obtained
and partly because they were small regions, British India appeared
to be an interesting place to compare with Europe, although the size
of the region and the diversity of geographical features make it otherwise an unsatisfactory area. Bermuda is a clear case of a small region
containing two different races, registered by similar methods. Australia, including the various states which make up the Commonwealth, provided again an interesting comparison with Europe, although unfortunately no data are available for the aborigines. JI had hoped to
include Canada, but the diverse methods of registration and the shortness of the series rendered this impossible. I used Switzerland as an
additional check. I have limited myself to these few countries in
order to bring the data within bounds.

At the outset of my enquiries I attempted to analyse the natural
increase in the population. It soon became clear that there were at
least two periodicities of short period in years which appeared to have
a great amplitude. I therefore substituted for the natural increase an
analysis of the birth and death rates. Owing to the different methods
in use in calculating these they are not always comparable, but as we
are concerned chiefly with periodicities, it will be shewn that the
different methods in use do not seriously vitiate our conclusions, provided that no change of method is used in calculating the rates in any
one country. In any case comparison between the rates in different
countries would seem to be a difficult matter, unless a long series is
taken, because most countries shew a periodicity, and therefore to
compare isolated years in various countries, as is often done in
otherwise very valuable tables of statistics, serves little purpose.
152 EUGENICS REVIEW.

FIGURE I.
Birth Rate per thousand in Finland.

 

DB (BOR ee AB ce MB rece BBR

35

30
FLUCTUATIONS IN NATURAL INCREASE IN MAN. 1538

FIGURE I—continued.

OM ee Eee ceed

 

1866 vo yee 1898. ey uo 90K

35°

  

340.

The figures on the left represent the birthrate per thousand. Guide lines
have been drawn every 4} years. They have been shifted one year forward
every forty-five years. For explanation see text.
54 EUGENICS REVIEW.

In every case where figures were available the crude rates have been
used, but in some cases for lack of satisfactory data the actual numbers
of births and deaths have been used. The selection of which rate to
use is a highly technical matter which cannot be discussed here for
lack of space, but it may be noted that in discussing periodicities there
is much to be said for the adoption of the actual figures, or still better
their logarithms, and by subtracting the logarithm of one year from that
of the succeeding year, thus finding the logarithm of the proportional
increase or decrease from year to year. This method was adopted in
the preliminary work. It was however rejected in making the final
calculations as it seemed better to publish the figures in a form which
was more likely to be familiar, instead of the unfamiliar logarithmic
form.

' ANALYSIS OF BIRTHRATES.

In analysing the births it became clear that though the periodicities were not clear cut,—which was hardly to be expected,—the most
marked short period variable in the birthrate of Finland was in the
neighbourhood of four and a half years. As there is no accurate
method of interpolation, it is most convenient to take the whole numbber of years closest to the periodicity. I have therefore selected
9 years in which the phase is twice repeated. The choice is further
governed by the fact that alternate phases of four and a half years
shew a greater, or less, amplitude. If the birthrates are arranged
in periods of five the successive three forty-five year average birthrates
are as follows :—

1 2 3 4, 5 6 7 8 9

1751—1795 488 421 398 408 416 422 4238 402 419

1796—1840 3879 865 377 360 3865 374 3865 3870 360

1841—1885 337 862 865 362 350 868 856 348 354*

During this whole period of 135 years the greatest birthrate recorded is 469 in 1759 and the least is 246 in 1868.+ It is clear from an
examination of these figures and from the curve of the whole period
(fig. 1.) that in addition to the periodicity there has been a gradual
decrease in the birthrate, especially between the first and second
periods, that is before and after the coming of industrialism to Europe.
If the figures be closely examined it will also be seen that though the
curves correspond to a certain degree there is a shifting of the minima
one place forward every forty-five years. In the first series they occur
in the third and eighth years, in the second in the fourth and ninth
years and in the last series in the first, fifth, and eighth, the last minimum not being apparent in the other series. I have indicated the
minima by printing in italics to guide the eye, and this shifting is
very apparent. In other words the true periodicity is rather more
than four and a half, and the change is one year in forty-five, that is
the minima advance one year every five times, on an average, that we

* In order to obtain these figures I wrote down the birth rates in nine columns,
putting that for the year 1760 under that for 1751, and so on till the forty-five
years was exhausted, and then averaged the total of each of the nine columns.

+ In this and all that follows I have given the figures without any decimal]
point, per mille it should be of course 46-9 and 24-6 respectively.
FLUCTUATIONS IN NATURAL INCREASE IN MAN. 155

repeat our nine year circle, the true periodicity will repeat itself twice
in 9.2 years, and therefore is in the neighbourhood of 4.6 This can be
seen graphically on the diagram. Here I have plotted the birthrates
and have drawn lines to guide the eye every four and a half years.
But this is not sufficiently accurate, and to allow for the inaccuracy I
have shifted my guide line one place forward every forty-five years, It
will be seen at once that sometimes the lines do not fall exactly on
the minima. This may be accounted for by the fact that our periodicity is not an exact number of years, whereas our figures are only given
for annual periods.

If instead of nine we had grouped our figures in sets of ten s a
trial period a certain periodicity would of course have occurred, but
with a lesser amplitude. The figures are:

1751—1800 404 417 418 481 424 412 411 405 406 407

‘These averages may be conveniently compared with the actual figures,
in which of course, as there is no averaging, the amplitude will not be
altered in any way.

1751—1760 443 447 41 464 469 458 483 423 445 466

1761—1770 458 413 480 457 429 415 407 429 424 409

Here again I have italicized the minima. Arranged in tens they do
not fall under one another but one year earlier, in nines they fall
under one another. The last figure is not a minimum, as can be seen
from the curve, but is followed by a lower figure. In order that the
periodicity may be further tested I have marked the ten year periods
on figure 1, but have not drawn lines, as too many lines tend to confuse
the eye. The reader by drawing lines in pencil, or better still in red
ink for every tenth year, will see at once that though first of all they
appear to correspond with the true periodicity, being in fact actually
.8 of a year wrong they soon cease to shew the true intervals to which
the other lines at 4.5 year intervals closely correspond.

This 4.5 (or more accurately 4.6) periodicity is not confined to
Finland, but seems to be widely distributed. In the long series
from Brandenburg, which starts in 1816, it is clearly marked. It
can be traced in the figures for Germany as a whole but in this case it
is noteworthy that the amplitude is less; suggesting that by taking this
large area with a considerable population, we are averaging our results
and to a certain extent damping our curve, a fact the significance of
which will be discussed later. Switzerland shews a similar periodicity,
it is well marked in British India, and elsewhere. One of the most
interesting series I have found is that of Bermuda, where the series
is a short one. The absolute figures are given in diagram form (Fig.
2). The Whites shew a clear periodicity, the Coloured while differing in many ways from the Whites shew a certain correlation, but the
series is too short to discover the relationship.

If we plot the curves of different countries independently then the
same periodicity appears, but usually if curves are superimposed the
relationship seems obscure. [ found however by comparison that this
apparent confusion is due to the fact that there is a lag between different countries, central Europe is between one and two years behind the
Baltic region, much in the same way, as Elton has pointed out to me,
156 EUGENICS REVIEW.

FIGURE II.

MOF I cee AO

600

Coloured Airs,

 

150 400

Birth Rates in Bermuda. (Absolute Figures).
Solid Line Whites. Broken Line Coloured.

Both"drawn on same scale. Figures on left are for Whites, on right for
Coloured. Vertical lines correspond to White minima and have been
drawn "for 44 year periods.
FLUCTUATIONS IN NATURAL INCREASE IN MAN. 157

the fox curve in some places lags a year behind that in others. Further
if we take different countries and adjust the initial date we shall get a
close correspondence. This correspondence appears whether we take
the crude birthrate or the absolute figures, shewing that the different
methods of registration in various countries will not affect our results.
Figure 8 shews the average values for 45 years arranged in chapters
of {:ve for Finland (initial date 1851) Brandenburg (initial date 18438)
and the average of the absolute figures of births for Switzerland from
1875. It will be seen at a glance that in spite of certain differences,
due very largely to the fact that the figures are given for years instead
of shorter periods, the three curves are very strikingly similar, although
the figures in themselves are very different. The point of similarity
then is the periodicity, for the birthrate of Brandenburg is nearly half
as much again, during this period as that of Finland, and, as I have
drawn it, the Swiss figures are actual births. It is also noteworthy
that Finland in spite of a lesser birthrate has a nearly equal amplitude
to that of Brandenburg, both curves being on the same scale, due I
fancy to the different social and economic conditions of the two countries. 3

There are some exceptions to this periodicity. In New Zealand
there is a practically continuous decline, such variations as occur being
not beyond the law of chance. Similarly since 1891 the Norwegian
birthrate has steadily declined without eny marked, or indeed any
periodicity.

ANALYSIS OF DEATH Raves.

Having analysed the periodicity in the birthrate it seemed clear
that since there was a well marked short period the interference which
appeared in the natural increase must be due to the deathrate. I
found that a period of about seven and a half years was well marked in
the same countries in which I had already analysed the birthrate.
Following the method previously explained I again took 45 year averages, but as it was necessary to have sets of 15 (twice 7.5) only chapters
of three could be used to form the average.* In this case I found that
my original rough estimate of 7.5 was rather too great although for the
first 28 years from 1751 there is a well marked seven year curve, as
can be seen on the diagram (fig. 4.). The forty-five year averages are

as follows:
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 18 14 15

1751-1795 266 268 277 262 304 296 246 281 291 305 332 289 805 290 248
1796-1840 265 219 240 288 256 246 267 348 254 237 256 285 357 357 243
1841-1885 248 244 252 236 235 286 252 258 222 250 274 278 228 240 241

The corresponding minima are in italics. In the second line the third
minimum is an exception and the last maxima are also rather different.
It is clear that we have in this case an alternation. For practical
purposes this periodicity is about 7.3, although it is actually slightly
greater than this, but as I have shewn at least in the earlier periods is
very close to seven. It is possible that there may be a slight change
of phase from time to time. The actual figures can be seen with
guide lines on figure 4.

*22 years is a better period still and figure 4 has been drawn on that basis. I
have selected 15 only for convenience in printing.
158 EUGENICS REVIEW.

FIGURE III.

|

 

Birthrates in Finland and Brandenburg, absolute number of births in 1000s in
Switzerland.

The curves represent an average of 45 years, periods of 9 years being
arranged in chapters of 5 years and averaged. Finland solid line, Brandenburg broken and Switzerland dotted. The initial date for Finland is 1841, for
Brandenburg 1843, and for Switzerland 1875.
tr

ies
: ag
Ft
Ae
eat
ep
Ay

 
FIGURE IV—continued.
1939 18 45 (959

 

Deathrates per thousand in Finland, arranged in 22 year periods. ;

Guide lines have been drawn every fifth, thirteenth and twentieth year in
each 22 year period. The letters A, B, C refer to the numerical order of the
periods.
FLUCTUATIONS IN NATURAL INCREASE IN MAN. 161

If the natural increase is plotted (fig. 5, which gives the first 28
years in which observations in Finland were taken, from 1751 onwards),
we get a complicated curve, in which birth and deathrate phases interfere with one another. Drawing two sets of guide lines makes the
figure rather complicated so the lines have been drawn below. We see
that on the whole the maxima correspond with birthrate maxima, and
minima with deathrate maxima. In the one case where these two
exactly coincide the natural increase is close to the average of the
whole series, in other words complete interference has taken place.

MAXIMAL AND MINIMAL YEARS.

Other periodicities occur which will be discussed later. It is of
interest to turn to the actual years in which maxima and minima have
occurred in various countries. In Finland the minima of natural
increase are more marked than the maxima. The most noticeable,
for by no means all the minima are equally marked, occur in 1768,
1789, 1808-9 (very marked), 1883, 1868 (very marked), less marked
minima occur in 1788, 1808, 1836, 1857. The chief maxima, which
coincide with birth maxima, are found in 1761, 1779, 1792-3, 1795,
1821, 1842, 1864, 1871, 1879, 1887, 1898. Most of the minima are
associated with epidemic diseases, but the regularity in which they
occur is very striking. It is usual to refer these drops in the natural
increase to disease and to suppose that this will account for the whole
matter. Fig. 4 shews the surprising regularity of the death curve for
Finland. For convenience the original curve was drawn in sets of 22
years. Figure 6 shews the first average of the first three sets of 22
years superimposed on the average of the second three sets, covering
altogether a period of over 150 years. There are certain differences,
but the general agreement is very great. Periodicity is clearly an
important factor, and the epidemics are part of the general rhythm
of the population.

In contrast to the European birth rates I examined those from
Australia which present features of special interest especially since
they shew that some of the high rates are wide spread and others are
limited to smaller regions, or if they appear over a wide area have a
different amplitude in different places. In Australia as a whole the
birthrates decline from 1860, there are however two periods of arrested
decline, between 1877 and 1890 and after 1908, the lowest birthrate is
1908, and the lowest deathrate 1871. There are exceptionally high
deathrates in 1860, 1866, 1875, 1884, 1898, and of course 1919, which
year, or the year before it is a universally bad year. All these latter
figures are associated with epidemic diseases and while correlated with
Europe shew on the whole a lag behind it.

'  _In the individual states the following points seemed of interest.
New South Wales shews no marked characters, there are minima in
1903 and 1919, the one associated with drought and the other with
influenza, and a maximum in 1912. Victoria seems to have a long
periodicity , the figures being insufficient to determine it with accuracy,
maxima occur in 1862 and 1891 and minima in 1882-3 and 1919, the
1903 minimum is found but is only slightly marked. The actual curve
for Queensland is shewn on fig. 7. South Australia has a marked
162 EUGENICS REVIEW.

FIGURE V.
NATURAL INCREASE. FINLAND

 

Natural Increase in Finland from 1751 onwards (28 years).
The broken lines indicate a year of deathrate maxima, the solid lines one
-of birthrate{maxima.
FLUCTUATIONS IN NATURAL INCREASE IN MAN. 168

periodicity. Maxima occur in 1862 and 1884-5 and 1914, and minima
in 1875, 1900 and 1919. South Australia has most noticeable maxima
in 1864 and 1886 and minima in 1875, 1896, and 1919. The birthrate
of Tasmania is also periodic, maxima occurring in 1860, 1884, 1893,
1912, with one in 1914 almost as big as 1912. .

The death rates do not shew so marked a periodicity. From 1860
to 1875 the 7.5 year period seems to occur, but after that there is no
apparent periodicity.

It is unnecessary to discuss the natual increase in detail; for
Australia maxima occur in 1871, 1892, 1914 and minima in 1866, 1875,
1898, 1903, and 1919. Of these minima all except that of 1903, a
drought year, are contemporaneous with an outbreak of epidemic disease. The maximum of 1871 is of special interest, being apparently
due rather to low mortality than to an exceptional birth rate.

I explored the figures for other periodicities which undoubtedly
exist, but no others of so short a period shew any great amplitude.
There does however appear to be a certain correlation between the
death rates and the birthrates and in some countries the 4.6 period is
reflected in the death rate also, this may be due to infant mortality.
The most important conclusions of this exploration seemed to be that
neither in the birthrate nor in the deathrate of my fairly long European
series was there any marked amplitude to the periods of 10, 11, or 12
years, although there is a suggestion of a period of 22 years in the
Australian natural increase tables. I have not a sufficiently long
period to make this certain either positively or negatively.

CAUSES OF PERIODICITIES.

These periodicities may be due to three causes, environmental or
geographic, by which I mean due to climate or similar factors; they
may be due to the action of other organisms, or they may be due to some
physiological rhythm or growth curve inherent in man himself. It
can be shewn that the first two are certainly important, and while it
is difficult in the present state of our knowledge to put the third out
of count there seems to be little evidence to support it.

The alternative effect of other organisms, although apart from the
subject of this paper, may be briefly discussed. Some of the maxima
of the deathrate are undoubtedly due to bacterial and other diseases.
The influenza epidemic of 1918 affected the whole world and there are
other pandemics which have had a universal effect. In some cases
however, though an epidemic supervened, it does not seem to have been
the entire cause of the fall in population. It is usual to ascribe the
low birthrate of Switzerland in 1871 to introduced epidemic diseases.
Such epidemic diseases did occur, but comparative figures are important
in this connexion. The year had a low birthrate in Brandenburg, but
was a good year in Finland, which country as I have shewn is between
one and two years in advance of Brandenburg. On other grounds also
it can be shewn that there is a fair parallel between the two countries.

Secondly it would appear that normally the birthrate is not
affected to anything like what it was in Switzerland in that year even
by the most virulent epidemics. In British India the deathrate for
the years 1918 ff. was 327, 625, 359, 308. The birthrate for the same
164 EUGENICS REVIEW.

FIGURE VI.
AVERAGE DEATH RATES IN FINLAND.

s
a
i

?

 

Average of ABC (fig. 4.)

“sce 99 DEF re)
The second curve has been shifted 3 places to the left
to allow for the fact that the assumed periodicity of

74 years is rather too small.

FIGURE VII.

 

Birthrate in Queensland from 1888.
FLUCTUATIONS IN NATURAL INCREASE IN MAN. 165

years was 393 , 353 , 302, 330, whereas the 1871 birthrate for Switzerland
was quite unparalleled. Epidemics then are of great importance to the
death rate and of importance to the birthrate, but in the latter shew a
lag on the deathrate. But there still remains the normal periodicity
which does not seem to be accounted for sufficiently by these reasons
alone. It must further be remembered that epidemics themselves are
caused by living organisms, and that their periodicity itself may possibly have a close relationship, as Elton has recently pointed out, to
geographic features. Nor must the possibility of ‘‘interference’’ be
ignored, if the maximum of the epidemic coincided with say a minimum
birthrate, that minimum would be still further reduced.

COMPARATIVE PERIODICITIES.

The influence of climate on human life still remains imperfectly
understood. I have not been able to find any direct correlation between a climatic periodicity and the periodicities mentioned above.
Droughts in Australia can be shewn to have an effect on natural increase, but the figures in this case are of short duration.

The well known Briickner* cycle was fixed by its discoverer at
84.8+.7. The period of complete interference of the birth and death
rates is 4.6 '7.83=—83.7. This is less than the Brickner cycle, but
its discoverer considered it as an average only and suggested that the
actual distance between any two successive groups of wet or dry years
might differ considerably from the average. Recently Sir William
Beveridge in his masterly analysis of corn prices} has suggested that this
cycle is even more regular than the discoverer believed. Sir William
has placed the periodicity at about 35.5, adding that the length cannot
be greater and may be less.

Taking Briickner’s original figures for wet and dry and hot and
cold years I arrived at the following results.

BRUCKNER’S CYCLES.

Hot Hot Cold Cold

Climate. Moist Dry Moist Dry
Brandenburg (births) .. 349-5(10) 379-4(25) 388-2(25) 899-2(10)
(deaths) .. 253-+7(10) 269-7(25) 266-7(25) 256-0(10)

Difference -- 95:8 109-7 121-5 143-2
Finland (births) .. 401-1(15) 350-5(40) 872-1(85) 388-3(45)
(deaths) .. 274-7(15) 288-8(40) 283-1(85) 296-8(45)

Difference -» 126-4 66-7 139-0 91-5

The figures are crude rates. Numbers in brackets indicate the number of years
used to form the average figure. (Finland 1751-1885, Brandenburg, 1816-1885.)

The figures are too few to warrant any conclusion being drawn from
them and they are by no means consistent, possibly owing to the smallness of numbers and to the fact that there is certainly a lag in the birthrate. The larger series however, that from Finland, does shew considerable differences. It is possible to isolate the hot and cold, moist
and dry, thus of course having more years in each average.

* E. Briickner, Geogr. Abhandlungen. IV. 2. 1890 (Vienna).
* Journ. Roy. Statistical Society, LXXXV. 1922. 412.
166 EUGENICS REVIEW.

TABLE II.
Hot. Cold. Moist. *** .
Brandenburg (Births) .. 383-7(35) 3888-5(35) 390-0(35) 385-1(35)
(deaths) .. 265-1 263-6 263-0 265:°9
Difference -» 118-6 124-9 127-0 119-2
Finland (births) .. 364-°3(55) 381-2(80) 380-8(50) 370-5(85)
(deaths) .. 281-3 268:9 245 +6 290-6
Difference -. 83-0 112°3 185-2 79-9

Here by taking a dichotomous table it is possible to use greater
numbers and to isolate the climatic factors. The differences for
Brandenburg shew no variation greater than might be the result of
chance. For Finland there are clearly marked differences, affecting
the deathrate more than the birthrate. But when the factors are
isolated the difference is by no means so great as when they are taken
together. Moreover, as I have already pointed out there is probably a
lag which this crude averaging fails to allow for.

These results are inconclusive and the separate curves were accordingly analysed. The persistent 4.6 in birth curve does not seem to
be related to any well known periodicity. It has no relation to
Elton’s 8.6 curve for animals. There are a series of periodicities near
4.8 of which the most familiar is the ice off Greenland. ‘The moon has
a periodicity of 18.6, 9.3 years being the period from maximum to
minimum, a period which certainly bears some relation to fisheries.
4.6 is curiously like half this, but further evidence is needed. I am
informed that many practical farmers work on a nine year period, the
nearest whole number, as I have already pointed out, which will eliminate the seasons. I am not aware whether this matter has been analysed but in Finland the crop maxima and the birth maxima shew a
tendency to coincide, both possibly are the result of some unknown
cause. The crop minima are succeeded in the next year by an increase
and usually a maximum in the deathrate. These figures are given
tentatively as I have not a sufficiently long record of crops to make a
correlation table.

The deathrate offers closer parallels to known periodicities. A
period of 7.8 was found by Douglas for tree growths in California.
My periodicity it will be recalled is 7.33, a very close parallel. This
period is also double the period which Elton found to hold good for
the Lemmings (3.6), which is very close to a period which various observers have noted for meteorological and solar phenomena, the length of
which is usually given as 3.7. My periodicity it should be noted
falls between these two periods.

The evidence at present then seems to suggest that, apart from
certain extremely marked factors of indeterminate periodicity, the
human stock suffers both in its birthrate and deathrate, and therefore
in its natural increase, from periodicities which are sufficiently close
to known periodicities of an astro-physical or biological nature, the
latter having been shewn to depend on others of the former, to suggest
that we are dealing definitely with features of a geographical nature,
and not due to organic physiological rhythm. |

Elton has shewn very clearly that living organisms integrate, as
FLUCTUATIONS IN NATURAL INCREASE IN MAN. 167

it were, a number of environmental features. I have tried to shew
that it is possible further to arialyse even a single biological periodicity,
natural increase. If this contention be right, the ultimate analysis
of human curves and their correlation with environmental features
becomes very difficult but it would seem best to attempt to correlate
them with other biological curves, especially where some kind of
experimental control is possible. We should thus have two of the
compound curves to correlate with each other. In some cases droughts
and summer frosts, the one in Australia, the other in Finland, can be
directly associated with human factors. But the periodicity is too
regular to be correlated by a rough method of contingency with isolated
events. The rise and fall suggests a regular march of phenomena.

In conclusion it may be worth while considering the theoretical
bearing of these deductions.

THEORETICAL DISCUSSION.

The importance of such periodic fluctations in the birth and deathrates of groups of mankind must clearly be great. When communities
are large and distributed over widely differing geographic areas the
effects will be to a certain extent nullified. Under savage or semicivilised conditions, however, the effects will be felt in full intensity.
A destruction in numbers sufficiently large to affect the number of
fecund females will result in the possibility of loss of the local type.
There is evidence which suggests that at least among primitive peoples
there are a number of biological types, differing slightly, but significantly, from one another and sometimes including one, sometimes
several, social groups. A considerable reduction in number unless
followed by a rapid rise ends in the destruction of such sub-types as
suffer from this periodic loss. Elton has suggested that after the great
increase and subsequent rapid diminution in numbers of some animals,
variations which occur may have a chance of being perpetuated as
they are not swamped by the normal population. The short period
variables to which I have drawn attention have hardly sufficient amplitude to permit of such a change taking place, yet it would seem that a
rise and fall of the numbers, even within the amplitude of such periodicities, would make considerable differences to the population, especially since in many cases it would seem not unlikely that the hardiest.
survived, and where the drop in population was considerable had a
better chance of breeding together. |

The rise in the population is, in the short periodicities, a less
marked phenomenon. But here again it is difficult to distinguish the
actual numbers from the numbers of fecund females. The influenza
epidemic, for instance, while seriously reducing the total number of
the Stone Sioux in Canada apparently has had little effect on the
number of children, who to-day are more than they have ever been.
A rise in the birthrate will not take effect for nearly twenty years.
The effect of such a rise will be twofold, though both effects may not
operate simultaneously. First, either one or more types will become
more numerous, with a probable tendency, if they are living as most
savages are, near to the margin of subsistence, to hybridize, especially
since all groups in a similar area are similarly affected. Secondly
168 EUGENICS REVIEW.

they will tend to migrate. It is clear that periodicities of so short a
phase and small an amplitude are not likely to have large migratory
results. The effect of peaceful penetration by hybridization is likely
to be greater. Apart from certain well marked and cataclysmic movements much of the history of man seems to have been a series of small
waves of peaceful penetration, hybridization rather than migration.
With a normal stationary population it seems difficult to account for
these minor waves. Periodicities may account for them.

Elton has suggested that it is to periodic fluctuations in the number
of animals that changes are due. It would seem that similar causes
have operated in regard to mankind. At present however our evidence of changes of type are scanty. Keith believes that a sort of progressive evolution is still working to-day. It is extremely difficult to
understand the mechanism of such changes in a stable population. In
a fluctuating one the explanation given by Elton for animals may be
applied to man, namely that when numbers are reduced, fortuitous
variations have a better chance of surviving. If this is the case modern
industrialism should tend to reduce all variation to a minimum, damping down as it does the periodicities of all the peoples who are subject
to it.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.

In addition to those works which are specifically referred to in the
text I have made use of the following publications.

The annual reports of the Registrar General, The Atlas of Finland
(text and maps, various editions Helsingfors), the Statistical Year
Books of various countries, the annual Statistical Abstracts published
by the Colonial and Foreign Offices. The Australian Year Books have
been of special value, containing as they do both diagrams and figures.
‘The figures for Bermuda have been extracted from the Blue Books.
