THE CONFERENCE ON AMENTIA‘’

HIS conference dealt with several

subjects of eugenic interest, and both

the opener, the Rt. Hon. Sir E.
Hilton Young, Minister of Health, and Sir
Leslie Scott, the Chairman, emphasized the
importance of preventive measures for dealing with mental deficiency.

In a comprehensive speech, the Chairman
alluded to the report of the Committee on
Local Expenditure, which had just been
issued, and ventured to make certain criticisms of the economy proposals. From the
eugenic side several of these have a distinct
element of danger. For example, the proposal to reduce numbers by lowering the
standard of certification, and the recommendation to place out in service, etc.,
under guardianship, the higher grades,
seems entirely to ignore the well-known fact
that in this class hereditary defect is more
often found and passed on than in the lower
grades.

The subject of the principal paper at the
morning session was ‘‘Some Practical Suggestions for the Boarding-out of Suitable
Cases from Mental Hospitals.’’ Dr. Ferguson-Watson spoke of the family care of
mental patients which has been in vogue in
Scotland since 1857, and described the two
systems : (1) where patients are boarded out
within the grounds of an institution ; and (2)
where they are outside the grounds. The
system of boarding-out lunatics obtains in
Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Holland, Italy, Russia, and Scandinavia, so that
there is a large amount of data available as
to its practicability and results.

It is, however, rather alarming to learn
that it has been applied in Scotland not
only to the uncertified insane and to children, but ‘‘ more recently to mental defectives, to curatory patients, to mental
patients who are on _ probation from
asylums, to criminal lunatics and defectives

* Central Association for Mental Welfare, Report
of a Conference on Mental Welfare, December 1st
and 2nd, 1932. London, 1933. Pp. 175. Price
3s. 6d

99

from the State Department of Perth
Prison.”’

It was suggested by Dr. FergusonWatson that the mental hospitals of the
future might only contain certain chronic
patients, not well enough to live outside.
‘There are a number of very small licensed
houses (two patients) and, needless to say,
all in private care are under inspection.
The speaker somewhat reassured his
hearers by the information that in his own
district no pregnancy occurred for ten
years, and only three cases in recent years.
He considered that the most suitable subjects for the boarding-out treatment
appeared to be those quiet and harmless
patients with some chronic form of insanity
and a large proportion of imbecile and
feeble-minded patients. As elsewhere, the
cost of maintenance is about halved.

In the subsequent discussion Mrs. Hodson stated in criticism of the proposal to
introduce this system, that the I[nternational Federation of Eugenic Organizations had passed a resolution four years ago
asking all members to bring before governments and those interested in mental welfare the importance of avoiding boardingout those who were mentally afflicted, particularly psychiatric cases, and she pointed
out the importance of sterilization if this
method were adopted in England.

The afternoon session dealt with ‘‘ The
Social Control of Feebleminded Children
leaving the Elementary Schools,’’ for
whereas children attending special schools
may be notified on leaving at sixteen, or
earlier if excluded, there exists no provision for the notification of defective
children in elementary schools in areas
where there has been no provision of special
schools.

Sir Henry Brackenbury, in the Chair,
further criticized the economy recommendations of the Committee on Local E-xpenditure and the especially retrograde one
that the diagnosis of mental deficiency
should depend upon the nature and extent
of local accommodation.
I0o

Dr. R. Ashleigh Glegg made a strong
plea for the primary need for biological
teaching in the schools from the lowest
classes upwards, in order that in the future
social problems might be viewed in their
biological significance. He ‘‘ considered
mental deficiency to be one of the basic
causes of social inefficiency, hampering and
impeding the wheels of progress,’’ and
maintained that the defective made the
slum, not bad environment the defective.

The speaker was in favour of the introduction of the recommendations of the
Wood Committee that all school children
should be specially examined at the age of
eleven, in order that all defectives exhibiting marked abnormalities of character could
be certified and notified to the local authority,
as well as lower grades who had failed to
derive appreciable benefit from school instruction ; the important point being the notification of children needing care and control,
irrespective of the school attended. At present
children often remain at special day schools
till sixteen, without having apparently
derived the least benefit from the expensive education they have received. This is
particularly wasteful as the accommodation
in special day schools has been almost at
a standstill, there being only 2,000 more
places than in 1914, and residential special
schools only housing 2,000 altogether.
Evidence of the need for supervision and
after-care is forthcoming from the 1932

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

report of the Board of Control, which shows
that out of 300 criminal defectives, 175 were
between the ages of 15-21.

On Friday the ‘‘ Inheritance of Mental
Deficiency ’’ was dealt with by Professor
Ruggles Gates and Mr. E. J. Lidbetter.
Professor Gates made out a case for the
mendelian inheritance of mental deficiency,
based on the pedigrees from Goddard’s book
published in 1914, but was subsequently
challenged on all sides and received no support for this theory.

Mr. Lidbetter’s approach was that of
pauper family records, extending over three
generations, his pedigrees showing evidence
of the intensive inbreeding of poor stocks,
producing the social problem group, which
forms the lowest 10 per cent. of the community. His investigations went to prove
a definite relation between the various
forms of mental disability ; and showed that
a large number of defective children are
born in families where there is a record of
certifiable insanity. It is significant that
in many cases several generations intervene
before the second defective appears, and
that the transmission then occurs through
an apparently normal member. Mr. Lidbetter suggested the lines which a comprehensive and intensive investigation by competent persons should take in order to
ascertain the dimensions of the problem,
and afford some indication of the possible
line of remedial measures.

FE. I. Corry.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 2.
