  
  
    
 
   
   
  
   
  
    
  
  
   
 
   
   
 
   
 
  
   
  
   
  

°
an wary
oa

: : HE first part of this paper was con*.cerned with the properties of phenyl
4g mercuric acetate as a spermicide and
Bithe use of gelatine as the main comBat of a solid vehicle for it. This second
ideals with the remaining components
meipar gels, and with the composition of
bar paste.

eg anolamine

: phenyl mercuric acetate is dissolved at
per cent. in an acid gelatine gel, a
Ip itate begins to form in less than a day.
petecipitate is only clearly visible in the
e of. glyceryl monoricinoleate, which,
‘present in emulsion, renders the gel
ye. This substance is therefore always
ped when studies of precipitation are
gcmade.

sous attempts were made to dissolve
“ yenyl mercuric acetate by the use of
eluble and emulsified solvents. Among
Mbstances tried were Turkey Red oil
: we found, in collaboration with Dr.
, Carleton, to be damaging to the
e of bitches), oleic acid, ethyl lactate,
wal. and carbitol. These experiments
a Hot so successful, however, as others in
E..we slightly alkalinized the gelatine
Bays obtained products which remained
" clear for considerable periods. For
Beurpose we used small quantities of
wm hydroxide, carbonate, bicarbonate,
porate.

m about three weeks at room temperajor yever, a scarcely discernible opalan to appear in our alkaline gels,
pery gradually thickened and became
med into a definite precipitate, whose

Fe os

: Ee CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF THE
ah VOLPAR CONTRACEPTIVE PRODUCTS
& Part 2. Vehicles for Phenyl Mercurie Acetate

fy JOHN R. BAKER, se, R. M. RANSON and J. TYNEN
z (From the Sir Wiliam Dunn School of Pathology, Oxford)

composition is not known to us. When this
occurred, not only was the spermicidal
power reduced, but pathological changes
were observed in the vagine of bitches into
which the gel was inserted.

At the suggestion of The British Drug
Houses Ltd. we tried triethanolamine as an
alkalinizer. This substance, (C,H,OH),N, is
a weak base, admirably suited to the purpose.
We made experiments to find how much was
necessary to keep phenyl mercuric acetate
stable at 0-06 per cent. in gelatine gels, and
found that 0°35 per cent. sufficed when the
gelatine was at 7-5 per cent. We have a
specimen of P.338 (made up without glyceryl
monoricinoleate) which is seventeen months
old and is as transparent and free from precipitate as on the day of its preparation.

There has been a feeling, almost amounting
to a dogma, that chemical contraceptives
should be acid, and we are striking a new
line in introducing an intentionally, though
weakly, alkaline product. Volpar gels have
a pH of about 8-o, which is approximately
that of human semen. They require for their
neutralization about half as much acid as
the same volume of human semen. Although
the vagina is ordinarily acid, it is adapted
to receive the cervical secretion and semen,
both of which are alkaline.

Glyceryl monortcinoleate

The speed at which the spermicide diffuses
out of the vehicle into semen is as important
as the total spermicidal power, and for this
reason we perform a special diffusion test,
in which mechanical mixing of the contraceptive with the semen is avoided. The test
has been minutely described in an earlier
paper (Baker, Ranson and Tynen, 1937). It
24

is performed at S concentration and at the
temperature of the body. The suppository
is given time to melt before the semen is
added, since the test is not designed to take
the place of the rate-of-disintegration test,
but only to measure the rate of diffusion of
the spermicide out of the already-disintegrated vehicle.

Observations on the activity of the sperms
are made at 2, 5, I5, 30 minutes, I hour,
2 hours, and 3 hours. The activity of the
sperms is recorded by means of the usual
symbols. When a ‘“o” is obtained (no
activity whatever), a drop of the sperm
suspension is diluted with alkaline diluting
fluid, and a second observation shows
whether the sperms have only been temporarily immobilized (e.g., 0/1) or actually
killed (0/o).

Gelatine gels alkalinized with triethanolamine and containing sufficient phenyl
mercuric acetate to give very high total
spermicidal power give poor results in the
diffusion test, nor does the addition of
soluble agents reducing surface tension (e.g.,
sodium oleate, hexylresorcinol and saponin)
greatly improve them. At the suggestion of
The British Drug Houses Ltd. we therefore
made experiments with spermicidal gels
containing dispersive agents, namely, diglycol
stearate, diglycol laurate and glyceryl monoricinoleate. The two former substances, at
2:5 and 5 per cent., gave poor results, sperm

TABLE V

THE RESULTS OF THE DIFFUSION TEST WITH PRODUCTS CONTAINING VARIOUS AMOUNTS OF GLYCERYL M
RICINOLEATE (WITH HUMAN SPERMS)

ES CEASE 5 A ASSORTED

Percentage

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

   
   
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
    
   
 
  

activity being still shown at thirty mis
Gels containing the same amounts of gly¢ re
monoricinoleate showed, on the contr
very quick action.

Glyceryl monoricinoleate is a thick,
fluid, of approximately the same spe
gravity as water. Its chemical structure!
be evident from the recollection that’
triricinoleate is the main constituent’
castor oil.

A series of diffusion tests was made to
the best concentration at which to use!
glyceryl monoricinoleate. The results §
shown in Table V. The spermicide in th
tests was phenyl mercuric nitrate in gelak
gels alkalinized with triethanolamine. |
will be seen that when the amount of.
dispersive agent exceeds 1-5 per cent., qu
diffusion of the spermicide results.
emulsified particles rapidly disperse th
selves among the semen, carrying with tk
the spermicide. The latter is slightly solv
in the monoricinoleate, and there must b
partition between the continuous phy
(water) and the disperse. 4

Increase in the amount of glycg
monoricinoleate above 2-5 per cent. 3
little effect on the rate of diffusion, and tly
is even some evidence that large amow
may slightly reduce spermicidal power‘
making part of the spermicide not availg
in the aqueous phase for the killing of sper
We have therefore chosen 2:5 per cent. (w

Activity of experimental sperms

of glyceryl , Activity
Number monoricino- | 2 mins. 5 mins I5 mins 30 mins. 1 hr. 2 hrs. contro
of gel leate in the sperm
gel
P.214 oO 3 I+ I I I I 3 4
P.331 0°75 2+ I 1* o/0,0/0 3 48
P.326 I'o 3 2 I+ 0/0,0/0 3 4
P.332 I°5 2 o/o,1* 1* 0/0,0/0 3 4
“a I°5 1* I o/o,o/o 3 43
P.335 2:0 2 I o/0,0/o 3 #4
P.336 2°5 oO o/o,1 o/o0,0/0 3
» 2°5 o I o/0,0/o 3°
P.328 5-0 I 0/0,0/0 3

 
  
   
   
   
 
   
  
   
   
  
 
   
  
 
 
   
   
  
  
  

Mieatration in Volpar gels. The size
peot monoricinoleate in an emulsion
aye micidal power, presumably
we-pheny! mercuric acetate in large
we less readily given up to the
Fe se. Small particles also give
its in the diffusion test. For these
fine emulsion, produced by an
gy machine, is used. Glyceryl
poleate at 2-5 per cent. is harmless
Wagina of the bitch.
ison of the rate of diffusion of
as with those of various supposito. wemarket { is shown in Table VI.

5 droxybenzoate

i uric acetate is not strongly
fat the concentration at which it
Volpar gels, nor does it protect
a wavy infections with bacteria attackSane Nevertheless P.338, which
wwmo other fungicide or germicide, has
Me our knowledge) in practical use
Meemposed by bacteria and has very
een attacked by moulds, although
1 used on a large scale by birthIn the laboratory, however,
r attanked if deliberately and
Biimfected with the moulds and
; Bit -grow on and in gelatine.
Piiese circumstances moulds grow
v. the surface, and a bacterium

nine d

VOLPAR CONTRACEPTIVE PRODUCTS 25

(identified by Dr. R. L. Vollum as Pseudomonas fluorescens liquifaciens) gradually
liquefies the gel.

It was thought worth while to include a
substance which would prevent the possibility
of infection by moulds and bacteria in practice. Among the substances tried were
borax, sodium ethyl mercuri-thiosalicylate,
quinine bisulphate, chinosol, eugenol and
eucalyptol. The substance, however, which
best fulfilled our requirements by acting as
a fungicide and germicide without reacting
with any of the other constituents was

COO.CH,

methyl #.-hydroxybenzoate,

OH

.A series of experiments at various concentrations showed that at 0-05 per cent.
this substance gave a large measure of
protection to the gels against experimental
infection with both moulds and _ bacteria,
while at 0-1 per cent. the protection was
noticeably greater and at o-2 per cent.
complete. Although it was found to be
harmless to the vagina of the bitch at o-1
per cent., we decided to use it slightly weaker,
in order to be sure that it would be imperceptible in the vagina. The chosen concentration is 0:07 per cent. This has proved
satisfactory in practice. Care is taken to

pe TABLE VI
we OF THE DIFFUSION TEST (WITH HUMAN SPERMS) WITH THOSE CONTRACEPTIVE SUPPOSITORIES WHICH

~~ HAVE THE HIGHEST TOTAL SPERMICIDAL POWER, AS SHOWN IN TABLE III

2 mins. 5 mins.
1* o/0,0/0
I o/0,0/0
I 1*
° I
I I
° o/0,0/0
2 I
3 I
3 3

«3 3
3 3
3 3

 

 

Activity of sperms at:

1 hour 2 hrs. 3 brs.
o/0,0/o0
o/0,0/0
I 1
3 3 I
2+ 2
3 I+ I
26

exclude infection during the course of
manufacture and packing.

In making the gels, the methyl #.-hydroxybenzoate is dissolved with the phenyl
mercuric acetate and some of the triethanolamine in part of the water.

Glycerol

It has been customary, when gelatine gels
have been used in chemical contraception,
to include a high percentage of glycerol, in
order to prevent evaporation and consequent
shrinkage. We ourselves made experiments
with both sorbitol and glycerol with this end
in view. There are disadvantages, however,
in using a high percentage of glycerol. It
tends to increase the time of disintegration
of the gel, unless the concentration of
gelatine is so reduced as to produce a suppository which can scarcely be handled at
room temperature. Further, glycerol in
large amounts may in itself cause undue
lubrication, and, by the osmotic pressure
which it raises, draw water into the vagina
from the body fluids. Such water would not
only still further increase lubrication, but
also dilute the spermicide. The passage of
water through the walls of the vagina and
cervix in response to osmotic pressure has
not, to our knowledge, been investigated,
but we have preferred to make our product
approximately isotonic with blood. Since
the constituents so far discussed in turn give
a hypotonic gel, we have added a small
amount of glycerol. It has appeared best to
us to add enough to put the product just on
the hypertonic side of isotonicity, to prevent
any rapid absorption.

We have thought it most convenient to
use the freezing-point method of determining
osmotic pressures, despite the drawback that

TABLE VII
THE VALUE OF AC FOR VARIOUS CHEMICAL CONTRACEPTIVES, IN DEGREES CENTIGRADE

Gel suppositories

Volpar gels (P.383) A.
J F.

C.

 

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Fatty suppositories

  
 
   
  
  
   
   
   
   
  
   
 
   
  
 
 
 
   
 
   
   
 
  
  

the cooling may in itself affect the
We allow four suppositories to disintegy
in 100c.c. of warm 0:9 per cent. sod
chloride solution and measure the depresdl x
of the freezing point below that of the salj
Four suppositories are used so as to af
for any variation which may occur with tk
kinds of suppositories in which the substa
or substances affecting osmotic pressure
suspended in fat and are thus liable to ¥
slightly in amount from specimen to sp
men. Considerable dilution (in the prog
tion of one suppository to 25 c.c.) is ned
sitated by the fact that with gel suppositos
the gelatine must be in the sol condition
the freezing point. The symbol A¢ is
to denote the depression of the freezing pi
due to the contraceptive (in degrees
grade), i.e., the extent to which the freez
point is depressed below that of 0-9 per ca
sodium chloride solution by the presence
the saline of four suppositories per 100

The value of Ac for various gel and fa
suppositories is shown in Table VII.
third place of decimals is not reliable.
the pastes, the dose is regarded as 2
and 8 gm. are therefore allowed to 100
of saline.

The amount of glycerol necessary to m
Volpar gels minutely hypertonic (Ac
0-009) is 2-0 c.c. per cent. (v/v). In genes
gel suppositories have usually been marked
hypertonic.

The low amount of glycerol in Volpar g
makes them liable to shrink by evaporati¢
and they are therefore sold in glass tulg
with air-tight screw caps.

General remarks on the chemical compo ,
of Volpar gels |
The amounts of several of the constitued

 

Pastes

c Ac
0-018 Volpar Paste (P.403) 0°003 3
0-018 M. 0°113 4

L. 0°05§ ;
  
 
   
 
  
  
   
   
 
   
   
 
 
  
   
 
 
   
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
   
   
 
   
   
   
 
  
  

be depend on the amounts of
peatituents; and if one be varied,
o sother, which will affect a third.
amircle is thus set up.
Bhéral statement may be illustrated
»; If one decides, for example, to
he pH by reducing the triethanons will not only affect the solubility
Mheny!l mercuric acetate but also the
ua.of the gel and therefore the rate of
saration. If one changes the amount of
me to allow for this, the amount of
meslamine must again be changed to
sgh the change in the gelatine. Any
a in the amount of triethanolamine
Ronly affect the solubility of the
Mercuric acetate, but also the osmotic
m If one allows for the change in
Bpressure by changing the amount of
&..then that very change may affect
Boi disintegration of the gel and hence
3 "an alteration in the amount of

Magh it is possible to overstress the
y -of breaking the vicious circle, yet
ppe claimed that the formula for the
M4 carefully balanced one, giving a
a "harmless, highly spermicidal and
mally unobjectionable product. If,
5 Stinical workers were to desire an
highly spermicidal gel, their
F sould be met.

VOLPAR PASTE

roblems confronting anyone wishing
mm a smearable contraceptive paste
Beh easier to solve than those presented
wl. The narrow range between the
ysummer temperatures and that of the
makes no difficulty. No question of
| ing arises in a product which is not
fasol. Neither very high spermicidal
per very quick diffusion is necessary,
ybber barrier will stand between the
ao. semen and the cervical os. There
wstion of a sperm finding its way
Mmediately out of reach of the
E by entering the cervical canal.
a in requirements are the following :

VOLPAR CONTRACEPTIVE PRODUCTS 27

The paste (or ointment) should be reasonably
spermicidal; the spermicidal principle
should not be inextricably bound up in the
vehicle ; the texture should be such as to
allow ready and smooth smearing on rubber,
which should not be caused to deteriorate ;
there should be no damage nor irritation to
vagina or cervix, and there should be an
approximation to isotonicity with blood ;
there should be no esthetic drawback, such
as an undesirable smell, feel, or appearance,
nor any tendency to liquefy completely and
run out of the vagina; and the product
should be reasonably cheap.

We found that the starch from the
rhizomes of Maranta arundinacea (Scitaminez), which is sold under the trade name
of St. Vincent arrowroot, provides a convenient vehicle for a product which is to be
smeared on rubber. (It may be mentioned
that the starch from other unrelated species
is sometimes called arrowroot.) It was
necessary to find the concentration which
would provide the viscosity and adhesiveness required, without preventing the diffusion of the spermicide into semen. This is
achieved by a 6 per cent. solution. Gelatine
is added at 0-6 per cent. to improve the
consistency at room temperature. At this
concentration it has little effect on the consistency at body temperature, which depends
on the arrowroot. In general, pastes and
ointments have tended to be unduly viscous,
with the result that their spermicidal power
is largely wasted owing to the inability of
the spermicide to diffuse out.

A spermicidal paste smeared on both sides
of a rubber occlusive pessary has two separate
functions, namely, (1) to kill any sperms
which may get past the rim of the pessary
before they have had time to reach the os,
and (2) to kill all the sperms in the vagina
before the pessary is removed. Sperms
cannot swim through a paste, but only
through crevices filled with vaginal fluid and
not occluded by the paste. Crevices large
enough to admit such excessively minute
bodies as sperms will no doubt exist under
actual conditions, and some diffusibility of
the spermicide out of the paste is necessary
to kill them ; but the sperms which get past
28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the rim of the pessary have such a long way
to go before they reach the os that there is a

considerable time in which to do so. The

sperms which do not get past the rim only
become a potential danger when the pessary
is removed ; and if this is not done unduly
soon after coition, there is again no great
hurry for them to be killed.

These arguments show that a paste may
without detriment be both less spermicidal
and less quick in action than a gel, which may
be used without an occlusive device. We
apply our standard tests to pastes and ointments, regarding the dose as 2gm. This
figure was fixed in consultation with the
Medical Sub-committee of the National
Birth Control Association. The S concentration is 2 gm. to 6c.c. of sperm suspension.
We have thought it best to use the standard
technique in order to avoid undue multiplication of tests, although in practice the
whole dose will not come into contact with

TABLE VIII

THE SPERMICIDAL PowERs oF CONTRACEPTIVE PASTES AND OINTMENTS (WITH HUMAN SPERMS). FOR THE PUR§
OF THE TEST, THE STANDARD (S) DOSE IS REGARDED AS 2 GM. IN EACH CASE 1

Volpar Paste, P.385
(acid test)

Volpar Paste, P.385
(alkaline test)

K (acid test)
K (alkaline test) ...

 
 

L
N
o0/o/2+
Oo 3/3/3/3/M 3/3/
  
 

3/3/
   
  
    
  

 
  
   
   
  
  
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
  
  

the whole of the semen unless the pes
becomes dislodged. 3
The results of the test of total spert nil
power of Volpar paste and other smeaf
products are shown in Table VIII,
Table IX gives the results of the ¢ itt
test. In these tables the various prod
other than Volpar paste, are disting
by alphabetical letters. A short descri
of them is given in Table X. The k@
their identification is in the possession ¢
National Birth Control Association. |
Sufficient phenyl mercuric acetate
been allowed in the paste to give a kif

concentration of s in both alkaline and |

4 ;
media. This is achieved by a 0-045 per
solution. Despite the lessened amoun
gelatine, as compared with the gel, we §
found it best to keep the triethanolamig
0°35 per cent. The glyceryl monoricing
is also kept at 2:5 per cent., in ordé

Concentrations
S/4 S/8 S/16 S/3
o/o/o o/o/o o/o/1* 2/1/4
o/o/o 1*/o/1* 4
o/o/o
o/o/o o/o/o 3/3/o/o/o 3/2/o/o/o
1/o/t 3/3/2/o/o
3/2/—
2/2/3/3/   
   
   
 
  
   
  
   
   
  
 
   
   
 
  
  
    
   
 

I 5 mins | 15 mins
og 2+ 1*
3 2+ o/o, I

3 I+ I
3 3 I
3+ 3 3
3 2+ I
3 3 I
3 3 2
3 3 3
I+ I 2+

x he tendency of the stickiness of
€ to interfere with the results of
i test. The methyl #.-hydroxyB sesiy reduced in amount (to
.), partly because a paste in a
abe i is less exposed to infection

ee

a
: “x *b
- o
a -.

y to prevent any possibility
x being irritated by the paste
in contact by the pessary. In
b pe centage of glycerol (2-2 per
a ip made very slightly greater than
#a0 as to keep the whole product
sypertonic.

ste (P. 385 and P.403) is not
i be used in the absence of an
messary. The dose of 2gm. is
g ribbon about three inches long
Mapsible tube. Paste should be

TABLE x

'8 OF THE PROPRIETARY CONTRAwae AWD OINTMENT WHICH HAVE BEEN
wr Votpar Paste IN LABORATORY TESTS

a ue paste, intended to be inserted
¥ "by 2 special applicator.

; rent, colourless, smearable paste containMesorcinol; made by the same manu
the suppositories, C and D.

colourless, smearable paste, gradu- € pale brown; made by the same
paining several acids and intended to
vith a glass syringe.

made by the same manufacturers

VOLPAR CONTRACEPTIVE PRODUCTS

d bacteria than a gel surrounded .

29

TABLE IX

LT GEE A RAR TA A SY $e ESSE

30 mins 1 hour | 2 hours 3 hours
o/0,0/o |
0/0,0/0
o/1* 0/0,0/0
I o/0,0/o
I 0/0,0/0
1* 0/0,0/0
o/1* 0/0,0/o
I 0/0,0/0
2 I o/0,0/1* o/0,0/0
0/3 0/2+ o/1 o/t

a tests, the ‘‘S’’ dose of K was taken as being the full amount (5-6 gm.) intended by the
f With the other products (Volpar Paste, O, and L), the ‘‘ S ’’ dose was taken to be 2 gm.

squeezed out on to the pessary and smeared
over both sides of the rim immediately before
insertion in the vagina. The paste is intentionally made to be dispersive and not very
tenacious or sticky, and it is not meant to be
inserted in the vagina a very long time before
coition. Thus, if an occlusive pessary
smeared with the paste be inserted in the
vagina in the evening and coition does not
take place until the following morning, it
would be advisable to insert a Volpar gel a
few minutes before ejaculation (or just after,
in the case of those who strongly dislike
taking contraceptive measures immediately
before).

Volpar paste is suitable for use in the
tropics.

GENERAL REMARKS ON CONTRACEPTIVE
PASTES AND OINTMENTS

When a paste or ointment has sufficient
dispersive power to mix fairly readily with
semen and thus allow the spermicide to kill
the sperms, it will not remain permanently
in position on the occlusive pessary. Those
smearable preparations which remain im
situ for long periods are shown by our
diffusion test to be very slow in action upon
sperms, and any spermicidal power that they
may possess is almost wasted. Some clinical
workers prefer to use a preparation which
will stay on the rubber pessary and be
30

visible there when the latter is removed the
next day. This may be a good method of
contraception, provided that something 1s done
to kill the sperms. A tenacious paste or
ointment will be unlikely to do so by itself,
and the sperms might pass into the cervix
after the removal of the pessary. The insertion of a Volpar gel would of course kill the
sperms, and in the circumstances under
discussion it would be allowable to insert the
gel after coition, if there were any dislike of
doing so before. (When, however, a gel is
used in the absence of any occlusive device,
it must always be inserted before the
ejaculation of semen, and given a few minutes
in which to melt.)

Two of us are engaged in formulating an
occlusive paste intended to remain 1m situ on
rubber for considerable periods and to be
especially suited for use in conjunction with
Volpar gels. The intention is to fulfil the
wishes of those clinical workers who desire a
tenacious physical barrier.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The brief acknowledgements usual in a
scientific paper would be inadequate in a
description of an investigation which has
been so corporate as this. The whole
research on chemical contraception was first
suggested to one of us (J. R. B.) by Dr. C. P.
Blacker, who has continually given valuable
advice over a period of ten years. Dr. Julian
Huxley and Lord Horder most kindly visited
us during the course of our work on phenyl
mercuric acetate and made suggestions which
materially helped us.

Dr. H. M. Carleton, who has collaborated
with us throughout, will contribute a special
paper on the testing of Volpar gels and paste
for harmful effects. The vagina of every
bitch into which we have injected our various
preparations has been microscopically examined and reported upon by Dr. Carleton,
whose contribution to the research has been
essential to its success.

We owe a special debt of gratitude to
Professor H. W. Florey for allowing the
research to be carried out in the Sir William
Dunn School of Pathology at Oxford, and
for his encouragement.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

  
  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
  
   
 
 
   
   
   
   
 
   
    
  
 
   
 
  
 

It is a pleasure to acknowledge the’
received from Mr. R. R. Bennett andy
research staff of The British Drug Hd
Ltd. The Volpar products could not
been devised without the help of the fra
suggestions of Dr. F. H. Carr and Mr. }
Allport.

The clinical trials of our various prod
have mostly been carried out by Dr. Mary
Hadley Jackson, Mrs. C. Harvey, Dr.
Griffith, Dr. Helena Wright and Dr. Isob
Sloan, to all of whom we are much inde
It is hoped that Dr. Jackson will publi
account of the extensive and care
recorded trials to which she has subje
our products.

We have always had at our disposs
valuable advice of the Medical Sub-comn
of the National Birth Control Associz
and many others have helped us in vz
ways by making suggestions or
practical assistance (as, for instance
exposing and reading maximum the
meters). We wish to record our obliga
to Dr. A. Cooke, Professor A. D. Gard
Mr. J. R. Groome, Miss Beatrice Hill
F. G. Hobson, D.S.O., Mr. B. Moss, Dr
Newfield, Mrs. Margaret Pyke, Mr. F
Trotman and Dr. R. L. Vollum.

The expenses of our research have |
met throughout by the Birth Con
Investigation Committee, through whom
have also recently received a grant from
Committee on Maternal Health (New Ya
which we much appreciate. We tender
best thanks to the Birth Control Invest
tion Committee for their support, contin
through years many of which must
seemed to them unproductive. The pref
Chairman of the Committee, Profes
A. W. M. Ellis, has repeatedly given us$
benefit of his judgment in decisions4
critical importance. :

SUMMARY 4

Volpar gels are of gelatine, sligf
alkanized with triethanolamine and contf
ing phenyl mercuric acetate.in aqua
solution. This compound and the nitrateg
the most spermicidal substances knof
The gels contain a dispersive agent, glycq
   
 
 
   
  
  
   
  
  
  
    
 

Ee | VOLPAR CONTRACEPTIVE PRODUCTS 31

meate, to give rapid diffusion of arrowroot is the main vehicle, the amount
pale into semen, and a germicide of gelatine being much less than in the gels.
ee », methyl #.-hydroxybenzoate, The spermicidal power and diffusibility of
mecomposition of the gelatine by the paste are adjusted to the less rapid
A moulds. A little glycerol is action required of a smearable product,
™ e the whole product approxi- which is not intended to be used in the
tonic with blood. The gels are absence of an occlusive pessary. Volpar
; micidal and harmless. paste is harmless.

Maste is intended to be smeared on REFERENCE

: itisive pessaries. The formula Baker, J. R., Ranson, R. M., and Tynen, J. (1937),
7 is at of the gels, but St. Vincent Journ. Hyg., 37, 474.

  
   

 

C. B.C.
CONSTRUCTIVE BIRTH CONTROL

&-Sociery AND CLINIC FOUNDED BY Dr. Marie STOPEs IN 1921

@ oldest Birth Control Clinic, the first to establish Birth Control
® Sheets and collect scientific data; C.B.C. Clinics are still the
3 py cies: the only birth control clinics dealing from the first
ts of birth control, i.e. prevention of detrimental births,
marie oe of healthy births and inducing potentially desirable pregnancy
- trile women, and general marital help.

F THE PIONEERS OF THE CLINIC MOVEMENT
a Library, Museum and Clinics open daily, 10-6 (except Sats.)
4 Books and Racial supplies may be obtained direct.

» en CAL DEMONSTRATIONS for MEMBERS of the MEDICAL PROFESSION
3 First Thursday each month

Reations to The Hon. Secretary, Headquarters Clinic,

a 106 Whitfield Street, W.1

   
 
      
 

    
 
 

    
   
  

 
 
   
   
     
 
   

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXI, No. 1.
