HENRI TAJFEL
University of Oxford

Co-operation between Human Groups

THE COMPLEXITIES OF human social behaviour
are not the preserve of any single discipline.
There has always been a great proliferation of
theories about the social nature or behaviour of
man. These ideas were sometimes expressed in
the form of modest and cautious inferences from
empirical data; sometimes as systems of social or
political philosophy related to postulates about
such-and-such inherent characteristics of “human
nature”; and sometimes they took a sweeping
analogy as their starting point and emerged at
the other end with a cosmic all-embracing
theory. The difficulty we have to-day is to distinguish between what is useless and what useful
for further inquiry; the subject matter is so vast
that almost any system of ideas is likely to
contain much truth. For example, as Plamenatz 10°
wrote, there is no doubt that modern social
science could learn a good deal more than it has
until now from the ideas of social and political
philosophers of the past.

When one considers the problem of co-operation between human groups and other related
problems, such as competition and conflict
between groups and aggression displayed by one
group towards another, it is not too difficult to
identify two general assumptions which form—
implicitly or explicitly—the basis of much
theorizing on the subject. These assumptions
represent, in some ways, two entirely distinct
ways of approaching the problems of human
interaction in society. One concerns itself with
the “‘instinctive social man’’, the other with the
“utilitarian social man’. One attempts to
explain the course of relationships between
social groups in terms of instinctive characteristics of man; the other relies on a rational
calculation, by members of a group or by their
leaders, of the future utility of various possible
courses of action. I shall try to argue from the
evidence gathered by social psychologists that

77

both these views are inadequate; that co-operation or hostility between human groups cannot
be understood fully on the basis of calculations
of utility; and that they can be understood even
less on the basis of sweeping assumptions about
the role of instinct in the social behaviour of man.
The “social psychological man” stands somewhere apart both from the instinctive and from
the utilitarian man; he is a good deal more
complicated than the two other homunculi could
ever become.

Psychological Analysis

A psychological analysis of the problems of
co-operation between human groups can be
undertaken only if its limitations are clearly kept
in mind. Such an analysis cannot provide an
explanation of large-scale historical or social
events. Each case of co-operation or of conflict
must be understood in its own right, in terms of
its own conditions and determinants which may
be economic or social, political or historical, and
are most often a mixture of all these. No set of
a priori psychological principles can replace the
detailed knowledge which is necessary for the
analysis and understanding of a concrete social
situation. The social phenomena which arise
from it pursue their course in terms of their own
logic. Modern wars, for example, cannot be
“explained” on the basis of hostile attitudes
harboured by large masses of individuals living
in the countries engaged in armed conflict. Such
attitudes may contribute to the creation of a
conflict, they may facilitate an explosion, they
may even be fostered to serve these ends. But
large-scale social and political events are not
predictable from a crude algebra of attitudes and
motives of millions of individuals.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, June 1966, 58, 2.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

To stress this point I can do no better than
quote from a recent paper by Withey and Katz!6:

The social psychological approach to war and
peace is commonly misconceived as viewing international conflict either in terms of the personalities
of national leaders or in terms of a national character
which suffuses the masses and the elite in similar
fashion. Relevant social psychological processes are
not revealed, however, by imputing to the character
of the people in the system the outcome of system
processes. For example, a nation declares war,
hence, its people or its leaders are regarded as
aggressive or warlike. This is the group mind fallacy
in reverse, because there is the attribution of system
outcomes such as belligerent or conciliatory actions
to the personalities of the individual actors (p. 65).

Once these reservations have been made, the
task of identifying the contributions that can be
made by social psychology to problems of
co-operation between human groups becomes a
little more tractable. The diversity of ways in
which mankind can be classified into groups is
practically infinite. Every one of us belongs to a
large number of them, some as transient as a
journey in a lift, some as permanent as a family,
a tribe or a nation. For the purposes of the
present discussion I shall define a group as a
category of people fulfilling two criteria: the
first, that an individual identifies himself as
belonging to that category; and the second, that
this identification is to him of some emotional
significance. Let me add immediately that there
are many other possible definitions, but their
adequacy is not vested in some sort of absolute
criterion of “‘truth’. They are useful only in
relation to the problem for which they are
needed. And a second point: this definition,
though it takes two subjective criteria for its
point of departure, need not remain “‘subjective”’
at the level of empirical investigation. There are
many behavioural indices which can be used to
decide whether an individual does or does not
feel himself to be a member of a group in the
sense just indicated.

Thus, a group has been defined here not in
terms of its physical characteristics or of its social
structure, but in terms of its psychological
existence for an individual. The main empirical
problems that arise within the framework of this
definition would then be as follows: What are
the origins of an individual’s conceptual and

78

emotional identification with a group? What are
the conditions for the stability of such an
identification? What are its effects on an
individual’s attitudes and behaviour towards
members of his own group and towards other
groups as a whole or their individual members?
And, finally, as a special case of all this, what are
the conditions leading to co-operative attitudes
and behaviour towards groups other than one’s
own?

Aggregations or Social Groups?

If in the attempt to provide some form of
answers to these questions one turns first
towards studies of animal social behaviour, such
as those discussed in the preceding papers, some
general points can perhaps be made. According
to Etkin5 and to many other workers in this
field, animal groups can be roughly classified
into aggregates and genuine social groups. This
classification is based on the nature of the
response made by individuals to other individuals. Thus, as Etkin puts it, animal groups are
social:
when the members stay together as a result of their
social responses to one another rather than by
responses to other factors in their environment.
Groups that are held together by responses to such
other factors will be called ‘aggregations’. Thus a
flock of sheep is a social group, since it is maintained
by the social responses of the animals to one
another; but the massing of insects around light at
night is an aggregation, since it results from their
common attraction to the light (p. 4).

Despite the fact that there may be many cases
when it is difficult to decide which of these two
types of response determines the coming together
and the functioning of a group, there are also
many animal groupings which can be assigned
without too much hesitation to one or to the
other class.

There is little doubt that many human
aggregations can be found to exist. But they
undoubtedly constitute the most temporary and
least complex type of human groups, and they
become social groups in a more adequate sense
only when, because of various pressures and
needs, they give rise to more stable organizations
whose members can be shown to display the sort
of identifications to which I previously referred.
CO-OPERATION BETWEEN HUMAN GROUPS

A comparative study of animal groups
exhibiting the second type of response—the one
which is genuinely “‘social”’ in the sense employed
by Etkin—can teach us a good deal about the
origin and the functioning of human social
groups. It remains true, however, that facile
analogies from animal to human are easily
derived from the results of such studies. The less
is the social behaviour of a species determined by
its capacity to show flexibility and variability due
to learning, the more likely it is that such
analogies will be widely off the mark. Studies of
animal social behaviour have shown that, in
many species, learning plays an important role in
various forms of social behaviour; for example,
in individual recognition between parent and
offspring, in differences in aggressive behaviour
shown towards members of in-groups and outgroups, in territoriality, in the establishment of
social hierarchies. Even this brief and incomplete enumeration shows clearly the striking
similarities of some aspects of animal and human
social behaviour. The question that arises concerns the extent to which the processes underlying these phenomena display the same sort of
similarity.

The study of the role played by innate and
acquired patterns of behaviour in animal social
groups is usually based on a careful analysis of
its various relevant aspects. This would include a
detailed and painstaking account of a sequence
of behaviour, its relation to physiological
mechanisms, to the ecological features of the
environment, and also the analysis of the possible
functions and survival value of the sequence. No
self-respecting student of animal behaviour
would commit here the “group mind fallacy in
reverse’, which would consist in this case of
“explaining”, for example, the intra-species
aggressive behaviour of members of a group
towards members of another group by a simple
attribution of this aggressive behaviour to an
innate tendency to be aggressive. And yet, in the
case of human social behaviour we are often
offered this type of statement with its implicit
injunction that we can now rest content since we
have explained the phenomenon. For example,
in a recent symposium on aggression,‘ its
attribution in human affairs to an aggressive
instinct seems to be, according to the editors, the

consensus of opinion reached by several members
of a distinguished panel of contributors ranging
from ethologists to social anthropologists.
Indeed, one of the papers? consists mainly of
an impressive array of examples showing the
horrifying incidence of cruelty, sadism, torture
and massacre in the history of mankind. The
author concludes that nothing but the existence
of an innate aggressive tendency could explain
all these phenomena. The argument has an
undeniable ring of plausibility; but using another
selection of examples one could infer with equal
plausibility the existence of innate tendencies
underlying the incidence in human affairs of
co-operation, altruism, patriotism, self-sacrifice,
or even perhaps of changes in fashion and of
beauty contests. There are two principal reasons
why all such explanations must remain unsatisfactory: one is that, without further independent
evidence, they are tautological; the other, that
they are not based on a detailed analysis of
conditions under which the behaviour in question
occurs or does not occur. As has been well
shown in studies of animal social behaviour,
only such an analysis would enable us to make
testable inferences concerning the causal factors
that may be involved. Even if it were true that
there are innate tendencies lurking behind
various forms of human competition, conflict or
co-operation, the complexity of social behaviour
in man is such that explanations of this nature
would not take us very much further than
statements relating the development of the rich
variety of gastronomic traditions to man’s
undeniably innate need for food and drink.

Identification with the Group

One of the basic phenomena of human social
interaction has been well brought out by
implication in a paper by Thompson!5 when he
wrote “the language of the bees is not the
language of love”. Human language is also very
often not the language of love. But it must be
remembered that as the human being matures,
one of the primary features of his development,
without which he would not be able to adapt to
the society of other human beings, is his increasing capacity to deal with his environment in
abstract and symbolic terms. In most (if not all)

79
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

cases of social interaction in animals the social
responses cannot be related to a capacity of
perceiving the events from the point of view of
another individual. The simpler processes also
no doubt play an important role in human social
behaviour; but they are inserted, as it were,
within a larger framework of symbolic activity.
The eminent Swiss psychologist Piaget has
shown in much of his work that as the child
progresses from one stage to the next in his
intellectual development, he becomes increasingly more capable of transcending the concrete
perceptual context of the moment and of
drawing inferences about the environment on the
basis of invariant rules applying to situations
which may differ widely in their concrete
perceptual characteristics. If this were not so, we
would never be able to teach our children that
the area of a square with sides of 6 in. is equal to
the area of a rectangle with sides of 2 in. and
12 in.; or that if a child in Ibadan lives further
south than a child in London, this means that
the child in London lives north of the child in
Ibadan. These examples point to a universal
human phenomenon which is sometimes ignored
in discussions of human social behaviour.
Emotional and conceptual identification with a
group consists of more than invariant responses
to clear-cut stimulus configurations.

The origins of identification with a group—or
with a large number of groups—are to be found
in early childhood. The Freudian accounts of
the manner in which the young child internalizes
emotionally his relations with his parents and
other members of his family are well known.
The important aspect of these accounts from the
point of view of the present discussion is the fact
that the transfer of these early emotional
reactions to other people or to groups of other
people is possible only through the use of
symbolic activity in which one individual is
made to stand for another. It is just as true,
however, that independently of these early
emotional experiences and of their possible
transfer in later life, we also come to identify
with a complex matrix of human groups in a
manner which seems to have, at best, tenuous
links with these early emotional reactions. We
are all members of national, professional,
religious, social and many other groups.

80

Definitions of most of these groups are not based
on a set of recognizable and invariant physical
characteristics of their members; they are
abstract class concepts.

We know that co-operation within a human
group is likely to develop as a function of
various concrete common needs. It must,
however, also be remembered that the only
possible basis for such co-operation in any
complex social situation is to be found in the
conceptual processes of the sort that Piaget
investigated in children. To return to
Thompson’s 15 reference to bees, the language of
the bees is not only not the language of love; it is
also not the language of co-operation. The
possibility to co-operate in most human situations is based on the ability to perceive a
situation from the point of view of another
individual, and then to make use of the information so obtained as a guide for subsequent
actions. If co-operation were not based on the
implicit or explicit use of this ability to become
allocentric as distinct from egocentric, it could
happen only sporadically, by chance encounters
of parallel or complementary actions, and it
could never form the basis of a complex and
co-ordinated sequence of behaviour originating
from many individuals.

If it is true that co-operation largely depends
upon this capacity to see the world from the
point of view of someone else, then its success
must depend upon the conditions which make it
possible or impossible to engage in this type of
behaviour. This is clearly the case in modern
societies with their complex checks and balances
due to a tangled network of competitive and
co-operative interests. In such social systems the
‘*zero-sum-games’’—all loss to one and all gain
to the other—are becoming increasingly infrequent, particularly at the level of large-scale
social events.

An individual’s identification—conceptual and
emotional—with a group has many psychological
aspects. One of the most important is in the
sharing of social norms. There are several ways
in which a social norm can be defined. Three of
these can serve as examples: “‘social norm’? may
refer to contractual obligations accepted and
shared by members of a social group; it may
refer to shared ideas about what ought to be the
CO-OPERATION BETWEEN HUMAN GROUPS

way to behave in a variety of situations; and it
may finally refer to observed uniformities of
behaviour in a social group, large or small. The
manner in which a society comes to create and
perpetuate norms in all these three meanings of
the term is a very vast issue fraught with
implications which I should neither wish nor feel
competent to discuss here. This issue has always
been a joint focus of interest for historians, social
philosophers, sociologists, lawyers, social anthropologists and many others—and this represents too many toes for anyone to dare to tread
on. I should like, however, to attempt a discussion of the manner in which an individual comes
to share the established norms of social groups
in which he enters. In doing this, I shall mainly
be concerned with the third meaning of the term
“norm” which I previously mentioned: the
observed uniformities of behaviour.

Many psychologists engaged in the study of
animal behaviour reached the conclusion that
some aspects of animal learning cannot be
adequately explained unless one postulates the
existence of a drive or a tendency to explore the
environment.2.8 The biological survival value of
getting to know one’s surroundings is obvious.
Some of the greatest achievements of mankind
would never have taken place had it not been for
the existence of a similar urge to explore and to
understand. But in the case of man, there is one
essential aspect of gathering this information
about the environment which appears only in a
very rudimentary form in non-human behaviour.
An enormous amount of human knowledge
about the environment—physical and social—is
not collected through the direct experience of an
individual but through information transmitted
to him by other members of the social groups to
which he belongs. Each human being learns that
one of the efficient ways to evaluate the information he has about his surroundings, about himself, about the consequences of his actions, about
other people, about the relative probabilities of
various possible future events, is to rely on the
information provided by others. In addition,
the more an individual perceives other people as
similar to himself, the more will his behaviour be
determined by his perception of their behaviour.
The importance of this phenomenon in the
determination of human reactions to all kinds of

events in the environment is sometimes not
sufficiently appreciated. It will be obvious that
under conditions of “‘ccommon fate’, such as
shared threats, dangers or goals, this convergence
in behaviour is bound to become more marked.
But it can also be found in cases where the
function of concerted behaviour does not appear
at all obvious. For example, there are many
psychological experiments showing the extent to
which individuals are prepared to accept the
unanimous verdict of a majority even in tasks as
simple as judging differences in length between
several lines, and even when this majority
verdict flatly contradicts the evidence of their
own senses.!

One example can perhaps be briefly described,
since it will serve as a transition to the next stage
of this discussion. It concerns the so-called
“‘autokinetic phenomenon’: when a stationary
pin-point of light is shown in complete darkness,
it appears to move. When several observers are
put together in a dark room, their judgements of
the extent of this apparent movement tend to
converge.!3 In an interesting modification of this
procedure, various degrees of insecurity were
introduced into the situation. This was done
through varying the size of the pitch-dark room,
placing obstacles in the subject’s way, making
him wander through complicated routes, and
varying the degree of pleasantness and help
shown to him by the experimenter. The most
extreme of these experimental conditions led to
considerable disorientation and confusion in the
subjects. Two successive experimental sessions
were used at an interval of several days. In the
first of these, each subject was alone; in the
second, they were in pairs. As a function of the
increasing degree of confusion there was, from
the first to the second session, an increasing
convergence between the subjects in their
judgements of the extent of the apparent
movement.14

The interpretation of results such as these
leads one immediately into one of the chickenand-egg situations so common in social psychology. The feeling of intense confusion creates
presumably a situation in which the subjects see
themselves as confronting together the same
difficulty. It is not, however, clear why this
shared crisis amongst wreckage in a pitch-dark

81
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

room should lead them to greater uniformity in
judging the movement of a point of light. This
agreement cannot conceivably have anything to
do with any rational attempts on their part to
deal with their plight. And thus, it appears that a
group situation in which people share common
needs or difficulties leads in turn to the development of a need to create a variety of norms. This
emergence of norms seems therefore not only
determined by the utility value of co-operating
in order to remove a difficulty, but also as an
emotionally autonomous consequence of affiliation with a group, whatever may be the original
causes of the group coming together. There are
many experiments in social psychology which
show the strength of these so-called “‘normative”’
effects of group membership.

It is for such reasons that the model of
“utilitarian social man” to which I previously
referred is no more adequate for the explanation
of co-operation in human groups than is the
model of the “instinctive social man’’. Shared
needs and shared background lead to shared
norms; shared norms lead to more shared background and to an emotional investment in the
creation of more shared norms. All these interlocked processes result in the strengthening of
group identification, and to the increased
capacity for perceiving those who are in the
same group as essentially similar to oneself. It
will be obvious that this perception of similarity
makes it much easier to adopt in any relevant
situation the point of view of those who are
categorized as being “in” in contrast to those
who are perceived as being “‘out’’.

Dissociation from other Groups

These phenomena are of direct relevance to
what is often referred to as “‘depersonalization”’.
Many people who are passionately humanitarian
do not experience the slightest stirring of conscience when they confront half of a dead
chicken on their plates at lunch. There has never
been much of sharing of norms with a chicken,
nor much opportunity of seeing the world from
the chicken’s point of view, But it may be worth
remembering that the dead bird on the plate
represents no more than an extreme case of a
familiar phenomenon. It is notoriously easier to

82

drop a load of bombs from a height or to press a
button releasing a missile than to plunge a knife
into someone’s belly even when there is no
danger of retribution. And to present a counterpart to our dead chicken, pet-lovers are well
known for their attribution of all sorts of subtle
characteristics to the objects of their love. The
creation of a psychological distance between
oneself and one’s victim is probably responsible
for at least as much murder and massacre as is
the much vaunted sadism and the presumed
ineradicable aggressive instinct in man. The
recent play by Weiss The Investigation based on
the Auschwitz trial in Germany does not show
most of the men involved as towering monsters
of inhuman proportions. They were little men
who managed to do what they did partly because
they were able to dissociate themselves completely from recognizing in their victims a
similarity to themselves, some form of a common
denominator.

In mentioning the executioners of Auschwitz
one approaches a level of dissociation from
other human beings which veers on the borderline of psychopathology. But milder versions of
this phenomenon are by no means uncommon.
No one needs a psychologist to tell him that in
situations of intense conflict between human
groups, of real threat, or of eruption of violence,
hostile attitudes between members of the groups
involved intensify rapidly. The conditions for
coexistence of human groups living in a common
environment are such that, in one way or
another, some forms of competition between
them are bound to arise sooner or later. A
discussion of conditions which may facilitate
co-operation cannot be based on utopian dreams
of a world free from competing interests. The
question is rather to what extent, in Rapoport’s
terms, fights can be transformed into games or
debates. Fights have no rules; games and
debates are ritualized. Ritualization and the
establishment of norms which effectively guide
behaviour, are only feasible when one of two sets
of conditions is satisfied : either when compliance
to established norms is enforced through the
existence of an authority superordinate to the
groups involved; or when, despite the competition the other group, while remaining definitely
“other” in some respects, is at the same time
CO-OPERATION BETWEEN HUMAN GROUPS

perceived as similar in fairly fundamental ways.
It is likely that the creation of both these sets of
conditions is interdependent: the existence of a
superordinate authority would lead to a slow
change of attitudes; a change of attitudes would
facilitate the creation of such an authority. Both
these processes have happened many times in
the past.

There is a good deal of evidence that hostile
attitudes towards an outgroup are closely related
to its perception as essentially dissimilar from
one’s own group. This process starts early in
childhood, and it is very difficult to decide
whether perception of dissimilarity leads to
dislike, or dislike leads to the perception of
dissimilarity. In some research that we have
recently done in co-operation with colleagues
from the University of Leiden in Holland,9 we
found that there were high correlations between
children’s preferences for one or another foreign
country, and their perception of these countries
as similar to, or different from, each other; i.e.
the greater was the gap between two countries on
a preference scale, the greater tended to be the
judged dissimilarity between them. It is also
known from research on highly prejudiced
people that they differ from those who are not
prejudiced in the differentiations they make
between their own group and the other. Two
examples will make this clear: in one experiment, (Secord, Bevan and Katz1!) after a
preliminary assessment of the degree of antiNegro prejudice, the subjects at the two extremes
of the continuum of prejudice were asked to rate
the shade of skin in a series of photographs, some
of which were of Negroes and some not. It was
found that the highly prejudiced subjects tended
to exaggerate more than the other subjects did
the differences in skin colour between those
photographs which they assigned to the category
“Negro” and those which they assigned to the
category “‘white’. A related finding is that
prejudiced subjects tend to be less accurate than
others in recognizing individual Negroes whose
photographs they had previously seen.!2

The depersonalization or dehumanization of
members of out-groups must be closely related
to these effects of emotional attitudes. It is only
because a member of another nation, class, race
or any other group is perceived by virtue of this

membership as dissimilar in some fundamental
ways from those who are—to use a current
phrase—our kith and kin, that things can be
done to him which we would not otherwise
dream of doing. This inability to conceive the
world reciprocally leads directly to a further
compounding of difficulties: namely, it creates
blocks in communication. This may take one of
two forms: either we assume that members of
another group must be able to communicate in
ways which are familiar to us (though we do not
have to repay the courtesy)—and if they do not,
this only serves to strengthen the case for their
essentially alien character; or it is assumed that
they may have acquired the gimmick of pretending to be like us in order to be able “‘the better to
eat us up”. This wolf in a grandmother’s bonnet
has now unexpectedly come to life in a context
far removed from a fairy story. A colleague who
had returned to the United States from a trip to
the Soviet Union presented to a group of
American children photographs of a tree-lined
street in Russia. In his informal report he
writes: “A hand went up: “Why do they have
trees along the road?’ A bit puzzled, I turned
the question back to the group: “Why do you
suppose they have trees?’ Another hand rose for
eager answer: ‘So that people won’t be able to
see what’s going on beyond the road.’ A girl had
a different idea: ‘It’s to make work for the
prisoners.” I asked why some of our roads had
trees planted along the side. ‘For shade.’ “To keep
the dust down.’ ’’3

Conclusion

I should like to conclude by stressing a few
points which perhaps hardly need stressing.
First, this paper is not a plea or an argument for
the disappearance of differences between human
groups. The world would be a sad and boring
place to live in if this ever happened. Secondly,
I was concerned neither with social, economic nor
political causes of conflicts between groups nor
with any policies relating to these aspects of
inter-group problems. My purpose was to discuss
those psychological aspects of inter-group
hostility and inter-group co-operation which are
vested in the attitudes and behaviour of
individuals who compose the groups. It is my

83
THE EUGENICS

view that one of the essential ingredients of these
attitudes and of the behaviour relating to them
is to be found in man’s capacity to see others as
men like himself, however different they may be
from him. No one needs to be told that this is far
from being the case to-day. It would be a form of
academic escapism, however, to leave it at that
and not to attempt some conclusions about
concrete problems. Though no one can expect
any sudden changes in the attitudes of millions
of people, some attempts to induce changes can
certainly be made. It seems to me that—with
regard to the psychological aspects of these
problems—these attempts should be concentrated
on two fronts: education and law. A good deal
is known about the development of hostile outgroup attitudes in children. Very little of this
knowledge has penetrated into the curricula of
primary or secondary education and of teacher
training colleges. As to law, the point can
perhaps be briefly stated as follows: discrimination without prejudice leads to discrimination
with prejudice; conversely, prejudice shorn of its
capacity to manifest itself in discrimination
withers away little by little. Strong and strictly
enforced sanctions against any form of discrimination or exercise of brute force, whether in
national or international affairs, would certainly
not succeed overnight in eliminating blind outgroup hostility. But they would go some way
towards bringing it home to all of us that the life
and rights of every human being are a matter to
be seriously considered.

REFERENCES

1. Asch, S. E. 1952. Social psychology. New York,
Prentice Hall.

84

10.

11.

12.

13.
14.

15.

16.

REVIEW

. Berlyne, D. E. 1960. Conflict, Arousal, and Curiosity.

New York, McGraw-Hill.

. Bronfenbrenner, U. 1961. Some problems in com
municating with Americans about the Soviet Union.
Mimeo report.

. Carthy, J. D., and Ebling, F. J. (eds.) 1964. The

Natural History of Aggression. London and New
York, Academic Press.

. Etkin, W. 1964. Cooperation and competition in

social behaviour. In Social Behaviour and Organization among Vertebrates. Ed. W. Etkin. University of
Chicago Press (pp. 1-34).

. Festinger, L. 1954. A theory of social comparison

processes. Hum. Relat. 7, 117-40.

. Freeman, D. 1964. Human aggression in anthropo
logical perspective. In Carthy and Ebling, op. cit.
(pp. 109-20).

. Harlow, H. F. 1953. Motivation as a factor in the

acquisition of new responses. In Current Theory and
Research in Motivation. Ed. J. S. Brown et al.
Lincoln, University of Nebraska Press.

. Jaspars, J. M. F., Van de Geer, J. P., Tajfel, H., and

Johnson, N. B. 1965. On the Development of International Attitudes, Psychol. Institute, University of
Leiden.

Plamenatz, J. 1963. Man and Society. A critical
examination of some important social and political
theories from Machiavelli to Marx. London, Longmans, Green.

Secord, P. F., Bevan, W., and Katz, B. 1956. The
Negro Stereotype and Perceptual Accentuation.
J. abnorm. soc. Psychol, 53, 78-83.

Seeleman, V. 1940. The Influence of Attitude upon
the remembering of Pictorial Material. Arch. Psychol.
No. 258.

Sherif, M. 1936. The Psychology of Social Norms.
New York, Harper.

Sherif, M., and Harvey, O. J. 1952. A study in Ego
Functioning: Elimination of stable anchorages in
individual and group situations. Sociometry, 15,
272-305.

Thompson, W. R. 1958. Social Behaviour. In
Behaviour and Evolution. Ed. A. Roe and G. G.
Simpson. New Haven, Yale University Press
(pp. 291-310).

Withey, S., and Katz, D. 1965. The Social Psychology
of Human Conflict. In The Nature of Human Conflict.
Ed. E. B. McNeil. Englewood Cliffs, N.J., PrenticeHall (pp. 64-90).
