DISCUSSION.
STANDARDIZATION OF PEDIGREES.

Mr. E. Nettleship, F.R.C.S., F.R.S., and Mr. Marshall have
been kind enough to send to the Research Committee certain criticisms
and suggestions, in consequence of which the Committee have drafted
the following additions to and corrections in the scheme set forth in the
Eugenics Review for January, 1913 :—

Insert at the end of I. (d), p 384, the following sentence :—
‘* When the order of birth is unknown this fact is to be indicated
by a wavy line drawn below the symbols.’’

Insert at the end of I. (f), p. 384, the following sentence :—
‘‘ The individual number can only be taken as representing the
place of a sib in order of birth, where the birth order is known,
in other cases it must be read as indicating merely the position
in the chart.’’

Insert after I. (%), p. 385, the following recommendation :—

(¢) In order to diminish the chance of confusion arising
between a pair of twins and a married couple, the horizontal
line connecting the symbols should be drawn in the former case
just above the symbols and in the later case just below them.
The connection is to be completed by short vertical lines.

Vide infra:

Husband and Wife. Twins.

It is to be noted that in the diagram on p. 390 a horizontal line
joining the middle points of the symbols is used in both cases,
the diagram should therefore be regarded as incorrect in this
particular.
In IV. (a), p. 385. end of second line of paragraph, alter the words
‘¢ are to’? to ‘‘ may when convenient.”’
Insert after IV. (4%), p. 386, the following recommendation :—
It is of great importance to note the source of the information
recorded concerning the condition of any individual included in
the pedigree, in order to distinguish between the statements of a
competent observer and the reports of relatives.
In V. (a), p. 386, alter the capital D’s signifying ‘‘ dead ’’ to lower
case d’s.
Insert on p. 387 at the end of the recommendations :—
VI. Where the husband and wife are relatives, the nature of
the kinship is to be written along the marriage coupling line.
On p. 389, line 19, alter “ III. Az” to “III. Ac.”
Mr. Nettleship does not approve of the use of squares and circles
to indicate male and female, but sends the following interesting notes
on their origin.
DISCUSSION. 67

‘* Although the history of how the square and circle came to be used
as signs for the sexes in the construction of charts is more academic
than practical, it may be observed that these forms have probably been
adopted from the signs used to indicate notes of music.

‘* The earliest pedigree in which I remember to have seen the square
was constructed by Dr. Pliny Earle to illustrate the occurrence of
colour-blindness and published in the American Journal of the Medical
Sciences, vol. IX., p. 346—354 (1845). In that chart the ordinary
notes for music were used without explanation for females, solid
blacks (crotchets) for affected, larger open ‘circles’ (in fact oval
semibreves) for normals; the males were squares, open for normals,
blacked for affected. Earle’s diagram suggests that at the time he
wrote he was unable to get any printer’s symbols capable of use for
his purpose except those employed in printing music. This fragment
of history does not affect the merits of the question at issue in its
practical aspect, and it could not be quoted as in any way weakening
the position of those who favour the retention of the classical biological
symbols. ’’

DO YOU KNOW OF ANY ADOPTED PERSONS ?

Our views on many questions of social reform turn on the relative
strengths of inheritance and environment. One of the most direct ways of
disentangling this knotty problem is to be sought in the comparison of
adopted persons with their real and their adopted relatives. It is
thought that there must be enough cases in existence to afford conclusive
evidence if only they could be studied and the results collected. But
on account of their rarity it will only be possible to obtain a sufficient
number if many workers co-operate.

Mr. Lewis F. Richardson would esteem it a great favour if anyone
in a position to furnish information about an adopted person would
communicate with him at Dalton Hall, Victoria Park, Manchester.
The name of the family studied is not asked for. The information
will be used for scientific purposes only. The name of the recorder
will be published or not, according to his wish. It is proposed during
the next few months to prepare a schedule of points which it is desired
to have recorded, and copies of this schedule will then be sent to each
recorder. At present only names of those who know of adopted children
are asked for. In making a collection such as that now proposed it is
especially important to obtain a great variety of cases. Let no one
think that a case is not worth recording because it appears to have no
outstanding features, or because it is in harmony with or runs counter
to prevailing opinions.
