REGIONAL VARIATIONS IN INTELLECTUAL

ABILITY IN BRITAIN: A DISCUSSION

OF

THEIR IMPORTANCE, AND OF THE POSSIBLE

EFFECTS OF SELECTIVE MIGRATION’
By J. A. H. LEE, B.Sc., M.D., D.P.H.

Research Board for the Correlation of Physical Education and Medical Sciencet

important to select men as carefully

as possible, so that the maximum use
could be made of their abilities. Further, it
was of great importance that. a man should
not be admitted to long courses of training—
such as learning to fly—if he did not have a
reasonable chance of being able to manage
the course. Fortunately in this crisis psychological techniques for measuring ability had
developed sufficiently for them to be used
extensively as an aid to selection. In this
they were an unqualified success, with the
result that it is now the established practice
of each of the Services to use these methods
for the selection of men, and their allocation
to particular jobs.

When the data provided by many
thousands of these tests were being analysed,
it was observed that the average score of
men from different parts of the country
varied by quite considerable amounts from
the average for the whole of Britain. An
account of some of this work was presented
to this Society in 1951 by Professor P. E.
Vernon. Variations of similar size have
been found in the results of tests applied to
large numbers of school children. Good
examples of this are to be found in the report

[)inmors the 1939-45 war it became

of the Scottish Council for Research 1 in Edu
cation (1933).

* A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the
Eugenics Society on November 14th, 1956.

t Now with the Social Medicine Research Unit of the
Medical Research Council, London Hospital.

19

TABLE I

MEAN SCORES OF SERVICEMEN FROM DIFFERENT AREAS
OF BRITAIN (VERNON, 1951)

Mean
Score
Region of Great Britain . Numbers (g)
Home Counties 1,663 104'0
East Anglia, Beds, Cambs,

Northants i 474 10I'7
S.W. and Hants... ‘ 563 IOI’5
Berks, Bucks, Oxon, Glos,

Hereford, Worcs 540 1OI'4
Leics, Notts, Derby, .

‘Yorks W., Cheshire 1,128 IOI'4
London : 695 100°6
Yorks E. &N,, Northumber
land, Durham, Cumber
land . 502 99°6
Scotland E. and N. Coun
ties . i 486 99°6
Wales 466 97°9
Lancashire . 1,125 97°2
Warwick, Staffs, Salop Bs 1,046 97'1
Glasgow and S.W. Scotland 495 93°7

%
Natives 74°8 99:0 .
Migrants 25:2 102°8

Examples of the variations of the mean
score of Servicemen from different areas of
Britain are given in Table 1, taken from
Vernon’s paper. In fact these examples will
probably underestimate the real variations
of the populations of the areas concerned,
for inability to score well in tests is likely to
be associated with rejection for service on
medical grounds. This is for two reasons:
the Services are unable to employ men of
very low mental ability, and certain medical
causes of rejection, such as chronic otitis

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April, 1957. 49, I.
20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

media* and emotional instability, are much
more common in the low scorers. Thus the
areas where the average score of Servicemen
is low will tend to have had a larger proportion of men of low abilities filtered out from
the Service group by the medical selection.

Intelligence Tests and National Servicemen

I have recently completed a study of the
health and social conditions of a large sample
of men medically examined in preparation
for National Service (Lee, 1955 a and b). The
Services have found it administratively
convenient to give these men a preliminary
test of intelligence at the same time as the
medical examination. This also helps the
doctors to recognize those men whose mental
abilities are too small for them to serve
usefully. The scores of these tests are distributed about their means in an approximately normal manner. Thus rather small
changes in the mean will result in much
larger changes in the proportions of the group
above or below fixed levels. The Army uses
one such fixed score as a threshold to separate a special group. Each man scoring less
than ro on the standard test, the R.T. 57
(a simple test of reasoning) is interviewed as
a possible dullard. The variation of this proportion by average score of the particular
Medical Board Centre is shown in Table 2.

Unfortunately, it is not possible to give
the average scores on this test of defined
areas or the proportions in these areas scoring less than 10, as this information cannot
be made available by the War Office. However, variations comparable to those demonstrated by Vernon (of. cit.) continue to
be present.

Are the wide variations in the proportions
of men with low scores from area to area
likely to be spurious? The test is the same

 

* The association between chronic otitis media and
apparent lack of intelligence in children is probably
complicated. It may only be found because both are
associated with poverty and poor environmental conditions, or there may be a closer connection—a partial
loss of hearing persisting for much of the formative
period having a direct effect. .

TABLE 2

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE MEAN SCORE OF THE
MEN EXAMINED AT DIFFERENT CENTRES AND THE
PROPORTION SCORING LESS THAN I0. SCORES ON R.T.
57 APRIL 1I1955-MARCH 1956 ENGLAND, WALES AND

SCOTLAND

Percentage

scoring less

Mean Score* than Io
%
20- .e - 19°3
2I- .. e 16°8
22- a i ‘a 163
23- am ba 12*7
24- ax ns 9°

25- < “8 9°3
26- 8-7
27- 77
28-29 3°8

* All areas with mean scores between the values
have been grouped together.

in every case, and is administered in a
standard manner. Variations in the effects
of deferment from area to area should not
affect the results, as this will be reasonably
constant over a period of time, with deferments during the period of observation being
balanced by men coming into the system
who were deferred from earlier periods.
There are, however, large variatibns from
area to area in the proportions of men who
are illiterate (War Office, 1953). If there
were local variations in the practice of
Medical Board Centres, as to whether or not
men who had difficulty in reading and
writing were admitted to the test, the results
might be affected to quite a marked extent.
This seems to occur in practice: some
centres with similar average scores, based in
each case on large numbers, show very
different proportions of the men tested
scoring under 10. However, these local
variations do not affect the grouped figures
very much—the relationship between mean
and proportion scoring under Io given in
Table 2 roughly follows the theoretical
distribution. Further, such local variations
in practice cannot account for the variations
in the mean scores observed. They only
affect a small proportion of the total numbers
of men examined. The coefficient of variation
of the mean scores of all examined at the
Medical Board Centres in England, Wales
REGIONAL VARIATIONS IN INTELLECTUAL ABILITY IN BRITAIN 21

and Scotland for the year April 1955 to
‘March 1956 was 8-6 per cent, the coefficient
of variation of the averages of those who
scored 10 and over was still 6-2 percent. These
variations are in the results of the test given
to men.opting for the Army. At the time of
these studies, the R.A.F. were using different
tests. Thus it is possible that some of the
variations are due to local differences in the
popularity of the R.A.F. and the Army
among boys of different levels of intelligence.
I know of no evidence of the existence of
differences of sufficient magnitude to produce

a large proportion of the observed variations

in mean score in the Army test.

Practical Consequences

These variations are interesting from the
purely scientific point of view, but it seems
probable that they also have practical
implications. The R.T. 57 test produces
results that are highly correlated with those
of the full battery of tests used in the Army
selection procedure. These tests give extremely good results in predicting which
men will be able to carry out certain jobs,
and which men will not. For instance, they
enable the selecting officers to identify with
a high degree of certainty the men who will
be able to pass successfully through a course
on the repair of motor vehicles, or one on
certain aspects of electronics. On the other
hand they help to locate the man who would
not be able to manage the full training
needed by the modern infantryman, and who
could only have a reasonable chance of
success in the less intellectually exacting
work of the Pioneer Corps. As mentioned,
they help in excluding men from the Army
who would have little prospect of fitting in
successfully. Now the details of all this are
only applicable to the military situation.
But there is no reason to believe that it is
important for the service authorities to
measure some special kinds of ability that
are irrelevant in civil life. Thus if it is found
that a man is capable of only a limited range
of service jobs, it is also likely that he will
also only be capable of the simpler ones in
civil life. On the other hand, a man who
does well in these military tests, and thus is

“civil life.

likely to be able to succeed in some difficult
course of training and subsequently to
operate or service very complex equipment,
is at the same time likely to be able to
undertake jobs of comparable difficulty in
It therefore seems reasonable to
carry over the results of these tests from the
service situation to that of ordinary life.
The existence in an area of an unusually high
proportion of potential National Servicemen
who are unable to score well on this test
seems likely to indicate that the whole
population of that area will contain a greater
proportion than average of people handicapped in one way or another by lack of
mental ability.

This statement is a deduction from two
aspects of the distribution of scores in tests
of intelligence—the man, and the proportion
of men taking them scoring below a fixed
level—and it therefore only applies to those
people whose intelligences form part of the
approximately normal distribution. It is
known that many of the more severe grades
of mental deficiency are not distributed in
this way (Roberts, 1952). Thus this data can
tell us nothing about them. However, I
think that it does apply to a substantial
proportion of those who can be classified as
mental defectives, and to those who are
classed as “educationally subnormal’”’
because of lack of intelligence.

I have been discussing only the lower end
of the scale, but I know of no reason why
comparable variations should not be found
at the upper if one looked for them.

Without the application of the same test
to substantial groups of the population
living in, or coming from, many different
parts of the country, it would be difficult to
discover these variations. It is not likely at
the moment that their effects could be traced
in, for example, the waiting lists for hospitals
for the mental defective or for special
schools. Here there are too many variations
—the actual provision of services differs
widely from one part of the country to
another, and this will affect the waiting
lists in complex ways, as well as the actual

numbers receiving care. Further, the pat
terns of work and family life are very varied,
22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and changes in them will certainly affect
the demand for such services.

While this is so now, I think that we shall
need to understand these variations more
fully in future years, and to take account of
them in the development of different services. They are certainly relevant to the
planning of both hospital and school facilities, and they may affect questions of even
wider social significance.

Mental ability is to a large extent constitutionally determined, and it may be
wondered how these large differences have
come about. In the second part of this
discussion I should like to mention one
possible mechanism by which some part of
it may have been produced.

Selective Migration

Vernon (op. cit.) noted that men who
were classed as migrants (i.e. were enlisted
in a place other than their birthplace) had
on the average higher scores than those who
were not (Table 1). Similarly, Martin (1949)
found that, in another sample of Servicemen,
migrants were taller and heavier than nonmigrants. Stewart (1953) found that among
men examined before military service, Social
Class I contained the highest proportion of
migrants, and that in one area illiteracy
was three times as common among the
natives as among the migrants. If men
moving about tend to be slightly more
intelligent than men remaining in one place,
areas suffering a net loss through migration

over a period will end up with a population »

of a rather lower average intelligence than
areas with a net gain through migration. If
the figures for the average intelligence of the
population of different areas (such as these
Service ones) are compared with measurements of migration (such as those published
by Newton and Jeffrey, 1951), some rough
correspondence is seen between loss of
population and low average score. However,
the correspondence is not very good. Further,
such comparisons may be vitiated by urban/
rural differences, etc. An opportunity to
test the hypothesis that selective migration
is an important cause of the observed
differences in intelligence of different popu
lations occured when Emmett (1954)
published the mean scores of the complete
population of children in the schools of
certain Local Authorities taking a particular
test* as part of the “ eleven plus’’ examination. ~

With the average scores of the children

_in certain areas available, it was possible to

relate them to the area’s experience of
migration, as shown by the percentage
change in the total population from 1931 to
1951 (Registrar General, 1951). The results
for the series of average scores for county
boroughs published by Emmett are given
in Table 3 and in the Diagram. This shows
the relationship between the average scores
for boys and population change. The correlation was 0:624. Similar values were found
for girls. These correlations are unlikely to
be due to chance (P < 0-01). As all the areas
were county boroughs, urban/rural variations
have been eliminated.

TABLE 3
THE MEAN INTELLIGENCE OF CHILDREN IN A SERIES OF
COUNTY BOROUGHS, AND THE PERCENTAGE POPULATION

CHANGE 193I TO IQ5I

Mean Percentage

 

 

Intelligence Population
County Borough of Childrent Changet
%

Barnsley 101:298 + 2°4
Blackburn .. 104:248 — 94
Bolton IOI*319 — 5°7
Bootle 98-559 — 3:3
Bournemouth 106°518 +23°9
Bury (Lancs) 101°461 + 08
Darlington .. 100-700 +17°7
Derby . 102°704 — 09
Halifax 101424 + 03
Leeds 99°419 + 4:6
Norwich 97°957 — 4:0 |
Salford 94°584 —20°3
Sheffield 102*329 — 10
Smethwick .. 97°998 — 9°5
Southend-on-Sea .. 103°169 +1771
Stockport .. 101-716 + 12-1
Warrington 99°523 — Il
Wigan es 98-784 — 1-0
Wolverhampton 100-871 +17°3
York . 102°Q14 +12-0

+ 52°0

Total .. . 2,017°495

 

 

* Moray House Test No. 41. Emmett (op. cit.).
+ Emmett (1954)
+ Registrar General, 1951.
~ REGIONAL VARIATIONS IN INTELLECTUAL ABILITY IN BRITAIN — 23

MEAN 1.Q. (MORAY HOUSE)
OF CHILDREN IN LE.A.SCHOOLS = *
AT AGE lit

107

  
  
  
    
  
  
 
   
 

« BOURNEMOUT#

BLACKBURN®

SSOUTHEND-ON-SEA
OERBY *

e
SHEFFIELD ¢STOCKPORT

SLEY
vl
WOLVERHAMPTON, 0 aa in cron

Ys 0-147x +100-492
r= 0-624

95 STANDARD ERAOR OF

* SALFORD Fw C259)

sO 25 20 1S 10 5 0 5 10 1S 20 325 30
PERCENTAGE CHANGE IN POPULATION (1931-1951)

The relationship between the intelligence of schoolchildren in a series of English County Boroughs and the
changes in population in these over the last twenty
years.

We have no means of knowing what
proportion of the change in population of
an area is due to natural increase or decrease,
and what is the result of net migration. If
the gain in population of some of these areas
was in large part due to a higher birth rate
or a lower death rate than elsewhere, the
observed effect might not have been produced by the postulated method of selective
migration. However, it has been shown
that there is a connection between large
families and lack of intelligence (Scottish
Council for Research in Education, 1953).
Thus a high local birth rate would be
expected to be associated with a low average
intelligence, and produce an opposite effect to
the one observed. Further, it is doubtful if
there exist sufficiently large variations in the
birth rate, combined with variations in the
death rate in the correct direction, to
produce very much effect on the population.

There might be variations in the proportions of children attending the Local
Authority schools in different areas. It is
difficult to see how this is likely to be
associated with the changes in population
in a way that would produce the observed
correlations. All the areas are complete
units—i.e. they are none of them suburbs

of some large city—and the proportion of
children attending Local Authority schools
is likely to be very high in all of them.
However, these data alone are not suff-.
cient fully to substantiate the hypothesis
that selective migration is an important
cause of variations in the average intelligence
of different populations. Emmett has also
published average scores for other areas.
Unfortunately, he was interested in urban/
rural variations and his material was, at an
early stage, pooled into types of. administrative unit. Thus he gave the mean score
for the children in all the Municipal Boroughs
in a particular county, and the mean for the
Urban Districts, and the Rural Districts.
This pooling of data could not subsequently
be undone. When an attempt was made to
relate these pooled figures to comparable
figures ‘for population changes, positive
correlations were again obtained, but they
were not statistically significant. This is not
surprising, as it would be remarkable to
demonstrate the effect, if it existed, unless
the population changes could be related to
average score for quite small and homogeneous areas. Unfortunately, the data
published by the Scottish Council for
Research in Education (1949) were also not
collected in a suitable form for this analysis.

Summary

There are wide variations in the average
intellectual abilities of the populations of
different parts of this country, and these
variations may have been produced by
selective migration, as well as by other
forces. The problem is complicated by lack
of data, and there is a need for information
about the mean intelligence of people in
different places to be related to population
movements.

Acknowledgments

I am most grateful to Professor J. M.
Mackintosh and to Dr. J. A. Fraser Roberts
for much help and advice during the
preparation of this paper.

The data on test scores was made available by the Ministry of Labour and National
Service, as part of a larger survey.
24 _! THE EUGENICS REVIEW

REFERENCES
Emmett, W. G., 1954. Population Studies, 7, 207.
Lee, J. A. H., 1955a. Public Health, 68, 102.
Lee, J. A. H., 1955b. Proc. Roy. Soc. Med., 48, 653.

Martin, W. J., 1949. The Physique of Young Adult
Males. Medical Research Council Memorandum
No. 20. H.M.S.O.

Newton, M. P. and Jeffery, J. R., 1951. Internal Migration. General Register Office Studies on Medical
and Population Subjects No. 5. H.M.S.O.

Registrar General, 1951. Census of Great Britain, Preluminary Report. H.M.S.O.

Roberts, J. A. F., 1952. Eugen. Rev., 44, 71.

Scottish Council for Research in Education,
The Intelligence of Scottish Children.
of London Press.

1933University

Scottish Council for Research in Education, 1949.
The Trend of Scottish Intelligence. University of
London Press.

Scottish Council for Research in Education, 1953.
Social Implications of the 1947 Scottish Mental
Survey, p. 108. University of London Press.

Stewart, A. M., 1953. Unpublished.
Vernon, P. E., 1951. Eugen. Rev., 43, 127.

War Office, 1953. Backwardness among National
Servicemen, Army Analysis. Unpublished.
