REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 213

Kelynack, P. N., M.D. (Ed.) Defective Children. Bale Sons and Co.;
1915; 78. 6d. net; 16+ 462 pp.

A COLLECTION of studies on the chief forms of defectiveness in children—
mental, moral and physical—by 27 well-known experts. The work is
intended to serve as a complementary volume to “ Medical Examination
of Schools and Scholars,” 1910, and to provide scientific workers for child
welfare with information on problems which relate to the care and control
of defective children of school age. It also affords helpful direction on
prophylactic measures, where these can be adopted. The cure or alleviation of well-defined personal ailments such as those dealt with in the book,
which must naturally interfere with a child’s education, cannot fail to be
a matter of concern to the whole community. For mentally defectives
who are educable, special schools are required, while for the ineducable
and the epileptic, farm colonies seem to be desirable. In his paper on
the “ Mentally Defective Child” Dr. Hamilton Marr devotes important
sections to “ Causation” and “ Principles of Management.”

The systematic medical examination of school-going children, in
accordance with the Act of 1907, has revealed a very high percentage of
physical defects. A summary in percentage form gives the following :
Defects of vision, 10; hearing, 5; ear disease, 3; injurious decay of teeth,
50; malnutrition, 10. Papers of special importance are: Defective
Children and the Co-relation of the Public Services, by Ed. W. Hope,
M.D., D.Sc.; School Clinics, by Lewis D. Cruickshank, M.D., D.P.H.;
Defective Growth and Development in Infancy, Childhood and Youth, by
Hastings Gilford, F.R.C.S.; Zhe Mentally Defective Child, by Hamilton
C. Marr, M.D.; Open-Air Schools and Residential Schools for Defective
Children, by Lewis Williams, M.D., D.P.H.; /diots and Imbeciles, by
Douglas W. Hunter, M.B., D.P.H.; Criminal Children, by William C.
Sullivan, M.D. Defective children in Canada, the United States, France,
Hungary and Germany are also dealt with severally. A useful working
bibliography is appended to each paper.

Saleeby, C. W., M.D., F.R.S. Edin. The Progress of Eugenics. Cassell;
1914; price 5S. net; pp. 259.

THE publication of an extensive book by Dr. Saleeby is bound to be an
important event to the Eugenic movement in this country. Persuasive,
eloquent and dogmatic, his works inspire enthusiasm even more widely
than they excite controversy. The truth is that Dr. Saleeby is among the
few who have gripped the ethical significance of our power to modify the
race, and he has the gifts of a popular preacher to make manifest the
faith that isin him. In The Progress of Eugenics he preaches a bold,
clear doctrine, the outcome of his practical thought and working
enthusiasm. Positive advice is given freely, to mothers, to fathers, and
to adolescents. Popular prejudices and popular fallacies are freely combated; misinterpretors and critics of eugenics are dealt with patiently, and
on the whole, convincingly.

The discoursive nature of this book, and its inevitable omission of
any deep and difficult problems, may be indicated to those who are not
already familiar with Dr. Saleeby’s works by a few paragraph headings.
Eugentcs and Natural Selection occupies four pages containing a vigorous
denunciation of Neo-Darwinism, whose tenets, according to Dr. Saleeby,
“practically consist in the condemnation of charity and altruism in all
their forms, and being contrary to every religion but Mammonism, have
no sanction either in science or in morality.” One is thankful to see that
Charles Darwin himself escapes this fire of condemnation, but one is left
doubtful as to whether or not it was his sprinkling of Larmarckianism
which saves him. The Duties of Fatherhood, containing an excellent plea
for the common parental care of children, passes on to the advantages of
maternity benefits, and the need for State obstetricians. The Housing
