THE CO-ORDINATION OF THE RECORDS OF
BIRTHS, MARRIAGES AND DEATHS*

By D. CARADOG JONES, M.A.

PART I

INTRODUCTION

HERE are occasions in the lives of all

individuals comprising the population

of this country when an official of some
department of the central or local government registers certain facts concerning them.
An infant is weighed and measured in an
infant welfare clinic of the public health
authority. A school-child is inspected and
records are kept of the condition of the teeth,
sight or hearing. Particulars of the occupation and industrial history of an insured
person are noted through the medium of the
employment exchange. Inquiry into family
income is made of applicants for public
assistance. These are a few of many examples
which might be cited, but none of these
records embraces the whole population. In
this they differ from the decennial census
which takes in every family in the land. It
was understood that, starting from 1936, the
Census would be repeated in some measure
every fifth year—but that is now a hope
deferred. .

Here then is a vast accumulation of valuable material produced periodically or spasmodically. But, owing chiefly to the manner
in which the various departments came into
being, some quite independently of the rest,
with a few notable exceptions no attempt is
made to co-ordinate the publications which
issue from them and the consequence is that
their realised value is very much less than
their potential value. Had the different departments all started together, no doubt such
co-ordination would have been achieved.

Apart from the national Census, in the

* An account of the proposals contained in this
article as originally drafted was given on November
23rd, 1934, toa small Group Meeting of the Manchester
Statistical Society, and a summary of them has been
published in the records of the Group Meetings.

experience of each one of us at least two and
possibly three outstanding events are registered officially. We have all been born; we
shall all die ; and between the alpha and the
inevitable omega there is a more problematical event : we may or we may not marry.
Since 1875 the registration of these three
events has been compulsory, in the sense that
penalties could be imposed for failure to
register, and my purpose is to show that, by
taking these records and amplifying them
slightly with a view to linking them together, it should be possible in course of time
to amass information that would throw a
flood of light on many social problems. The
further possibility of a closer co-ordination
between the registration and the Census
returns, and between them and other central
and local statistics, is evident but the present
discussion will be confined to proposals for
making fuller use of the registration material
alone as a first step.

EXISTING REGISTRATION SYSTEM

At present the registration of a birth, a
marriage, or a death is an isolated event,
although in any selected district the same
officer is usually responsible for registering
births and deaths and he may be responsible
for registering marriages also. In a large
area several registration officers are appointed, each in charge of a sub-district
but all working in consultation with a superintendent registrar who is responsible for a
group of sub-districts, and whose business
it is to check the entries which aré made on
the registration forms. Such records, with
corresponding data from other districts, form
the basis of important tables which the
Registrar-General presents to the public in
Quarterly Returns and an Annual Statistical
Review.

These tables give us the totals of births,

197
198

marriages and deaths, or, in conjunction with
information derived from the Census, their
rates in relation to the population, by sex and
age from year to year, and in regard to death
a mass of detail as to alleged causes. But the
attention throughout is focused on the
individual as unit—it is the sum of individual
births, marriages and deaths that is determined; whereas, by directing attention to
the family as unit, fresh results of great
interest might be derived from an analysis
of much the same material.

Under present arrangements all births are
recorded locally, in the order in which they
are registered, in bound volumes each containing 500 names and the volumes are
stored on shelves in order of date. Copies,
certified by the signatures of the local registrars concerned to be true copies, of these
records are sent to the Registrar-General
once a quarter on loose sheets containing
five birth registrations to a sheet. These
sheets, bound together and arranged by
year, quarter and district, form a duplicate
permanent register of births which is kept in
the vaults of Somerset House. The virtue of
this second register is that it is centralized
whereas the original is scattered.

In addition to the certified copy of the
birth registration sheets sent to the RegistrarGeneral at the end of the quarter, two carbon
copies are sent up monthly of all completed
sheets. One set of these carbons is used to
compile periodical vital statistics ; by means
of the other, a set of abbreviated copies,
a beginning is made with the methodical
arrangement of the births from all districts
throughout the country for each quarter in
alphabetical order according to the surnames
and the Christian names of the infants. Any
member of the public who wishes to trace a
birth, knowing the name and the date when
the birth took place, will readily find it by
means of this admirably simple device of an
alphabetical Index which, when completed,
records also the names of the parents and
gives a cross-reference to the volume and
page of the Central Register containing full
particulars of the birth. It should be added
that the public have direct access to the
Index but not to the Central Register. If a

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

copy of the birth registration form were
required it would be made by a member of
the General Register Office staff on payment
of the usual fee. ,

The procedure in regard to deaths and
marriages is very similar ; for these also an
alphabetical index is compiled, which again
gives a cross reference to the volume and
page of the death or marriage register where
detailed particulars of the event are to be
found.

A FAMILY REGISTER

Regarding the family as the pivot on
which the extension of the present system is
to turn, it is proposed that, in addition to the
three existing registers of birth, marriage and
death, a fourth register should be maintained
which might be called the Family Register.
It would differ from the other three in that
it would have its origin at the Central General
Register Office; it would be built up entirely from information derived from these
other registers ; 1t would contain no clue to
the identity of the individuals to whom it
related : to discover who they were it would
be necessary to refer back to the original
registers ; and it would be filed on a card
index system, one card for each separate
family. It will be immediately seen that the
new system is not revolutionary: the intention is not to scrap existing machinery but
to develop it and make fuller use of it. One
or two additional questions are proposed at
each registration, but otherwise no essential
alteration is suggested in the form and content of the Birth, Marriage and Death
Registers.

If the family cards were filed by the year to
which they relate, and, within each year,
alphabetically by district where registration
took place, comparison would be possible
between one year and another and between
one area and another. In this respect they
would conform exactly to the general plan
defining the order of arrangement of the
other registers. Within each district or
division of a district the cards could be
arranged alphabetically by surname and
Christian name(s) of the male head of the
family. Finally, individuals with the same
CO-ORDINATION OF THE RECORDS OF BIRTHS, ETC.

initial letters, married in the same district and
within the same quarter-year, could be numbered in the order of marriage registration.

Each family card when complete would
contain particulars of the birth, marriage
and death of the man and woman who by
their union founded the family; it would
contain particulars of the birth of each child ;
and it would also contain particulars of
either the death ov the marriage of each child
whichever event occurred first (if both
occurred). As soon as a child grew up and
married, he (or she) would found a new
family and his (or her) story would then be
continued on a new card. In the same way,
to pursue the history of the parents backwards in time from the date of their marriage,
it would be necessary to refer to the cards
containing records of the two families founded
by the four grandparents. Every person in
short would appear on the family card of his
(or her) parents and, in addition, on the
family card which he (or she) in turn initiated
on marriage. If more than one union were
contracted by the same person, that person
should appear on three or more family cards.

The procedure contemplated would be
somewhat as follows: At the end of each
quarter, when the certified copies of the
marriage registers reached Somerset House
from different parts of the country, after the
Marriage Index had been compiled and the
usual statistical analysis for the quarter was
completed, the records before being filed
away would be sent to the department
responsible for the preparation of the new
family register so that a family card might be
made out for each marriage. On. the back of
the family card would be marked the volume
and page of the Marriage Register—the
source of the information about the marriage
given on the card. In due course, if children
were born, the birth registration forms would
also reach Somerset House, and, when all
that is now done with these forms had been
done, they in turn—along with all the birth
forms relating to the same quarter—would
be sent to the Family Registration Department. It will be assumed for the moment that
the answers to the questions asked when
the birth was registered were reasonably

199

complete and accurate; that being so, there
should be no difficulty, as will be seen when
the birth registration form is discussed, in
tracing, with the help of the Index to Marriages, the family card of the parents of the
newly born infant. On the front of this
family card certain particulars about the
birth would then be recorded, and at the
same time a cross-reference would be given
on the back of the card to the volume and
page of the Birth Register whence the information had been abstracted. In the same
way, when any member of the family died or
married, the death or marriage registration
form would be sent to Somerset House and
these forms, if adequately completed as in
the great majority of cases they should be,
would contain clues to the related family
cards and the family cards could thus be
brought up to date in regard to these events,
cross references to their source being given
at the back as before.

It should be observed that a death, like a
birth, would only need to be recorded on one
family card: the death of an unmarried
person would be recorded on the family card
of his (or her) parents, but the death of a
married person would be recorded on the
family card relating to his (or her) own (last)
marriage. A marriage would normally be
recorded on the family card of the parents of
both the married persons, and at the same
time it would start a fresh family card on its
own account. In short, by the plan above
outlined, the term family would be restricted
to parents and their children—two generations only—and, when their vital history
was complete, the family card would contain,
on the back, cross references to the birth and
death (or subsequent re-marriage) forms of
the two parents and the birth and marriage
(or death) forms of each child. Except by
going back to these registration forms there
would be no means of identifying the family
concerned. The precise nature of the information to be found on the front of the
card will be explained presently.

BIRTH

It will be convenient now to turn back to
consider the questions asked when a birth,
200

marriage or death is registered. It is proposed that the information required at the
registration of a birth should be as follows:

REGISTRATION OF BIRTH

. Date

. Place (full address)

. Live or still

. Single or multiple

Sex 
Name

. Name and surname of father

. Name and maiden surname of mother

. Marriage of father and mother: place (name
and address of church or registry office) and
date

10. Occupation and industry of father at birth of

child (If unemployed, give last occupation)
11. Occupation (if any) and industry of mother at
birth of child

Answers are required to questions I, 2, 5;
6, 7 and 8 at present when a birth is
registered. Also the occupation of the father
is given, but with a view to greater precision
it is suggested that the industry should be
stated in addition ; for example, a man may
be employed as a clerk in a bank, or a shipping office, or a retail store. For co-ordination with the Census and Ministry of Labour
records it would be reasonable to adopt the
same broad classification in regard to occupation and industry as that which is used for
these other purposes.

The registration of still-births has been
compulsory only since 1927, and they are
recorded ina separate register ; in due course,
as these statistics accumulate, they may
throw important light on factors affecting
general infant mortality. Incidentally, it is
worth noting that the definition of a stillbirth is not the same in all countries and this
in consequence affects the comparability of
statistics of live births. Through the medium
of the International Statistical Institute a
standard classification of causes of death has
been agreed by statisticians and is in use in
the more important European countries: it
would be well worth while to aim at corresponding agreement in regard to the definition of still-births, and in fact the whole
subject and machinery of registration.

Returning to the list of questions proposed
at the registration of a birth, question 4 is
important because suitably directed research

© Cy Ou bw NH

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

on twin and multiple births has helped and
may still further help towards the solution of
problems which are of peculiar interest to
biologists. The answer to question 9 should
make it possible to connect the birth of the
child directly with the marriage of the parents
by reference to the Index of Marriages ; and
answers to the last two questions would
indicate whether any change had occurred
in the occupational class of the parents since
their marriage. When there had been prenuptial conception there might be hesitation
in giving the date of marriage. The question
of the date, however, need not be pressed ;
the parents might indeed be informed—if
they showed any reluctance in replying—
that the answer to this question was purely
voluntary. Hesitation would only be likely
if marriage had occurred within the previous
nine months, and in all probability the
marriage would be registered in the same
district as the birth and could be traced
locally. The registrar could indicate this
type of case by a note attached to the form.
Knowing the place and approximate date of
marriage, and the names of the contracting
parties, it should be a simple matter at the
Central Office to trace the marriage certificate.

Parents should be informed that a copy of
the birth certificate might have to be produced at death, or marriage, or on some other
important occasion in the life of the individual, and they should be encouraged therefore to take and carefully keep a copy. It
could be given to them free of cost or the
customary small charge could be made for it.

MARRIAGE

In the Marriage Register it is suggested
that the following particulars should be
recorded :

REGISTRATION OF MARRIAGE

1. Date

2. Place (name and address of church or registry
office)

3. Name of husband (A.B.)

4. Name of wife (C.D., late C.E., previously
C.F., previously C.G., formerly C.H.)

5. Occupation and industry of husband (If unemployed, give last occupation)

6. Occupation (if any) and industry of wife
CO-ORDINATION OF THE RECORDS OF BIRTHS, ETC.

. Birth of husband, date and place

. Birth of wife, date and place

9. Relationship of husband and wife, if related
by blood

1o. Previous marriages* of husband :

i. date and place

ii. date and place

11. Previous marriages of wife :
i. date and place
ii. date and place

12. Last home address of husband
13. Last home address of wife

The first four of the foregoing questions
are asked now when marriage is contracted.
Also, the rank or profession of husband and
wife, their ages, and the occupations of their
fathers have to be stated; questions 5, 6,
7 and 8 are designed to elicit, in part indirectly, this same information in a more
satisfactory manner. Questions 5 and 6 are
in line with the corresponding questions
asked at birth and death and they are
expressed in the same form. Questions 7
and 8 would suffice not only to give the
ages of husband and wife at marriage,
but would enable them also to be traced
in the Birth Registration file, which
would give in addition information as to
their parents including their occupational
class. It is probably of greater interest to
know the rank or profession of the parents
at the period when their children are born
than at the period when their children
marry. Both partners to the marriage might
well be required to produce copies of their
birth certificates for inspection when the
marriage is registered. If this were done one
could be reasonably sure that the answers to
questions 7 and 8 were accurate. Assuming a
somewhat hazy knowledge of date and place
of birth, the local registrar might offer his
services for a small fee in tracing the particulars. The fee could be fixed by regula
Cony

tion : it should not be much more than the

cost of search at Somerset House. Question 9
has been included because a systematic
study of the offspring of consanguineous
matings is calculated to assist in the solution

* Illegal unions, if they have resulted in the foundation of a family, should be included under (10) and (11)
when the information is available. The appropriate
date and place would in such cases be the date and place
of birth of the first child to the union.

201

of important problems of human heredity.
Answers to questions 10 and 11 should
prevent confusion between different marriages contracted by the same individuals,
and the history of these earlier marriages also
could be explored once the dates when and
the places where they took place were known.
The home address of each partner to the
marriage is alsorequired at present and this,
though not essential, may still be useful in
order to make contact with husband or wife
again if necessary. A copy of the Marriage
Certificate should be given to each of the
contracting parties on registration either free
or at a nominal charge. If a marriage is
legally dissolved, otherwise than by death,
it should be the duty of some official of the
law court concerned to send to Somerset
House a note of the names of the parties to
the marriage, the date and place of marriage,
and the date and court of dissolution. The
fact could then be recorded on the Marriage
Register and the family cards.

DEATH

Proceeding now to the Death Register the
following questions are proposed :

REGISTRATION OF DEATH

. Date (age at death)

. Place (full address)

Sex

. Name and surname

. Cause

. Occupation and industry at death (If unemployed, give last occupation)

. Date and place of birth and name at registration of birth

8. If married, date and place of (last) marriage ;

or, failing this, full name of partner to

marriage (if dead), giving place and year of

death.

Answers to the first five of these questions
are supplied already at death. Also, the (last)
occupation of the deceased is stated, but for
greater accuracy, as before, the industry has
been included in question 6. The registrar
could fill in the answers to questions 7 and 8
if it were required that a copy of the birth certificate, assuming the deceased person single,
or the (last) marriage certificate, assuming
the deceased person married, had to be produced for inspection within a few days of the

AnbhwWN

“J
202

registration of death. To avoid delay the
local registrar himself might send for a copy
of the certificate to Somerset House, if the
relatives were unable to produce one, and
charge a small approved sum for his services.
The parents or other relatives would in most
cases be able to state the place and year of
birth of an unmarried person. In the case of
a married person, assuming one partner to
the marriage still alive, the place and year of
marriage would almost certainly be known.
If the other partner to the marriage were not
alive, it would serve the purpose equally well
if a copy of the death certificate of the partner first deceased were produced ; the year
and place of death would be more likely to
be known to the surviving relatives than the
year and place of marriage: given the place
of death, it should suffice indeed if the year
were known even approximately.

There would undoubtedly be some elderly
persons, married and unmarried, with no
known living relations, for whom it would
prove impossible to insert the particulars
desired on the Death Register, but the proportion of such cases is not likely to be large.
It could not be expected indeed that every
record would be complete and accurate in a
scheme which was of universal application,
but a closer approach to completeness and
accuracy might be anticipated year by year—
that has been our experience with the existing records of vital statistics. Moreover, the
fact that some of the returns could not be
used would not make the rest valueless. If
we had waited to calculate birth and death
rates, marriage and sickness rates, until our
returns were complete we should be waiting
still. It would certainly make for greater
accuracy if birth certificates had to be produced at marriage and if birth or marriage
certificates had to be produced at death.
This is not an unreasonable proposal, nor is
it one that would inflict any very great hardship or inconvenience on those concerned ;
marriage and death are both important
events in a person’s history and it is right
that the regulations governing their registration should be strict enough to ensure the
accuracy of the records so far as is humanly
possible.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ILLEGITIMACY

The case of an illegitimate birth requires
special consideration. Any union, whether
legal or otherwise, that results in issue must
be regarded as the foundation of a family,
and a fresh family card should be made out
for every such additional union.* An illegitimate union should be registered as
starting at the date of the birth of the first
child to the union. Question g in the Birth
Register would be left blank unless and until
the parents subsequently married. In rare
cases of illegitimacy it might prove impossible to fill in replies to more than one or two
questions on the form. Quite frequently the
name of the father would not be disclosed.
It follows that the ‘‘ family ” card relating
to an illegitimate union would in many cases
be incomplete though not by any means
altogether without value.

THE FAMILY

We are now in a position to consider the
nature of the information to be recorded on
the family card. It is to be specially noted
that all its contents are obtained shortly
after the occurrence of a birth, marriage, or
death, and as soon as the forms recording
these events reach the Central Office and can
be dealt with there. The time lag between the
event and its registration on the family card
should be as short as possible.

It is suggested that the card might be
designed on the following lines, taking a
purely imaginary illustration :

REGISTRATION OF FAMILY

1. Date 2. Registration district

3. Rel. C.C. 4. Mar. H. (1 div.) ; W. (0)
5- M, F, F, F;

6. H. 27-9

W. 22-6; 23-11, 25-8, 28-7, 32-10
. H. taxi-driver; taxi-driver, motor mechanic,
ditto, ditto; pen.
W. shop assistant (grocery stores)
8. H. reg; U, reg, reg, cas.; cas.

“

9. H. 67-4 cause of death
M, 19-2 cause of death
W. 72-1 cause of death

F, 1-3 cause of death

* The distinction drawn here between an illegal union
and a marriage is that a family card is to be made out
for every marriage, whether children are born to the
marriage or not.
CO-ORDINATION OF THE RECORDS OF BIRTHS, ETC.

to. M., fitter (engineering) reg.
II. Fy 23-5 F, 27-8
postman (reg.) general labourer (U)

A marriage takes place at a certain date and is
registered in a certain district. These two facts are
recorded first. If husband and wife were cousins,
that would be indicated in (3). The man may have
been married before and divorced as shown in (4).
Ages of husband and wife at marriage (27 years
9 months and 22 years 6 months, respectively) are
given in (6). The occupations of each, also at
Marriage, appear in (7), and if the husband’s work
was of a kind that would be normally classed as
regular, that is recorded in (8). As children are
born—one boy, followed by three girls, assumed in
this case—that is shown in (5) ; the age of the wife
at each birth is recorded in (6), and the occupation
of the husband in (7). The fact that the husband was
unemployed at the birth of the first child is noted in
(8). The ages of husband and wife at death and cause
of death are given in (9). The same information is
given also for any children who die before marriage;
here it is assumed that the son and one daughter
die young. The father was in receipt of a pension at
death (See (7)) but was still engaged in work of a
casual character (See (8)). The son’s occupation at
death is given in (10); also the occupations of the
husbands of the two married daughters at the time
of marriage are shown in (11).

MATERIAL FOR RESEARCH

On the back of the card, as already explained, would appear the cross-reference
links with the birth, marriage and deathcards of the various members of the family.
A random sample of the family cards could
therefore be taken from the file and analysed
by a responsible authority, interested in some
special problem, without any knowledge by
name of the particular families whose vital
history is recorded on the cards: the investigation would be quite impersonal. In
due course one could measure with greater
precision than is at present possible the
relation of the decline in the birth-rate—if
it continue to decline—to the ages of the
parents, the duration of marriage, occupational class. What is the difference in such
respects between one generation and the
next? Is it consistent within each class ?

Similar inquiries could be prosecuted in
regard to death-rates, and, in particular,
infant and maternal mortality. What is the
bearing of the decline in births upon the
rate of mortality of infants and mothers? Is

203

it true that more mothers die because the
first confinement is the most difficult, and
there is an increasing proportion of first
births because families are smaller than they
were ? It would be a simple matter, by tak
ing a random sample of family cards, to

determine the proportion of maternal deaths
at first, second, third, and subsequent
confinements.

Again, to what extent do marriages occur
between persons of different social class and
is there any sex difference in this class relation ? Do persons tend to re-marry in certain
occupational groups more frequently than in
others, and what relation has age to remarriage? More attention has been paid in
the past to the statistics of birth and death
than to marriage statistics. Consequently
there is a rich harvest here waiting to be
garnered, especially when we consider also the
data that might be analysed in regard to
human fertility for which suitable statistics
on a large scale are scanty. How does the
chance of a birth depend upon the age of the
wife? That seems a simple question and
the answer to it has a greater influence upon
the size of family than is appreciated until it
is examined ; yet only one large sample of
really reliable English figures exists on the
subject and it dates back to the 1911 Census.
But, assuming that records were assembled
in a Central Office on the plan here outlined,
it should be possible to collect within a comparatively short time comprehensive data
establishing the average relation of fertility
to ages of both husband and wife, the mean
intervals of time after marriage between
successive births, the variation with age in
the tendency to single or multiple, live or still,
births, and the effect upon all such figures of
differences in the ocupational class of the
parents. The association between fertility
and age among married women is clearly of
the first importance to statisticians trying
to estimate the future population, and now
that we are approaching the stage of a
serious decline in population the problem is
one that is bound to receive public attention.
We take stock of our material possessions
from time to time; still more ought we to
concern ourselves about the quantity and the
204

quality of the people who are the true wealth
of the country.

ESTIMATED COST OF SCHEME

It may be worth while to add a rough
estimate—and it can only be rough—of the
cost of the additional clerical work in the
Central Office called for by the proposed new
development. In Great Britain in 1931 there
were 724,301 births, 555,859 deaths, and
344,516 marriages, making a total of
1,624,676 registrations in the year. Allowing
48 weeks of 54 working days in the year, this
would give a total of 264 working days.
Hence the mean number of registrations per
working day would be 6,154. Each registration would involve the insertion of a few
straightforward entries on an old or new
family card. If we suppose that one clerk
could be responsible for an average of 60
registrations in a day, it follows that the
number of additional clerks required would
be about roo. The labour would not be
highly skilled. If the pay were estimated at
£3 a week, the total cost would be about
£15,000 a year.

But this procedure envisages one clerk
undertaking the several stages relating to
each registration, whereas in practice it
would no doubt be possible so to organize and
subdivide the work as to reduce the labour
and cost appreciably. Supervision and establishment charges are not included in the
above estimate.

PART II
MIGRATION

The case already made out for the coordination of the records of birth, marriage
and death can be discussed on its merits
quite apart from the proposals which follow
in regard to Migration. But, in order to make
the scheme theoretically watertight, while
fully recognizing the practical human limitations to which it is subject, I have been
tempted to go on to explore the problem of
registration as it is affected by people
entering or leaving the country. For a really
adequate system to meet all difficulties it
would be necessary for the Governments of

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

different countries to come to an agreement
to interchange data in regard to migrants on
some common plan. Preliminary steps have
been taken to achieve this with some measure
of success through the initiative of such
bodies as the International Labour Office
and the International Statistical Institute.
But it will be well to devise a scheme which
does not assume as a practical possibility any
agreement so comprehensive as to embrace
all countries in the immediate future.

TRAVELLERS

The scheme must clearly differentiate
between persons who enter this country (or
who go abroad) only as visitors, on business
or pleasure, who may be termed travellers,
and those who enter (or leave) the country
with no intention of returning—the true
migrants. It is suggested that every person
entering (or leaving) Great Britain on a visit
by sea or air should be required before
leaving the port of landing (or departure) to
complete a Traveller’s Identity Card, copies
of which should be obtainable in every British
passenger boat or plane and at every British
sea and air port. Exceptions should only be
made in the case of crew and officers engaged in navigating or piloting ship or
plane, and in the case of passengers leaving
and returning to a British port by the same
ship or plane in the one voyage. The master
or chief pilot should be responsible for
reporting particulars of any change in crew
or passengers in such a case.

TRAVELLER’S IDENTITY CARD

. Date of registration

Sex

Name

. Name as registered at birth

Date of birth

. Place of birth (full address)

. Home address

. Visiting address

. Probable duration of visit, if likely to exceed
six months.

For his own protection the traveller might
be advised to include also his photograph
and finger prints but this would be purely
voluntary.

Identity cards would have code numbers
stamped on them to distinguish the port of

19 ON AUS WN H
CO-ORDINATION OF THE RECORDS OF BIRTHS, ETC.

departure (or arrival) and, on completion,
they would be kept in a special Travellers’
File, one for inward and one for outward
visitors, alphabetically by name and by
date of birth for persons of the same name.
Each traveller should receive a duplicate
copy of his card which would serve as his
passport on leaving (or re-entering) this
country later. If he should lose it, he should
be obliged to pay, say, five shillings and
complete a fresh card, giving the same particulars as before. To impersonate a traveller
should be regarded as a serious offence liable
to result in imprisonment or a heavy fine.
The duplicate (or the copy of it, as the case
might be) should be cancelled along with the
original form after establishing correspondence between them on the traveller’s
return. The files should be inspected
periodically, and a courteous communication
(with prepaid postage for reply) sent to each
person more than three months overdue,*
asking for the new home address should
there be no intention of returning to the
previous home. Assuming no reply received
after a further three months, the traveller
should be provisionally treated as a true
migrant, but every effort should be made to
confirm permanent residence.

IMMIGRANTS

The true immigrant is a person who enters
the country with the intention of remaining
permanently, and in practice it is not uncommon for Governments to define “ permanence ”’ as meaning a period longer than
a year. The responsibility should be laid
upon such persons to complete, at or before
entry, a birth registration form and also, if
married, a marriage registration form, assuming no such forms had already been completed
as the result of residence in the country at
some earlier period. No change need be made
in the ordinary birth or marriage registration
form to suit the particular case of immigrants,
but their family cards for a period of years
should be filed separately in order to
facilitate analysis. It is probable that the

* For this purpose travellers who did not answer

question 9 should be treated as due to return three
months after the date of departure (or arrival).

205

answers to some of the questions relating to
immigrants would be less trustworthy,
because the facts would be recorded some
time after the events to which they refer.
For instance, an adult should be able to give
date and place of birth and names of parents ;
but date and place of marriage of parents
and their occupations might not be known
with certainty. If the parents had been
married in this country, the year and place
being known, the particulars could be
readily checked; on the other hand, if,
as would be more likely, the marriage was
contracted abroad, the date would be of less
interest and their uncertainty of less importance. In that event, questions 9, Io
and 11 on the Birth Registration Form might
be omitted altogether without much loss,
the word Abroad being stamped against
them to cancel them.

Assuming the immigrant himself married,
his marriage, too, was either contracted in
this country and the facts concerning it
should be entered already in the Marriage
Register ; or it was contracted abroad, and
most, if not all, of the particulars desired
about it should be within the knowledge
of the parties to the marriage; although
again, owing to the lapse of time between
the events and the recording of them, it is
probable that there might be an element of
uncertainty about some of the entries.

In order to secure prompt registration,
attention should be drawn to the forms—
which, like the travellers’ cards, should be
available on board all British ships and
planes carrying passengers and at each port
of landing—and facilities should be provided
for completing them before the passengers
land or before they leave the port for their
inland destinations.

Assuming the forms were not satisfactorily
completed in any essential particular, the
immigrant should be required to state his
address and to present himself once a week
at the office of the nearest Superintendent
Registrar until the required information
was obtained. Failing this, he should be
treated as an alien and reported to the
police. An appropriate penalty should be
exacted from anyone convicted of neglecting
206

to take steps to complete registration within
seven days’ residence in the country or
knowingly making any false statement in
registering. If such procedure were not
considered to be a sufficient safeguard
against the “‘ dumping ”’ of undesired aliens
in this country, photographs and _ fingerprints could be taken before they were
permitted to leave the port of landing.

EMIGRANTS

The true emigrant who intends to leave
the country permanently should be required
to fill up a form exactly similar to the
Traveller’s Card already described, except
for the last three questions.

EMIGRATION FORM

. Date
Sex
Name
Name as registered at birth
. Date of birth
. Place of birth (full address)
. Last home address
. Future home address (i.e. town or district and

country)
. Occupation and industry (If unemployed, state

last occupation)

These forms should be forwarded direct
to the Central Register Office and filed in a
separate file. The following particulars, in
regard to themselves or their children as the
case may require, typed on a thin yellow
card and clipped to the appropriate family
registration card, would then explain why
there was no entry later recording the deaths
of the individuals concerned.

Emigrated to (destination) on (date)

Occupation and industry at date of emigration

(If unemployed, state last occupation)

The yellow clipped card would make the
cards containing entries relating to emigrants
easy to identify. Should an emigrant decide
later to return to this country it would still
be possible to insert any necessary particulars
on the original family registration card. Also,
a note could be added to the emigration form:

Returned to Great Britain (date)

such persons could be readily distinguished
from travellers because no Traveller’s Card
would be made out for them. They would
accordingly be treated as immigrants, but

oon) OunbwWN H

o

THE EUGENICS REVIEW |

it would be unnecessary to duplicate their
birth or marriage forms if already made out
before emigration. They would, therefore,
be required merely to call at the office of the
nearest Superintendent Registrar to arrange
for the completion of their registration.

THE RELATION OF VITAL STATISTICS
TO OTHER LOCAL RECORDS

I have intentionally confined my remarks
in this paper to the subject of registration,
but a moment’s reflection will suggest the
almost unlimited scope for research which
would follow by combining these foundation
statistics, once they were in suitable and
accessible form, with other records in the
possession of different departments of the
national or local authorities. One could
pick out all the cards relating to families of
a particular class in a given district, where,
for instance, the head of the family was in
receipt of public assistance or unemployment insurance, or where the children were
getting free dinners or had gained free places
in school, and they could be studied from
various angles. This more intimate type of
inquiry could only be made, of course, with
the clear understanding that no information
would be disclosed in regard to any individual
family. The use of the family cards for the
purpose would really ensure this. General
principles and controlling factors alone
would be explored and their average effects
exposed.. Answers to such questions as
those previously suggested (See page 203)
concerning the birth, marriage, and mortality of a random sample drawn from the
normal population—would provide standards
with which the experience of the random
sample drawn from a selected class could be
compared.

It is unnecessary to elaborate further the
immense variety of problems which might be
discussed as a result of the co-ordination
and centralisation of the raw material of our
main vital statistics. Enough has been said,
perhaps, to emphasize the lack of economy in
making the laborious collection of registration
data on a universal scale compulsory, and in
the failure to take the short additional step
essential to get the full benefit out of it.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVIII, No. 3.
