English and Foreign Divorce Law in relation to
Mental Disorder.
By W. G. H. Coox, LL.D. (Lonp)., Barrister-at-Law.

According to the law of England, where a marriage has once been
validly contracted, the usual incidents belonging to it attach and
continue notwithstanding the subsequent insanity of either party:
that is to say, in the present state of the law supervening insanity of
ttself will not operate as a dissolution of the bond, nor afford a ground
for a decree of dissolution of the marriage, or of judicial separation.

The question whether insanity arising during the marriage
state will, in any circumstances, be a defence to charges of misconduct has received the consideration of the Courts, and it has been held
that even if insanity can in any circumstances be admitted as a defence
to proceedings for divorce on the ground of misconduct it is necessary
that the plea should state that the insanity is lasting and abiding and
that there is no hope of recovery or of amelioration, and that it is not a
mere recurrent or intermittent insanity. In a case where a husband
who had returned to the conjugal home after a period of confinement in
an asylum, was subject to fits of mania which endangered the safety of
the wife, it was held that she was entitled to the protection of the
Court by the grant of a judicial separation: the Court had no power to
dissolve the marriage. The decision in Hanbury v. Hanbury was
based on the fact that at the time the respondent committed certain
acts of cruelty and adultery he was capable of understanding the
natural and probable consequences of his acts, the jury having been
satisfied, especially on the evidence of Dr. Henry Maudsley, that the
insanity was intermittent: in these circumstances the Court granted the
wife a decree nisi, but it must not be assumed that if the insanity had
been proved to have been absolute and permanent the divorce would
not have been granted.

In this connexion it is necessary to bear in mind that the courts
insist upon proof that the misconduct complained of is the consequence
of the insanity.

In the leading case of Yarrow v. Yarrow a married woman admitted
having committed adultery, and was subsequently sought to be divorced
by her husband: the guardian ad litem (who was appearing for the wife
who was at the date of the action detained in a lunatic asylum) opposed
the petition on the ground that the wife was insane at the time of the
adultery. In the opinion of the Court the defence of insanity was not
allowable, inasmuch, as although the wife may have had certain delusions and was not absolutely of sane mind, she was quite capable, at
the date of the act of adultery, of appreciating the character of her
acts and the probable consequences thereof, i.e., that a petition
would be brought for her divorce. In these circumstances, the
husband’s petition was granted. The decision in this case depended
408 EUGENICS REVIEW.

entirely upon the degree of the insanity. The President of the Court
‘said that he was by no means sure that if the respondent were suffering
from insanity of such a degree as would entitle an accused person to
acquittal on an indictment for a crime, such insanity would constitute a valid defence to a suit for divorce on the ground of adultery.

As to the legal effect of insanity of one of the parties to the hearing
of a petition for divorce on the ground of adultery, reference may usefully be made to the important case of Mordaunt v. Moncreiffe,
where it was held unanimously by the House of Lords that the insanity
of the respondent is no bar to proceedings for divorce and that the
respondent’s defence should be conducted by a guardian ad litem.
‘The case is particularly interesting by reason of the fact that the
House of Lords obtained the opinions of the judges upon the important
question of principle which was raised. The ratio decidendi was that
if the petitioner were prevented from having his petition. heard, the.
effect would be that insanity would of itself be a defence to a charge of
adultery, and that this was clearly not the intention of the Divorce
Act, inasmuch as the statute directed the Court, upon the petition of
the husband in cases of adultery committed by the wife, to pronounce
a decree declaring the dissolution of the marriage. The House of
Lords refused to allow the insanity of the respondent to bar or to
impede the investigation of the charge of adultery brought by the
petitioner, and sent the case back to the Court below with directions to
proceed with the hearing of the petition notwithstanding the insanity
of the respondent.

In Hanbury v. Hanbury the President of the Divorce Court (Sir
Charles Butt) stated that the object of the Divorce Act is not so much
the punishment of retribution for a marital offence as the protection of
the party in peril. On this principle, if it can be shown that the
insariity of the husband is of such a nature as to endanger the safety of
the wife she is entitled to the protection of the Court. Sir.Charles Butt
said that, while the Divorce Act does not entitle a woman in such a case
to have her marriage dissolved, he would be disposed to hold that acts
of cruelty committed during an attack of mania would entitle a wife to
be legally separated from her husband.

As to the question whether insanity of so pronounced a degree that
the party has to be confined in an asylum or in some other place of
permanent detention, and the disease is such that there is no hope of
recovery or amelioration such as will allow of the patient’s discharge
will be a good defence to a petition for divorce on the ground of adultery
with cruelty, there is no doubt, since the decision in Hanbury v.
Hanbury, that if the act complained of be committed during such
insanity, the marriage will not be dissolved. Sir Charles Butt said :—
““When a disease of mind of so pronounced a type seizes upon a person
and he or she has to be incarcerated or permanently to be placed in
confinement, I should hesitate to say that in regard to an act committed
in such a state of insanity a plea of insanity might not be an answer.’’

The law of England to-day is that the insanity , even of an incurable
type, e.g., general paralysis of the insane, of either a husband or wife
does not, ipso facto, entitle the other party to a divorce or even to a
judicial separation. Divorce will not in any circumstances be granted
ENGLISH AND FOREIGN DIVORCE LAW. 409

upon the ground merely of the insanity of one of the parties; and
judicial separation will be granted only in circumstances similar to
those set out above. |

The hope or expectation which operates or has been operating in
the mind of a husband, whose wife has become insane after having
committed adultery, that he may be released from the marriage by the
death of his wife, may be accepted by the Court as a valid excuse for, or
explanation of, what would otherwise amount to ‘‘unreasonable
delay’’ in filing his petition for a divorce.

With reference to the foregoing statement of the law of England as
to supervening insanity as a ground for divorce, it is interesting to
consider the following recommendation of the Royal Commission
on Divorce and Matrimonial] Causes with reference to the question of
insanity as a ground for divorce :—

That insanity should be introduced as a ground for divorce subject
to the following limitations and conditions :—

(i) The insanity which should form a ground for divorce should
be certified as incurable, and

(11) The insane spouse should have been continuously confined,
under the provisions of the Lunacy Acts for the time being in
force, for not less than five years.

(i111) The insanity should be found to be incurable to the satisfaction of the Court.

(iv) This ground should operate only when the age of the insane
person is, if a woman, not over fifty years, and if a man, not
over sixty years.

In this connexion it is instructive to have set out by way of
comparison a statement of the law of other countries in regard to the
matter under consideration.

British DoMINIONS.

Scotland. Insanity is not a ground for divorce.

Ireland. The only way by which divorce may be obtained in
Ireland is by means of a private Act of Parliament: insanity is not
allowed to be a ground for the passing of such an Act.

Isle of Man. Insanity is not a ground for divorce.

Channel Islands. The Courts have no power to grant divorce.

British India. (1) Insanity is not a ground for divorce among the
Christian communities in India—to whom alone the Indian Divorce
Act of 1869 applies.

(11) Under the Mahommedan Law a husband may divorce his
wife without any misbehaviour on her part, or without assigning any
cause.

(111) Divorce, in the ordinary sense, is unknown to the Hindu
Law: the Hindus contend that even death does not dissolve the bond of
mairiage.

Dominion of Canada. In none of the provinces is insanity a
ground for divorce.

Union of South Africa. In none of the provinces is insanity a
ground for divorce.

Newfoundland. There is no Court in the colony which has jurisdiction to pronounce a divorce.
410 EUGENICS REVIEW.

New South Wales. Insanity is not a ground for divorce.

Dominion of New Zealand. By the Divorce and Matrimonial
Causes Act, 1908 (No. 50 of the Consolidated Statutes of New Zealand),
whether the petitioner is husband or wife, divorce may be obtained on
the ground that the respondent is a lunatic or person of unsound mind
and has been confined in an asylum or other institution or house in
accordance with the provisions of the ‘‘Lunatics Act, 1908,’’ for a
period or periods not less in the aggregate than ten years, within
twelve years immediately preceding the suit and is unlikely to recover.

Queensland. Insanity is not a ground for divorce.

South Australia. Insanity is not a ground for divorce.

Tasmania. Insanity is not a ground for divorce.

Victoria. Insanity is not a ground for divorce.

Western Australia. By Act No. 7 of 1912, among the causes upon
which a decree of divorce may be granted is the fact that the respondent
is a lunatic or person of unsound mind, has been confined in an
asylum or other institution in accordance with the provisions of the
Lunacy Act of 1903 for a period or periods not less in the aggregate than
five years within six years immediately preceding the suit, and is unlikely to recover.

FOREIGN COUNTRIES,

Argentine Republic. 'There is no absolute divorce on any grounds.

Austria. Insanity subsequent to marriage is not a ground for
divorce.

Belgium. Insanity subsequent to marriage is not a ground for
divorce.

Bulgaria. Insanity subsequent to marriage is not a ground for
divorce.

Brazil, Cuba and Mexico. Absolute divorce is not obtainable.

China. Insanity subsequent to marriage is not in itself a ground
for divorce.

Denmark. An administrative divorce may be obtained on the
ground of supervening insanity.

France. Insanity subsequent to marriage is not a ground for
divorce.

The German Empire. By the German Civil Code of 1900 insanity
of three years’ duration after the marriage is an absolute ground upon
which a decree for divorce is granted throughout the German Empire.

Greece. Insanity is not a ground for divorce.

Holland and Hungary. Insanity is not a ground for divorce.

Italy. No divorce is permitted upon any grounds.

Japan and Luremburg. Insanity is not a ground for divorce.

Norway. Either party to the marriage is entitled to a divorce where,
at the time of marriage, the other party, without the knowledge of the
former had suffered from insanity. Insanity for three years with no
reasonable prospect of recovery is also a ground for divorce.

Portugal. Divorce may be obtained upon proof of incurable
lunacy three years after the date upon which insanity has been declared
by the competent authorities.

Peru, Roumania and Serbia. Insanity is not a ground for divorce.
ENGLISH AND FOREIGN DIVORCE LAW. 411

Russia. Members of the Lutheran Church (other than those
resident in Finland) may seek divorce in their Consistorial Courts upon
the ground of the insanity of one of the parties to the marriage.

Spain. No divorce is permitted.

Sweden. One of the grounds for divorce is insanity of three
years’ duration which is pronounced incurable.

Switzerland. By the Civil Code of December, 1907, divorce may
be obtained upon proof of insanity of a nature such as to render married
life unbearable and which, after three years’ duration, is pronounced
incurable.

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

Alabama, Arizona, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware,
District of Columbia, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina,
Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, Rhode Island, South Dakota, Tennessee,
Texas, Vermont, Virginia, West Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.
Insanity occurring after the marriage is not a ground for divorce.

Arkansas. By an act approved on 28th March, 1895, the following ground for divorce was repealed :—‘‘Where either party shall,
subsequently to marriage, have become permanently or incurably
insane.”’

Florida. On 25th April, 1901, a statute was enacted making
incurable insanity for four years in either party a ground for absolute
divorce. This statute was repealed on 11th May, 1905.

Idaho. By a statute of 4th February, 1895, permanent insanity
is a ground for divorce: the insane person must have been duly and
regularly confined in an asylum of a state for at least six years next
preceding the commencement of the action for divorce, and such
insanity must appear to the Court to be permanent and incurable.

North Dakota. By an act approved on 6th March, 1899, incurable
insanity after two years’ duration was made a ground for divorce: this
was repealed on 15th February, 1901.

Pennsylvania. The husband may obtain an absolute divorce
when the wife is a lunatic or non compos mentis and the petition is
brought by any relative or next friend of the wife.

South Carolina. No divorce is allowed.

Utah. By an act approved on 9th March, 1903, permanent
insanity of one of the parties is a ground for divorce, provided that the
party shall have been duly and regularly adjudged insane by the legally
constituted authorities of Utah or of some other State at least five years
prior to the commencement of the action, and that it shall appear to
the satisfaction of the Court that the insanity is incurable.

Washington. Absolute divorce may be granted in the discretion
of the Court where either party is proved to have suffered for ten
years or more from incurable chronic mania or dementia.

A survey of the foregoing statement shows that the laws of several
non-Catholic countries, as well as those of New Zealand and of
Western Australia, evince a tendency to regard the contract of marriage
412 EUGENICS REVIEW.

_as voidable upon proof of the confirmed insanity of one of the parties.

In at least three of the North American States the Legislature has repealed, after a short trial, Acts which made the supervening insanity
of one of the parties a ground for divorce.

If, as is proposed by the Royal Commission on Divorce, supérvening insanity be made a ground for divorce in England, it would
seem to be necessary , according to the principles of the law of contract,
to alter the conditions as to the irrevocability of the marriage, which
are commonly inserted in the contract of marriage. Apart from
the ethical question involved, it may be considered inconsistent with
public policy for the Legislature arbitrarily to introduce into a contract of the solemn nature of marriage, and to make retrospective, a
condition which was not contemplated by either of the contracting
parties at the date of the marriage.
