NOTES ON THE REPORT OF THE ROYAL

(p. 172)*

COMMISSION ON DIVORCE AND
MATRIMONIAL CAUSES.

By Major L. DARWIN.

The Royal Commission on Divorce and Matrimonial Causes, which issued its report last November,
was appointed three years ago. Soon after its
appointment, a Committee of the Society was nominated to consider the questions involved; and at a
meeting of the Council held on April 6th, 1910, the
draft of the memorandum in preparation for the
Commission was read, the Council ‘‘ suggested that
Dr. Mott, Mr. Lane, and Dr. Sullivan should be
asked to give evidence, and adopted the lines of
the report ’’ of the Committee. Mr. Crackanthorpe,
the President of the Society, was also examined at
length by the Commission. Extracts from the memorandum drawn up by our Committee, giving their
actual recommendations, are given below in order
that members of the Society may see to what extent
the views thus advocated found favour with the Commissioners.

The Report of the Royal Commission consists of
a Majority report, signed by Lord Gorell, Lady
Frances Balfour, Mr. Burt, Lord Guthrie, Sir F.
Treves, Judge Tindal-Atkinson, Mrs. Tennant, Mr. E.
Brierly, and Mr. J. A. Spender, and a Minority report
signed by the Archbishop of York, Sir W. Anson,
and Sir L. Dibdin.

The Commissioners had to consider many questions, and on many points they are unanimous in
their recommendations. As to the main point of
controversy, the Minority Commissioners ask ‘‘What
“then is for the public good in England with regard
‘“‘to divorce? Is it in the true interests of the nation

* These numbers refer to the pages of the Report. Cd. 6478.
364

EUGENICS REVIEW Major L. Darwin :

‘that the present law under which marriage once
‘validly contracted is, except for adultery, indis‘‘ soluble, should be abandoned?’’ And they add
that very early in their enquiry ‘it became evident
‘* that true answers to these questions cannot be given
‘‘ without due appreciation of many different matters,
‘“some making for and some against change. It is
“only on a balance of these conflicting considerations
“‘that we can hope to reach a right conclusion.’’
Amongst ‘‘these conflicting considerations”’ eugenists hold that the ‘‘ racial qualities of future generations’? must be given a very important, though not
in all cases a predominant place, and that conduct
thus regulated is in accordance with the highest moral
code. Considerable differences of opinion are certain
to exist as to the reforms held to be desirable, even if
the questions at issue are regarded solely from the
eugenic point of view; and these differences cannot
but be wider still when religious and other moral
factors are given their due weight in the scales.
Catholic eugenists, for example, cannot be expected
to adopt the same attitude as regards divorce as the
majority of their colleagues. If, in this review,
divorce is discussed almost solely from the eugenic
standpoint, it must not be held that this indicates
any disposition to minimize the importance of religious considerations; it is merely because the existing diversity of opinion makes it necessary that each
eugenist must himself decide on the weight to be
attached to all other factors. On certain questions,
however, the report of the Committee of the Society
does indicate that there is a fair amount of agreement
in our ranks.

INSANITY.

The Committee of our Society reported as
follows :—

““Amongst the heritable defects which, it is

“submitted, should in the interests of the parties
THE DIVORCE COMMISSION 365

‘‘or the race, or of both the parties and the race,
‘furnish grounds for divorce are the following :—
I.—Insanity.—‘‘ The insanity here intended is certi
‘* fied chronic incurable insanity, and certain cases

“‘of repeatedly recurrent insanity.”’

In comparing this suggestion with the views expressed by the Commissioners, it is to be noticed with
satisfaction that they, Majority and Minority alike, are
unanimous in recommending that a party to a marriage should be entitled to a declaration of nullity
when the other party was at the time of marriage
either of unsound mind, or in a state of incipient
mental unsoundness which became definite within six
months, or subject to recurrent insanity or to epilepsy,
where the first party was ignorant of the defect, or, in
certain cases, where it was concealed, subject to

(p. 118 Certain safeguards. This, together with a similar

& 190) provision with regard to venereal diseases, constitute
the most important recommendations of the Commissioners as far as racial effects are concerned; and this
both as regards the direct effect of diminishing the
production of unfit children, and the indirect effect of
calling attention to the great importance of taking
such matters into consideration before marriage.

The Majority Commissioners also recommend
that insanity should form a ground for divorce if certi
(p. 306) fied as incurable and after the patient had been continuously confined for five years. The Minority Com(p. 182) missioners do not agree in this recommendation. The
number of the certified incurably insane who recover
after five years and who again become parents is so
minute that the direct eugenic effects of this recommendation in stamping out insanity would be almost
negligible. It would no doubt somewhat help to call
attention to this question before marriage, and may
be recommended on that ground. The more important suggestion in the report of the Committee of this
Society that certain cases of repeatedly recurrent in366 EUGENICS REVIEW Major L. Darwin:

sanity should furnish grounds for divorce was not

adopted.
VENEREAL DISEASE.

Our Committee also included amongst the suggested grounds for divorce :—

II.—Venereal Disease.—‘‘ (a) Active syphilis, a

‘‘transmissible disease which is one of the most

** powerful factors in the production of racial

“* degeneracy.

‘“*(b) Gonorrhea, which is responsible for a large

‘number of cases of blindness in children, and is

‘* a fruitful source of sterility in women, and conse
“* quently indirectly responsible for race degenera
** tion.”’

On this subject the Commissioners are unanimous
in recommending that where at the time of the marriage one party was suffering from a venereal disease,
and where this fact was not disclosed, the other party

(p. 118) should be entitled to a decree of nullity. This, as
already remarked, is a most valuable recommendation.

The Majority Commissioners also recommend
that cruelty shall be a ground for divorce, and
that the communication of a venereal disease should
be regarded as cruelty; this being one of the
cases where they would make divorce possible
where only judicial separation is now obtainable.
This also is a valuable recommendation. The
Minority Commission disagree as regards the form
though not as regards the substance of this recommendation; for they would abolish the rule whereby
adultery must be accompanied by cruelty in the case
of a man, with the effect that the above-mentioned
offence could in all cases be made the ground for
divorce.

It may be worth noting that in the Majority Report in justification for this same recommendation of
making even a single act of adultery on the part of
the man, unaccompanied by cruelty, a ground for
divorce—the putting of the sexes on an equal footing—
(p, 89)

(p- 112)

(p. 183)

THE DIVORCE COMMISSION 367

it is remarked that by such an act there is grave risk
that by infecting the wife with disease, her ‘‘ health
and that of her children may be most seriously
affected, or sterility may be produced.’’ We are glad
that attention is forcibly called in the Report to the
“‘appalling amount of suffering ’’ thus caused.

CRIMINALITY.

The third suggestion of our Committee ran as
follows :—

I]I.—Habitual Criminality.—‘‘ Habitual criminality,
“where such criminality (a) is due to moral
“‘imbecility or (b) is the expression of general
““mental deficiency. The former condition is
“‘found in a certain proportion of the more
“‘ dangerous criminals who fall within the defini“‘tion of ‘habitual criminals’ in the Prevention
‘of Crime Act (1908) while the condition indicated
**in (b) is met with in a large number of the petty
“‘offenders who are amenable as ‘ incorrigible
““rogues’ to section 10 of the Vagrancy Act
“* (1824). Conviction as an habitual criminal or
“as an incorrigible rogue, with proof by medical
“* certificate that the anti-social habit is due to one
““of the causes specified, above (a) or (b) should
‘““be made a ground for divorce.”’

The Majority Commissioners, after careful consideration, arrive at the conclusion that with one exception imprisonment should not be a ground for
divorce. That one suggested exception is to be in
the case of a person who has been condemned to death
and whose sentence has been commuted to penal
servitude for life. The direct eugenic effect of the
divorces thus possibly obtainable may be dismissed

-as being negligible. The Minority Commissioners

disagree with even this exception, a proposal which
““seems to go either too far or not far enough,’’ according to the evidence tendered. These recommendations of the Commissioners make both the passing of
368

(p. 71)

EUGENICS REVIEW

the Mental Deficiency Bill, and its efficient working
as regards our criminal classes, even more urgently
necessary than before, as being apparently the only
method which the public will now tolerate of checking the masses of feeble-minded criminals in our ranks
from reproducing their kind in unlimited numbers.

DRUNKENNESS.

IV.—Habitual Inebriety—The fourth and final
recommendation of our Committee dealt with
habitual inebriety. ‘‘ This is already recognized
“‘ by the law as constituting a ground for judicial
“separation. It should, it is submitted, be made
“‘a ground for divorce, the condition it imports
“‘ being one which for eugenic reasons should dis“* qualify for parenthood.’’

The Majority Commissioners give a suggested
definition of the term ‘‘ habitual drunkard,’’ and
recommend that, as defined, drunkenness should be a
ground for temporary separation or for divorce. That
some method of preventing habitual drunkards from
becoming parents should be adopted is the opinion
of both those eugenists who hold that alcohol is a
serious racial poison and also of those who regard the
tendency to drink as being a heritable inborn quality
which seems in some cases to defy all moral persuasion.
The Minority Commissioners agree as regards separations for drunkenness, which are indeed now generally obtainable, but disagree as regards divorce.

OTHER RECOMMENDATIONS,

On a few other points the Commissioners make
recommendations of eugenic value. All the Commissioners agree that when a woman is found to be

pregnant at the time of marriage, that fact being con
(p. 118)

cealed from the husband, he should be entitled to a
decree of nullity. A man should certainly be able
to repudiate a child not his own, even on eugenic
THE DIVORCE COMMISSION. 369

grounds alone. Cruelty is suggested as a ground for
divorce by the Majority Commissioners, it being now

(p. 300) only a ground for separation. In certain cases cruelty
implies the possession of inborn qualities so objectionable as to make it desirable that no more children
should be produced, and, in such cases, divorce, in so
far as it is more likely to produce this result than
separation, is to be desired. The Minority Commissioners object to this recommendation partly as giving
too easy a pretext for divorce on account of the difficulty of clearly defining cruelty.

A considerable amount of the Majority Report
is devoted to questions of administration, the main
object being to put the poor on an equality with the
rich as regards both separation and divorce, the cost
now placing divorce at all events beyond the reach of
numbers of the poorer classes. The Minority Commissioners agree in this aim, but are again alarmed
at the prospect of making divorce too easy. From
the eugenic point of view all that need be said is that,
as regards all the facilities which it is held ought to be
given for breaking up a marriage either by divorce,
nullity, or judicial separation, it is more important
that those facilities should be open to the poor than to
the rich; both because the classes described as poor
are the more numerous and because they contain, including the slum dwellers, a higher proportion of the
biologically unfit. As regards many problems dealt
with by the Commissioners, such as the publication
of reports, the position of the clergy, etc., they are
not here dealt with because eugenists as such are
not interested in them.

UNSOLVED PROBLEMS.

The Majority Commissioners state that the com
munity ‘“‘is interested in its citizens maintaining

(p. 90) ‘‘ proper standards for themselves and especially in
“their bringing into existence healthy children,’’ and

in this way the eugenic principle is distinctly endorsed
370

EUGENICS REVIEW Major L. Darwin:

in their Report. It is, therefore, important to note
that this Report cannot be quoted as indicating the
full lengths to which the Majority Commissioners
would like to go in support of eugenic ideals; for
the following extracts clearly indicate that other proposals of eugenic value might have been forthcoming
if the scope of the reference to the Commission had
been wider :—

“There is a considerable body of medical and
“‘ other evidence from the eugenic point of view. It
‘‘is directed to two main points. The first is the
‘“‘ desirability, in the interests of the race and the
‘* State, that persons, who are unfit to enter into
“the state of matrimony and propagate healthy
“‘children, on account either of mental or physical
“infirmity, should not be permitted to do so. The
‘* second is that, in the same interests, measures should
““be taken to prevent intercourse between married
““persons who become unfit to have healthy children
“* for similar reasons.

‘We do not think that questions affecting the
“formation of marriage and the laws which should
“govern its formation are within the scope of our
“‘ inquiry, though later on we shall notice some points
**connected with these questions which fall within our
“inquiry. We, therefore, only draw attention to the
“* great importance of the first point.’’

** With regard to the second point, although from
“the national point of view its importance is equally
“‘ great, yet it seems to go beyond the questions
“* directly involved in divorce, the right to which, in
“our opinion, rests upon the practical impossibility
** of the continuance of married life, and the frustra“tion of its objects. It involves the consideration
“‘of the proper course to take, where these results
“do not follow, as, for instance, cases in which a
‘“ person is insane at one time but has long intervals
‘“‘of sanity. In these cases as between the parties,
THE DIVORCE COMMISSION 371

** married life, though interrupted, is not completely
**ended nor all its objects frustrated.

** These points while deserving careful considera“tion, and possibly action with regard to them, are
“* directed to the prevention of the propagation of a
*‘degenerate race, and do not appear to us to fall
“strictly within the consideration of the law and its
“‘administration in divorce and matrimonial causes.

“We think it desirable to call attention to certain
““ defects, which, it is said, exist in the Lunacy Acts,
**on the following points, namely :—

“*(1) That the sane spouse can obtain the release
‘* from an asylum of the insane spouse before con““valescence is fully established, in defiance of
*“medical opinion opposed to such release.

“* (2) That patients subject to recurrent insanity
*‘are allowed out of confinement during the inter‘‘ vals between the attacks, and in such intervals
“may, if married, resume marital relations.

“‘(3) That married patients, allowed out of
“‘asylums on probation, are allowed to resume
*‘marital relations while still on probation.

“* (4) That there are no provisions by which a
“person, whose sanity is open to question, can
“‘be restrained from cohabitation against the wish
“‘of the other party. It does not seem to be
“‘ within our province to make any specific recom“‘mendations upon the above matters, which in“‘volve the amendment of the Lunacy Acts rather
“than any questions submitted to us for the pur“* pose of inquiry and report.”’

Again, with regard to marriage laws, the Majority
Report contains the following clause :—

(p. 161) “An inquiry into these laws and their working
“is not authcrised by the terms of our Commis“sion, but many witnesses have attributed much
“‘of the matrimonial troubles, miseries and mis“‘ fortunes which exist to the present state of these
372 EUGENICS REVIEW Major L. Darwin :

‘* laws, and have incidentally expressed themselves
‘* on the need for their improvement on the ground
‘‘that they permit far too freely of improvident,
** reckless, and unsuitable marriages, which lead
‘*to disastrous results. They point to the power
““to contract marriage at an age too early; to the
““need for further and more stringent provisions
‘“as to obtaining the consent of parents or
“‘ guardians to the marriage of minors; to the
“* need for more adequate public notice of intended
*‘ marriages, and more publicity and formality in
“‘ marriages before registrars; to the want of any
“* provisions for ensuring the fitness of persons,
*‘mentally and physically, to marry, and that they
‘“have any adequate means of livelihood; and to
*‘other matters which render a marriage unsuit“able. Though we are not able to inquire into
“‘and make recommendations on this important
“subject, we have felt that its close connection
“with the subjects of our inquiry made it impos“sible to exclude the incidental statements to
““ which we have referred, and that we ought to
“‘make this reference to the subject in our
** Report.”’
On this subject the Minority Commissioners state
that :—
“* Possibly some restraint on the present free(p. 188) “‘dom of adults to contract marriage without
“regard to conditions of health, or ability to
“maintain a family, may be practicable, and, if
“‘ practicable, would certainly do something to
** diminish the number of unsuitable and unhappy
“* marriages.”
These sentences contain suggestions well worthy
of the attention of eugenists.
