INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF
EUGENIC ORGANIZATIONS

A Survey of the Zurich Conference
By C. B. $8. HODSON, ELS.

International Federation of Eugenic Organizations assembly should meet biannually ; owing to the depression it was
only in March of this year that an invitation
was forthcoming from Switzerland through
the kind offices of two constituent organizations—the Julius Klaus-Stiftung and the
Swiss Psychiatric Society—and the meeting
was arranged for July 18th to 21st in Ziirich.
Our hosts made the novel arrangement of
holding the meetings in an hotel, the Waldhaus Dolder, housing all the foreign delegates
there and in a couple of neighbouring hotels.
It was an admirable plan, no time being
wasted in journeys, while the lovely parks on
the mountain-side and the new swimmingpool gave opportunities for peaceful recreation in the few free hours available Programme arrangements were facilitated by a
preliminary meeting in Berlin in April between the President and several European
members, and despite the short notice over
fifty scientists assembled.

Business transactions were of interest
chiefly in passing constitutional changes
which will allow of wider expansion of representative membership. Programmes of three
of the four research committees were reviewed and extended; in particular the
work of Standardization of Human Measurements progresses—physical measurements
being formally transferred to the International Congress.of Anthropology and Ethnology, while psychological measurements
are receiving attention by national committees in England and the United States.
The physiological problems which begin to
attract interest were relegated to a new
sectional committee.

|: was decided in New York that the

SOCIAL EVENTS

The kindness of the Swiss hosts made
possible a number of interesting visits to the
plant-breeding experiments in the Institute
directed by Professor Ernst, and to the
beautiful show of transmission of feather
colour which has resulted from the work of
Professor Steiner. Some were able to see
Dr. Hanhart’s local studies tracing the first
appearance of certain mutations in isolated
valleys, the results of which will be most
illuminating for the genetics of man. Professor Schlaginhaufen demonstrated some of
the most interesting skulls from prehistoric
sites on which he has been working in the
Julius Klaus-Stiftung, which he directs. The
usual friendly hospitality was demonstrated
by an excursion and a dinner given by the
Julius Klaus-Stiftung.

One of the three evenings was enlivened by
a film brought by Dr. Steggerda from the
Yucatan jungle villages in which he has been
working amongst the Mayas; and his running commentary added to the interest of
the picture.

DIAGNOSIS AND GRADING OF OLIGOPHRENIA

As in previous years the conferences were
limited to a few topics—namely feeblemindedness, the analysis and genetics of
mental traits, twin studies and reports on
eugenic progress in certain countries. The
discussion on mental deficiency or oligophrenia was restricted to two major questions, diagnosis and grading. Professor
Riidin, President of the International Federation of Eugenic Organizations, described
the distinction made in Germany between
oligophrenia as a psychiatric condition and

217
218

what his school describes as normal stupidity.
Professor Berry gave an account of his long
researches and submitted the theory that
mental defect can best be described as failure
of development of the central nervous system
—a, condition which, as such, passes by indistinguishable grades from a pre-embryonic
type in brain development to something
which can best be characterized as less than
the highest development known. He finds
somatic and functional characters corresponding biologically to the various grades
of lack of neural development. Dr. Rudolf,
of Brentry Colony, Bristol, gave a lucid
explanation of the way in which legislation
has governed both the terminology and
method of certification of mental deficiency
in Great Britain.

Eminent workers in this field were present
—namely Dr. Wildenskow (Denmark), Dr.
Jens Smith, Professor Maier and Dr. Brugger
(Switzerland), and Dr. Tietze and Dr.
Hamburger (Austria). The ensuing discussion was very lively, and the German
psychiatrists did not succeed in convincing
those present that they had any valid psychiatric criterion for the alleged distinction
between normal and pathological dullness.
It would appear that legislation in both
countries has covered and to some extent
controlled the purely medico-biological treatment of the question. Denmark, with complete legislative control, has avoided this
pitfall, the Danish psychiatrists frankly admitting that an arbitrary line is drawn below
which lack of intelligence is regarded as
warranting social control. Several speakers
urged the evolutionary importance of this
outlook ; it might be hoped that, generation
by generation, the point of poor development might be slightly raised if and as the
average intelligence of the population rises
progressively.

Time did not allow of a full discussion on
grading, but nothing contradicted the impression left by a study of recent European
researches that higher grades are included in
oligophrenia in Europe than under the term
mental deficiency in England and the United
States. The only comparable base line still
appears to be provided in the Binet-Simon

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tests. A comparative study is urgently required.

TESTING ABILITY AND INTELLIGENCE

The second day began with a study of
psychometry, Dr. Mjgen opening with a
demonstration of his methods of testing
musical ability. His work is too well known
for repetition here, but the demonstration
of five of his twenty different tests created
so much interest that discussion ran through
the whole morning. Concentrating mainly
on the degree to which training would affect
test of performance, Dr. Mjgen gave evidence
from re-tests, proving quite conclusively
that certain of the most diagnostic factors
remained unchanged. Indeed, he had two
cases of brothers, one of whom was a professional musician, yet was in each pair
graded slightly below the sib who had followed another calling. There is probably no
work extant that has given such careful
analytical examination of three generations
with collaterals for a number of families.
The results demonstrate most clearly the
importance of characters in collaterals for
ascertainment of the true genetical constitution of the family; such demonstrations
have been shown in the studies of oligophrenia, but lack of factorial analysis has
rendered these latter somewhat ambiguous
hitherto.

Professor Spearman gave a lucid exposition
of his analysis of intelligence into general and
special factors, and asked for help in the
attempt which was being made, both by
national committees and by a committee
of the International Federation of Eugenic
Organizations, to bring greater order and
clarity into methods of psychological
measurement.

Dr. Steggerda, who has just been appointed
chairman of the International Federation of
Eugenic Organizations Committee, gave an
account of the difficulties of psychological
studies of non-European races, based on his
own work amongst the Mayas in Yucatan,
whites and negroes in Jamaica, Indians in
Arizona, and some other groups. Both he
and Professor Rodenwaldt stated that there
could be no doubt as to wide racial
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF EUGENIC ORGANIZATIONS

differences in mental faculty. For instance,
in music the tests satisfactory for Europeans
would fail altogether to elicit the much finer
discrimination common in the yellow races
and negroes. It would appear that a careful
and sympathetic study of the manner of life
of any people should make it possible to
eliminate those aspects of European tests,
such as speed, which are wholly inapplicable
in some other cultures.

TWIN STUDIES

The afternoon was devoted to papers on
twin studies introduced by Professor Dr.
Freiherr von Verschuer of Berlin, the first
problem to be tackled being methods of
differentiation of identical and non-identical
twins. From a study not yet published he
gave a chart showing the unreliability of
judging from the chorion. In 52 cases with
double chorion, 12 proved to be identical
and 40 non-identical.

He proceeded to describe an interesting
series of cases of tuberculosis in twins which
have been studied since the work published
by himself and Diehl in 1933; amongst
identical twins concordance was found in 69
per cent. of cases, and amongst non-identical
pairs in 26 per cent. of cases.

He was followed by Dr. Sanders, Director
of the Medical Statistical Section of the new
Dutch Institute for Human Heredity, Eugenics and Race Biology (this section is
located in The Hague). Eight cases of homosexuality in twins were reported from his
recent investigations ; the identical twins
were concordant with one exception in which
the homosexual twin was an epileptic, the
condition being attributed to forceps
delivery ; the only pair of non-identical
twins were discordant.

HUMAN GENETICS

A session was devoted to human genetics,
in which a few outstanding pedigrees were
shown, the most puzzling case being a family
with spasmodic paralysis and muscular
dystrophy ; Dr. Sanders referred to this
condition as possibly cryptomeric, and certainly one of which further cases would be
required for proper elucidation.

219

Professor Ride of Hong Kong demonstrated his elaboration of Wilder’s method of
palmar print notation. He has found distinct
racial differences which can be studied by
this Method. Dr. Reichl, Vienna, followed
with observations on his recent work. Inheritance of finger and palmar pattern have,
he stated, recently been used to establish
cases of doubtful paternity in view of the
regular transmission of dominant patterns.

Reports on eugenic work were of such outstanding interest as to absorb three sessions.
In addition to the President, five experts
came from the Reich, Dr. Ruttke, Dr. Astel,
Dr. Loeffler, Dr. Kiirten and Dr. Gross,
accepting the invitation of the International
Federation of Eugenic Organizations to give
an account of the practical working of the
new measures. Dr. Ruttke, directing popular
education in protection of heredity, gave a
clear outline of the whole policy, which may
be briefly summarized as (a) unification of
State control throughout the nation, (d)
abolishing unemployment (shown to have
disintegrating effects on the sense of
parental responsibility and family life), (c)
de-urbanization, which removes large families
with self-supporting parents and good family
history to peasant holdings which will be
entailed, (d) revision of marriage laws,
making marriages for social or economic ends
liable to be annulled, (e) the creation of
bureaux for advice on heredity and marriage,
(f) provision of loans for young persons of
sound stock who desire to marry, a measure
which goes hand in hand with the exclusion
of women from those industries which can be
served by unemployed men, (g) the sterilization law, which is sufficiently well known to
be omitted here. Dr. Ruttke explained that
the exclusion of criminals was determined
in order to remove any sense of degradation
being connected with the operation ; both in
the courts and by popular propaganda the
ideal is put forward which has made sterilization successful in California, that the citizen
who accepts the operation with a sense of
responsibility for posterity merits the esteem
of the community. In regard to compulsion
he stated the fact not so widely known that
220

patients may accept institutional treatment
of segregation if they prefer it to sterilization. Finally, (4) the Danish plan (also
largely used in Switzerland) of castration for
habitual sex offenders has been enacted as
obligatory, the objective being double, both
the cure of the condition in the individual,
and the protection of society. This last is
not necessarily regarded as a eugenic measure.

Dr. Astel, director of the protection of
heredity for Thiiringer, followed with a full
account of the methods adopted there. Intensive popular education and propaganda
have beensystematically undertaken. Courses
of instruction are given to the lawyers and
physicians concerned in public health work,
to the teaching profession, and to all civil
servants. Laws of heredity are taught in
schools; material is issued to the Press; over
250 lectures attended by thousands have been
given in less than twelve months. A play
contrasting good and bad inheritance is
touring the provinces, and has been a success.
An exhibition is being shown in one centre
after another.

The results of this preparation are satisfactory, in so far as the Sterilization Courts
are meeting in that area with little opposition.
About one-third of the cases have come in
voluntarily ; less than 10 per cent. ask for
an appeal, and these, after discussion with
the physicians concerned, have been reduced
to 3 per cent. He finds real and growing

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

enthusiasm for the ideals of working for a
fitter race, of which the most striking example is the numbers of young men and
women coming to ask questions at the
heredity advisory bureaux.

De-urbanization, marriage and family
grants to families of good stock and control
of immigration and emigration form part of
this work ; in immigration the possibility of
industrial absorption is taken into account as
well as personal and family suitability.

A number of searching questions were
exchanged with the different speakers. The
Dutch in particular showed hesitancy in
accepting the findings of transmissibility in
regard to certain diseases as an adequate
criterion for sterilization, while these coming
from countries such as Switzerland, where
the operation is a practical possibility and
increasingly practised, found less difficulty
in accepting the German point of view. In
fact, between those critics who alleged that
Germany was going too far and those
(notably the French) who suggested that the
categories should include more types, the
protagonists of the new eugenic era in
Germany appear to hold a middle course.

Reports of growing work and increasing
interest were given from every country
represented. These will be published in full
in the report, which will appear in the
autumn, and will be obtainable from the
Secretariat, price 2s. 6d. per copy.

—— roe ey

 

SCIENTIFIC BOOKS

 

Current and Standard ENGLISH, FRENCH and GERMAN Literature
in Chemical, Biological, Medical and Physical Science supplied from
stock, or obtained promptly to order. Catalogues post free on application.

MEDICAL and SCIENTIFIC LENDING LIBRARY.

Annual Subscription, Town or Country, from One Guinea.

PROSPECTUS ON APPLICATION

H, K. LEWIS & Co. Ltd.,

Telephone: Museum 7756

136 GOWER STREET
LONDON, W.C.1

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 3,
