OTHER NOTICES

Berry, R. J. Teach Yourself Genetics. London,
1965. English Universities Press. Pp. xi+164.
Price 7s. 6d.

TO TEACH THE subject of genetics in about 150
pages of a small book is almost as ambitious as
learning it from such material as can be got
into a limited space. The criterion of success is
not how scholarly such a work proves to be
but how well it communicates the subject.
Despite the clear writing and good learning of
the author, it is doubtful if anyone without a
biological or scientific background could get
very far with the text. It is eminently suitable
for the good sixth form scientist but less so for
the non-scientific layman.

Teach Yourself Genetics covers a wider range
of subjects than many books of this size.
Starting with elementary definitions and descriptions, it soon gets to complicated examples
of linkage, sophisticated chemistry of genetic
substances, population genetics and radiation
genetics. No important aspect of the subject is
neglected. There is a short chapter on statistics.
A wealth of information from the classical
foundations to the present day is concisely and
clearly presented.

In a book of this size it was impossible to
provide sufficient illustrations. There are a
number of irritating misprints including heading
Chapter 6 by “Chapter 7”.

In short, the material is good, the instrument
of presentation less so. K. W. WILKES

Bertram, G. C. L. Socio-Biological Responsibility.
Hull, 1965. University of Hull Publications. Pp.
22. Price 5s.

THIS MOST INTERESTING lecture, delivered by
our former general secretary, first draws attention to the numerous “explosions” with which
we are surrounded to-day—nuclear, population,
of minor nations, etc., and of knowledge. In
connection with the explosion of knowledge it
seems that of all the “scientists” known to world
history 90 per cent are alive to-day and the vast
new knowledge which has accrued carries with

39

it much wider responsibilities. The old answers
no longer suffice. Methods of population control
previously quite unacceptable must now be reexamined and this leads on to the ethical aspects
of infanticide and euthanasia, artificial insemination, semen banks and the eutelegenesis of
Herbert Brewer, suicide and the maintenance of
isolated organs by perfusion. Mention is made
of a totally isolated monkey brain having been
adequately perfused and of a Russian claim that
a live dog’s head was removed and grafted—as
an additional head—on the neck of another dog;
the second head giving some normal reactions.
It was conscious. Questions of “‘propriety”’ are
raised when human biology is considered and
the lecturer asks “‘Are we backward or unscientific if horror and conscience fail to
convince us that such further experiment is
appropriate?’’. Cc. W. USHER

Butler, J. A. V. The Life of the Cell: Its nature,
origin and development. London, 1966. Allen and
Unwin: Unwin University Books. Pp. 167. Price
21s. Paperback.

The Life of a Cell was first published in the
autumn of 1964 and a review appeared in our
March 1965 number (57, 31-2), where it was
described as “eminently readable’’. Its re-issue
as a paperback is to be welcomed.

King, Robert C. Genetics. Second edition.
London, 1965. Oxford University Press. Pp.
xiv-+450. Price 68s.

THE FIRST EDITION of this book was published
in 1962 and was reviewed in our issue of April
1963 (55, 45).

The second edition constitutesamajorrevision:
it is about one-third longer than its predecessor,
there is a new chapter on the mechanism of
gene action, the lists of references have been
extended and the appendices expanded. This is
a textbook for undergraduates. Each chapter
includes a set of “study questions” (answers at
the end of the book) and has its own biblio
graphy.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The author is Professor and Chairman of the
Department of Biological Sciences at the
Northwestern University, Evanston, USA.

Williamson, A. A. Biological Forces in World
Affairs. Washington, DC, 1965. Public Affairs
Press. Pp. vi-+-57. Price $1.00.

THE AUTHOR OF this book is certainly not inhibited by convention and it would be unfair
to expect his treatment of terrestial and celestial
problems to appeal to orthodox thinkers. His
contention, however, that the electro-magnetic
forces generated by cerebration make a contribution to the formation of new “material’’ in
the universe is unverifiable and thus quite unscientific. C. W. U.

World Health Organization. The Biochemistry
and Microbiology of the Female and Male Genital
Tracts: Report of a WHO Scientific Group.
Technical Report Series, No. 313. Geneva, 1965.
WHO. Pp. 15. Price 3s. 6d. Chairman, Dr.
Thaddeus Mann. Available through HMSO.

THIS REPORT CONTINUES the series summarized in the December number of the REVIEW

(1965, 57, 194-6). Although knowledge of the
male and female genital tracts has greatly
increased in the past twenty years, it remains
fragmentary in respect of some important processes; others, however, have been studied in
detail, but only in certain species, and this
Group again stresses the need for more broadly
based comparative studies of the physiology of
reproduction.

The report sums up existing knowledge on
the chemistry and enzymology of the uterus,
sperm transport, capacitation and the acrosome
reaction, nidation and placentation, and the
chemistry and enzymology of semen. It considers
the effects of cadmium, zinc, and selenium compounds on reproduction, and the results of infection on reproductive capacity. A list of
“research needs” is included, with emphasis on
determination of the time of ovulation in the
primates and the reaction of the uterine tissues
to the changing stages of the cycle and of pregnancy. The importance is stressed of viewing
the male and female components in reproduction
as an integrated whole rather than as isolated
events.
