EUGENICS ABROAD

I—IN AMERICA, by PAUL POPENOE, D.Sc.

NE of the scientific events of the

past year in the United States

has been the White House Conference on Child Health and Protection,
which brought together specialists on
every phase of the subject, and is
resulting in the publication of a long
series of reports. Inevitably the point of
view was environmentalist, but room was
found for a detailed report on heredity and
eugenics, and the Conference went on record
unequivocally in favour of sterilization.
Birth control propagandists were disappointed by the decision of those in authority
to avoid that subject as one that was more
controversial than scientific.

On the positive side the Conference collected valuable material on education in the
public schools. The subject of home economics has long been taught to girls in
secondary schools; it is now _ being
broadened and deepened into a more
thorough preparation for home-making for
both sexes. Personally, I consider this
trend of home economics to be the most
significant change in American education
just now.

SEX DIFFERENCES IN INTELLIGENCE

The positive side of eugenics is likewise
emphasized in the appearance of a third
volume of L. M. Terman’s monumental
study of the bright children in California
schools. This study was based on re-tests
seven years after the first ones, and showed
that these children, who represented the
brightest one in each thousand of the State’s
school population, were holding their own
both educationally and socially. One interesting development was noted, however.
Whereas the boys stand just where they
did, in IQ, the girls have lost an average of
17 points. Evidently the changes that

accompany adolescence are not favourable to
the maintenance of the most highlyorganized intellectual capacities among
women.

While many eugenists feel that the positive side of the eugenic programme is
really more important than the negative,
the greater simplicity of the latter continues
to attract adherents. H. S. Jennings, of
Johns Hopkins University, one of the leading American biologists, endorses it in his
book The Biological Basis of Human
Nature, but looks on the positive programme as little less than Utopian. Dr.
Jennings’ book has been criticized, however, as showing closer acquaintance with
genetics than eugenics.

Not much less pessimistic is the President of the American Eugenics Society, Dr.
Henry Pratt Fairchild (Professor of Sociology in New York University). ‘In the
field of positive eugenics research has
scarcely even been visualized, not to say
started, and it would be difficult to put one’s
finger on any notable accomplishments,’’ he
declares in an article in the April issue of
the Survey Graphic. ‘This number is entitled ‘‘ Science Looks at People ’’ and is
given over to a series of papers by outstanding authorities, many of them eugenic
in tone. Among others, Roswell H. Johnson writes specifically on the positive programme of eugenists.

Dr. Fairchild likewise deplores the preponderance of biologists among American
exponents of eugenics. Granting that their
contribution has been useful, he urges that
the application of eugenics is a problem for
sociologists, and must be turned over to
them. Unfortunately, however, most of the
other sociologists of the United States are
out of step, having held the cultural view
of sociology until they have lost sight of
eugenic fundamentals.

151
152

TWO STERILIZATION LAWS

One of the few policies on which nearly
all schools agree is eugenic sterilization, or
selective sterilization, to use a name that is
gaining ground. Two more States (Vermont and Oklahoma) adopted sterilization
laws last winter, making 27 that now have
such legislation in force. The book of E. S.
Gosney and Paul Popenoe, Sterilization for
Human Betterment, has been translated into
German and Japanese.

A new bibliography of eugenics, by a
committee of which Professor S. J. Holmes,
University of California, is chairman, has
been issued by the American Eugenics
Society. S. Wayne Evans, for the Eugenics
Research Association, is at work on a history of the eugenics movement, which will
be much more extensive than anything
hitherto attempted. The secretary of the
American Eugenics Society, Leon F. Whitney, has been compiling the views of the
ancients on heredity and eugenics, and is
publishing this as a historical study. Mr.
Whitney has also attempted to get some

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

sound eugenic ideas before boys in story
form by a novel, Pigeon City, which
received wide circulation through its adoption by the Juvenile Book-of-the-Month
Club. On the didactic side, its purpose is to
call attention to the importance of inherited
mental differences.

The race problems which are so important
in the United States continue to bring forth
a literature that is, for the most part, only
ephemeral. A committee of specialists
worked for several years to determine the
racial make-up of the American population
to-day, in the light of its recorded history,
and much was hoped from this ‘‘ National
Origins ”’ study, the main purpose of which
was to furnish a background for Congressional legislation. ‘The word is now passed
out that it is in too unsatisfactory a form to
be published, and probably will remain
buried in manuscript. From the sociological
point of view E. B. Reuter (University of
Iowa) has published a book on Race Mixture, but it offers little of significance
eugenically.

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 2.
