ROBERT C. COOK

Population Reference Bureau Inc.

Eugenics

of forces under social control which enhance or impair the inborn qualities of future
generations”.

That inborn qualities could be greatly modified by artificial selection was appreciated by
ancient civilizations, which developed breeds of
livestock by the application of rule-of-thumb
methods of selective mating.

HE WORD “EUGENICS” was coined by
Sir Francis Galton in 1890 as “the study

History 
The idea that human beings differ in their
hereditary endowment is also very old. Without attempting a review that would be mainly
of antiquarian interest, a few references to
Greek writings may not be out of place. In the
sixth century B.c., Theognis took a pessimistic
view of then current human mating practices:

With kine and horses, Kurnus, we proceed

By reasonable rules, and choose a breed

For profit and increase, at any price,

Of a sound stock without defect or vice.

But in the daily matches that we make

The price is everything; for money’s sake,

Men marry; women are in marriage given.

The churl or ruffian, that in wealth has thriven,
May match his offspring with the proudest race.
Thus everything is mixed, noble and base.

If, then, in outward manner, form and mind,
You find us a degraded, motley kind,

Wonder no more, my friend; the cause is plain,
And to lament the consequence is vain.

Among the Spartans, mate selection was
practised, and the age at which marriage took
place was regulated to assure procreation at
the time of life when it was believed the production of fine progeny was most likely. Ex
* Reprinted, by kind permission of the author and of the
publishers, from The Encyclopedia of Sexual Behavior
(1961), edited by Albert Ellis, Ph.D. and Albert Abarbanel,
Ph.D. Published by Hawthorn Books Inc., New York:
London, William Heinemann (Medical Books) Ltd.

posure of weak or defective infants to the
elements was practised by the Greeks and by
many other peoples throughout history. In The
Republic, Plato set forth a comprehensive code
of eugenics that has become almost a horrible
example of what an abstract philosophical
approach can lead to.

Although different mating systems—endogamic or exogamic—have affected the genetic
constitutions of human populations throughout
history, their eugenic effects have been mainly
accidental or incidental. The exact knowledge
of the genetic process on which a rational
eugenic policy might be based has existed for less
than half a century. Until the key had been
found to the riddle of heredity, man’s penchant
for theorizing had little practical value, and
these ancient writings have now only an historical interest. Not until the latter half of the
nineteenth century did factual bases for manipulating the “inborn qualities of future generations” begin to be developed. The publication
of Darwin’s Origin of Species in 1859 marked a
turning point in biological science and provided
the intellectual environment for experimental
work on the phenomenon of evolution.

Darwin envisioned evolution as an interaction
among the variable factors inherent in all organisms exposed to the rigours of survival. Those
organisms better adapted to a particular
environment tended to survive and to perpetuate their kind. The less well adapted variants
failed to survive or to reproduce. This selective
“sieve by veto” of the environment, operating
over hundreds or thousands of generations, resulted in the emergence of strains of organisms
showing remarkable adaptation to most varied
environments. Darwin was puzzled by the
nature of the variability of organisms that he
saw as an essential factor in the evolution process.
His speculations as to how and why variability

145

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1963, 55, 3.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

occurred have proved in the light of much experimental hindsight to have been mainly
erroneous.

The key that unlocked the mystery of variability and heredity was provided by Abbot
Gregor Mendel in 1865. His experiments with
peas, conducted in a monastery garden in what
is now Czechoslovakia, formed the basis for
the modern science of genetics. Mendel’s
pioneering was so revolutionary that thirty-five
years elapsed before biological concepts had
reached a point in development where his discoveries could be understood and evaluated.
The science of genetics actually began with the
rediscovery of Mendel’s paper in 1900, rather
than in 1865.

During this interval a cousin of Charles
Darwin, Sir Francis Galton, had become convinced that heredity was a prime factor in
determining the quality of human beings. Basing
his studies on Darwin’s evolution concept,
Galton attacked the problem of heredity and
environment—of nature vs. nurture—statistically. Between 1869 and 1883, he published three
books supporting his view that nature—the
inborn qualities of a human being—was a major
component in the development of the gifted
individual. In Hereditary Genius, English Men of
Science: Their Nature and Nurture, and Inquiries
into Human Faculty Galton reported his statistical analyses of the background of gifted individuals. He also pioneered in pointing out the
value of studying identical twins as a means of
learning more about the nature—nurture problem.

Galton’s work broke new ground in analysing
factors that contribute to the development
of human intelligence and personality. His
studies convinced him that heredity played an
essential part in the development of individuals
of unusual competence, and this became the
motivation of his later years, leading to his
founding of the eugenics movement. Towards
the end of his life he wrote (1908):

I take eugenics very seriously, feeling that its
principles ought to become one of the dominant
motives in a civilized nation, much as if they were
one of its religious tenets. .. . Individuals appear
to me as partial detachments from the infinite
ocean of Being, and this world as a stage on which
evolution takes place, principally hitherto by
means of natural selection, which achieves the

146

good of the whole with scant regard to that of the
individual.

Man is gifted with pity and other kindly feelings;
he has also the power of preventing many kinds of
suffering. I conceive it to fall well within his province to replace Natural Selection by other
processes that are more merciful and not less
effective.

Galton devoted the later years of his life to
promoting an acceptance of his view on eugenics and, through his influence, the Eugenics
Education Society was founded in London in
1908. He bequeathed his fortune at his death
to the University of London for the establishment of the Galton Laboratory.

Recent Advances

The past half-century has seen a very rapid
advance in the science of genetics, adding to
the effectiveness of animal-breeding techniques.
The problem of nurture vs. nature has been
experimentally studied, and in its original form
it has been found to be meaningless in the sense
that no blanket answer can be given. It is an
approach useful only in terms of specific heredity
and specific environment. For example, blood
groups and eye colour are very little affected
by environment, whereas body weight and
intelligence are considerably more labile.

That many important physical characteristics
of human beings are largely determined by
genetic differences can no longer be questioned.
Pedigree studies of many characteristics, both
normal and pathological, are to be found in
the literature. These heredity-determined diffferences range from trivial characteristics such
as a blaze of white hair or a minor variation in
ear form to profound physical or mental
defects: sickle-cell anaemia, sex-linked muscular
dystrophy, colour blindness, specific forms of
mental defect, and the like.

The question of the extent to which mental,
emotional, and personality differences are due
to heredity is still under exploration.

Frederick Osborn (1951) surveyed the psychological and genetic studies on the interaction
of heredity and environment made over the
previous twenty-five years, and concluded:

1. Variations in capacity for developing intelligence tend to follow family lines. Similarity of
hereditary factors accounts for a substantial part
EUGENICS

of the known similarity in intelligence between
parents and children.

2. Individual differences in intelligence are in
part due to individual differences in inherited
capacity. When the environment of two unrelated
individuals is similar, differences in heredity probably play a major part in making the individuals
different. When their environments differ and their
heredity is somewhat similar, the environment is
probably the major cause of their differences.

3. There is no evidence on hereditary factors
as a cause of differences in the average intelligence
of racial or regional groups in this country. Known
differences in their environment are probably
sufficient to account for present differences in the
average intelligence of racial and regional groups.

4. Hereditary factors appear to account for a
part of the average differences in intelligence
between the skilled groups and the unskilled
occupational groups... .

In order to obtain a proportionate increase in
the number of persons at the upper levels of intelligence, it would be necessary to raise the level
of hereditary capacity for intelligence.

That evaluation holds to-day. Although our
picture of the genetic mechanism has changed,
Galton’s appraisal of the importance of inborn
qualities in the emergence of high intellectual
endowment has ample support. Granting that
the expression of inborn endowment of man
can be considerably modified, the evidence
indicates that the inborn component remains
paramount: it sets the limits.

Now, whether these limits are achieved
depends on the nature and effectiveness of
environmental stimuli. ““Wooden legs are not
inherited, but wooden heads are’, Dr. E. G.
Conklin remarked many years ago. The observation still holds.

Even before Osborn, a group of distinguished
geneticists subscribed to a statement that explicitly spelled out the tremendous improvement in the human breed that might be made
in a very few generations if the enhancement
of the inborn qualities of future generations of
mankind were purely a genetic exercise:

... The intrinsic genetic characteristics of any
generation can be better than those of the preceding generation only as a result of some kind of
selection, i.e. by those persons of the preceding
generation who had a better genetic equipment
having produced more offspring, on the whole,
than the rest, either through conscious choice, or
as an automatic result of the way in which they
lived. Under modern civilized conditions such

selection is far lesslikely to beautomaticthan under
primitive conditions, hence some kind of conscious guidance of selection is called for. To make
this possible, however, the population must first
appreciate the force of the above principles, and
the social value which a wisely guided selection
would have.

. .. conscious selection requires, in addition, an
agreed direction or directions for selection to take,
and these directions cannot be social ones, that is,
for the good of mankind at large, unless social
motives predominate in society. This in turn
implies its socialized organization. The most
important objectives, from a social point of view,
are the improvement of those genetic characteristics which make (a) for health, (b) for the complex
called intelligence and (c) for those temperamental
qualities which favour fellow-feeling and social
behaviour rather than those (to-day most esteemed
by many) which make for personal ‘‘success” as
success is usually understood at present.

A more widespread understanding of biological
principles will bring with it the realization that
much more than the prevention of genetic deterioration is to be sought for and that the raising of
the level of the average of the population nearly
to that of the highest now existing in isolated
individuals, in regard to physical well-being,
intelligence and temperamental qualities, is an
achievement that would—so far as purely genetic
considerations are concerned—be physically possible within a comparatively small number of
generations. Thus everyone might look upon
“genius”, combined of course with stability, as
his birthright. And, as the course of evolution
shows, this would represent no final stage at all,
me only an earnest of still further progress in the
uture.

Mutations and the Human Gene Pool

The years that have elapsed since the “‘Geneticists’ Manifesto” was written have seen remarkable developments in genetic theory. Some of
these give a heightened urgency to the need for
developing means to conserve the adaptive
efficiency of the gene pool of the human species.
In his presidential address before the Society for
the Study of Human Genetics in 1950, Dr. H. J.
Muller explored the proposition that the lack
of selection against nonadaptive genes means an
inevitable deterioration of the human species.
The principle is illustrated by the loss of organs
and even organ systems in parasitic species. It is
now clear that this deterioration is not due to a
Lamarckian response to the nonuse of the
organs, but rather to the buildup of nonadaptive
mutations in organs no longer having survival

147
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

value for the species, and thus no longer exposed
to effective selection.

The reason for this is to be found in the nature
of the mutation process, which has been intensively studied in many organisms during the
past thirty years. It is now established that
mutations occur spontaneously at all loci, the
rate of occurrence varying with the locus.
These mutations are conceived of as being biochemical changes in a highly complex system,
which is integrated and timed to trigger developmental and/or metabolic sequences. Defects
such as albinism or diabetes are due to the
absence of gene-controlled enzymes essential to
pigment synthesis or to carbohydrate metabolism.

The development of organic adaptation is
thus seen to consist of a process of scanning and
screening the mutative changes that are constantly appearing in any species, the vast
majority of which are deleterious.

The scanning process consists of sexual
reproduction, which includes meiosis (crossingover) and the formation of gametes, showing
all possible combinations of parental genes, and
the random recombination of these gametes at
fertilization. A wide array of genotypic combinations from heterozygous parents is displayed
in the progeny, to be screened by the test of
survival. Under natural conditions this consists
mainly of the ability of the organism to live
and to reproduce.

The Problem of the Future

Until very recently, it would appear that the
scanning—screening process has applied to the
human species in much the same manner as it
has applied to all other organisms. But Dr.
Muller estimates that in order to maintain the
present level of morbid mutations in the human
gene pool, some 20 per cent of the population
would have to suffer selective elimination
through death or nonreproduction. Since in
the advanced industrial countries to-day less
than 5 per cent of the population fails to reach
the age of 25—the mid-period of reproductivity
—it is apparent that a buildup in mutations is
occurring. Muller concludes that to-day “‘nothing like the equilibrium quota is eliminated by
death before the age of reproduction’’. Nor, it
might be added, by nonreproduction.

148

The rate at which this deterioration in the
human gene pool is occurring is not definitely
established, for adequate statistics do not exist
in any country to permit a direct estimate of
the existing load of morbid mutations. Over a
short period of time it is a matter of no great
consequence, for the buildup will unquestionably
be slow. In the long run, however, the effects
may be profound.

Muller foresees that the elimination of adaptive selection will eventually result in the biological disintegration of the human species:

Our descendants’ natural biological organization would in fact have disintegrated and have been
replaced by complete disorder. Their only connections with mankind would then be the historical
one that we ourselves after all had been their
ancestors and sponsors, and the fact that their
once human material was still used for the purpose
of converting it a1tificially into some semblance of
man. However, it would in the end be far easier
and more sensible to manufacture a complete man
de novo, out of appropriately chosen raw materials,
than to try to refashion into human form those
pitiful relics which remain.

As matters stand to-day, it appears that the
current patterns of survival and fertility are not
calculated to enhance the inborn qualities of
the human species, either physically or psychologically, but rather are increasing the proportion of morbid genes in the gene pool of the
modern industrial nations. The almost universal
existence of birth rates that favour the reproduction of the less intelligent offers no prospect
for upgrading the inborn intelligence factors
of future generations, and the need to substitute some form of humane and voluntary
selection for the stern selective forces of the past
is the crucial eugenic dilemma. To hope that
entire gene systems can be made over through
some form of microgenetic magic is about as
realistic at the present time as proposing to
solve the population problem by resorting to
space travel.

Accomplishments and Hypothesis

How this eugenic miracle is to be brought about
remains an enigma, and the eugenics movement
has not made much progress in coming to
grips with this problem. In the early years of the
eugenics movement in England, it was naively EUGENICS

assumed that the “divinely ordained’ social
classes into which the English population had
traditionally been divided provided a readymade criterion of eugenic excellence. To enhance
the inborn quality of future generations nothing
more would be needed than to encourage the
breeding of the aristocrats and to check the
breeding of the plebeians. In the United States,
in a society lacking hereditary classes, the early
eugenists could turn to no such convenient
criterion of inborn excellence. This difficulty
was met by the equally questionable assumption
that race provided the necessary criterion. The
eugenic salvation of mankind was given into the
hands of the Great Blond Nordic. This theme
developed an interesting variation in the delimitation of “problem families’’ (the Jukes, the
Kallikaks, and the Nams). It was hoped that
their elimination through compulsory sterilization would pretty much solve the eugenic
problem.

The adoption by Adolf Hitler of a programme
of “race purification” based on superficial and
perverted derivatives from the naive concepts
of the early eugenic enthusiasts understandably
engendered opposition to any programme of
eugenic reform. Yet the problem remains.

The Scandinavian countries, with relatively
homogeneous and stable populations, have
made considerable progress in locating in their
populations some strains that have a high frequency of human hereditary disease. Programmes of voluntary sterilization with adequate
legal safeguards have made some impact in
reducing hereditary defect. But these are trivial
in terms of the over-all problem of enhancing
the inborn qualities of the human population.

Since its establishment in 1921, the American
Eugenics Society has undergone some changes
of outlook and policy. Over the past ten years
it has evolved the policy that it is possible to
build into the culture a pattern of living which,
without conscious volition on the part of the
individual, will automatically assure a eugenic
distribution of births. In a “Programme of
Positive Eugenics”’ published by the Society in
1953, it was stated:

... there are strong grounds for believing that
the same means could be used to improve both
the social and genetic inheritance. There is no

so

divergence between the qualities desirable in a
good social inheritance and the inherent capacities
of a good genetic inheritance. The home conditions
which are best suited to child development depend
among other things on affection, intelligence,
patience, honesty, loyalty and respect for the
individual. .. . It seems almost certain that a distribution of births which would improve the social
inheritance along these lines could be developed
in such a way that at the same time it would tend
to improve the genetic inheritance.

This has evolved into a “Eugenic Hypothesis”
that the criterion for eugenic excellence is the
“healthy family’. “Health now includes almost
all aspects of human well-being” and these
aspects are held to be related. “Health, like
liberty, is indivisible.” This “healthy-family”’
complex is assumed to be transmitted in families more or less as a unit. The postulate therefore is that, once reproduction has beccme a
matter of voluntary choice, the healthier families
will desire to have the larger number of children
and the unhealthy families will automatically
desire to have the smaller number of children.

All that is necessary, according to this view,
to start on the road to a eugenic millennium is
a social situation in which parenthood is
voluntary. The enhancement of the inborn
qualities of the human breed will follow almost
automatically.

That eugenic progress can be assured without
the need for the individual to make choices
except those that are assumed to be virtually
automatic by reason of being a member of a
“healthy family’ or an “unhealthy family”
appears to err on the side of naiveté. Furthermore, the assumption that all members of
“healthy families” carry an equally favourable
genetic endowment is untenable in view of the
extreme heterozygosity of the human species.
Finally, and the most serious objection to the
““Eugenic Hypothesis’’, the existence of a genetic
complex that can be defined as a “healthy
family” runs counter to all genetic experience.
A basic tenet of genetics is that the units that
transmit heredity are discrete and independently
inherited. Nor can the phenomenon of linkage,
which tends to transmit genes located on the
same chromosome as a unit, be adduced to
support this concept. And crossing-over means
that in populations—as distinct from pedigrees

149
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

—the unfavourable alleles are as likely to be
linked as are the favourable alleles of the
“healthy family’’ genes.

Only when relatively pure genetic strains of
human beings exist can the “healthy family’’
act as an adequate selective criterion. Such
strains are not to be found to-day; and human
mating patterns do not provide much basis
for expecting them to appear. The effective
selection envisaged by Dr. Muller and the
signers of the “Geneticists’ Manifesto” cannot
be achieved by the application of the “Eugenic
Hypothesis’.

It is unfortunate that the publication of the
““Eugenic Hypothesis” produced so little comment or discussion. The writer proposed an
alternative hypothesis, hoping it might stimulate
further exploration of what appears to be the
central problem of eugenic motivation. This
took the view that an effective eugenic programme must necessarily be based on the individual rather than the family as the unit of
selection. Its effectiveness would therefore
depend upon highly motivated individual decisions: the motivation would have to be strong
enough to result in individual decisions not to
have progeny where the genetic prognosis was
unfavourable.

It was postulated that a basis exists for developing such a compelling motivation: the
overwhelming desire felt by virtually all women
to bear perfect children, without physical or
mental defect. Obstetricians testify that this
desire is so deep-seated and overwhelming that
the first question a woman asks about her newborn child is not “Is it a boy or girl?’’ but “Is the
baby perfect?’’.

During the years since Galton, very little
progress has been made in developing, identifying, and utilizing those forces under social
control that might be called on to produce a
eugenic society. Until the effective ‘“‘motivational
pressure points” that will promote sound
eugenic decisions are identified and applied to
bring about a selective pattern of births, eugenics
will remain a paper discipline.

The crux of the eugenic dilemma lies in how to
manipulate these “forces under social control”
in order to assure a selectively favourable
pattern of births. That social and economic

150

factors influence fertility cannot be questioned.
For example, in the United States over twothirds of the female population between the
ages of twenty and twenty-four is married, as
compared to less than a fifth in Ireland. If the
one Irish woman in five who marries during the
years of maximum fertility had a better-thanaverage inborn endowment, the genetic quality
of the Irish people would be rapidly enhanced.
If the reverse were true, eugenic deterioration
could be very rapid. No evidence exists that
provides an answer to which—if either—of these
situations exists in Ireland.

In the United States, on the other hand,
where a situation approaching pangamy exists,
any possibility of rapid enhancement of inborn
qualities seems much less likely. Pangamy may
be democratic, but it can hardly be selective.
When virtually every woman produces approximately her quota of children, effective birth
selection does not exist.

Neither in England nor in the United States
—or in any other country, for that matter—does
there exist a climate of opinion extensive enough
and strongly enough motivated to form the
basis for an effective programme. The steps
which are being taken to develop such a climate
of opinion are pathetically inadequate to
produce any measurable effect.

In a population enjoying a very high degree
of genetic enlightenment, the urge towards
perfection could be a compelling and effective
eugenic motivation. This is not the case to-day,
anywhere on earth. Were it possible to identify
in the heterozygote a majority of the existing
lethal and morbid genes, a major revolution
in attitudes towards reproduction might be
brought about. Much progress in identifying
heterozygotes has been made in recent years;
and such a possibility may be realized before
very long.

However, until more is learned, the mandate
to perfection—which appears to be deeply built
into our species—could be strong enough, if
properly directed, to motivate a voluntary withholding from reproduction on the part of those
so unfortunate as to carry an unfavourable
genetic heritage. Great numbers of women have
foregone reproduction for far less compelling
reasons.
EUGENICS

Since eugenics deals with human conception,
with birth and death, it is the centre of one of
the most highly charged areas of emotional
stress in human experience and action. Eugenic
progress will continue to be an extraordinarily
complex and difficult field of human endeavour,
but it remains a challenge that cannot indefinitely
be evaded.

REFERENCES

Blacker, C. P., 1952. Eugenics: Galton and After. London:
Duckworth.

Blacker, C. P., 1957. “Family Planning and Eugenics
Movements in the Mid-twentieth Century.” Eugen.
Rev. 47, 4.

Cook, Robert C., 1955. ““Eugenic Hypothesis B.”’ Eugen.
Quart. 2, Nos. 3 and 4,

Darlington, C. D., 1953. “The Major Policies of the
American Eugenics Society.”? Eugen. News, 38, No. 2.

Darlington, C. D., 1958. “‘The Control of Evolution in
man.”’ Eugen. Rev. 50, 3.

Differentiation of Current Mating and Fertility Trends
(Symposium). 1959. Eugen. Quart. 6

Galton, Francis, 1908. Memories of My 'y Life.
E. P. Dutton & Co. Inc.

Holmes, S. J., 1936. Human Genetics and Its Social
Import. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co.

Lorimer, Frank, and Osborn, Frederick, 1934. "Dynamics
of Population; Social and Biological Significance of
Changing Birth Rates in the United States. New York:
The Macmillan Co.

Muller, H. J., 1950. Our Load of Mutations. Amer. J.
hum. Genet. 2, 111.

Osborn, Frederick, 1951. Preface to Eugenics (rev. ed.).
New York: Harper & Brothers.

Roberts, J. A. Fraser, 1959. An Introduction to Medical
Genetics. London: Oxford University Press.

Stern, Curt, 1950. Principles of Human Genetics. San
Francisco: W. H. Freeman & Co.

Woodworth, R. S., 1941. “Heredity and Environment:
A Critical Survey of Recently Published Material on
Twins and Foster Children.’’ Social Science Research
Council Bull. No. 47.

New York:

15
