E. SUNDERLAND

Science Laboratories, The University, Durham

The Tasting of Phenylthiocarbamide
in Selected Populations in the

United Kingdom

Introduction

During the last few years the author, together
with various helpers in the University of
Durham, has carried out a number of projects
involving the examination of some genetically
controlled variables, including dermatoglyphics,
colour blindness and PTC tasting in selected
British populations. This paper is intended to
present the results of this work in so far as
PTC tasting is concerned, but with special
reference to north-east England where the
largest numbers in the surveys were tested.

The Data

Well over one thousand individuals in
north-east England were tested to determine
whether or not they possessed the inherited
ability to taste phenylthiocarbamide. A modification of the Harris-KalmusS sorting technique
was used, with the number of solutions reduced

to eight:
PTC
CONCENTRATION

SOLUTION NUMBER mgm/litre

40:63
20:31
3:08
1-27

m=O TOA A fe GW
oO
rare
bO
CA

pms

Much of the work was done in schools widely
distributed in the counties of Northumberland
and Durham (Map 1).

The birthplaces of both parents of each
participator were noted, with a view to establishing the “locality” from which each subject was

genealogically derived. The limits of the various
postal districts in north-east England were
established and the participators allocated to
the districts according to their parents’ birthplaces. More than sixty postal districts were
delineated in Northumberland, County Durham
and contiguous parts of the North Riding of
Yorkshire. Of the total sample tested, and using
parental birthplaces as the criteria, only some
682 individuals could be allocated to the various
districts, resulting in very small numbers in
some districts, too small in fact for statistical
comparisons among them to be meaningful. For
this reason, the postal districts were grouped to
form nine areas, each composed of contiguous
districts and each containing forty-seven or more
individuals. Historical associations and information were not consciously used in delimiting
the areas.

Results

The results for the nine areas, shown on Map |,
are summarized in Table 1. In each area, the
total number represents individuals whose
parents were born in any one or any number of
the constituent postal districts.

There is no statistically significant variability
among the nine areas. The calculated yx? value
is 6:29 which, for 8 degrees of freedom gives p
values of 0-50-0-90.

Yet, it would appear that certain areas have
much lower percentages of non-tasters than
have others. Areas A, D and E have particularly
“Low” values, whilst C, F, G, H and I have
“High” values. Area B (postal districts 10-16)
divides the “Low” area into two parts, the

143

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, September 1966, 58, 3.
Ai ae A a SRE NE EE a dea a A A a nn NE EE

" . eS BERWICK UPON MAP |

TWEED

   
  
   
       
     
   
 
        
 
  
     
     
    
  
   

% NON TASTERS IN 9 AREAS
IN N. E. ENGLAND

(/_/| HIGH % AREAS
[- = -] Low % AREAS

SCHOOLS WHERE
e CHILDREN WERE
TESTED

22:2, 28°6 = % NON TASTERS
—--— HADRIANS WALL
west EDGE OF COALFIELD
sn COUNTY BOUNDARIES
+++++ SUB-REGION oF B

XQ

SEAHOUSES
"  "WOOLER’ .~
re ee

eo 222 0

"+ ROTHBURY ©

> + BELLINGHAM 
Eo

 

Vo. 2B LL PL

r ——-=

| eee me ‘ Te ee eee i

s . ACOMBe. — \
C co. * my 8 '

FRASER ROBERTS

y "HEXHAM — BLOOD GROUP

/ DIVIDING LINE

/ -~—--KOPEC'S BLOOD
7 GROUP DIVIDING LINE
\

.

\ a

NL?

     
   
 

CMOUSINSHAM }
|“ 30-3”, 3
So

  

 
 
  

IDDLETON,/
IN TEESDALE ~

 

J
5 0 5 fe 5 20 25 MILES yp

 
THE TASTING OF PHENYLTHIOCARBAMIDE

Morpeth postal district itself extending from the
town to the Scottish border. For this area it was
noted that the majority of the participators were
from the town of Morpeth and immediately

TABLE 1
Tasters and Non-Tasters in9 areas of North-East England
No. of Total %

Area Non-Tasters No. Non-Tasters

A 17-5* 79 222

B 33-5** 100 33-5

C 14:5 47 30-9

D 12-5 51 24:5

E 29:0 122 23°8

F 25°5 75 34-0

G 30-0 95 31-6

H 29:0 99 29:3

I 33-0 109 30-3
TOTAL 224-5 777 28:9

* In most European groups a large proportion of the
participators are either complete non-tasters or else can
taste either solution 1 or 3. Another large proportion can
taste one of the weaker solutions, numbered 5, 6, 7, 9,
and 11. The former group is termed “‘non-taster’’, the
latter ‘“‘taster’’. However, a very small number taste at
solution 4; that is, they are able to distinguish between
water and a PTC solution of 162-5 mgm/litre. Thus, in
the bimodal distribution, the antimodal value is at
solution 4 and the individuals tasting at this solution are
equally allocated to the “‘non-taster’’ and to the ‘‘taster’’
categories.

** See text below.

adjacent areas in the east; the minority from
Rothbury and other districts in the west of the
area. In the south-eastern group there are 24-5
non-tasters out of a total of sixty-nine individuals
(35:5 per cent non-tasters), and in the west,
six non-tasters, of a total of twenty-one individuals (28-6 per cent non-tasters). It seemed at
least geographically reasonable to place the
western parts of area B with the other “Low”
areas; the south-eastern parts with the “High”
areas. Table 2 summarizes the data.

TABLE 2

Tasters and Non-Tasters in North and West N.-E. England
and in South and East N.-E. England

North South
and West and East Totals
No. of Non-Tasters 65-0 156°5 = 221-5
No. of Tasters 208-0 337°5 = 545-5
Totals 273-0 494:0 767-0
% Non-Tasters 23°8 31-7 28-9

x?=5-30. For 1 degree of freedom, p=0-02—0-05.

It would therefore appear that there is a
statistically significant difference between the
two areas.

Additional individuals could then be placed
in the two areas, again according to the parents’
birthplaces in the north and west “Low’’ or
rural area, or the south and east “High” or
industrial-coalfield area. Of the eighty-one
additions to the north and west data, twenty-one
or 25-9 per cent were non-tasters; of the 241
additions to the south and east data, 77-5 or
32:2 per cent were non-tasters. All the data are
summarized in Table 3.

TABLE 3

Tasters and Non-Tasters in North and West and in South
and East N.-E. England

N.and W. S. and E.

“Low” “High”

Area Area Totals
No. of Non-Tasters 86:0 234-0 320:0
No. of Tasters 268-0 501-0 769:0
Totals 354-0 735-0 1,089-0
% Non-Tasters 24°3 31:8 29-4

x2=6-62. For 1 degree of freedom, p=0-01-0-02.

This clearly indicates a statistically significant
difference between the two groups.

Discussion

Dr. Fraser Roberts demonstrated that a
clear distinction could be drawn between two
homogenous populations found respectively
north and south of a certain line in northern
England, in terms of the ABO blood group genes.
This line bisects Newcastle and runs westward
south of Consett, so that most of Northumberland together with small areas of northern
County Durham lie north of the line whilst most
of County Durham, much of Newcastle, together
with an outlier at Morpeth belong south of the
line. Statistically, the north-south division is
highly significant.

Again, Dr. Ada Kopedé’ indicated certain
regional differences in north-east England in
terms of the ABO genes. As with Dr. Fraser
Roberts’s data, the numbers of individuals in
the samples used were very considerable. In
her analysis it is shown that there appears to be
a distinct population in north and west
Northumberland, which continues northwards
far into Scotland, compared with the population
south and east of that area in Northern England.
As might perhaps be expected, the areal extent

145
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of the two populations delineated by each author
does not coincide exactly but the areas are
sufficiently similar to confirm that there is a
very real distinction to be drawn between the
north and west Northumberland population and
that immediately to the south-east of it, mainly
in County Durham, in terms of the ABO genes.
The A and O frequencies in the two populations
are given by Dr. Kopec’?:

North South
Cc —_— c ————_————
O A O A
Dr. Fraser Roberts 51:97 36:75 48-11 39-66
Dr. Ada Kope¢ 50:85 35°52 48-88 39-70

Viewed in the context of these data it is most
interesting that a distinction may also be drawn
between the two groups in terms of the PTC
tasting polymorphism.

Satisfactory reasons to account for this
pattern in terms of prehistoric, historic and
recent population movements cannot readily
be provided. Some salient features may however
be noted. In Neolithic times, there is but little
evidence for settlement in north-east England.
From 1700 Bc onwards there was a considerable
ingress of Beaker people, especially north of the
Aln and in the Tyne valley, with few settlers in
County Durham, perhaps because of the difficulty seafaring invaders experienced in finding
good landing places on the cliffed coastline.

The Brigantes, with their Iron Age culture
occupied areas south of the Tyne; the Votadini,
areas in Northumberland and southern Scotland.
It has also been asserted that the Romans
“pushed” the British population northwards
to the areas beyond the Tyne and the Wall which
they built just north of that river. Certainly the
post-Anglian Romano-British remains are most
concentrated around the Cheviots. Again, in
the area north of their Wall and east of the
North Tyne, the Romans may have settled
people from Rhaetia whilst removing Votadini
to the Rhaetian frontier.

The Anglian settlement in north-east England
is mainly post 547 aD and the Anglians constitute
the last major group to enter the area before the
recent period. Most of the early Anglian
settlements were in Northumberland and along
the Tyne valley, with far fewer located in the

146

areas immediately to the south. The Tyne-Tees
area was described in the sixth century AD by
Symeon of Durham as a “‘deserted waste’’. The
Anglians probably mixed with and did not
replace the previous population with the result
that there was probably a persistence of the
Romano-British population in areas north of
the Tyne.

Post-Anglian invasions were most important
south of the Tees. Thus the Danish settlements
extended as far north as southern County
Durham whilst Bernicia remained under Anglian
control. Again in the harrying of the north after
the 1069 rebellion there, only Teesdale and the
lower Tees valley suffered; more northerly areas
escaped unscathed. These southern areas were
later resettled by Norse speakers from the Vale
of Eden who might well have been a group of
mixed British, Norse and Anglian origin. It
would seem that the distributions of Anglians
and Scandinavians in this area were very different.
Anglians, Norse and British appear to have
contributed to the pre-industrial population of
north-east England but their relative importance
varied locally.

In the mediaeval period Northumberland in
particular was a frontier zone and as such
difficult to settle and to occupy permanently.
Many of the people were periodically evacuated
during Border disturbances. The plains of
south-east Northumberland and areas south of
the Tyne were far less affected by these disturbances. All the mineral working areas of the
north-east are, with the exception of some coal
mining districts, located south of the Roman
Wall. The so called lead dales of County
Durham saw pastoral and mining colonization
in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, by people
from more southerly dales as well as from areas
as far afield as Germany. Since the Middle Ages
there have been many villages “lost” in
Northumberland, with presumed loss of population in the area, but this phenomenon is not
found to anything like the same extent in
County Durham.

The period from 1825-50 witnessed an
enormous inflow of migrants to the north-east
coalfield, especially from the lead mining dales
to the west, the North Riding of Yorkshire
and Darlington. After 1850, there was much
THE TASTING OF PHENYLTHIOCARBAMIDE

immigration to the coalfield in particular from
rural northern England, rural Wales, Ireland,
Scotland, East Anglia and Cornwall.

Thus it would appear that in certain prehistoric, historic and also in recent times, the
north-east coalfield area, including most of
County Durham and the south-east plain of
Northumberland, had a different population
history compared with the areas to the immediate
north-west. These population movements may
early have resulted in a basic population
dichotomy still to some extent discernible in
terms of segregating genetical features. Moreover, the tendency to a disaffection with local
social conditions, and the wish to move away
as a result, is to a considerable extent familial.
Migrants do not appear to be randomly selected
in a population; social factors differentially
affect individuals and families in this respect.
This has been demonstrated in the coritemporary
context by studies conducted in coal mining
villages in County Durham. Long continued
selective migration, very largely familial and
socially determined, may be of great importance
in accounting for the genetic differentials noted
here.

Since many immigrant groups in north-east
England arrived from areas across the North
Sea, it is of interest to note the non-taster
frequencies in some Scandinavian populations:

Denmark. (Mohr?) 31-8 per cent
Southern Sweden. (Akesson!) 32-0 per cent
Norway. (Merton®) 30-5 per cent

These figures do not differ significantly from the
Durham and other English values cited below.

In south-east England, the percentage of
non-tasters is reported by Harris and Kalmus>
to be 31-5. For Pembrokeshire!®, the percentage
is 27-6. Cartwright? has unpublished data for
Lancashire with 27-9 per cent non-tasters and
Kitchin et al.6 found 29-4 per cent for Liverpool.
The 31-8 per cent non-tasters in County Durham
is not significantly different from these other
figures quoted. Again, hitherto unpublished
data collected by Sunderland show 32 per cent
non-tasters for Scotland as a whole and 37-7 per
cent for Orkney. These figures suggest that there
may well be a single homogeneous population
in most of the United Kingdom together with

the possibility of a rise in the percentage of
non-tasters northwards as Fisher and Taylor}
originally showed for the ABO genes. Much of
the available data is summarized in Table 4.
With the exception of the Orkney figure, the
percentage value in each instance approximates
to 30. It is however noteworthy that Scotland
and County Durham provide the high frequencies, though they are not statistically significantly
higher than the values found further south.

TABLE 4
Non-Tasters in various British Groups

vo
Total Non
No.  Tasters
S. E. England (Harris & Kalmuss) 441 31-5
Pembrokeshire (Pullin & Sunderland!) 1,005 27°6
Lancashire (Cartwright2) 430 27:9
County Durham (Sunderland) 735 31-8
Scotland (Sunderland) 206 32:0
Orkney (Sunderland) 420 37-7
Liverpool (Kitchin et al.®) 265 29:4

In this context, the low percentage in
Northumberland (86 non-tasters of a total
sample of 354: 24-3 per cent non-tasters) is
very remarkable and difficult to explain. The
Scottish sample is too small to be sub-divided
and allocated to different regions of that country
so that it is unknown whether or not the low
percentage of non-tasters in the Northumberland
area is also found in the southern counties of
Scotland. Of the total Scottish sample, only
twelve individuals have parental birthplaces in
the Southern Uplands. Of these only one
(8-3 per cent) is a non-taster. Thus, if these
twelve were added to the Northumberland series
the low frequency of non-tasting would be even
further established.

Again, it is unknown whether or not the very
high percentage of non-tasters in Orkney is
duplicated on the nearby parts of the Scottish
mainland or whether it is in fact a feature better
explained in terms of genetic drift or founder
effect in the archipelago. The Orkney sample is
too small to allow of allocation by parental birthplaces to the various islands in order to establish
whether or not significant inter-island variation
exists. However, the islands were divided into
three groups; firstly the islands lying north of the
Mainland of Orkney (Stronsay, Sanday and

147
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Westray for example); secondly the Orkney
Mainland, and thirdly the islands located south
of the Mainland (Hoy, South Ronaldsay and
Burray for example). The frequencies in each of
the three areas are summarized in Table 5 and
no significant difference exists among them.

TABLE 5
Non-Tasters in Orkney
No. of vo
Non-Tasters Total Non-Tasters
N. Orkney Islands 17-0 41 41-5
Orkney Mainland 83-5 226 37:0
S. Orkney Islands 4:5 12 37°5

Summary

PTC tasting data for north-east England was
presented and a marked difference was demonstrated to exist between the population of the
north and west parts of the area and that of the
south and east parts. A similar type of dichotomy
in north-east England had previously been
shown to exist for the ABO blood group genes
by other workers. PTC data for other populations
in the British Isles were also presented. It would
appear either that there is a single homogeneous
population in this respect in much of the United
Kingdom or else that there might be a gradual
increase northwards in the non-taster frequency,
culminating in the very high figure for Orkney.
Alternatively, however, the Orkney frequency
may be the result of genetic drift or founder effect.
Whichever overall interpretation is adopted,
the very low percentage of non-tasters in

148

Northumberland seems quite anomalous and no
altogether satisfactory explanation presents itself.

Acknowledgements

Thanks are due to Mr. R. Cartwright for allowing
quotation of his hitherto unpublished Lancashire
figures and to Mr. R. C. Taylor, Miss J. E. Travers
and various undergraduates in the University of
Durham for assistance in collecting the data.
Moreover, one is grateful for the co-operation of the
County Education Authorities in Orkney,
Northumberland and Durham, the staff of the
Department of Psychology in the University of
Aberdeen and the Head Teachers of the many schools
visited.

REFERENCES

. Akesson, H. O. 1959. Taste deficiency for phenylthiourea in Southern Sweden. A. Ge. Me. Ge. 8, 43.

. Cartwright, R. 1965. Unpublished typescript. P. 11.

. Fisher, R. A., and Taylor, G. L. 1940. Scandinavian
influence in Scottish ethnology. Nature, 145, 590.

. Fraser Roberts, J. A. 1953. An analysis of the ABO
blood group records of the North of England.
Heredity, 7, 361.

5. Harris, H., and Kalmus, H. 1949. The measurement
of taste sensitivity to phenylthiourea (PTC). Ann.
Eugen. Lond, 15, 24.

6. Kitchin, F. D., Evans, W. Howel, Clarke, C. A.,
McConnell, R. B., and Sheppard, P. M. 1959.
PTC taste response and thyroid disease. Brit. med. J.

i, 1069.

7. Kopeé, A. 1964. Blood group distributions in the
United Kingdom. Unpublished typescript. British
Association Meeting. Southampton. P. 18.

8. Merton, B. B. 1958. Taste sensitivity to PTC in 60
Norwegian families with 176 children. Acta Genet.
Stat. Med. 8, 114.

9. Mohr, J. 1951. Taste sensitivity to phenylthiourea in
Denmark. Ann. Eugen. Lond. 16, 282.

10. Pullin, E. W., and Sunderland, E. 1963. A survey of

phenylthiocarbamide (PTC) tasting and colour

blindness in Pembrokeshire (Wales). Man. 63. 52.

bemanh

bk WN
