ANALYSIS OF THE BROCK REPORT
By MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN

frequently been advocated in the

pages of this Review; fire on this
subject having been opened by Havelock
Ellis in our first volume about a quarter of a
century ago. Contemporaneously with this
long and somewhat desultory discussion in
England, the experiment was actually being
made in California, and no doubt the accounts
of it reaching here from time to time helped
gradually to rub off the crust of our conservatism, a crust not always to be despised.

THIS SOCIETY’S RECORD

By 1926 matters had sufficiently advanced
for the Society to declare its policy on this
subject ; for in the ‘ Outline ’’ then published it was stated that when liberty “is
socially objectionable only because it would
involve the risk of procreation, and when
such liberty is permitted, sterilization ”’
should be performed with the consent of all
parties concerned (EUGENICS REVIEW, Vol.
XVIII, p. 95). The next step, as far as our
Society was concerned, was the drafting of a
sterilization Bill and its appearance in our
REVIEW in October 1928 (p. 166).

In order to make a more rapid and practical advance, a Committee of the Society
was subsequently appointed, which at once
proceeded to do much valuable work. What
came to be known as the “ buff pamphlet ”’
was published, in which the whole subject
was discussed, and of which in its various
editions more than 20,000 copies have been
distributed. It indicated the full programme
of the Society, voluntary sterilization for
mental defectives, mental convalescents and
sufferers from or carriers of physical disorders
being advocated. Other pamphlets on the
same topic were issued, including one by Mr.
Cecil Binney on the legal aspects of sterilization. In 1930 a Bill was drafted for the Society
by a parliamentary draftsman, which was
subsequently included in the buff pamphlet.

\ } OLUNTARY eugenic sterilization has

9

Y

In the same year Dr. Langdon-Down and Dr.
Blacker were received at Westminster by the
Medical Committee of the House of Commons,
with the subsequent result that, on July 2ist,
1931, Major Church, M.P., introduced a Bill
limited to mental defectives under the tenminute rule. It was rejected (by 167 votes to
89), aS was anticipated, but it was of great
value in convincing Members of Parliament
and the public that sterilization was a live
issue. This Bill was supported by no other
society besides our own.

A UNANIMOUS REPORT

The next step in advance was the demand
on the part of a number of bodies, including
the Central Association for Mental Welfare,
for the appointment of a Royal Commission
on the subject. Luckily, this was not exactly
the course actually adopted, for such a Commission is, as I have heard an eminent civil
servant remark, an excellent device for a
government which wishes to shelve a disagreeable subject for some years. Instead,
the Minister of Health, Sir Hilton Young,
being desirous of making real progress,
appointed a Departmental Committee to
consider the whole question. The members
selected were obviously chosen with the
object of obtaining valuable practical
results; for the committee consisted of
persons of both sexes of very wide and varied
experiences. And the results fully justify the
selection made.

One of the most remarkable features of this
report is that it is signed without dissent by
every member of the committee. This result
indicates great tact on the part of the chairman, and if it should come to be known as
the Brock Report, that will be but a suitable
tribute to his skill. Of course, such ‘‘ complete harmony ”’ does prove a full agreement
on all the main issues ; but there must have
been, we cannot but suspect, many minor
points on which it was felt that silence would
10 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

be more serviceable than disagreement.
Those who are familiar with the history of
reform in regard to poor law, divorce, etc.,
will agree, I believe, that minority reports
have often acted as most efficient impediments in the path of progress. The Committee is to be congratulated on the report
as a whole, and on having set such a valuable
example in this respect.

ANOMALIES IN EXISTING LAW

As to the legal questions involved, we
learn that “‘in practice it appears to be
almost universally accepted that’ the
eugenic sterilization of persons of normal
mentality is illegal, though the matter has
not been decided in court (p. 6). Nevertheless we are also told that ‘‘ at present the
well-to-do can and do get themselves
sterilized if they wish ” (p. 43). In fact, the
existing merely possible illegality is not a
complete deterrent, and this is certainly
objectionable both as indicating an apparent
injustice to the poor and as resulting in some
dysgenic sterilization. But should we not
here inquire whether, after the passing of a
sterilization Act on the lines indicated by the
Report, a medical practitioner might not be
prosecuted for an unauthorized sterilization
and acquitted ? If this should occur it would
make the provisions of such an Act useless
in so far as they rendered surgeons free from
criminal and civil proceedings after performing an unauthorized sterilization. It is also
stated in the Report that eugenic sterilization
should never ‘‘ be performed without two
medical recommendations ”’ (p. 43) ; though
if things go on as at present, there will sometimes only be one operator concerned. The
Committee, who must have realized the
situation, may have felt that to suggest the
safeguards necessary to make their proposals
legally watertight was not their affair. But
in any case this matter ought to be considered
in advance.

STERILIZATION BY UNAUTHORIZED
PERSONS

In the first place, would it not be advantageous to make it a crime for anyone not a
medical practitioner to sterilize anyone at

any time? This would be a valuable safeguard both as to the conduct of the actual
operation and as to the nature of the advice
given beforehand as to its advisability. The
article in our last issue by Dr. Tietze, on the
Graz sterilization trial (p. 259), points to the
possibility of quacks either making money by
sterilizing young men or at all events of
unscrupulously advocating such a proceeding. The seriousness of the operation on
women, and the strength of their desire for
parenthood, would make it unlikely that they
would be easily persuaded to consent. Young
men might, however, well be tempted by a
person in search of a fee, with illicit sexual
intercourse as a bait; and whether some
extra precaution should not be taken in the
case of minors, in order to save them from
the shame and sorrow of waking up to the
situation when it was too late, is well worthy
of consideration. Probably it would be
sufficient if, as suggested in the Report (p. 47),
the consent of a parent or guardian had to be
obtained before the sterilization of a minor
would be authorized ; for then it would be
known that the secret was not confined to
the operating surgeons, and the possibility
of its becoming known elsewhere would
induce caution on the part of the patient.

THE NEED FOR DISCLOSURE

Another danger to be guarded against will
be that of the sterilized person marrying
without informing the spouse of his sterilization. This possibility would be best dealt
with in a separate act concerning marriage,
in which it might be enacted that certain
certificates should be exchanged between
the parties concerned before the ceremony.
Irretrievable damage might, however, be
done by a sterilized man by merely obtaining
the affections of a woman; because if she
only found out the fact of sterility after her
engagement, more or less serious trouble
would generally be inevitable. No doubt as
a rule “‘ the procedure should be treated as
strictly confidential’ (p. 45); but it might
be worth considering whether, especially in
regard to normal unmarried males, the members of the medical profession should not
regard it as part of their duty to point out
ANALYSIS OF THE BROCK REPORT II

these dangers before operating and subsequently on certain occasions. In any case,
the doctors concerned have to report the
operation, and they should realize that they
are acting not merely as doctors, but also in
what is nearly a judicial capacity ; for they

will be administering what amounts to “a
kind of case law”’ (p. 45).

A SAFEGUARD FOR PRACTITIONERS

It might seem illogical not also to make it
a crime for a medical practitioner to perform
a eugenic sterilization operation without
permission ; but it is to be hoped that this
will not be considered to be necessary. If it
lay with the operating surgeon to decide
whether a sterilizing operation on a female
should be regarded as eugenic or therapeutic, then to make eugenic sterilization
only a criminal offence would be useless ; for
he would always be able to plead therapeutic
necessity. If, on the other hand, the surgeon,
when he regarded an operation which he was
about to perform as being therapeutic, knew
that he would subsequently run the risk of
legal proceedings on the ground that he
ought to have regarded it as being eugenic,
the results might be very harmful. Doctors
must be responsible for their recommendations, and if they “‘ are reluctant to accept
this responsibility, the whole system inevitably breaks down” (p. 45) and many
necessary operations would not be performed. As soon as the door to authorized
eugenic sterilization is opened, unauthorized
sterilization will cease almost entirely. The
medical profession must be trusted in this
respect, and if any further disciplinary safeguards prove to be necessary, then their
administration had better be left in the hands
of the General Medical Council.

A PIONEER STUDY

The Report contains a brief but excellent
summary of our existing knowledge in regard
to the heredity of mental defect, on which, of
course, the whole structure of their recommendations is built. I cannot, however,
refrain from remarking that the Committee
seem to me to be unjustly severe in the tone
of their comments on the work of Dr. H. H.

Goddard. Pioneers are practically certain to
make some mistakes, whilst after a lapse of
twenty years comments can be made on any
investigation with little apprehension that
they will ultimately turn out to be blundering. There was at the date of its publication
no English work at all comparable to
Goddard’s lreeblemindedness, and to indicate
what was at all events possible in the way of
systematic research was in itself an achievement of considerable value.

THE “CARRIER” PROBLEM

Before the publication of this Report, we
all hoped that it would recommend the
voluntary sterilization of mental defectives,
whilst many of us feared that it would not
open the door to the sterilization of those
who are merely carriers of a mental or physical defect. I believe that my memory does
not play me false when I recall Dr. Tredgold
having said to me some years ago that
sterilization would really be more useful in
the case of high-grade mental defectives, because in their case it was impracticable to
ensure sterility by segregation. Now highgrade defectives, who have relatives who are
definitely defective, constitute the type most
certain to be carriers of mental defect ; and
I think that Dr. Tredgold, as an eminent
member of this Committee, may well congratulate himself on helping to open the door
to their sterilization.

It will be as well, however, here to note
that the word “ carrier ’’ is somewhat vague
in its implication. In regard to certain
physical defects, which are known to be
dependent on the coming together of two
recessive genes, the carrier is obviously he
who carries one of them. But very few now
believe that the inheritance of mental defect
is as simple as this. It is more probable that
several factors, some probably completely
recessive, but others perhaps not so, contribute to produce mental defect. Assuming
for the purpose of illustration that five loci
are concerned, then there may exist a very
large number of forms intermediate between
the normal and the certifiable defective, and
any one of this finely graded series might be
classed as a carrier. Now a little considera12 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tion will indicate that in all cases, however
few be the loci concerned, a presumed
carrier may be perfectly normal. Hence the
decision as to whether sterilization is to be
permitted or not will really have to depend
entirely on the estimated probability of the
offspring or later descendants of the individual in question being defective ; and this
probability must, in its turn, depend on
statistical research. And if it should in consequence come to be boldly and openly admitted that it is justifiable to act in such
matters as sterilization on a mere probability,
this will, in my opinion, in itself constitute
a great step in advance.

Though the Committee definitely recommend that sterilization should be permitted
where there is “‘ reasonable ground for believing’’ that defects may be transmitted
(p. 41), yet they seem to suggest as a possible
alternative that the criterion should be the
actual production of a defective child. The
objection to this latter proposal is that, before the defect in a child is noticed, several
other children may already have been born.
Such a criterion would be most valuable as
an alternative but certainly not as a substitute.

THE “ RIGHT” TO BE STERILIZED

It may be worth noting that it is held that
in the above-mentioned circumstances the
‘parent should have the right to be sterilized’’ (p. 41), it having been previously
stated that “sterilization ought to be regarded as a right and not as a punishment ”’
(p. 40). Now this word “ right ”’ is one which
is very convenient to use but very hard to
define. One important authority has declared that a right possessed by one person
always implies that an obligation is thrown
on some other person or persons. No doubt
the Committee hold that sterilization should
never be performed without a medical report.
But a personal opinion cannot possibly
overcome a right, and we may therefore
conclude that the doctors are to regard
themselves as merely judging whether the
right has been acquired, not whether they
themselves think the operation is advisable
or inadvisable. And we may also hold that

an obligation is thrown on the State to see
that the individual can freely exercise his
right when it has been thus established.

THE NEXT STEP

If, as we hope, an Act is passed legalizing
voluntary sterilization on the lines recommended by the Brock Committee, that will
no doubt be an end to one chapter of the
work of our Society; but it ought equally
certainly also to be the opening of a new
chapter. All that this reform will do will be
to open a now nearly closed door; and a
door, though open, may remain unused. The
measure being on a voluntary basis, persuasion will be necessary to ensure beneficial
results, and we should, therefore, now inquire
who should be the persuaders and who are to
be persuaded.

In the first place, as regards certified
mental defectives, it is their parents and
guardians who will have to be influenced in
order to gain their consent. Many of them
will belong to the social problem group and
many will, therefore, be both uneducated
and stupid. The persuaders will need much
tact and patience. In dealing with carriers,
many of whom will also be of low intelligence,
the difficulties to be encountered will be much
the same. Turning to the defectives themselves, their consent will as a rule be easily
obtainable, and it is indeed chiefly desirable
in order to prevent any possibility of violence
being used.

Then as to the persuaders, where are we to
find them? Here will be the main difficulty.
Large numbers of persons have by now
acquired valuable knowledge concerning
mental defect as members of local Mental
Welfare Associations and as_ voluntary
workers in connection with hospitals and
asylums, and here will be the most valuable
recruiting ground. Members of local governing bodies must also be approached, whilst
the success of the whole scheme will depend
more on the attitude of the medical profession than on anything else. Adequate
medical facilities, including hospital beds,
must also be made available. To set all these
balls rolling in the right direction will indeed
be a big task.
ANALYSIS OF THE BROCK REPORT 13

In regard to these future efforts on the part
of our Society, I cannot but hope that the
results of the inquiry into the characteristics
of the children of mental defectives, which
was inaugurated by the Brock Committee,
will prove to be of especial value. From it we
have learnt that, whether the cause of defect
be bad heredity or bad environment, or, as is
most often the case, both operating together,
of such children of mentally defective
parents as survive more than 40 per cent.
““ must be expected to exhibit some degree of
mental abnormality ’’ (p. 21), and nearly
one-third to be actually defective. Here is a
fact which ought to be brought to the notice
of all those potential persuaders who care
little about eugenics; because it demonstrates the undeniable social benefits now to
be obtained by a diminution of parenthood
amongst all who can be classed as defective.

Our Society ought in my opinion only to
concern itself with such reforms as are likely
to produce definitely beneficial racial results ;
but when once we have decided to attack any
problem, all the immediate social consequences of our proposals should be carefully
studied. Now social influence is never a onesided process; for, by social contact, the
inferior drag down the superior as surely as
the superior improve the inferior. This is
plain enough as regards what occurs in

everyday life amongst social equals, whilst
im no circumstances can it be altogether
denied. The social worker, to take an extreme example, will certainly elevate his own
character by his noble efforts, yet he will
necessarily thus lose some opportunities for
his own improvement. Moreover, we must
bear in mind the heavy financial cost of
attending to the unfit, and the harmful
burden of taxation thus necessarily thrown
on the more fit. From all this we clearly
see not only how great and immediate would
be the social benefits resulting from a reduction in the number of the mental defectives
in our ranks, but also that if procreation
amongst mental defectives were to be reduced these improvements would continue to
take place generation after generation for an
indefinite time in the future. Let us continue
to search for the ultimate causes of mental
defect in the hope, rather than in the expectation, of soon discovering some new methods
of stamping out this great evil at its source.
In the existing state of our knowledge it
is at all events clear that both those who
believe and those who are disbelievers in
eugenics have ample reasons for pulling
together in an endeavour to translate the
recommendations of the Brock Report into
practice and thus to lessen the present
“ disastrous social consequences of ignoring
defect ”’ (p. 56).

VE SK

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 1
