ON PRACTICAL EXPERIENCE OF
STERILIZATION IN SWITZERLAND

By PROFESSOR DR. HANS MAIER
(Director of the Psychiatric Clinic of the University of Zurich)

T is an honour and a pleasure for me to

report in the land where Francis Galton

in 1883 laid the foundation of modern
eugenics, the modest findings which we have
been able to collect in Switzerland. Out of
my field of work arises a special interest in
the question of the prevention of psychiatric
disorders. In our psychiatric clinic, Burghélzli, in Zurich, with 400-500 patients, in
which I have worked for twenty-eight years,
and have directed during the past six years,
the interest of society in the fate of the
mentally ill and in the prevention of mental
disorders was already particularly keen under
the directorship of my predecessors, August
Forel (1879-98) and Eugen Bleuler (18981927), so that I can report to you experiences
reaching back over nearly fifty years. A
little country like ours, in which there is a
relatively high degree of general education,
is particularly suitable for the personal contact between the clinic and the practising
physician, and again between these and the
courts and various administrative boards, so
we have been able to make various practical
experiments which could either not have been
made in other places, or else with a great deal
more difficulty.

I should like to review the entire field of
psychiatric experience with sterilization
measures, with the exception of castration of
sexual delinquents. It is obvious that this is
a question not only of purely eugenic concern
but also, in many cases, of the individual
care of the patient. Both factors are generally present, as for example in the case of a
schizophrenic woman in whom each pregnancy aggravated her psychosis and in whose
case, therefore, sterilization afforded a therapeutic as well as a prophylactic measure.

If we first consider the possibilities for the
prevention of issue in the psychically ab
19

normal the following types should be differentiated: there are patients who during
periods of convalescence have sufficient insight and strength of will to abstain completely from sexual intercourse, or in whom
the psychosis has caused such a degree of
autism* that no danger exists in this direction. It is just in the case of psychically abnormal married and unmarried people that
birth control, which among normal people
usually suffices to limit issue, often fails, because they do not carry out the precautions
properly, or completely forget them at the
critical moment. The patients who have to
be interned in an institution for a considerable period of time are naturally protected
during this time. But, as you know, modern
psychiatry believes in making the patient
so much better during his stay in the institution that he can be discharged again as soon
as possible. Precisely with the greater number of schizophrenics this considerable advance in medicine also relieves the institutions and reduces expenses. The principle of
discharging patients as soon as possible,
which we have practised with good results
for several decades, brings about the fact
that many a patient who would formerly
have degenerated in the asylum attains a
good degree of recovery. The advance in
occupational therapy and psychotherapy
in institutions, which we supplement by
special measures, such as the sleep cure for
the schizophrenics, has, however, as regards
eugenics, the drawback that the patient,
despite his illness, is the sooner in a position
to reproduce. The only sure method of
hindering this is to prevent conception, or
the ejaculation of sperm, either through liga
* A tendency to turn away from the outside world
and become completely self-centred.
20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tion of the tubes or the vas deferens, or by
means of castration, or X-ray irradiation.
Irradiation is, in our experience, not to be
relied upon for permanence, and it brings
with it the danger that a true differentiation
between mere sterilization and the destruction of the gonads, that is castration, is not
possible. For this reason we seldom use it,
and then only in the case of women upon
whom for other reasons an operation cannot
be performed. It is our duty as physicians to
prevent conception in the way least harmful
to the patient, and this is the ligation of the
tubes or vasa deferentia, which we hereinafter call sterilization. Castration, on the
other hand, is a mutilation, which so far as
we are concerned comes only into consideration in infrequent cases of male sexual
delinquents, where the primary object is to
eliminate the physical portion of the libido.

According to our experience no general
rule can be formulated as to which particular psychiatric disease calls for the application of a certain one of the methods here
enumerated for the prevention of issue.
Especially in psychiatry the important thing
in all our methods is not the nature of the
disease in question, but its course (which
varies from individual to individual), and
the external circumstances, and above all the
individual disposition (that is, the unaffected
portion of the personality) ; it is, therefore,
the first principle in this field to judge each
case on its own merits and vary our procedure
accordingly.

We must now examine if and how we have
the right as physicians to carry out such
operations. The law varies in different
countries, and J can only give you here a
picture of our conditions. Law is also, however, subject to development and change
and, therefore, the experience and concepts
of one country can be of value to another.
Every injury to a person’s bodily integrity is
punishable in most countries—and also in
ours—as “ bodily injury,’ except when it is
applied by a physician in the healing of
disease. When it comes to judging the operation of sterilization it depends what one
means by the term healing. When a doctor
declares that the necessity for sterilization

exists on account of individual or racial
hygiene, our judges have taken the sensible
point of view that it is a matter of healing
and, therefore, a legal prophylactic measure.
Usually sterilization carries an advantage
for the patient himself. The law should protect society and, therefore, it is evident that
it may not act as a hindrance to racial
hygienic prophylaxis. A doctor who, after
careful consideration and examination,
comes to the conclusion that sterilization
is necessary is, therefore, in our country
not liable to punishment. As it is always a
question of the resulting complications and
an irreparable operation we hold the point
of view that the surgeon alone should not
decide, but that he should professionally
consult with a psychiatrist, whose findings are
to be given in writing so that they can be
verified at any time. One of the difficulties
is that generally the operation can only be
performed with the patient’s consent. In the
case of the mentally sick, this consent cannot
always be had, and when this is the case it
must be decided whether the person in question is, despite his illness, capable of deciding
the question. If this is doubtful, we regularly put the facts before the Guardians’
Council,* which, after considering the case,
usually gives its approval. When a patient
still has some capacity of judgment, it is
usually possible to convince him of the necessity of the operation and also to get his consent. If this plan does not succeed, we give
up the operation, but in such cases the
authorities often use other methods so that
the patient finally acquiesces. For example,
a woman who, during an attack of schizophrenia, killed her child and was committed
to an asylum, may only be discharged from
the asylum with the Court’s permission. | If
the danger exists that the woman might kill
another child after another pregnancy, the
authorities decide that the patient may only
be discharged if she is first sterilized. The
same procedure is carried out, for example,
in the case of a weak-minded girl who, after
discharge from the institution, runs the

* Not Poor-law Guardians, but those responsible for
‘‘minors,’’ that is ‘‘ Court of Wards.’’
STERILIZATION IN SWITZERLAND 21

danger of again having illegitimate children.
In our experience most cases can, when
necessary, be operated upon by these means,
even in the absence of special laws regulating
sterilization. If two doctors perform the
operation and write out their findings, there
is no danger of the procedure being abused.

The marriage laws in Switzerland constitute a further aid in this field. The law reads
that the mentally sick, and persons incapable
of judgment, may not marry, and that
marriages which are, nevertheless, contracted
between such people are to be annulled. In
our country the judge takes the point of
view that above all the propagation of the
insane should be avoided in the interests of
racial hygiene. From this we can see that we
also have the right to prevent the illegitimate production of such patients. It even
occurs in border-line cases, where it is a
question whether a psychic defective may
marry or not, that the judge only permits
the marriage if one of the two partners be
previously sterilized. Naturally, these are
only exceptions, for, in principle, the bearing of children should be the corner-stone of
marriage.

Just as we prescribe and permit sterilization in cases where it is necessary, so we
oppose it wherever it is not indicated. Sometimes the authorities try to force girls, who
have had the misfortune to bear one or two
illegitimate children, to be sterilized in order
that they may not cause further expense
through subsequent pregnancies. If no
psychic or physical defect is present to
justify this we always refuse to comply with
these wishes. We take the same point of
view with regard to people who desire operative sterilization as a luxury or an easy way
out. In this case the doctor is not justified,
since no medical reasons exist. Quite otherwise are the circumstances in the case of
married women in miserable economic conditions who have several children and who are
simply not in a position to bring more children into the world and to bring them up.
Here it is, as a rule, not a question of patients
in our institution, but of polyclinic patients,
whose weak psychic and physical dispositions
are exhausted through poverty, and where

there is no prospect, or very little, of an
improvement in their external circumstances.
In these cases there must always be the
certainty that the woman’s constitution
cannot bear the further burden without great
injury to her health, and that the usual
means of contraception will fail. In these
cases we usually require the written consent
of both the woman and her husband and
then, upon our recommendation, the gynecologist is enabled to perform the operation.
Sometimes, indeed, in such cases we come to
the conclusion that the more defective, perhaps the less healthy member of the partnership, is not the woman but the man, and then
we require that the operation be performed
upon him—which is a much simpler procedure and one entailing no disturbance of
the potentia coeundt. Because of men’s
egoism in this matter, it is frequently difficult
to obtain their consent, but we succeed,
nevertheless, in not a few instances. This is
particularly the case when it is a question of
interrupting an already existing pregnancy.
Then we explain, if grounds for interrupting
the present pregnancy are sufficient, that we
can only interrupt the pregnancy if the
man is first sterilized, so that another pregnancy will not occur. The question of interrupting a pregnancy in the case of psychic
defectives is frequently combined with the
necessity of sterilization. In accordance with
our policy, we hold that, in general, the
eugenic consideration is not, or is not in
itself, sufficient reason to interrupt pregnancy, because it is here a question of the
destruction of a living being. The interruption of pregnancy should only be performed when by its means one can prevent
serious damage to a patient’s health or life.
With the social conditions that exist to-day
we are certainly of the opinion that the social
grounds alone cannot be the determining
factor, but it is a factor that the physician
must also take into consideration.

On the physical side this is certainly true :
a rich woman with mild tuberculosis can
afford the best care, and therefore runs far
less risk in pregnancy than a poor woman
with the same affliction. In deciding whether
there is to be an interruption of pregnancy
22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

we let ourselves be guided by a consideration
of the whole physical and psychic condition of the pregnant woman, and also take
into account the social and eugenic aspects.

Equally in such cases, the findings of two
physicians must be stated, and in psychiatric
cases those of a psychiatrist as well, and a
protocol must be drawn up. If there is the
likelihood that future pregnancies will cause
similar complications, and especially if
eugenic reasons exist, we perform the interruption on condition that sterilization also
be carried out, and in such cases permission
for the latter is usually granted. Usually our
surgeons only perform this operation after
an official psychiatrist has re-examined the
case and has written a report. Sometimes
specific inquiries are also made through the
social service workers and documentary
evidence concerning the social and family
conditions, so that there be no danger of
being deceived by the people in the case.
Besides, the physicians are, of course, aware
of the fact that sterilization, while a more
serious operation and one with more serious
consequences than interruption of pregnancy, is, nevertheless, one that carries with
it less danger of bringing them into conflict
with the law.

In the past four years an average of 500
pregnant women, with more or less serious
psychic disturbances and depressions, have
been reported on each year in our Polyclinic.
In half the cases we affirmed the need of
interruption ; in two-thirds of them we found
that they ought to be sterilized ; and in sixtenths of the cases we expressed our opinion
that the operation should be carried out
upon the husband. We believe that such a
careful examination, taking into account all
the circumstances leading to a decision in
favour of interruption, is the best method of
combating criminal interruption with all its
evil consequences, both physical and moral.
If at the same time we decide to carry out a
sterilization, we are applying the best method
of decreasing the number of unfortunate
pregnancies in the future. From a medical
standpoint we also believe that, in the interests of women and society, the continuation
of legal protection of pregnancy is necessary.

But we can the better maintain this protection if we see to it that pregnancies, which
in view of the circumstances cannot go to
term without grave injury, may be interrupted by recognized procedure in hospital.
Let us now return to the sterilization of
institutional patients with more _ serious
mental disease. These are above all feebleminded girls who usually, without being
themselves particularly active sexually, are
not capable of defending themselves against
sexual approaches, and for that reason,
although unmarried, become repeatedly pregnant. Many of these girls could remain with
their family or otherwise at liberty and could
earn their living if this danger did not exist.
Many of these have to be interned because
in their weak-minded helplessness they kill
a child. Others come to the psychiatrist for
the most diverse reasons. Very often eugenic
as well as individual grounds lead to the
decision for sterilization. One is faced with
the alternative of having to intern such an
abnormal person as long as she is capable of
bearing children, or else of sterilizing her and
giving her her freedom. The latter is the
lesser of two evils for the patient, and at the
same time a great advantage for society.
It is well known that not all cases of feeblemindedness can be inherited, but nevertheless many can. What is more, these unmarried mothers are not capable of bringing
up their children. Naturally, we do not consider every little mental defect as reason for
sterilization, but require that the feeblemindedness be at least of such a degree that
the possibility of marriage is out of the
question.* As there are many people whose
intellectual development is only retarded, we
never undertake such sterilizations until the
twentieth up to the twenty-fifth year, and
before so doing still attempt education in an
institution for the feeble-minded. The same
rule applies to feeble-minded men, although
the question here is less frequently a practical
one. We have, however, a few such young
men every year upon whom we carry out the
operation on these grounds. We are even
more careful in the case of people with

* According to Swiss law.
STERILIZATION IN SWITZERLAND 23

psychopathic tendencies. Amongst these we
often find people who, as they grow older,
can still fit into society and can even found
a family. As a general rule, sterilization is
performed only in those cases where a grave
moral defect, sometimes combined with the
psychopathy, and an incurable lack of social
principles, indicate the operation. These
cases are very infrequent, but just the moral
defect, which is capable of reaching an actively criminal degree, is in our opinion also
very much to be feared eugenically, as it is
often directly inherited in a most alarming
manner. In the two groups of endogenic
psychoses again the circumstances are different. In the cases of actual manic-depressive
psychoses, which are really few, we hardly
have occasion to consider the indications for
sterilization. Most of these are in institutions
during the period of illness, and during the
convalescent periods are able to control
themselves sexually. The group of schizophrenias are quite the opposite. Here we
fear, above all, inheritance, and the unreliability of the patient in his sexual relations.
A hard-and-fast rule for schizophrenics cannot, in our experience, be formulated. Most
of those who are interned have periods of
improvement, and are at liberty part of the
time. Many of them are so autistic, that
they are no sexual risk. In others, especially
married schizophrenics, or in hebephrenic
girls, on the other hand, this is very decidedly
not the case. The inheritance of the schizophrenias is similar to that of recessives; it
is, however, not yet completely worked out.
It is certainly desirable that carriers of inheritable schizophrenia should be sterilized.

We must see clearly, however, that not
only the schizophrenic himself, but many
people with schizophrenic relatives, who
themselves remain well, are transmitters of
schizophrenia. Further, not infrequently
people fall ill with schizophrenia after they
have already produced children and these
children are naturally as seriously hereditarily tainted as if they were born after the
outbreak of the disease. It is our experience
in general that patients who have once been
committed to an institution because of
schizophrenia do not bring many more chil
dren into the world, with the exception of
girls who are afterwards married off by their
families. Among the great mass of schizophrenic patients in institutions, there is a
certain limited number where we convince
the patient and his family that sterilization
is indicated, and carry out the procedure.
Here, however, we must judge every case
absolutely on its own merits. With many
patients the operation has no practical value,
and if regularly prescribed might carry. a
certain psychic trauma that would influence
the course of the psychosis unfavourably.* In
epilepsy we exercise the same regard for the
individual case. We know to-day that this is
a group of diseases of which only a small percentage is inheritable. In this group procreation should certainly be prevented, but
this can be done in many cases without an
operation, simply by placing the epileptic
under proper supervision. With female
epileptics pregnancy frequently aggravates
the condition, and in such cases there is an
individual ground for sterilization as in the
case of many schizophrenics.

The bad influence of alcoholism was formerly certainly exaggerated, but there is,
nevertheless, a group of completely degenerate alcoholics, who can no longer bring any
normal children into the world, and who are
in no position to bring up children. In those
cases in which we do not succeed in placing
the patient permanently in an institution,
which is usually the best course, we frequently recommend sterilization. The morphine and cocaine habit in both men and
women is still more harmful to posterity than
alcoholism. When it is a question of incurables, conditions usually are already so
bad that no children are conceived. Those
infrequent cases that we do sterilize in the
main are individuals who from childhood on
were gravely psychopathic and hereditarily
tainted.

Of the instances that I have mentioned, it
seems to me that the timely sterilization of

* A single woman of exemplary life and nearing the
menopause might feel ‘‘ hurt’ if it were considered that
she could not be trusted to refrain from marriage and
parenthood knowing that she risked having tainted
offspring. .
24 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the congenitally feeble-minded is the most
important for society. Eugenically, this is all
the more important because such defectives
frequently marry one another and the children produced by them have a still less
promising inheritance. In the other psychic
disturbances one must consider each case
absolutely individually, and frequently good
can be achieved and misfortune prevented.

One might here raise the objection that
sterilization would upset the moral behaviour
in certain psychic defectives and allow them
to lose still further their sexual repressions.
Our experience has shown us, however, that
this is not the case. It is possible to supervise a psychic defective outside of an institution and to prevent his coming into bad
society and neglect. It is, however, impossible to prevent his occasionally having sexual
intercourse, and it is fortunate, personally
and socially, if one can prevent the pregnancies that might ensue. The repression
which normal people have through fear of
pregnancy is generally absent in psychic defectives. Therefore sterilization does not
carry with it an added danger of sexual
promiscuity for such individuals.

As you know, special laws have been issued
in many countries concerning sterilization.
At first this was so in several states in
North America, where, however, the laws
were very incompletely carried out. Then
Scandinavian countries, and three years ago
a Swiss canton, Vaud, also issued such a
law. The law of 1930 of the Swiss Canton
Vaud is as follows :

Art. 28 bis. Une personne atteinte de
maladie mentale ou d’une infirmité mentale peut étre l’objet de mesures d’ordre
médical pour empécher la survenance
d’enfants, si elle est reconnue incurable
et si, selon toutes prévisions, elle ne peut
avoir qu'une descendance tarée.

L’intervention médicale n’a lieu que sur
autorisation du Conseil de santé.

Le Conseil de santé lui-méme ne donne
cette autorisation qu’aprés enquéte et sur
préavis conforme de deux médecins désignés par lui.

Il décide de l’attribution des frais.

The decision for the advisability of the
operation is, be it noted, not dependent on a
court of law, but only on a court of hygiene.
It is not compulsory for all patients with
certain diseases, but only for individual cases.
Such a law can be good for obstinate and
especially criminal mental defectives.

In consequence of this opinion the Canton
Vaud has allowed in its new penal law from
1931 the interruption of pregnancy for
eugenic reasons. This paragraph is as follows :

Art. 130. L’avortement n’est pas punissable, lorsqu’il est pratiqué sur une personne atteinte de maladie mentale ou
d’une infirmité mentale, dont la descendance selon toutes prévisions ne peut étre
que tarée. Toutefois il ne peut étre opéré
qu’avec l’autorisation du Conseil de santé.

So far as I know, the administration and
the results in these countries were about the
same as ours in Zurich, although we possess
no actual sterilization law.

Personally, I am of the opinion that sterilization is a matter which makes so profound
an inroad on the integrity of the individual,
that it should only be performed under
medical direction and with great understanding of the individual case. We must recognize the fact that through orders of a court
a great number of the carriers of psychic
defects, who are themselves often normal,
will escape, and that therefore the good
results will not be so great as the layman
imagines.

Moreover, the innovation of a tribunal for
sterilization runs the risk of officially branding people as defective who are already unhappy enough, and by whom even without
the operation there is no danger of reproduction. If our institutional directors are to be
forced to parade all their patients before the
court in conformity with a sterilization
law, fear and prejudice against the institutions will arise, not only among the patients,
but amongst their relatives as well, such as
we have had to fight for decades, and are
gradually overcoming. It is to be feared that
such a law would make it very difficult for us
to get correct information from the patients
STERILIZATION IN SWITZERLAND 25

and their relatives concerning the heredity
in the family.

I have shown you how we, in Switzerland,
through enlightenment of the people and
through purely medical decision in each case,
have been able to make considerable progress,
which can indeed be still further advanced.
To me it seems a good method whereby we
combine the care of the sick individual entrusted to us with the prophylactic care for
society, without unnecessarily hurting the
one at the expense of the other. To be sure,
there are occasionally refractory psychopathics in whom the prevention of propagation is urgent and who will not give their
consent : in most cases these are definitely
antisocial or even criminal individuals. I
consider it indicated in particular cases that
laws be made to apply in the exceptional
cases in order to force them to undergo such
a prophylactic operation. I must, however,

say that we in our circumstances usually
achieve this by threatening these people with
commitment to an institution, or workhouse, if they will not consent to the operation. On the other hand, in the case of
patients who are not criminal, the decision
ought to rest with the physician, and the
co-operation of a court should not be necessary, and would only be disturbing for the
patient and his family. In view of the moral
standard of the medical profession in civilized
countries, a great abuse of this right by the
physicians is not to be feared. Through the
correct application of sterilization we can
avoid injuring the psychic defective for
whom it is a necessity and, nevertheless, at
the same time do society a great service by
eugenic-prophylactic methods. In this way
are we in no wise disloyal to the humane
care for the mentally sick; likewise, also, in
this eugenic duty we follow our old medical
principle: Aegroti salus suprema lex.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 1
