A BIOLOGIST IN A NEW ENVIRONMENT.
By ¥. A. E. CREW.

ONE had time to think in Flanders, and reason too; but all the world
seemed mad, and one’s previous education failed to offer any explanation
of the acts and thoughts of men. Time has sieved the happenings of those
days and now it is possible to collect the scattered pictures that remain,
and, in fitting them together, to realise how the war has reshaped one’s
opinions.

A biologist by inclination, education, and occupation; a territorial
because I was a national and essayed to be a patriot; I was plucked from
the calm contemplative atmosphere of the study and flung into the strange
activities of an army life. Of British ancestry, I was a Briton; by reason of
my social inheritance I was heir to the traditions, the recorded knowledge,
the ideas and ideals which were the proud possessions of my country.
My education had discovered some of my capacities, and during this time
i had absorbed much of my social inheritance and many of the traditions
of my own particular profession. I was, in consequence, a typical British
citizen, although the desire to accumulate property was not the motive
force in my conduct, and a capacity for altruism had remained with me
and was not merely “enlightened egoism.”

In the Army I was introduced to the traditions of the service and of
my own regiment in particular. I was taught the history of my country
from another point of view, and its history was one long story of homicide.
The democratic ideas and the Christian ideals which had guided my
thoughts were disregarded, and the inequality of men and the impracticability of the Christian concept were emphasised. I became a soldier, an
efficient fighting male, living in a herd of social vertebrates controlled by
a bureaucracy whose actions were founded upon a purely biological conception of life, and whose policies were essentially eugenic ideas, though
not eugenic in their purpose.

My previous training and sympathies should have fitted me to accept
these new conditions with relish; but though I was very willing to subject
myself to discipline, I have to confess that I found myself out of sympathy
with the efforts made to order my development.

I always was impressed by what to me was a fact—the German was
the finest possible product of the school in which I was now being trained.
He seemed to be possessed of a larger capacity of devotion to an ideal.
In every way he appeared to be the more efficient fighting animal, less
sensitive to physical pain and more thorough in his methods. And yet
the, in my opinion the most efficient fighting man and a unit of the most
efficient military system the world has ever seen, was beaten in the field.

The credit for the victory has been claimed by many, among these the
General Staffs of the Allied Forces, the Navy, the Americans. Be that as
it may, there can be no doubt that it was the coming of the Americans
that permitted the Allies to turn a stubborn defensive into an overwhelm120 EUGENICS REVIEW.

ing attack. And there is no doubt whatever that the American soldier
came ‘to make the world safe for democracy.” I have lived with many
of them, and it was obvious that each regarded himself as a crusader.
In them we saw the ghosts of our armies of 1914-15.

Theirs was our spirit of the earlier years before the dreary dragging
years had brought demoralisation. Their coming brought the sadlyneeded reinforcements, but above all, it meant a reappearance in the field
of ideals actively antagonistic to those that were spurring on the enemy.
Throughout, it had been a struggle between a people reared in a school
of nationalism, militarism and materialism, and thoroughly efficient in
war, and the rest of the world, led by the peoples who were striving after
the ideals of true democracy along the lines of the development of the
characteristic western civilisation. And I choose to read in the defeat of
Germany a proof that the German conception of civilisation is false, and
that the fundamental ideals of the victors are nobler, more productive of
benefit to humanity, and more in the direct line of the evolution of
civilisation, than those which they opposed.

If this is true, then Britain must take heed; for what Germany was,
we were in danger of becoming. The modern biological conceptions of
civilisation had not been embodied in the policies of the State in Great
Britain, as had occurred in Germany, but the speculations of the British
philosophers had been marching abreast of those of the leaders of political
and military opinion in Germany. Haeckel, Neitzsche, Karl Marx and
Treitschke were no more daringly dogmatic than were Herbert Spencer,
Galton, Karl Pearson and Bateson. And their doctrine was the same—
biological predestination; biological justification for aggressive war in
the spheres of international and domestic policy; the Darwinian standard
of efficiency of the animal as the standard of fitness for survival of individuals and races in a civilised world; the new conception of the nature
of the mental and mora] characters and their transmission through
heredity ; superior races and classes; and the absolute rights of the State
founded in force and responsible to none.

Thus my masters! I was persuaded that the aims of democracy were
unsound and that the ideals of the Christian churches were impracticable.
But the war came, and now, at the end, I have to confess that I feel that
I was misled. I am convinced of three things :—(1) That the Darwinian
standard of efficiency of the animal is not the standard of the individual
as a member of society, and that the Darwinian science of the evolution
of the individual is not the science of the evolution of society; (2) that
the mental and moral qualities of the human are not at all comparable to
the physical characters in the degree of their heritability, and are more of
the nature of acquirements than of inborn characters, and that the organic
inheritance is always subordinated to the social inheritance, that environmental factor that consists of the recorded knowledge, the traditions, the
characteristic ideas and ideals of a people; and (3) that it is possible to
change the psychology of a nation in a brief space of time.

(1) The rise and fall of Germany are my reasons for my contention.
The German Empire. in 1914 was the perfect example of a State erected
upon the Darwinian conception of efficiency, that of the individual
A BIOLOGIST IN A NEW ENVIRONMENT. 121

equipped for supremacy in the struggle for means of subsistence and for
the opportunities for reproduction by the possession of superior force; and
whose actions are guided solely by reasons of self-interest.

The State required absolute unquestioning obedience and service
from the individuals comprising it, whilst the State itself, the highest
thing in history, was responsible to none. Military power was the
standard of the nation’s fitness for survival, and the means to acquire the
justification of possession. .

Germany fought and defeated Denmark, Austria, and France, and it
seemed that the practical application of this new doctrine of force was
the proven way of the further evolution of civilisation. Applied to
industrial competition the same principles, apparently, were making
German methods supreme, and were filling her war-chests with the sinews
of modern war; whilst in the sphere of domestic politics the military
caste of Prussia was accepted as the dominant superior class.

And in 1914 the training was completed and the preparations finished,
and Germany flung the gauntlet in the face of the rest of the world,
arrogantly confident of the issue. She must have won, had not the whole
of the rest of the world been convinced that her conceptions, her methods,
and her ambitions were unworthy of civilised humanity. The doctrine of
force lies buried in the stricken fields of Flanders, and the world is
eagerly awaiting the call of a Mazzini.

(2) I am convinced that the factors of environment and function are
responsible for the exhibition of mental and moral qualities which cannot
be regarded as having been inborn. The capacity for such certainly was
inborn but not the quality as exhibited.

All the men passed into the Army were physically fitted to become
soldiers. Modern warfare is so utterly unlike anything in the previous
experience of mankind, that nothing in the previous civil life had
demanded those mental and moral qualities the possession of which makes
the complete soldier. We were all introduced to an entirely new set of
conditions, and very soon it was obvious that thousands could not make
the essential acquirements and could never become efficient fighting men.
But under proper training and in response to the appeal to our emotions,
we all became soldiers in matters of behaviour, attitude of mind, and
motive. We accepted with the uniform all that it implied, and became a
different people. In these new conditions, physically, we all became
alike; mentally and morally, we differed greatly, according to the differences in our capacities for acquiring those qualities of use in war; but
not one of us was the man he had been. We had been reshaped, quickly
and thoroughly, and the outlooks and motives of the civilian were discarded and forgotten. And in the behaviour of the demobilised, as in
the methods of the political parties, it can be seen that this change was
not merely a transient adaptation. The war conditions have changed
us all.

(3) The conception of the inborn nature of the psychical characters
implies that such are, to a great extent, fixed and unchangeable. But
in the recent history of Germany, as in that of modern Japan and of the
Maoris of New Zealand, there can be traced an abrupt and complete
122 EUGENICS REVIEW.

change in the mental and moral qualities of a whole people. We have
seen lustily-growing Germany, embarrassed in her ambitions for expansion by the demands of the religion she professed, abandon the teachings
of her churches and eagerly accept a doctrine which seemed to justify
her proposed methods, and in accepting this, completely remove the
old-type German and in his place produce the man with whom we have
fought. It was Germany, above all others, that hailed ‘‘ The Origin of
Species,” and she quickly adapted the doctrine therein to the policies of
the State. Haeckel, Neitzsche, and Treitschke provided the new creed,
and the Emperor William, the Prussian Minister of Education, Falk, and
the leaders of political and military thought, applied it. All attempts at
compromise were dropped when Neitzsche launched his impeachment of
“the religion that has enchained and softened us,” and the nation
accepted Treitschke’s powerful teaching. The idea of war became no
longer a shame and a reproach to civilisation, but a biological necessity.
Nationalism, militarism and materialism were taught in the schools and
in the universities, and within the lifetime of two generations a new
German people had been produced. This was accomplished by the
insistent presentation of a certain ideal to the children and youth of the
nation during their education.

We who have been through the turmoil are waiting for the birth of a
new religion. We know full well that we are capable of sacrifice in the
cause of civilisation. We know that the mind can be swayed to a new
and permanent endeavour by an appeal to the emotion of the ideal. We
know that, properly led, we can build a new Britain, and that all that is
needed is a new social inheritance. We know that this already exists in
the recorded knowledge and traditions of the Anglo-Saxon peoples, and
in the ideals for which our country has stood. We know that there is no
dearth of ability in our ranks, but we no longer accept the pre-war
standards of efficiency as taught by our leaders. ‘We believe that equality
of opportunity has discovered unsuspected capacity, and that the average
man can acquire the average mental attainments of the classes, up to this,
termed the intellectual. Of these matters, youth may know more than
its masters, for it was youth that went through the fire in Flanders.

As a eugenist, I believe that this appeal should come from us. It
will not come from the churches, or if it did, it would not be heard.

As a biologist, I am awaiting a creed of morality based upon our
knowledge of the continuity of the germplasm and a biological justification of the institutions of our social life. I look for the final rejection of
the Darwinian conception of the fittest animal as a standard of the individual as a member of society, and the Christ-like man set up again as a
model—I speak not as a Christian but as a citizen. I am convinced that
the greatest of ‘‘ the agencies under social control that may improve or
impair the racial qualities of future generations, either ‘physically or
mentally,” is that of the social inheritance, an environmental factor consisting of all the gains of progress in the evolution of society, and acquired
by the individuals of each generation through the medium of the mind
during education.
A BIOLOGIST IN A NEW ENVIRONMENT. 123

The League of Nations and the universal brotherhood of man will
remain idle dreams until they are taught as biologically sound conceptions
of the future evolution of civilisation. It is for us to show that they are,
and then to organise public opinion to our point of view. And this can be
effected in a generation, and a new Britain created. We look to our
women for inspiration, for to these the race is more than the individual ;
and they it is who are most likely to respond to the rousing call to constructive effort which Mr. John Oxenham, as a revealer of their best selves
to the people of his age, has uttered in the appeal :—

‘‘Can’t you see the signs and portents?
Can’t you feel them in the air?
Cant you see—you unbeliever ?
Can’t you see ?—or don’t you care—
That the Past is gone for ever,
Past your uttermost endeavour—
That To-day is on the scrap-heap,
And the Future—anywhere ?
Where?

Ah—that’s beyond me !—

But it lies with those who dare
To think of the big To-morrows,
And intend to do their share.”
