SOME EXAMPLES OF POOR LAW EUGENICS

By E. J. LIDBETTER.

‘‘Ei1rHeR the Urban population is becoming less fitted to maintain their
independence, or the facility with which relief may be obtained and the
immunity from ‘labour which it confers are enticing a larger number of
persons to avail themselves of poor relief.”

Report of the Royal Commission, 1909, part 11, folio 43.

SINCE its inception, three centuries ago, the Poor Law System
has been continuously the subject of criticism, experiment and
revision. The process has been by way of enquiry, examination,
and an elaboration of machinery which has become the pride of
the expert and a source of unfailing difficulty to the novice.

Whatever may be said of the result it should be remembered
that the present administration is the product of the experience
gained in those three hundred years, the record of which is to be
found in the extensive literature peculiar to the subject.

It might be reasonable to suppose that in a subject on
which so much had been written, and so many experiments
tried, no point of view with regard to it could have been overlooked. Yet in all the record there is no suggestion that
pauperism may be due to hereditary causes.

The Reports of the Royal Commissions, both of 1834 and
1908, fail to indicate that any evidence was taken from that
point of view, and certainly no recommendation eugenic in
character is to be found in either report.

It is to be regretted that the subject did not receive the
attention of the latter Commission in view of the fact that there
exists evidence that a high proportion of chargeability is due to
defect which, if not hereditary, is yet found repeated in the
children and grand-children of defectives. That evidence
could have been collected much better through the Commission
than in any other way. The omission can, perhaps, be explained by the habit of considering merely current chargeSOME EXAMPLES OF POOR LAW EUGENICS 205

ability, and by the now fashionable doctrine that if you only
rearrange administrative machinery, that which has to be
managed thereby, forthwith assumes a different character and
will be easily amenable to the forces brought to bear upon it.

Only those intimately acquainted with the Poor Law know
the extent to which its system is used over and over again by
the members of one family, or by successive generations.

Pauperism is considered in its current aspect merely, and it
is only when enquiry is undertaken on a large scale that it is discovered that the pauper of to-day is frequently the child of the
pauper of yesterday, who was in turn often himself the child of
pauper parents. This condition is not startling to those engaged
in Poor Law or charitable work. If it were otherwise, all the
principle and much of the practice in Poor Law affairs during
the last eighty years must have been wrong and human nature
not understood.

Since the Act of 1894, under which Guardian Boards
became popularly elected and subject to popular influence, there
has been a vast improvement in pauper conditions, especially in
the metropolitan and urban areas. Workhouses have become
more and more comfortable, infirmaries are greatly superior in
equipment, management, and staff to many hospitals for paying
patients, and the applicant for relief comes forward buoyed up
with the assurance that relief is his right, and the knowledge
that his parent or parents were not uncomfortable under the
Poor Law. (All this, it may be argued, shows that the ratepayer
is getting the sort of administration he wants,—which may be
true, but if it is so, why all the outcry ?)

Meantime the standard of pauperism laid down by the
Commission of 1834, ‘‘that the condition of the pauper should
be less eligible than that of the independent labourer,” has been
definitely abandoned; perhaps because the condition of the
independent labourer, in some quarters, is so low, that pauper
conditions cannot be depressed to the same level.

From the Eugenic standpoint pauperism resolves itself into
four distinct classes: the sick, the non-sick (commonly called
the able-bodied), the children and the class known as the aged
and infirm. Neither of the two latter classes need separate or
206 E. J. Lidbetter :

special consideration, for it will be found that both classes are,
in the main, the product of the other two classes and that their
chargeability arises from the same circumstances.

At least one-eighth of current chargeability is due to consumption and almost as large a proportion must be due—directly
or indirectly—to recognised mental disorder. In the charts
which follow it should be noted that every case has one or more
lunatic or mentally defective persons.

More than one half of the inmates of Poor Law infirmaries
are persons who have been there before and habitually use such
institutions on a recurrence of their chronic disorder, whilst of
our workhouse population (excluding children in Poor Law
schools) at least 80 per cent. suffer from some chronic or recurring
sickness or are the victims of some abnormality or deficiency.
Those classed as ‘‘ aged and infirm” are seldom in health, and
their chargeability, it should be remembered, is, in many cases, a
sign of incapacity in their children.

This latter fact is well illustrated by the example in chart
No. 10. There the sons of paupers were called upon to contribute
to the support of their parents and they replied respectively that
they could not, one because he suffered from “disease of
nerve” and the other that he suffered from ‘“ paralysis "—
neither were paupers.

THE SICK.—The questions as to the chargeability of the sick
and the inheritance of sickness, are questions into which the writer,
being a layman, cannot enter. The method of treating the Poor
Law sick—(not always the same as other sick)—in elaborate
institutions and the abuse to which the system lends itself are not
matters with which we are here concerned, but it may be noted
in passing, that institution treatment has come to be recommended and demanded for many classes of sickness which a
generation ago would have been treated at home, and that by that
channel many first come under the Poor Law.

The charts overpage, numbered 4 to 13, are representative
cases of sickness and the chargeability arising therefrom.

The charts accompanying this paper represent the pedigrees
of pauper families, in every case personally known to the writer.
The facts therein recorded are fully verified.
SOME EXAMPLES OF POOR LAW EUGENICS 207

Generally these cases indicate a variation of disorder and
it will be noticed that Lunacy and Consumption follow each
other with startling regularity—often in the same case.

In chart No. 4 we have a typical case of chargeability arising out of sickness. Of the fifty-two individuals shown in this
chart twenty-one have been in receipt of medical relief, and
still-births and infant mortality account for an equal number.
None of the persons shown in this chart have been relieved
except on account of sickness or old age. It will be seen that
there is a union of two consumptive families, but that in the
last generation where that disorder is most prevalent neither of
the parents suffer—either from consumption or any other
complaint.

This case is one which might be studied by those who enjoy
the old controversy as to whether consumption is inherited by
direct transmission or merely by inherited predisposition. If it is
merely a question of environment why are the parents not consumptive? Important as that question undoubtedly is from
other points of view, it is a matter of minor importance to the
Eugenist. The fact that the children and the grand-children
of the consumptive develop consumption is the all-important
point and the question with which we have to deal.

In Chart No. 8 we have the remarkable case of a woman
who, whilst with her first husband, repeatedly produced defectives (chiefly deaf and dumb), and on his death remarried and
thereafter had four healthy children, of whom three are now
alive and quite normal.

Theother charts relating to sick cases, Nos. 5 to13, sufficiently
convey all that is material and all that can safely be said by a
layman—Eugenists will understand.

Chart No. 1.—It is to be understood that at the time of
writing there are eighteen persons in the W.-V. combination
chargeable to the poor rate. This number includes one deserted
woman with three children receiving out-door relief, three adults
and one child in the Infirmary, five children in Poor Law Schools,
and six adults in the workhouse.

One man Is undergoing a term of imprisonment for the desertion of his wife and children ; one is absent, having also deserted ,
208 | E. J. Lidbetter :

   
 
 

  

‘ eeeeese voce annie
M "ten yoy fwageg .

[eam

   

eee © « 0 fg’ "ee *
© Gant ¥ Bad = dnfny Som Set

      

CuHart &.

 

In reading the charts the symbols should be read as follows:—The clear
rings are non-paupers, and the dark rings are paupers; the upward arrows represent
males and those downward females, whilst the small signs are for deceased
children. B. should be read ‘'‘ Born" and D. “‘ Died.”
SOMt EXAMPLES OF POOR LAW EUGENICS 209

 

?
(ger
one Biget

Rechsls, Comsum pine Bem
m baie Leff jee »

CHaRT 6.

f ¥ av

   

Point $ suzy gs

  

483
pun 9 use aus@ A
Deepa Bab ayn goon Oi Dass Del L L ba goed ow 9
Oo on 2 Boke. get a a
Kesketemd ae Keatoly ealed
{ ook
Rraneg
te te
CHaRT 7.
210

E. J. Lidbetter :

 

Bark wm Worklass 81703
(gor Ose
(Qvo

CuHartT 8.

 

CHartT 9.
SOME EXAMPLES OF POOR LAW EUGENICS 2Ir

  
  
  

ye Oo” ke
piel
Bisse Kisnats &
Sunes (90S
a
# Oo =O aisyo ey unr?
a

du Gonsds Lunatic w

igezbeges
+ 1910

ef ae
go "
¢. eo" . ¢. ? ? . Oe

Jim 1918

ak Chikdhn. bom on Lucite wnliwel "1993-19 10

winioane

Cuart 10.

 

sm @ «On PQ

? 198%.

Cuart tf.
212 E. J. Lidbetter :

Grrecamcpilire

@ 7%.

BIC

     
 

529
$O*® Bases eS
BISEl New \ Tin?

a“ tm
wnkbs. bo.

 

x.
1902

oe” ¢
1956 B1gh | 09
Turner

A thilditn Tw Por Kau Solel

   
 

Cuart 12.
Beat o” °” Be ny 1910
Lag 905 6
Bud,
as,
suaaed Stale oO A187/5
aia © Buy o OO iu
4 oy 1905 bm ant Stoyeel Uns.
puck 5 Gnase Bencd 1908 Par eam, allt
sans bet oh

 

/ .
iy iw. 03,
14 ef ‘9 8rd

(qo3_ |
JS

Cuanrt 13.
SOME EXAMPLES OF POOR LAW EUGENICS 213

fifteen have died whilst chargeable, and the others, for the time
being, are not engaging the attention of the relieving officials.

The story commences with the three brothers, marked 2, 3
and 5 on the sheet, all of whom are in the workhouse. Their father
was a blacksmith working at his trade, in the same Metropolitan
Parish in which they are now chargeable; his wife is said to
have supplemented his earnings by taking in washing and
mangling, so that he could not have been a very prosperous
man,—it appears, however, that he was never chargeable,
although he was once in hospital as the result of an accident,
and as he lived to reach the age of 75 years and bring up seven
children, we must assume that he was a man of both energy and
independence.

Having regard to the high rate of pauperism among his
descendants, it is much to be regretted that we have no record of
his antecedents; the only record we have is that he had a
brother, G., who was certainly an inmate of the workhouse in
1862 and 1871, and for some (probably the entire) period in
between those years.

The first record of the chargeability of his sons is in June,
1882, when C. entered the workhouse. He is described as then
being destitute, and appears to have had no fixed home since the
death of his father seven years before; he has been in and out
of the workhouse ever since that date—much more in than out.
In the year 1883 he left and re-entered twenty-five times, being
out on the longest occasion only a few days; he is seldom out
for more than a few days at a time.

He states that he had rheumatic fever at 12 years of age,
which left him crippled down his left side. It is impossible to
say at this period how far his injury prevented him from maintaining himself in 1882, but it is significant that from the time
he first entered the house he has never been away for a long
period.

The elder son, No. 2, first entered the workhouse in 1906,
and in that and the following year was an inmate for two
short periods; in March, 1907, he last returned to the house
and has not since left.

It is important to note that he hasa grown son and daughter,
214 E. J. Lidbetter:

the latter a cripple (tuberculous hip) and that they with their
mother have maintained, without parochial assistance, the home
which he left to enter the workhouse. In his younger days this
man assisted his father in the smithy, but latterly he drifted—as
so much other casual labour does—to the river, and he describes
himself as a waterside labourer.

The third chargeable son is No. 3; he has been in and out of
the workhouse since 1892, he is there at the time of writing,
and has been so continuously for more than three years—the
intervals out of the house having a tendency to get shorter. His
case is different from that of his brothers in the respect that he
has been taught a trade; he was apprenticed to the trade of a
step and ladder maker, and served his master for several years
after the term of his apprenticeship.

He has not lived with his wife for over twenty years. She
appears to be a hard-working woman, earning her living as a
charwoman, and states that she left her husband because he
could not earn enough to keep them, also “ because he, his
father, and his mother, all had ulcerated legs, and she was
afraid she might catch it.” . . . They had three children,
one died in infancy, and the surviving two have been troublesome to the Poor Law officials, in the case of the boy ever since
he left the army, and in the case of the girl from the time of her
marriage until the present time.

The son, J. (marked 19 on the chart), married in 1897, having
just completed a term of seven years’ service in the Army. In
1903, whilst he was in prison, his wife and three children were in
the workhouse. for three months, during which time a fourth child
was born. In 1907 the wife and five children were again
chargeable, this time deserted by the husband. In February,
1909, she was again deserted with her five children—this time at
Bristol, and besides the cost of maintenance, the public had to
bear the cost of the whole family being sent to London; since
then the husband’s whereabouts has not been discovered, the
woman has died in a lunatic asylum, and the five children have
been and are still chargeable at the Poor Law Schools.

It should be here observed that Mrs. W. came of a pauper
family. Her father died in the workhouse of a neighbouring Union
SOME EXAMPLES OF POOR LAW EUGENICS 215

in 1906. His brother, E. L., is also an inmate of the workhouse,
and has been since 1907. This last man is a wood-turner by
trade, and in full work could earn 30s. weekly. He says that he
came to the workhouse through “slackness of work”; he was
66 years of age when he entered the workhouse and in health.
He was married in 1865, and wife died in 1890; no children.

The other child of J., E. (on the sheet marked 20), married
J. V. about 1892. J. V. came of a pauper family, as we shall see
later on, and had himself been chargeable in 1877 with his
mother and her family, and at intervals since. He is consumptive, has had five children, two died in infancy—attended by the
parish doctor—and three survive and are now chargeable with
their mother whilst he is undergoing a term of imprisonment
for deserting them.

As the marriage of these two persons is the connecting link
between the W.’s and the V.’s we must break off the story of the
W.’s at this point and go to the early record of the V.’s.

The record of the V.’s commences with M. V. and his wife
M.; they must have been born somewhere about 1790; no information is available as to the man except that he died leaving
his widow with four young children ; she was a midwife, and it
is said that she provided for her children without the aid of the
parish, but ultimately died in the workhouse herself. The
relief records for the period are not now available, but when one
remembers the practice pursued by the Guardians, in the matter
of Poor Relief, between 1830 and 1840, it is difficult to believe that
a widow with four young children would reverse the then
common state of things and manage without receiving relief—if
she did so she is entitled to our consideration, as a woman of
independence.

Of the four children referred to, the youngest, R. (marked 6
on the sheet), died in the infirmary in 1903, having been there a
few months, and his widow is now in the same institution ; she is
eighty years of age, and from the time of her husband's death
until recently she received out-door relief. They had nine
children ; five survive, but with one exception their addresses are
not known.

The second child of the original M. V., Charles, had several
216 E. J. Lidbetter :

children, but information can now be obtained with regard to
one only, (No. 15 on the chart); he married in 1882, and
his wife died in 1904, leaving him with six children. A seventh
died a few months before his wife in 1904; this man had relief
for his wife and two children in the year of her death.

Primogeniture students will note that it is through the eldest
son of M. V. that we get the larger crop of defectives. J., the
eldest son, was consumptive, as was also his next brother, C.,
above referred to. There is no record as to the position or condition of the woman he married; they, however, had three
children, two boys and a girl. The girl married and disappeared.

We will leave the first son for a moment and look at the
record of R., the second (No. 11r on the sheet). This man
married, about 1868-1870, one E. and they had five children.
Two of these died in infancy. All the family was chargeable from
about 1873 until 1876, when he died ina London Lunatic Asylum.

His second son was J. (No. 22 on the sheet) referred to
before as, by marriage, the link between these families. His
eldest, R. a consumptive, was chargeable at intervals from about
1877 until his death in the Infirmary in 1899; he was never
married.

The other surviving child was a girl, E. (No. 23 on the
sheet). Herself consumptive, she married a consumptive, and
of their five children, one died in infancy and three are known to
be tuberculous. Between 1903 and 1907 all this family was
maintained on the rates from time to time and the woman is at
this date an inmate of the Infirmary.

Nos. 31 and 32 relate to the parents of the man last referred
to (No. 33) both of whom died in the Parish Infirmary.

The widow of No. 10, re-married four years after his
death, her husband being J. D. She had been chargeable more
or less since her first marriage, and her second marriage did
not improve her in this respect ; she continued in the workhouse
at intervals until 1904 and then finally entered the house with
her second husband and there they remain.

They had two children but both died a few weeks old.

No. 8 is the sister of J. D., who died in the Infirmary in the
present year.
SOME EXAMPLES OF POOR LAW EUGENICS 217

We can now go back to J. (No. 12). He married E. W.
about 1862, and in 1867 they with two children were receiving
relief. They had ten children; four died in infancy, three, as
adults, have been inmates of the Infirmary, one has been
chargeable in respect of relief to his wife, and two had been
chargeable with their parents as infants,—one of these latter
was also chargeable through his wife in 1908.

Nos. 29 and 30 relate to the parents of the last named man’s
wife, who were both inmates of the workhouse for several years
before their death in 1go9.

At the tail end of the story comes a most striking addition.
No. 53, the child of one of the last family, was admitted
to the Infirmary as an imbecile. Its paternal grandfather’s
brother (No. 11) was a lunatic, but further enquiry was made.
The mother was questioned and stated that her father was an
insane epileptic, her mother consumptive, and her maternal
grandmother probably consumptive and certainly a pauper.
She herself was illegitimate and had fits.

G. W. (on the chart marked 4, previously said to be dead)
has now been discovered to be an inmate of a neighbouring workhouse, where he has been since June, 1887. He states that he
became an inmate, on account of ulcerated legs, and then
decided to remain. He does not know where his wife is and
he has no children.

If a line were drawn down the centre of this chart it would
be found that we have the able-bodied pauper represented on the
left ‘“‘ W.” side, and chargeability through sickness on the right,
“V.”’ side.

It seems inevitable that the W.’s at some time must find a
resting place somewhere, and so we find that one by one, independently, and without association, the four brothers marked
2, 3, 4 and 5, found their way to chargeability; note also that the
channel through which they all came was the Infirmary and in
every case with ‘“‘ulcerated legs.”” Each, when the time came
that Infirmary treatment was no longer necessary, preferred to be
transferred to the workhouse—and there remained. Three had
wives to whom they preferred not to return, and of the two sons
they collectively produced, the only married one abandoned his
218 E, J. Lidbetter :

wife, whereby she and their five children became chargeable to
the Poor Rate. His present whereabouts is unknown, his
children are all in the Poor Law Schools, and since he went
away his wife has died in an asylum.

a .

meat ye
© bmn roy
hed
7H arsowes
se
CuarT 3.

       
 

é
02

7

@es5
=
; =
Lad
MEG T
@~ S
3S
e
= e
x Osh
ww 2 ~ = =

al

CHILDREN.—The chargeability of children cannot be considered from our standpoint apart from the parents except as
regards the very important question as to how many Poor Law
SOME EXAMPLES OF POOR LAW EUGENICS 219

children (i.e., children maintained in Poor Law Schools for
considerable periods) return to Poor Law in after life.

Without a special enquiry it would be difficult to arrive at
any reliable conclusion on this important point,—the writer’s
opinion, based upon general observation merely, is that the proportion of children so returning is small, having regard to the
number passing through the schools. The special enquiry suggested would, to be of any value to Eugenists, necessarily embrace
many very important points, viz., as to the period of stay in
the school (were they merely “ins and outs ”’ ?), their condition,
mental and physical on discharge, what calling were they trained
for, the original cause of chargeability, were they of pauper
stock, biological influences, and finally to what extent they
return to the influence of degenerate relatives.

Reserving that question, therefore, for future examination,
we may consider children at this stage with their parents,
remembering always that a very important consideration with
regard to these children is the difficulty of the ‘‘ ins and outs.”’

There is no more certain road to pauperism than the relief
of children through or with their parents, and no child having
accompanied its parents to the workhouse can afterwards be
expected to regard that institution as it 1s properly regarded by
the children of independent parents. If, moreover, as frequently
happens, the growing child developes signs of the disorder which
caused its parents’ chargeability, that comes to be regarded asa
further reason for seeking relief.

THe ABLE-BopIED.—There is no more misleading or persistent error than that which regards the “‘ able-bodied’ pauper
as, on the one hand, the healthy, virtuous and efficient unemployed workman, or, on the other hand, as the capable but
scheming “ work shy” ne’er-do-well. Both these points of view
are very far from the truth. None of the former are to be found
personally chargeable, and of the latter there are very few—the
number is greatly exaggerated.

Much that has been written and said recently has given the
impression that there is a large body of “‘ able-bodied ” pauperism
in the country. That impression may be true of certain districts
—such districts being generally coincident with those areas in
220 E. J. Lidbetter :

which the Poor Law administration is favourable, or unfavourable
according to the point of view. |

However that may be, the fact is that ‘‘ able-bodied”
pauperism—that is to say, the chargeability of persons physically
and mentally able to perform satisfactorily the day’s work of a
normal healthy man or woman—is so scarce (statistics notwithstanding) as to be practically negligible in quantity.

From the published statistics of the Local Government
Board it would appear that between the year 1872 and 1go9 the
number of “ordinarily able-bodied adult paupers’’ fluctuated
between 122,152 persons in 1872 and 82,343 in 18g0—the last
figures, for 1909, being 118,389g—representing in the worst year,
1892, 5°3 per thousand of population.

It also appears that of the “ordinarily able-bodied adult”
pauper those ‘‘in health” represent only about 30 per cent. of
the total of that class chargeable.

The following extracts from official reports on this point are

of interest :

1. ‘Of the adult indoor paupers (excluding vagrants and insane) on
the 1st July, rg01, less than 9% were described as healthy able-bodied
persons, and of those relieved on 1st January, 1902, less than 10% were so
described.” (Report of L.G.B., 1901-1902.)

2. ‘Of the total adult male pauperism of England and Wales (excluding casual paupers), the able-bodied classed as ‘in health’ represent
only 67%.” (Half-yearly statement—Pauperism, England and Wales, July,

1909.)

When due allowance is made for the able-bodied parents of
chargeable children and for the able-bodied paupers “‘ temporarily
sick” it will be found that the balance of able-bodied chargeability consists of persons ‘‘ able-bedied ” only in the sense that
they are below a certain age' and do not, for the time being,
require the attention of the Medical Officer.

The point with regard to parents with children is important
when it is remembered that a parent is chargeable if his or her
child is chargeable,—thus the statistics include persons not in
themselves chargeable. Again, a deserted woman has no remedy

1 The age at which a pauper is classed as ‘‘ not able-bodied ’’ varies in almost
every Union ; generally discretion is exercised by the Master of the Workhouse ;
and most Masters have their own standard. Asarule a person is not entered as
able-bodied if he or she claims to be 65 years of age or over.
SOME EXAMPLES OF POOR LAW EUGENICS 221

“*

against her husband unless and until she becomes chargeable to
the poor rate—she is helpless until she actually receives relief,
mere desertion being no offence in the eyes of the law. Here
again is a fruitful source of able-bodied Pauperism. Students of
the Poor Law, and others, receive and consider statistics of
pauperism in which these women, and other persons driven by
our legal system into the workhouse, are included—quite
properly—as able-bodied adult paupers, yet it must be recognised
that in this and other special circumstances a large number of
able-bodied persons become chargeable and swell the statistics
for purposes not contemplated when the form of return was
settled, and not properly considered by those who study the
returns ; moreover they cannot be regarded as the idle, scheming
‘‘work-shy’’ person usually in mind when “the able-bodied
pauper ” is publicly referred to.

Before leaving this subject of the able-bodied statistics there
is another problem of which mention might be made, namely,
the position of the able-bodied labouring man who is left, by
death or otherwise, with a number of children without their
mother. Among the working people the maintenance of the
home depends upon the mutual service and capacity of both
parents. The husband is generally referred to as the “ bread
winner,’’ but the fact is that the wife is an indispensable necessity in the workman’s home, and when she dies, or goes away,
the position of many men is hopeless. It is not uncommon for
a man so left to apply to be relieved of his children, or even to
bring them into the House.

Such men are classed, as in fact they are, as able-bodied,
and as such are considered in the returns without reference to
the children, the inference being that such a man is unable to
maintain himself, whereas in fact he is generally able to maintain himself and perhaps his children, but he cannot be out at
work and look after his children at the same time.

No fertile imagination is needed to see the many consequences that ensue from this position. Such cases frequently
arise, and when they do it is often found that physically or
mentally, by training and example, the men are unfitted to
bear their responsibility.
222 __E, J. Lidbetter :

If all these considerations are borne in mind when the
‘* able-bodied ”’ are under review, it will be realised that in that
class, no less than in the other classes, society has to deal with a
chronic defect in the character and training of the working
people, as well as in the circumstances in which they live. The
solution of that problem will inevitably raise the old question of
environment versus heredity, for it is very difficult to say that
character can be improved in their present environment, or what
improvement in that environment is likely to survive without an
improvement in character.

It was formerly regarded as the proper thing, among working men, to put their growing boys to a trade, and the girls, if
not also taught a trade, were at least taught to do something
useful, or sent into domestic service.

That system no longer prevails to any extent. Its failure is
due to a variety of causes, among which may be named the
incapacity or disinclination of the parent either to pay a
premium or, in the alternative, to support the growing boy or
girl during the period in which the employer expects service in
return for instruction. The breakdown of that system naturally
bears its own results. Boys drift into unskilled occupations and
girls have to marry to be decently maintained. The labour
market has become over-burdened with general unskilled
labour.

The economic:situation here produced is of a most disastrous
character; it means that the labour of both men and women,
fitted by intelligence, temperament and capacity—by all, in short,
except training,—is being used for the kind of labour which could
and should be left to those who are received into and maintained
in the workhouse to-day and are generally classed as able-bodied.

Workmen’s Compensation legislation and its consequence
to the employer has produced employers keenly observant of the
mental and physical capacity and defect of the applicant for
employment, and, unfortunately, for the failing fitness of the
employee of years’ standing. The result of these conditions has
been to produce a large body of unemployed labour, unemployed
because, in the main, it consists of persons physically and
mentally unfit either to secure employment or to continue
SOME EXAMPLES OF POOR LAW EUGENICS 223

employment when found. Automatically the standard of employable labour has risen, with the larger supply of labour and
more exacting conditions,—not the least important of which
conditions is the demand for mental alertness.

The question here suggested is: What degree of mental
alertness is necessary to make a safe employee having regard
to the risk to the worker himself and others? The employer
must himself answer that question. And he does so ina very
practical way—by the process of rejection and elimination.

The person so rejected becomes the casual worker. He or
she has no trade to follow and they must be satisfied with such
occasional employment as they can get. Low conditions of
living serve to accentuate their weakness and as the physical
condition becomes reduced so does the mental.

Now it is not suggested that all casual labourers or all
unemployed persons are mentally defective,—as that term is
usually understood. What is suggested is that, on the whole,
the casual worker or unemployed person is of a lower mental type
than those in regular employment and that those classes include
many persons (many more than is generally admitted) whose
mental condition is so weak as not merely to make them unemployable, but also to prevent their supporting themselves except
by the aid of the rates.

The danger arising from this condition of affairs is the more
serious in that it is not recognised. The mental weakness is
not that condition which we call lunacy, it is much more subtle
than that, it is rational without being intelligent. It is a failure
to grasp the essential facts of life; and torise to thestimuli which
the normal person should rise to. There is a shrinkage from
recognised responsibility, the inability to appreciate an opportunity or to take advantage of one, and above all there is
lack of a right perception, leading to unwise marriages, misdirected effort, and a failure to foresee and arrange for even
ordinary domestic necessity. The charge of being improvident,
often brought against this class, is a true charge, but it is so
because of the people’s incapacity to be otherwise.

Included in this class are the feeble-minded. Persons recognised as being mentally deficient but not dangerous to themselves
224 I. J. Lidbetter :

or others. The extent to which pauperism is increased by this class
is difficult to estimate, but the charts here produced may serve to
show that the imbecile parent is somewhat prolific and that if
the children die young they also die chargeable—and that when
they survive, their existence is marked by a continuous demand
upon the poor rate.

The able-bodied are represented in Chart No. 1, on the left
‘““W”’ side, and in Nos. 2 and 3.

Chart No. 2 (on the next page) relates to the case of two
families comprising sixty-one individuals, of whom no less than
forty-one are or have been in receipt of Poor Lawrelief. The total
includes eight persons who have died in Workhouse or Infirmary,
and two who have died in Asylums for lunatics; of the twentyfour children relieved fifteen were brought upin Pauper Schools
(seven are still there) and nine on out-door relief.

This case came to light when the woman marked 4 on the
chart entered the workhouse with her children. She stated that
she had lived for twelve years with the man marked 3, and that
he was the father of her children—a statement which he does
not deny—and that having abandoned her a year ago he was
about to marry a woman, marked 2 on the chart, who already
had children in the Poor Law Schools. Whilst denying this
story the parties were actually married. In these circumstances
the chargeable children were sent home and a few days after the
man was sent to prison for failing to pay for the maintenance of
the illegitimate children.

On further enquiry it was found that the woman in the
workhouse (No. 4 on the chart) was the daughter of a man in the
same workhouse, who had been chargeable since 1893 and who
had had six children, three of whom were chargeable, two had
died in Poor Law Institutions, and one in a lunatic asylum.
Of the survivors one is the widow of a man who died 1n the
Infirmary, marked 5 on the chart, with one child an imbecile
and the other defective. She receives outdoor relief. Another
daughter, marked 7 on the chart, married in 1879; when she had
seven children her husband deserted her and has not since been
heard of. This man was one of a family of six, three of whom
have been chargeable for long periods and whose father was an
225

SOME EXAMPLES OF POOR LAW EUGENICS

           

         

     

    

‘G LUVHD
i Hepes wie or | o——— seal 2 ——> |  g .
. lise phys Shed bys lan * gemeg ali ly, the beer laze a a weep wre Treg pebt cobs pdae tha. yi? dy, 1
es op 6 6 fe bs 6 6,76 Tet, bp bb bbee ie

    

          

     

     

  
 
   

CO Pre rergy id
TP gait rssig

§ @., #90 Aue / yon
| 6 pa

 

ae a 8 ame ame

okt! Oo
ye) cue
226 : E. J. Lidbetter :

inmate of the workhouse for some years, and whose mother died
in the Infirmary.

Of the three chargeable in this family one, marked g on
the chart, was in the workhouse from 1893 till 1895, when she
was sent to an Asylum as a lunatic, and there died in 1902.
Meantime her husband had been living with another woman
(who disappeared), and when he died in 1903 the parish was
saddled with his two illegitimate children by the woman, who
are now in the Schools.

A rough estimate of the cost of relief and maintenance in
this case follows, from which it will be seen that the several
persons whose record is here set out have been chargeable for a

STATEMENT SHOWING THE ESTIMATED PERIOD AND COST
OF RELIEF IN CHART No. 2.

 

Cost or Cost
PERIOD OutT-DOOR oF INDOOR TOTAL
CHARGEABLE RELIEF MAINTENANCE

NO.| vos. |arens.| Dys. | £ d £is
4 | 37 5 219 | 7

7 9 306 | 10

Oo 7 | 14

oO 32 | 8

° Ir} 0

23 23} 8

7h) 414 / 5

Oo 2] 0

Ir || 1,013 | 19
6 11g | oO

ToTALs 2 \f 68 2k £2,229] 13

 

 

1 Includes cost of burial. 2 Includes cost of emigrating one child.
SOME EXAMPLES OF POOR LAW EUGENICS 227

collective period of ninety-one years and have cost £2,229. In
addition to that sum there are four persons, marked on the chart,
whose chargeability exceeded ten years but as to whom no
definite record is available.

Here we have a typical case of the able-bodied pauper in
health. In all this family there is no bodily sickness. On the
left it will be seen that the progenitors attained the age of 68
and 76 years respectively, and their son, the primary pauper, on
the chart marked 1, died (since these notes were prepared) at the
age of 84 years from ‘“‘senile decay.”

Moreover, if further evidence is required as to the general
healthiness of the stock it is to be found in the fact that the
family is free from infant mortality—if we except the case of the
unmarried mother, who would have no reason to preserve her
children and some reason to be rid of them.

The question arises, therefore: How comes such heavy
chargeability in healthy stock? To the Eugenist the answer is
obvious,—it is a case of “reversed selection.” The defect is
mental and not physical. There are two lunatics and an imbecile
in the record, and in all the persons interviewed in the enquiry
the only person of really clear intelligence is the father of the
illegitimate family (on the chart marked 3)—and this is probably
why he never married the mother. The other adults are slow,
dull and addicted to drink, and—what really accounts for most of
their difficulties—have no idea of morality in the ordinary sense
ef that term. The record here being a record of fact, much that
came out in the enquiry is not disclosed—because it is not
provable. It is difficult to determine exactly the full influence
of this immoral tendency on the pauperism in the family, but it
is clear that one woman and five children became chargeable
through no other cause, and there is evidence that the man
marked 7 on the chart had a good, if not sufficient, reason for
leaving his wife, whereby she and their children became
chargeable.

In conclusion, the writer desires to say that the utmost
intended in this paper is to show that there is evidence that a
high proportion of chargeability is due to inherited defect, to
insist that there is a matter for enquiry and consideration, and
228 E. J. Lidbetter:

to indicate by example and suggestion the lines upon which that
enquiry should be directed.

The break up of the Poor Law and the prevention of
destitution will be possible when the causes of pauperism have
been removed. Those causes will be found in the mental and
physical condition of the pauper, and in the character which
those conditions induce, no less than in economic conditions.

To aim at economic change, without seeking to change the
quality of the human element, is to waste good energy to no
purpose.

Finally, to seek to amend matters by administrative upheaval and the abandonment of a tried system which has not
failed, is a leap in the dark. Administration and administrative
machinery are very important, but the kernel of the matter is
the subject which has to be treated—the pauper.
~ =: 1 ~ § mo" V.
.@ f itd. Q ft.

(
4
A (804, ” p> 187
, 0° (874
ta Horkhauet | gbo Peed

     
  
    
  
 
  

    

   

       

   
    
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  

4 gfe 8S rc "6 , Ho? tO
fo .. ise! ne Coad ° ee g 7 i - c Li
Workkons pysqge eS Wharf
Sree 1890

D

£6 '§ y 10, i! 2
? 4. %e = .
Oe sy aitez g Or. WE ? O g  kildumn 7 fog |
1qto Sines age Runate ‘ tora, econ | a 13
P 01999

     

Foufur ac’ R id Oo” aor
Selon POY 1992 4 (8920 689) 999 2,

1879-1899

      
     

7
Give ; @ | ™
a iS 29
om ¢ Wi + forty
a ) BIG SL
tt, Igor Wekebeve
an 1896 1964
bled
35 36 3” 38 39 40
ow c i) o ° [
disbu Gus 1 0 18 OR @,, Dh. "961
Digol |
i ©
til
ce oe
on @ 1899 e' a0 Bxb. ? me .
1q00. (Go (Gos 597 1898 Ing (go3 19 02
49 20 51 a2 °
oo @& ° on a er ¢
164. reqs. 99s #47 nger Q ¢ oege  Mfen agen oi. Gt " © 90
: Jubeecks
