HAN SUYIN
(Dr. Elizabeth Comber)

Birth Control in China—
Recent Aspects

October-November 1959 was the time of my

fourth trip there; I spent some of this time
in the communes and the factories, inquiring
about developments in the status of women,
their work, and the social safeguards instituted
for pregnancy, maternity and child welfare.
Family planning, or as it is called in China,
limitation of conception, was every time one of
the subjects discussed.

The question of birth control did not arise in
China until 1956, when it was broached for the
first time at the National Assembly in May of
that year (see my previous article).* Until then
the Chinese government had been too preoccupied putting things in order in the huge
territories after half a century of civil and
external wars. A census of the total population
was taken, not only of the Chinese or “Han”
nationality, but of the various national minorities, such as Mongols, Uighurs, Tibetans, inhabiting remote areas of the Chinese territory and
comprising altogether about thirty-five million
people. The figure of six hundred million (reported now to be nearer six hundred and ninety
million) now came to light. But it was not this
enormous figure which prompted some members
of the government to mention publicly birth
control, its advantages and its methods; it was
the fact that birth control, or family planning,
was considered in line with modern, scientific
ideas; that therefore, like all scientific, modern
gadgets which render life more efficient, it
seemed to certain sections of the Chinese population (chiefly in the cities) a useful way of planning the future communist society of China.

1956 was also the time of the Hundred Flowers

| HAVE VISITED China every year since 1956.

* THE EUGENICS REviEW, 1957, 49, 81.

19

Policy, when many suggestions and ideas were
being aired, and birth control was one of them.
For a time it even looked as if birth control
would become government and state policy.
There was no religious barrier to be invoked
against it, as in other Asian countries. It was
“scientific”, and to the Chinese intellectual,
logical, a religious and certainly the most
pragmatic people in Asia, it did not feel wrong,
immoral or in any way opposed to nature. It
appealed to the strong sense, among the intellectual set, of a blueprint society which can be
planned down to the last detail.

Official Approval in 1956

Birth control was granted official approval in
1956, though it never became what is called in
China “a campaign”. By “‘a campaign” on a
subject is meant a colossal, nation-wide, unremitting emphasis by all means at the State’s
disposal: pamphlets, posters, loudspeakers,
radio, television, films, processions, marches,
lectures in schools, universities, workers’ factories, villages, and all newspapers, to press a
point of policy home to the total population,
until it is impossible, even in the smallest village,
to find one person who has not heard of the
subject. This was not done in the case of birth
control, but an “education movement” was
undertaken, which means that in big cities, and
even in small ones, large window spaces with
exhibits, in the most accurate detail, of the
human anatomy and the processes for prevention of fertilization, blossomed in the main
streets; late marriages (late for Asia, that is,
above the age of twenty rather than under
twenty) were extolled in the newspapers, in all
high schools and universities, where sex biology
is taught in a scientific, matter of fact way.

EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1960, 52, 1.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Contraceptives were made freely available to
married persons only (free love is regarded as
license); they began to be manufactured in large
quantities in China (chiefly rubber sheaths) in
1957, and one hundred and twenty million of
these were sold in one year.

In 1957 exhibitions for birth control practices,
with no details spared, toured the country; in
the cities married people queued up to receive
free contraceptives. An aunt of mine was enrolled in her street committee to go from house
to house in her street suggesting contraception,
or sterilization (which is legal, both male and
female) to those women who had too many
children: this was not judged by number, though
five was vaguely mentioned, so much as by
economic status and health of the mother;
finally, through the health clinics in the cooperatives, birth control was taken to the peasants on the farms in the form of pamphlets,
contraceptives and advice from nurses and
doctors.

A Change of Policy

Round about early 1958, however, a change
occurred. The change was based on two things:
(1) Psychological factors. (2) Practical assessment of total and nation-wide needs.

To begin with psychological factors: There
are, in China, over five hundred million peasants, only a hundred and ninety million or so
city and factory workers. For the peasant the
struggle for existence for the past century has
been a constant, recurring nightmare of floods,
drought, famine and war. To him security,
wealth, automatically means food and children,
because children would look after parents in
their old age. When, therefore, birth control
began to be talked about, it produced a kind of
silent panic among the hard-headed, conservative peasants, still haunted by memories of
starvation. Surely, they reasoned, this was proof
that the future was insecure, that a famine was
impending, since the government asked them to
have fewer children! That meant the government
was frightened there would not be enough food to
go round. Panic of this kind in China is enough
to paralyze the countryside, to set off extraordinary reactions and to sap the foundations of
the order which the Chinese government was

20

trying to achieve. “It was too early,” said one
official to me, ‘“‘they could not understand it”.

This obsession about food cannot be understood any longer in the west, which has lost the
atavistic memory of starvation. But in China
hunger is far too near the bone: it is only in the
very recent seven or eight years that nobody has
died of hunger in China. In some regions there
are still many shortages, because the land is
poor and it takes a long time to make it productive.

Now famines as such have disappeared, as
have epidemics; the organization of the communes, where the basic needs (grain, medicine,
education and housing) are freely supplied to all
members, is slowly withering this haunting fear
of hunger, though shortages occur and rationing,
similar to that in England during the war years,
is applied to the whole country.

The second aspect of the question is this:
During these ten years the Chinese have had to
pull themselves out of poverty and want by
their own bootstraps (except that they had no
boots). All that is done elsewhere by mechanized power: digging canals, building dams,
hydro-electric works, even, as is being done,
removing mountains to cut a canal across one
thousand kilometres of arid land to irrigate four
million new acres: all these things are done
nearly entirely by manual labour, by millions
of people working together, human hands and
bodies removing, basket by basket, hundreds of
thousands of tons of earth, or acting like conveyor belts, or pumping with their feet by means
of primitive water wheels water out of flooded
fields, or strengthening dams along a stretch of
eight hundred miles of river (this needed in 1954
twenty million people, and twenty million were
organized to do it and thus prevented a calamitous flood and saved the city of Wuhan from
being flooded).

China’s Wealth is Her Manpower

“Man is capital, capital is man,” is the way
China looks at the only wealth she has—manpower. Capital accumulation of wealth, in the
way of building permanent assets such as wells,
waterways, houses, factories, roads, forests
(afforestation is proceeding at an incredible
pace), heavy industrial projects, depends on the
BIRTH CONTROL IN CHINA-—RECENT ASPECTS

labour of man’s hands since machinery is not
available. In this kind of thinking, it is labourpotential, rather than financial aid, which conditions the doing or non-doing of a project. In
other words, instead of first acquiring monetary
aid with which to buy the machinery to undertake the necessary construction, China depends
on direct help in the tangible shape of some
machinery for heavy industry from Soviet Russia,
technical experts also mainly from Russia, and
her own human labour. Thus, for instance, very
early on, tractors for agriculture were spoken
of; but a tractor is still a rarity in Chinese fields
to-day, though at last it is making its appearance, here and there. The reason is that it is
hopeless (as other Asian countries have found
to their cost) to introduce machinery among a
conservative peasantry totally ignorant of how
to run, manoeuvre or repair tractors; in six
months nothing works, and the money and the
machinery is a complete waste. It is only now in
China, with the communes, that the accumulated capital owing to collective effort is sufficient to establish community centres and to lay
down the basic education for the necessary
technical knowledge to maintain and run
machinery.

' But the process of basic technical and scientific education of the peasant is long. Meanwhile
the urgency of remodelling the land to make it
more productive, the plans laid down for this
total effort to attain a high industrial and
agricultural production are ambitious—and for
any other country but China would be deemed
impossible. But in China the acceleration of
change, and the immediate benefits derived
thereby, have caught the imagination of the
whole population to an extent I have never seen
before. As a result so many things are being
done together, at the same time, that there is
shortage of manpower in all fields of activity: it
is impossible to get servants; waiters in hotels
prefer to go into factories; at railway stations
there is no one to carry luggage, only a very
occasional woman, pushing a_ tyre-wheeled
luggage cart, much as in America or in England
during the war.

In the communes there has been an increase
in labour available by the release of women from
housework. This in some quarters of the world

has been interpreted as the “‘break-up of the
family” and as “destroying the sanctity of the
home’”’. I am afraid these are figments of indignation rather than facts. Women in China, just
as everywhere else, are divided into the homebodies and those who would rather do a job
and assert their own personalities. Most of those
I saw in the communes (and I saw hundreds)
were the active type who prefer to be paid for
their work rather than to remain unpaid, shut
up at home, coping with three meals a day and
the children. The community canteens provide
meals for those who want them, just as factories
do in England; most peasants eat one or two
meals a day at the canteen in time of ploughing;
in time of harvest, when the work becomes
strenuous and all the women turn out to help,
all meals are eaten at the canteen, or brought
out by the canteen staff to the fields so the
peasants don’t have to walk back and forth. On
rainy days, holidays, and when winter settles in
and there are only household tasks, they eat at
home.

There is, therefore, no incentive to limit
families as a necessity; but there remains the
incentive to limit the family as a convenience.

This is where it is not correct to speak of
China as having reversed its policy of birth
control. Nor is it correct to say that China
wishes to stimulate a large population for
aggressive purposes. What can be said is that
the government is suspending judgement. With
a higher standard of living, and since a large
family is an inconvenience, the majority of
China’s people may demand family planning as
a convenience, but at present this is still a
minority.

Birth Control and Female Labour

Birth control is available and is produced without demur in the clinics and hospitals attached
to the factories. I personally saw a legal abortion
being performed in a hospital. It was “on
demand”; the mother already had six children,
and wished no more. If both father and mother
wish it, abortion is performed, although it is
not encouraged. The demand for contraceptives
continues in the cities and factories, but there is
little of it in the communes; although now, with
a rising standard of living, with women going

2I
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

out to work and in tact demanding to work
outside the home because they can get equal pay
with the men for it and thus increase the financial
potential of the home, the communes are finding
that many peasant women “do not wish to
become pregnant every year, they say it is
troublesome”’.

Each commune has two heads, one of
them always a woman. This is done so that the
women of the commune can bring their problems to her without having to talk to the man
about it; there is still a lot of ‘‘bashfulness”
among Chinese women in the villages of China
to-day. I spoke to several female commune
heads. They talked to me of the problems of
work for women: ‘*The women want to work, of
course. What peasant woman ever did not
work ?” In the old days they did not get paid for
it, now they do. They like the nurseries, and the
canteens relieve them of a considerable amount
of drudgery. Each woman is entitled to take
two or three days off during her menstrual
periods, and has six weeks off for each pregnancy; she gets her basic needs, and free
maternity care in the hospital; but she does not
get her full financial income for time off, only
half-pay; she gets time off every day to feed the
baby (breast feeding is still the rule). But even so
many women are beginning to tell their husbands that they feel four or five children is
enough. They don’t want any more. And, unlike
France, there are no financial benefits to
stimulate more children.

The Future

With the advent of mechanization in agriculture
and the completion of big projects, the demand
for manpower may become less; with a rising
standard of living, a big family will become a
handicap. Since a man’s and his wife’s earnings
are determined by the amount of work they do,
repeated pregnancies become a handicap to

22

their combined earning power and therefore to
the well-being of the family. Since there is no
income-tax in China, there are no means whereby
a large family can “‘cash in” directly or indirectly
on their children. |

The Chinese government seems to believe that
adjustment will come of itself: with a higher
standard of education, with the removal of the
fear of hunger, with adaptation to modern
community life, with the demand of women to
become independent wage earners, and, finally,
with the removal of the emotional tie-up between
many children and security for old age. “The
government looks after us, we don’t need children
to look after us when we become old,” is what
the peasants are beginning to say.

All this, I am afraid, sounds rather naive and
down-to-earth. It happens to be real. China is a
land of peasants.

It is, therefore, wrong to say that there has
been a reversal; but it is correct to say that at
the moment China is not bothered by unemployment, or by too little food for too many
people, and suffers from manpower shortage;
its government feels that it can feed, house,
accommodate and raise the standard of living of
many more millions in its enormous, unpeopled
hinterland. Birth control is therefore not being
pushed. At the moment the Chinese say it is a
‘negative’ way of coping with social and
economic ills. This is the situation in 1959, and
the future will bear watching. There are no such
things as inflexible policies in China, at any time.

At the moment of writing, there are still voices
in China raised for birth control as government
policy, notably that of Professor Y. C. Ma of
Peking University. Although he has been
criticized, yet he goes on pushing his point of
view, and gets his “‘opposition views” published
in government newspapers, a most encouraging
sign of democracy. It may mean rethinking of
the problem, depending how soon mechanization, replacing human labour, comes to China.
