PROGRAMME OF EUGENIC REFORM.

Masor LEONARD Darwin.

At the meeting of the International Commission of Eugenics at
Lund, Dr. Alfred Mjoen of Christiania, mentioned the Programme
that had been worked out at the Winderen Laboratory in 1908, and
asked for comments thereon from all present. In response to this
appeal, Major Darwin sent to him the following remarks, making it
clear that they represented his personal opinion and not an authorized
pronouncement on the part of the Society.

Negative Eugenics. Segregation should be the normal treatment
for the feeble in mind; and also for habitual criminals, hopeless
drunkards, and wastrels, provided that in their case it be remembered
that periods of liberty form the only reliable test of the effects of curative or reformatory treatment, and consequently that it is only after
several lapses when at.liberty that permanent segregation should be
adopted. After two or three convictions, imprisonment ceases to have
any deterrent effect, and then all idea of making detention more
unpleasant than it need be to the criminal should be abandoned.

Sterilization should be adopted as an alternative to segregation
when accepted voluntarily by the individual in question, or by his
relatives, and when liberty can advisedly be permitted with this precaution but not without it. |The amount of pressure which the State
may thus justifiably and wisely bring to bear on the individual to
induce him to accept sterilization should depend largely on the state
of public opinion, and would, it may be hoped, become more and more
effective as time went on.

Positive Eugenics. Family limitation. The most important
need now is to make it widely known that where families are limited
to one or two children, the stock in question must inevitably become
extinct, and also to make it widely felt that it is immoral unduly
to limit the size of the family when no special reason for such limitation exists. Parents should be reasonably certain that they can
maintain all the offspring they produce at the same standard of civilisa
tion as themselves, but not necessarily at the same social level.

Education. Natural science should be given an important place
in the curricula of all schools. Eugenic research should be undertaken
at Universities, this being an effective way of stimulating an interest
in practical methods of promoting racial progress.

Finance. No system of either motherhood endowment or mutual
family insurance has yet been elaborated which would be free from
racial disadvantage, and further research is much needed. The amount
received per child by an insured person should vary with the amount
he pays; for if all contributed the same proportion of their wages to
family insurance schemes, whilst all received the same amount per
596 EUGENICS REVIEW.

child, the naturally efficient would be unduly taxed for the benefit of
the naturally inefficient. Income Tax should be materially reduced
when there is a family, but excessively large families should not be
encouraged.

Racial Poisons. I am not yet convinced that either alcohol or
syphilis permanently injures a race. Intemperance is often the result
of a constitutional defect ; but on no account should those who share my
doubts as to the ultimate effects of these so-called racial poisons be in
the least deterred thereby from taking part in the fight against drunkenness or venereal disease.

Voluntary health declarations before marriage by the parties concerned would be of some value; whilst great benefits might accrue from
a registration system which enabled serious ancestral defects to be
readily ascertained.

Miscegenation. When crossings take place between two races
which have not intermingled freely in the past, it seems probable that
inferior types would be produced; for in these circumstances natural
selection would not have been acting in the past in such a manner as to
prevent interbreeding from producing harmful results. Further
study in regard to race mixtures is much needed.
