VETERINARY EBUGENICS*
By PROFESSOR W. G. MILLER, MR.c.vV‘S., F.RS.E.

HERE may be some who require

enlightenment upon what exactly are

the conceptions embodied in these two
words, veterinary eugenics. To explain all
that could be included within such a title
would be far beyond the scope of this paper.
I may be permitted to point out that if we
define eugenics in the widest sense, namely as
“a study of the influences which improve the
inborn qualities of a race, and especially the
development of those qualities to the highest
degree ’’—which is the Encyclopedia Britannica definition, and if we restrict the word
“veterinary ’’ to its modern meaningf
—namely, “ pertaining to animal health and
disease,’ we are faced with a structure
possessing such a multitude of differing
facets, comprising the whole of livestock
improvement, that we must choose only
some one or two to examine in detail.

The Historical Background

The control by man of animal breeding,
which has without doubt achieved its
maximum results in Great Britain, has not
been effected by conscious scientific progress.
For some 150 years or more, breeders of
livestock in this country have had no definite
settled policy, no clearly envisaged goal at
which they could aim, apart, of course, from
the production of the animal which would sell
for most money. If I may expand this idea
in some detail for one specific breed it will
serve to illustrate the circumstances which
have, more or less, applied to various other
breeds and to a very large extent to the
British livestock industry as a whole.

Perhaps the most famous breed of cattle
produced in these islands is the Shorthorn—

* A lecture delivered before the Eugenics Soctety on
June 15th, 1937.

The old meaning of “ veterinarii’’ is those who
looked after the beasts of burden. This might restrict
the word to horses ; although a cow giving 3,000 gallons
of milk, i.e. 134 tons, is also possibly a “ beast of
burden ”’!

a breed which now can be readily divided into
at least three distinct categories: the beef
type; the dairy type; and the so-called
commercial type which can be utilized for
dual-purposes, i.e. for either beef or milk
production. Before about 1790 the Shorthorn did not exist as a pure breed. A few
men of great individualism, courage and
foresight, whose names to-day are historic
in agricultural circles—Bates, the Collings
brothers, Booth, Amos Cruikshanks—at different times during the later eighteenth and
the nineteenth centuries began selective controlled breeding. Some followed the principles laid down by Bakewell—the doyen of
all livestock breeders; others followed their
own ideas and ideals. The hitherto very
heterogeneous, even mongrel breed, was in
their hands moulded and shaped until slowly
a certain degree of uniformity of type began
to emerge. What had hitherto been a collection of animals liable at any moment to produce creatures possessing no characteristics
or perhaps possessing almost every bovine
characteristic, by dint of inbreeding, constant
selection and elimination of undesirables
from further breeding, began to take shape as
a breed possessing some uniformity. The
mob plasticity of the original stock slowly
became less, and a more concrete fixed type
grew in its place.

The pioneers were followed nearer to our
own times by men no less able or successful
—especially and most pre-eminently William
Duthie of Collynie who died only a few years
ago, to whom has been given the ungrudging
title of the ‘‘ Shorthorn King,” the man who
practically founded the modern Scottish beef
Shorthorn, the supreme individuals of which
still command prices running up to thousands
of pounds per head. The work of these men
and numerous others is being pursued and
continued to-day by modern breeders, and
short of calamity will continue in future
indefinitely and incessantly.

189
190

It becomes pertinent to ask: What was
the guiding star which led these men?
What was it that enabled them to foresee
what would be the proper type to breed ?
How could one analyze their policies, and
use them ourselves? I think to these
questions there is no answer. Each of the
great animal breeders was a man who was
born—an individual who sometimes owed
little or nothing to his environment (Duthie
was originally a branch bank manager)—a
man who had in his mind a clear-cut conception of what to him was the perfect
animal, and who, aided by a mastery of the
art and the craft of animal breeding (two
complementary necessities), sought to conjure from among his material this perfect
type. Different men used differing methods :
some practised the closest inbreeding ; others
tried to correct deficiencies in one sex by
mating them with animals in which the required characters were markedly developed.

. Perhaps you wonder where this historical
survey is leading. I wish to give you some
idea of the stocks upon which present work
is carried out, and to enable you to contrast
the patient, sure, steady progress of the
older breeds with what happens to-day. In
these days we are rich in everything except
time. In the days when the foundations of
British livestock pre-eminence were laid,
time was a far more plentiful commodity
than it is to-day. The older breeders could
afford the time to make their matings in the
unhurried, dignified and natural manner.
The bull was not just a supply factory; he
was the chief actor in the drama. His likes
and dislikes were considered; he was
nurtured and studied and observed and
managed, with a view to keeping him up to
concert pitch, in a way which would probably amaze many of you if you heard the
details.

I chose the early history of the Shorthorn
not because efforts with this breed were more
intense or successful, but simply because it
serves admirably as an index to what happened and is happening with every other
British breed. There are names connected
with the foundation of other cattle breeds
quite as famous as those of the men who

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

founded the Shorthorns, and this applies
also to horses, sheep and pigs.

So much then for one aspect of livestock
eugenics—perhaps hardly “veterinary
eugenics ’’—except in so far as it may indicate that in Great Britain the stocks of
animals which the veterinarian must now
use have already, in a very large measure,
been improved. But breeding alone has not
been responsible for the high general level of
excellence possessed by British livestock.
There has been, almost parz passu, tremendous improvement in the animal’s environment and management. Problems of nutrition, physiology, disease control, and all that
is included in the comprehensive term
“animal management,” have engaged attention and a complete or partial solution
has been found for at least most of them.

Economic Factors

To some extent the direct application of
results obtained has lagged behind the
knowledge of the facts. In every branch of
knowledge there is always a time lag between
discoveries and their application ; but this
lag is now of far shorter duration than
formerly. It may be stated without hesitation that many of the most serious scourges
of the animal population could readily be
eradicated from Britain were there no
economic factors involved. Bovine tuberculosis, for example, could be eradicated in
Britain, if the farmer and the country could
face the cost. Similarly, we possess the knowledge and the ability to effect complete control and ultimate elimination of many other
animal diseases, such as sheep scab, distemper of dogs, rickets, contagious abortion,
swine fever, Johne’s disease of cattle, bovine
mastitis, pullorum disease in fowls, and
probably many others, just as some even
more serious diseases, e.g. rabies, glanders,
pleuro-pneumonia and sheep-pox have been
eradicated.

Perhaps I have said enough to show that,
in contrast to the position to-day in connection with human affairs, a great deal has
already been done to effect such improvement among the domesticated animals as
will enable them to achieve a reasonably
VETERINARY EUGENICS

satisfactory equilibrium in relation to their
environment. Man’s animals are in fact
better bred than is man himself. In other
words, keeping in mind that we demand
meat, milk, eggs, work, and offspring from
our farm livestock, the types which have been
evolved are those which under normal farm
conditions, in the shortest time and with
least labour, will give the best economic
returns.

Some Problems of Livestock Improvement

I must not, here, give an impression that
all British stock is perfect. This is by no
means the case. There is still much room
for improvement, and far too many animals
with inferior qualities and potentialities are
retained for breeding instead of being
castrated or otherwise eliminated. The
general level of efficiency is, however, high,
and all British breeds are without exception
immeasurably superior to the stocks from
which they originated.

But few other countries, if any, are in this
fortunate position. In some, such as the
Argentine, Canada, Australia and New
Zealand, it is still necessary for one or another
reason to maintain a constant stream of new
blood from Britain, so that such improvement in the local cattle stocks as has already
been brought about will be maintained and
increased. In others, such as Russia in particular, a previously fairly satisfactory population of domesticated animals was allowed,
owing to political upheavals, to degenerate
into a mixed heterogeneous mongrel stock,
very much like the London pigeon, or like
the animal population of Britain prior to
improvement. An average or good-grade
stock deteriorated into “‘ scrub stock.” In
yet other countries, especially in some of our
African colonies, in some countries in South
America and other areas, improvement of
local stocks is hindered or made difficult by
the incidence of diseases transmitted by
coitus, or by diseases to which local races
have in the course of time acquired a tolerance or even immunity, but which make the
importation of improved stock not possessing
this tolerance, an impossibility. In many
areas of Kenya, Tanganyika and Uganda,

IgI

local cattle possess a resistance against
trypanosomiasis (a disease due to blood
parasites transmitted by an insect vector),
whereas British or European cattle possessing
superior conformation or performance carry
no such immunity.

For these and many other reasons, therefore, it has become necessary to evolve techniques which will enable man to effect a
greater degree of control of livestock improvement, and to speed up the processes of
reproduction to a faster rate than was
possible in former times.

One of the chief factors which has made
this possible has been the application of
artificial insemination to horse, cattle and
sheep breeding in particular; another has
been the development of early methods of
pregnancy diagnosis—especially in the mare ;
and intensive studies of the physiology of
reproduction including lactation, and of the
pathology of sterility, have each contributed
much valuable information, which will without doubt contribute even more help in
future.

Indications for Artificial Insemination

To those who have an incomplete anatomical knowledge it is somewhat difficult to
explain in detail the methods of producing
artificial insemination in animals, and I
propose to deal with them in the simplest
manner. The following are among the
reasons for employing artificial insemination :

(i) To make reproduction possible in cases
of infertility due to discrepancies in size
between male and female, abnormal physiological function, lack of- uterine tone, etc.,
when there is no other pathological or
physiological bar.

(ii) To conserve the energies of males of
proved superior quality, or alternatively to
enable a single superior male to become the
sire in a single breeding season of a far greater
number of offspring than would be possible
from normal matings. This accelerates the
rate of improvement of a species of livestock
in which there is a comparative dearth of
superior males but a superabundance of
breedable females often of inferior quality
(e.g. in Russia and the Argentine).
192

(iii) To avoid (a) infection of males with
diseases contracted during, and transmissible by, coitus; or (b) spread of coitally
transmitted disease among female breeding
stock by the agency of the male.

(iv) To breed from animals which, being
in captivity or under domestication, might
otherwise be “‘ shy breeders’”’ or refuse to
mate (e.g. silver foxes and martens).

(v) To overcome sex antagonisms, either
between animals of differing breeds or species
(hybrids), or in those peculiar cases of repulsion which apparently have a psychological
basis.

(vi) To explore the scientific possibilities
of interspecific hybrids which might have
important economic uses—e.g. argali xX
domesticated sheep in Pamirs, and zebra x
domesticated horse. There are other theoretical possibilities, such as the eland x
cattle cross, the buffalo x cattle (the “ cattallo’’), and so on, in which hybrids have
already been produced by natural mating.

Normal Reproductionin Domesticated Animals

Before dealing with the technique of artificial insemination, it is desirable to say
something more about normal reproduction
in the larger domesticated animals. As is
well known, all farm livestock sires are polygamous, but this polygamy is not a constant
feature. The normal average number of
mares served by an adult thoroughbred
stallion in a season (say February to June)
is about forty ; in the heavy draught breeds
(Shire, Clydesdale, etc.) with a breeding
season from March to July, it may be almost
any number between 80 and 120. Most of
these mares are given at least two separate
services ; many need three, four or five, or
even more. There are, however, some really
amazing records for individual heavy draught
horses. The famous Clydesdale stallion,
““Dunure Footprint,” for instance, in one
particular season served 480 mares. A
groom slept in his loose-box, and day and
night an alarm clock, set for every two hours,
fixed the time for a fresh mare to be brought
in for service. The record of fertility for this
particular year’s services is normal, about
64 per cent., and there was no diminution in

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the quality of the offspring, if one can judge
by the prices obtained for many of them and
by the number of prizes they obtained in the
show and sale rings later. One breeder, for
example, sent forty-five mares to this stallion, and forty-one of them proved to be in
foal after one service only.

The adult bull may serve on an average
between fifty and seventy cows in a year, the
ram fifty to sixty (up to eighty or ninety in
particular instances), and the boar some
twenty-five to thirty-five sows.

It should be clearly realized that these are
all figures for adult animals, and that most
young or adolescent animals are only allowed
to serve half or two-thirds of these numbers.
It should also be realized that the average
level of fertility of some of our farm livestock is rather low. In the horse, for example,
apart from ponies living a free life, the
average fertility is only between 56 per cent.
and 68 per cent. of the mares served. It is
certainly higher in cattle, sheep and pigs,
though few sires leave 100 per cent. of the
females they serve pregnant. Without doubt
much of this low fertility is directly due to
the trammelling effects of domestication
systems on the free play of reproductive
impulses. Females are not always served at
such a time that the recently erupted ovum
has a chance of being fertilized by a living
active spermatozoon. Frequently service is
too early ; sometimes it may be too late.

It is very difficult to obtain adequate and
reliable figures about differential fertility, as
between the beginning, the middle, and the
end of the serving period, for there is a great
deal of individual variation. I think, however, it is safe to say that where the breeding
season is restricted to certain months of the
year only, as in the horse and sheep, there is
a certain proportion of unsuccessful matings
at the very beginning of the season; then
fertility rises and remains at its maximum
for the greater part of the period, but tends
to fall off again with the later services at the
end of the season, especially in a sire which
is expected to fertilize more females than
whatever the number may be of which he
is physiologically capable. This latter drop
in fertility may, however, not always be
VETERINARY EUGENICS

attributable to the sire, since if there should
be any females among those he serves which,
for one reason or another, are sterile, a big
proportion of these will almost certainly fall
among those served latest in the season, and
may contribute towards an apparent terminal infertility. Physiologically, however, it is
to be expected that during a period of exceedingly active spermatogenesis, there will
come a time when a greater or lesser degree of
exhaustion of spermatogenic tissue occurs.
This brings up the important question of
the great desirability of adequately spaced
matings. Unfortunately, the periodicity in
horses and sheep is always—or nearly always
—determined by the frequency, duration and
sequence of cestral manifestations in the
mares and ewes. On one day, no females may
be at the right stage of cestrus for mating ;
on another, there may be four, six, eight or
even more, and few owners and no rams are
content to postpone service until a later date
(matings in horses being usually controlled,
but in sheep the animals are at liberty).

Problems in Britain and Abroad Compared
From this brief outline, it may perhaps
be appreciated that successful artificial insemination can bring to the aid of the stockowner a very powerful expedient for correcting some abnormalities of reproduction. In
Britain, however, the need for the development and extension of the use of artificial
insemination amongst the various species of
domesticated animals is not by any means so
acute as it is in many countries abroad.
Britain is essentially a “ sire-producing ”’
country ; many overseas states are “ sireimporting ’’ countries—for example, Argentine, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa
and Russia. Wherever there is an absolute
or comparative dearth of pre-eminent sires,
there artificial insemination can be of the
greatest aid to rapid livestock improvement.
As will be mentioned later, it is possible, by
using a technique in which each ejaculation
is diluted with a suitable fluid (now called a
“ dilutor ’’), and then divided into a series
of fractions, to effect successful insemination
of eight, ten or twelve or even up to fifteen
or sixteen females in place of the one only

C

193

which would be impregnated by a normal
service. The accelerating effect of this technique in mass improvement schemes can be
readily realized. From a single bull during
one season over 1,000 calves are stated to
have been produced by the Russian investigators. Instead of perhaps fifty to
ninety lambs from a ram, in a single season
over 1,200 have been produced, and it is
claimed to be possible to inseminate 4,000
ewes during a forty to fifty-day season by
the latest methods in which as many as
fifty ewes may be impregnated from a single
ejaculation. As already mentioned, however,
the British stockowner is not so much interested in mass improvement, as in securing
the maximum numbers of offspring from a
particularly prepotent or pre-eminent sire.

Obstacles to Extended Use of Artificial
Insemination

At this stage it may be well to mention
three other facts which serve to illustrate
why very large numbers of females are not
being inseminated in Britain as they are in
Russia. Livestock-breeding is a competitive
business, and he who breeds a particularly
superlative bull or stallion naturally wishes
to reap some financial rewards for himself.
These rewards are represented partly by
prize money, but much more so by the value
of the offspring. For example, the owner of
a “ triple crown winner,” or the owner of a
supreme Royal and Highland Champion
Bull, will most naturally wish to reserve as
many as possible of his own brood mares or
breeding cows for service. To maintain
something in the nature of a partial monopoly of offspring from such a sire is financially
profitable. To multiply the numbers of such
offspring tenfold is to do far more than to
decimate the price per head obtained.
Secondly, when natural mating occurs there
is a considerable degree of security of pedigree for the offspring. Were artificial insemination to become a common technique
in this country, a certain proportion of the
more unscrupulous breeders might succumb
to the temptation of substituting sperm from
an inferior sire for one of superior merits—
with the risk of disastrous results to pure
194

breeding. Of course, it would be relatively
easy to devise a mechanism whereby this
latter disadvantage might be overcome, but
the former would still operate. There is also
a third reason. The use of a large number of
sires in any given breed keeps that breed,
when viewed as a whole, in a satisfactory
state of genetic fluidity. When the genetic
characters of any one animal, superlative
though it may be, become unduly concentrated within a breed through excessive use,
much of this malleable breed fluidity is lost,
and more fixity of characters results. If there
should be a sudden change in breed fashions
or in the nature of the public taste, or if some
adverse character begins to assume undue
general prominence, there is a more restricted
choice of out-crossing available to the
breeders, and valuable time may be lost in
achieving once more that desirable lack of
undue rigidity which permits rapid breedmodifications to be made to meet sudden
demands.

Methods of Sperm Collection

There is a choice of several methods of
collecting sperm for animal insemination.
These methods, some of which have distinct
advantages, will be briefly outlined here.

(a) Collection from a normal service. This
method has been in common use for some
considerable time. The female in cestrus is
served in the normal way, and immediately
afterwards semen is collected from the
anterior vaginal floor, by a long syringe-like
instrument (the inseminator), which is then
inserted through the cervix into the uterine
cavity where its contents are expelled. This
method has certain disadvantages: there is
the possibility of infection being transferred
from male to female or vice versa; it is
essential that the female shall exhibit
cestrus; and it is generally possible to
inseminate only one or perhaps two females
from one service, so that male energies
are not greatly conserved. Alternately,
there is greater guarantee of pedigree,
less chance of unscrupulous malpractice,
simplicity of technique, and less risk with a
valuable highly strung sire or dam of any
untowards psychological sequele.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(6) Collection by means of the artificial
vagina. There are two main types of these :
the Russian type which is virtually a pure
latex rubber lining for the vagina of the
female ; and the Cambridge pattern, which
consists of a felt-covered metal or bakelite
rigid tube, into which fits a latex rubber
liner. The cavity between tube and liner
is filled with warm soapy water and air,
and at one end is a glass collecting-chamber.
Lubrication is effected by means of pure
white vaseline or liquid paraffin. The
penis of the male is diverted just before
penetration into the artificial vagina held
alongside the female, and the semen is collected in the glass container. In the Russian
type, the sire serves into the rubber vaginal
lining fitted to the female ; this receives the
ejaculation and is subsequently removed.
From either type the subsequent procedure
is similar. The semen is obtained pure and
uncontaminated by vaginal secretions or
saprophytic or pathogenic vaginal organisms,
and it can be diluted suitably and used for
the insemination of such other females as
are in cestrus, or it may be used undiluted
after division into appropriate fractions.

The disadvantages are that a female in
cestrus is necessary, or alternately a specially
trained female which will allow the male to
mount even though she is not in season. The
technique is not so simple, and for the larger
animals two operators are usually required,
while the apparatus must be maintained
scrupulously clean and _bacteriologically
sterile. Advantages are that coital infections
are avoided and that the complete uncontaminated emission is available and under
complete control.

(c) Collection by service-crate. The purpose
of this is to secure the female in such a way
that irrespective of whether she is in cestrus
or not she cannot escape from the attentions
of the male, which will mount and serve
either into a Russian or Cambridge-pattern
vagina as above. Up to the present, the
method has been chiefly employed for sheep
and cattle, since the females of these species
are more tolerant and placid. Mares will
probably never lend their co-operation to
VETERINARY EUGENICS

man for purposes of collection by servicecrate; thoroughbreds certainly will not.

(2) Collection by phantom female. Certain
sires, especially rabbits, bulls and rams, if a
stuffed imitation of a female is presented to
them, in which the skin is used and the
general outline is preserved, will mount it
and serve into an artificial vagina held in
suitable position. Such phantom females are
useful in that no female in season is required
and no actual contact between the two
parents takes place. Subsequent procedures
are the same as those already mentioned
above.

(e) Collection by electrical stimulus. A
technique has been elaborated within the
last few years whereby, by passing an electrical stimulus through the lumbar region of
the spinal cord, a normal emission of semen
can be obtained in rams. This itself is remarkable, but when it is mentioned that
previous administration of certain drugs to
the ram will increase the survivability of the
sperms from about two to four days up to
as much as sixty-four days in one instance,
and from twenty-four to forty-eight days in
numerous instances, it may be realized what
tremendous possibilities there are in the
further development of this technique in
future years. So far as I am aware, this
method of collection has not yet been
attempted successfully in the larger domesticated animals, but there seems no reason
why it should not be applied to bulls at least.
At has great possibilities in connection with
the examination and investigation of breeding sires which are not functionally up to
normal breeding standards as regards such
matters as sperm count, density, total
volume, and reaction, or are possibly infected by such organisms as Brucella abortus,
or by tuberculosis of the genital organs.

(f) Collection by frictional methods. This
hardly merits more than mere mention, but
since it is sometimes practised by certain
dog-breeders and owners of silver fox farms,
especially abroad, perhaps it should be included. Manual or other friction is carried
out until an emission is obtained; this is
collected in a test-tube and used to inseminate
such females as are in cestrus. The method,

195

though apparently eminently practical, and
of use to prevent injuries to valuable
breeding animals through fighting or even
playfulness, is a somewhat rough and ready
one and does not commend itself to modern
ideas.

It will be seen that the steps in the
development have been (i) a normal female
in full oestrus which is given a normal service ;
(ii) a normal female in cestrus given an abnormal service ; (ili) a normal female not in
cestrus given an abnormal service; (iv)
an abnormal female (phantom) with an
abnormal service ; and (v) no female at all—
electrical and manual stimulus to the male.
Do not think we can dispense with the male
just yet!

Technique of Insemination

The actual technique of insemination of
the collected sperm does not present any
undue difficulty. The appropriate amount is
introduced into or through the cervix by
means of an all glass or other non-metallic
syringe, using a suitable means of illumination and a vaginal speculum. No evidence is
available to show that any active co-operation on the part of the female is required,
apart from the obvious one of exhibiting
normal signs of full cestrus. No orgasm or
other psychological or physiological disturbance occurs during insemination, yet
fertility in carefully inseminated groups of
females is recorded as being frequently much
higher than when normal service occurs.

Possible Lines of Development

It may be mentioned that with further
development of methods of employing the
various gonadotropic hormones now being
actively investigated in many centres, it may
probably be possible to induce artificial
cestrus in groups of females at any given
prearranged date; but to be effective such
cestrus will have to be accompanied by the
development of mature and ripe follicles and
by their ovulation. As a corresponding
development, the preservation of spermatozoa in an active state for considerable
periods will be required. When this is
possible, Man will have achieved almost
196

complete control of the mechanical features
of reproduction, and it will then be possible
to superimpose any desirable modifications
upon the sexual rhythms which at present
are to a large extent dependent upon or at
least associated with seasonal and climatic
conditions. If, for instance, it became
economically desirable for a portion of lambcrop to be produced in autumn or midsummer instead of early spring, this could
readily be arranged. Appropriate use of
hormone preparations is readily capable of
overriding many or most of those subnormal or abnormal physiological or psychological functionings (such as unduly long or
short cestral periods, irregularities in rhythm,
lack of adequate desire, or undue desire)
which at present appear to be concomitant
with the intensification of modern methods of
livestock production no less than they are of
the progress of human civilization.

Before these days arrive, however, there is
much to be done. As yet, although much
more is known about reproductive physiology than formerly, there still remains a
great deal to be investigated. Especially
is this the case regarding hormone therapy,
the exact vitamin requirements needed
during reproduction, the details regarding
anti-hormone production, the control of
infections of both male and female generative
tracts, and the exact influences of feeding,
exercise, and general methods of management upon breeding, both in man and
animals.

Conclusion

Breeding is an exact science which, like
any other science, possesses its own rigid
laws. Just how far knowledge obtained from
a study of reproduction in animals can be
used to solve the problems of mankind

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

remains to be seen. Doubtless there are
households where the disappointment occasioned by a lack of offspring might have been
avoided by judicious employment of these
modern reproductive techniques; equally
certainly similar opportunities for their
application will arise in future. It would
seem that careful consideration might be
given to the pros and cons of the problem as
it applies to man. There may be difficulties
to be faced: staunch supporters of the
established social structure of the modern
world might look askance at such suggestions; the law of entail and inheritance
might have to be modified; and without
doubt there would be bitter antagonism from
those whose knowledge of anatomy and
physiology is limited to what they have
learnt by the exercise of their own limited
powers of observation.

On the other side of the picture, however,
there are very definite advantages to be
obtained. In addition to contributing to the
sum of human happiness by making progeny
possible where otherwise there could be
none, artificial insemination might open up
wider and truly eugenic vistas ; some control over the temperament, mental or
physical abilities of future races might be
exercised and our sons and our sons’ sons be
consequently better fitted to cope with the
exigencies of a civilization that becomes more
complex and a society that becomes more
exacting as the years pass.

In conclusion, I claim no originality for
what I have put before you. Most of the
work to which references have been made

‘1s contained in the post-war literature of this

and other countries, particularly Russia ;
and so far as Man is concerned others before
me have envisaged the Brave New World of
to-morrow.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIX, No. 3.
