SECTION II.

fHE EUGENIC PRINCIPLE AND THE TREATMENT
OF THE FEEBLE-MINDED

In the Majority and Minority Reports of the Poor Law
Commission the questions relating to the feeble-minded are only
briefly reviewed, as they agree in adopting the Report and recommendations of the Royal Commission on the Feeble-minded,
which had hardly concluded its sittings before those of the Poor
Law Commissioners began. The conclusions of the Poor Law
Commissioners with regard to the mentally defective can,
therefore, only be given by summarising the Report of the
preceding Commission.

In adopting that Report, it is chiefly remarkable as the one
instance in which the Poor Law Commission has recognised
heredity as a factor in the creation of pauperism, and in which
the measures proposed for betterment are not almost exclusively
dependent on improvement of conditions. It is a welcome
innovation in state effort towards social reform to find that the
elimination of degenerate stock has at last been realised as the
sole way of preserving a high standard of racial vigour. In
suggesting this, it must be remembered that it is not a new and
untried experiment which is being brought forward, but a method
which has already been practically carried into effect by various
Societies for the feeble-minded, and with completely satisfactory
results.

The question of the permanent detention of the feebleminded therefore secures a foremost place in the reforms
advocated. If any doubt still lingers in the public mind as to
the wisdom of this step, it should be speedily set aside by a
consideration of the lot of the feeble-minded in society, and their
relation to various social problems. This has been very carefully
and exhaustively dealt with by the medical investigators to the
THE EUGENIC PRINCIPLE, ETC. 179

Royal Commission, who have placed before the public, in
statistical form, lamentable truths which every Poor Law
Guardian and social worker had realised, but which nothing but
a comprehensive investigation could establish as incontrovertible
fact.

In connection with pauperism generally the tables of the
Medical Investigators show that on a day count, 12°7 per cent.
mentally defectives were found in the urban, and 18°75 per cent.
in the rural workhouses. In the prisons at the lowest estimate
the feeble-minded may be reckoned as one in every ten, and the
tramps and vagrants average about the same number. The
statistics of the Medical Investigators also give °79 per cent. of
the children in public elementary schools in England and Wales,
as being feeble-minded. As a sad forecast of the probable future
of these children, the After-care figures of the 1909 Annual
Conference of the National Association for the Feeble-minded
may be taken. In giving the statistics of thirteen large towns,
they prove that 518 boys and girls only, out of a total of 2,185,
are in regular work after leaving the Special Schools. A table
presented by the Association, at the time of the Royal Commission, of the earnings of children who had left Special Schools,
shows that in eight different centres they averaged only about 8s.
weekly. In Birmingham, which was treated apart, Mrs. Hume
Pinsent stated that they averaged only 7s. 2d. The very wageearners, therefore, can only be reckoned as economic nonentities,
while the rest, in spite of an extra costly education, represent in
after life an actual loss to the community.

Investigations undertaken by various individuals and Associations demonstrate, perhaps as forcibly, why the segregation
of the feeble-minded is demanded in the interests of society. An
enquiry made as to the mental condition of the inmates of
Inebriates’ Homes has disclosed the fact that 62 per cent., or
about two-thirds of the whole number, are mental defectives ;
and for such persons reformatory measures, designed for those
destined again to take their place in the world, are completely
inappropriate. The same observations may be applied to rescue
work; another enquiry has shown that in three years 2,521 such
menta:ly defective women were aliowed to go back into the world,
180 THE EUGENIC PRINCIPLE AND THE

from 100 Rescue Homes, although they had been accountable
for an increase of over 1,000 illegitimate children to the population, and were mentally no more fit to take care of themselves
than before they entered. Unfortunately the vicious lives of
such parents is frequently repeated in that of the children. One
of the Medical Investigators, Dr. Tredgold, pointed out in the
same connection, that half the women admitted to the maternity
wards in Somersetshire during five years, were of feeble
intellect.

Yet though the direct results of mental deficiency on the
community are calamitous, they are perhaps less dangerous,
because more easy to recognise, than the indirect influences,
caused by the wholly reckless way in which feeble-mindedness is
allowed to permeate society. The history of a family thus
tainted will show that even where few of its members are held to
be actual mental defectives, its influence as a whole upon the
community is completely disastrous. A careful scrutiny of the
Family History of Table I. will probably prove convincing in
this respect. Dr. Potts also illustrates the subtle spread of this
taint of degeneracy ; at Birmingham, he states, ‘‘many of the
defective children are related, either as brothers and sisters, or
as cousins. The majority come from bad homes in the worst
slums. When investigating the prison it was found that a large
percentage of the prisoners had been educated at the Floodgate
Street School. This area was, till recently, notorious for the
number of low-class public-houses, many of which were the
rendezvous of criminals. More than one headmistress stated
that when she encountered a defective child she generally found
that the home was a dirty and neglected one, the cause usually
being that the father did not go to work. Several teachers told
me that in the worst slums they estimated that something like
fifty per cent. of the fathers did no work.” In fact bad influences
radiate from such families in a neighbourhood, as the circles
spread from a disturbed surface throughout a pool.

Nor is this the worst aspect of the case. Dr. Tredgold and
Dr. Ettie Sayer produced evidence which tended to prove that
the feeble-minded increased much faster than the normal family,
an opinion with which many since that time have expressed
TREATMENT OF THE FEEBLE-MINDED 181
|.Varieries of Deficiency

‘4 2
a Anbesile
3 Peers. 4 SQ pape At 70 emt 1,
ye, wre ° Aezisan
4 BS net nat
t 7 Soldushreat
: Schoo!
Fao
+ 2 ss Sar 6 7 Be
4d sae eat ver @ thee Asplaw Inmere! Inari fre Fealle teacher beue
Ded 2 Induatrid Nelematry Spec Spend tare ‘seat Sell, te
Years oka Schoo! Sciea! Schead

History ILLUSTRATING DANGER TO SOCIETY OF GIVING MgnTaL DEFECTIVES
UNRESTRAINED LIBERTY.

Paternal G. father—said to be normal.
‘ G. mother—given to petty theft.

4 Children :
1 daughter; Asylum for many years.
I $3 Unmarried.

1 son (A); very excitable, has been inmate of Asylums (family history given
below), now in Workhouse Infirmary.

1 son (B); sent to prison on several occasions for drunkenness and cruelty to
children (family history given below).

A's family :—1st wife.
3 Children :

1 daughter; died 6 weeks old.

I son ; committed to Industrial School at 12 (2nd offence), at 24 years had
appeared in Police Court 19 times for stealing, begging, housebreaking, etc.

1 son; Special Class; at 12 years had been 4 times convicted for stealing, and
was sent to Reformatory.

2nd wife-—Poor Law relief stopped when husband in Workhouse Infirmary as
woman suspected of immoral conduct. Family repeatedly worried
and prosecuted by N.S.P.C.C.
6 Children :
1 daughter ; died 2 years.
1 son; sent to Industrial School, ‘‘ not under proper control."
1 son; 8 times convicted, Reformatory.
1 son; lives away from home.
t son. Special School f condition filthy and grossly neglected.
B's family: 1st wize.
2 Children :
1 son; Industrial School, stealing ; since convicted, ‘‘ drunk and disorderly.”
1 son; Industrial School, not under proper control; since, 11 times before
Magistrates.

2n¢ wife.—Imbecile ; in prison three times for cruelty to children, fined for obscene
language.

8 Children :
1 daughter ; went to class for feeble-minded; now in Asylum.
1 daughter ; Asylum.
1 daughter ; immoral life.
1 son; Industrial School.
I ; Feeble-minded.
1 girl; Home for Feeble-minded
x girl; backward
i infant.

Relieving Officer reports: ‘‘ family have been a great trouble.”

N.B.—(From Notes furnished by Allen Warner, M.D. at the Annual After-care Conference of
the National Association, 1909.)
182 THE EUGENIC PRINCIPLE AND THE

Il. Feeble Minded Family

 

Special Special § 5 Di
Sct Sheol School Schaal hogleated lgheted

CASE ILLUSTRATING AMOUNT OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE CHARITY DEVOTED TO
MAINTENANCE OF A FEEBLE-MINDED FAMILY.

Father—normal.

Mother—feeble-minded ; absolutely no control over children.
10 Children:

3 dead.

I normal.

1 feeble-minded, at Special School.

1 feeble-minded ” a

1 feeble-minded » »

1 feeble-minded o “

+} dirty, verminous and neglected.

(1) Family conditions necessitate frequent visits from :—
Sanitary Inspector.
Health Visitor.
School Attendance Officer.
N.S.P.C.C. Officer.
School Nurse.
" Children in continual attendance at Jafirmary for various ailments.
3) Poor Law Relief obtained at intervals.
TREATMENT OF THE FEEBLE-MINDED 183

“concurrence. These huge families of the incompetent, incorrigible, and irresponsible, absorb a large amount of public
-and private money, and also the time and attention of whole
- armies of officials and volunteer workers in ministering to their
‘various needs. The extent of this may be realised by glancing
at Family History, Table II.

Permanent detention appears, therefore, the only practicable
way of preventing a disproportionate increase of the abnormal.
As to the degree and methods of extending permanent control,
Opinions appear to vary. In this connection the pioneer Training
Homes for the feeble-minded bought the experience by which their
successors have profited, and have proved that even the most
favourable conditions will not render the feeble-minded fit to
stand on their own feet unassisted. Ten of the Homes furnished
information of their earlier work, showing that while a total of
422 girls had left, only one-fourth had gone into service, and of
these only two-thirds remained at work; the rest were in Homes,
asylums or returned to their friends, and a number had illegitimate children. The majority of the Homes opened since this
time are for permanent care only, and it is amply evidenced
that the feeble-minded quickly settle down to institutional
life, with results which are, in many instances, good beyond
expectation.

Recommendations. The main burden of the recommendations
of the Royal Commission is therefore the necessity, in one shape
or other, of continuous control of the mentally defective. In
order to achieve this, it Is necessary to secure unity of action
amongst the various agencies dealing with them. It is therefore
proposed to establish a central Board of Control, composed of
salaried Commissioners, including a certain number both of
barristers and medical men amongst its members. The work of
this body is to be locally administered by the County Councils,
which are to form a Statutory Committee for the care of the
mentally defective. In addition to taking over the duties of the
visiting Committees of Asylums, these Committees are to provide
for all the epileptics and the mentally defective of every type,
within their area.

‘‘ The cost of maintenance, care and treatment, education,
184 THE EUGENIC PRINCIPLE AND THE

training and control shall be borne by the county and county
borough Councils aided by new grants from the Exchequer.”

For the mentally defective three methods of exercising control are recommended, oversight, certification and detention.
Notification to the Local Committees of mentally defective cases
is enjoined upon medical officers of institutions and public bodies,
and upon anyone receiving such cases for private profit; while
the Board of Control is to undertake the supervision and registration of all houses in which mentally defective persons are
maintained.

Here, however, it is probable that a great number of persons
will slip through the net and escape notification altogether.
With reference to future legislation on the subject, it will
probably be to the best interest of society to make the notification
of cases of mental defect as thorough-going as possible. As
notification need not involve removal from the guardianship of
friends and relations, hardship could not be pleaded.

Another note must be also added. In recommending an
alteration of nomenclature, the Royal Commission chose the
term ‘“ mental defective,” as covering all objects of their investigations,—lunatics, idiots, imbeciles, feeble-minded, moral defectives, as well as the mentally defective, epileptic and inebriate.
It is remarkable that in a Royal Commission on the “ Feebleminded ”’ (and not ‘‘ Mentally Defective”), the separate statistics
of the feeble-minded class, as such, are entirely absent from the
summarised tables, nor are they to be found anywhere but in the
tables of the Medical Investigators, grouped under the term
‘* Other Feeble-minded ” (the italics are our own). This perhaps
accounts for the fact that the frequently quoted figures of the
66,000, “ needing provision,’’ are often taken as referring to the
feeble-minded only, and the fact is ignored that they include all
idiots, imbeciles, epileptics and the uncertified insane, both adults.
and children, in England and Wales, in addition to the feebleminded.

An extract from their actual enumeration by the medical
experts is given, and the percentage upon the total population
investigated has been worked out.
TREATMENT OF THE FEEBLE-MINDED 185

Population Total Per cent.
(1901) F.M. on Population

STOKE-ON-TRENT 154,889 328 °21
BIRMINGHAM 245,216 421 "I7
MANCHESTER 712,420 818 ‘IL
HULL AND SCULCOATES 254,884 141 05
DuRHAM 132,738 73 05
SOMERSET 1530725 328 "2X
WILTs. 151,871 340 ‘22
Notts. 145,339 232 ‘16
LincoLn 150,351 224 "I5
CARMARTHEN 125,570 64 05
CARNARVON 137,219 301 "22

Average for all areas 14

Although legislative measures must deal with the whole of
the mentally defective, these figures offer a gleam of hope to
those interested in this special type, as it shows their numbers to
be less overwhelming than is generally understood.

The preamble of the recommendations concludes with these
words: ‘‘ The aim of the scheme is the application of particular
methods suitable for the cases of different persons, not the
general adoption of any one method exclusively.”

If this indicates that it is intended to leave scope for experiment, adaptation, and a choice of varied means to an end, before
certain stereotyped methods are fixed upon, these measures are
likely to offer less cause for regret than many which have not
enjoyed this advantage. It would be an excellent precedent,
and might be a model for more legislation on such lines.

The whole of the problem at present at issue is more than
usually complicated, and it may account for the fact that so
many different agencies are found at work in connection with it.
This has brought about a situation which seems to promise
difficulties on the administrative side. The Board of Control,
however, could, if it chose, turn the position to its own advantage. It might in this way obtain the greater choice of agencies,
and therewith better realise the ideal of the Commissioners, in
securing a variety of treatment for the needs of different cases.
By utilising all the means now ready to hand, it would thus
the more easily and quickly dispose of what is, without doubt,
one of the most urgent, yet difficult, social problems now
confronting us.
