THE SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT & EUGENICS"
By RICHARD M. TITMUSS

T was, I think, Professor Carr Saunders
| wee in delivering a Galton Lecture some
_B years ago, speculated on the problems
that would confront an historian intent on
tracing the development of the eugenics
movement. The materials and the problems
he would have to face are indeed vast; they
stretch far back in the social history of
England and they are studded with some of
the greatest and most vigorous polemics of
the past 200 years. But our historian would
be most sorely tried in his task of evaluating
the respective contributions of some of the
chief actors in this history—giants of the
stature of Darwin, Huxley, Galton, Lamarck,
Malthus, Spencer, Karl Pearson, and others.
I do not intend in this paper to offer any
historical reflections on the work of these
great men. But what I have to say will, 1
hope, suggest to some future historian—
earnestly browsing in the Society’s library—
certain currents of thought, empirical perhaps, but worthy of pursuit.

The Victorian Climate |
From time to time it is wise to remind
ourselves that we tend to romanticise the
past. And eugenists are by no means immune
from this amiable weakness. Perhaps we
surrender to the past too easily because we
dislike the present. But whatever the reasons,
and we can be sure that they are many, the
result is often a distorted view of history and
of the leading personalities of the day.
Judgments on men and social movements
are continually being revised, especially when
the period of survey is so close to us as the
Victorian age—the age of the great controversy : nature and nurture. If there can be
as yet no finality in our historical assessments in the field of, say, politics and
economics in the nineteenth century, may
this not be equally true of heredity and

*A paper “read before the Eugenics Society on
November 16th, 1943.

53

environment? The certainties of one age
become the problems of the next. That,
broadly, is the theme of my paper within
the context of eugenics and the social
environment.

Now the Victorian age was conspicuously
an age of uncompromising judgments.
Philosophies concerning the nature of man,
and discoveries, for instance, in the field of
human biology, were converted into immutable laws. There were the principles of
individualism and of self-help. There was
the blind, unqualified acceptance of the
“struggle for existence ’’—a dogma which
Darwin himself certainly did not hold. State
education, sanitation and health services were
vigorously opposed on the grounds that they
would undermine responsibility. The Times
asserted with confidence that the English
people would rather run the risk of cholera
than be bullied into health. The introduction
of a school medical service was fought because
it was feared that it would pauperise both
children and parents. In 1874, the President
of the Society of Medical Officers, alarmed by
the growing’ use of drains and water-closets,
argued against this development by saying
that ‘“‘ an increase in the rate of mortality is
often a sign of prosperity ; for a high deathrate means a high. birth-rate, and a high
birth-rate is the invariable concomitant of
prosperity.”’ The implication was that as
water-closets and drains increased, prosperity
would decrease. These sturdy expressions of
individualism may amuse us to-day, but we
should remember that they were an integral
part of the Victorian outlook on the affairs
of man. As such they must be studied in their
context ; that is to say, if we wish to understand their value and significance we must
read them against the social, economic and
political background of the age. In a similar
way we should attempt to evaluate the controversy over heredity and environment
against the Victorian background.
54 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Galton’s Eugenics

Francis Galton and Gregor Mendel were,
curiously enough, both born in the year
1822. But heredity was a live issue long
before any sound knowledge of Mendel’s

discoveries on the mechanism of inheritance _

became generally available at the beginning
of the twentieth century. Right down the
ages heredity has been held to be of immense
importance in human affairs. The emphasis
given to hereditary factors in the Old Testament can be traced in all types of ethnic
groups, from the Bantu to the Nordic. And,
indeed, it was natural that they should
receive such prominence when little was
known about environmental influences. The
belief in the importance of heredity can also
be traced to parental “ wishful thinking,”
and to such historical developments as kingship and inherited leadership. These empirical views were strengthened and given
some scientific basis when Charles Darwin
began to write of heredity in relation to
evolution, and when his cousin, Francis
Galton, from a study of fifty-five pairs of
twins, coined the term “eugenics.” In his
book, Inquiries tnto Human Faculty, he
studied what he thought were thirty-five
identical and twenty fraternal twins. For
reports on these twins—the influences of
environment, education, and so on—he relied
on anecdotal evidence from friends and relatives. An experiment controlled in this manner to-day would, of course, be rejected by
competent statisticians ; but i those days
statistical techniques were very rudimentary.
Those who criticize Galton, however, for not
anticipating the refined statistical methods
of to-day, show little sense of history or
awareness of how far Galton was in advance
of most of his contemporaries. On the basis
of this work on twins, Galton was led to the
conclusion: ‘‘ We may, therefore, broadly
conclude that the only circumstance, within
the range of those by which persons of similar
conditions of life are affected, that is capable
of producing a marked effect on the character
of adults is illness or some accident that
causes physical infirmity. The impression
that all this leaves on the mind is one of some
wonder whether nurture can do anything

at all, beyond giving instruction and professional training. There is no escape from
the conclusion that nature prevails enormously over nurture when the differences of
nurture do not exceed what is commonly to
be found among persons of the same rank of
society and in the same country.” Judged
by the caution of modern science, Galton was

_certainly sweeping in his verdict, but never
theless he may be considered temperate in
comparison with some of his contemporaries
and successors. I will give two quotations
which broadly summarise the views of the
school of heredity in the nineteenth century.
That great statistician, Karl Pearson, said,
“We have two groups in the community—
one parasitic on the other. The latter thinks
of to-morrow and is childless, the former
takes no thought and multiplies.” Leonard
Darwin, past President of the Society and
one of the outstanding eugenists of this
century, stated, ‘‘ The nation as a whole is
slowly and steadily deteriorating as regards
its average inborn qualities,’ and proceeded
to prophesy that we should be unable to fight
a major war. At the end of the nineteenth
century the dominant note concerning the
biological outlook was one of inspissated
gloom. What John Cotter Morison called
“the devastating torrent of children”’
would bring ruin and decay in its wake.
That rapid breeding from what was thought
to be genetically poor stock would eventually
lead to national decline. The views, in those
days, of the school of heredity may be
summed up in the words of a poet whose
name I have not been able to trace :
‘“‘Come, Malthus, and in Ciceronian prose
Tell how a rutting population grows

Until the produce of the land is spent
And brats expire for lack of aliment.’”

Darkest England

I want now to consider why such astonishingly gloomy prophecies were being made
by these early eugenists. What led them to
think that national decay was inevitable
unless the torrent of children from the poor
was stopped? To answer this question I
think we should try and recall the social
conditions of the last quarter of the nine~

. teenth century. For a few minutes, then, let
us imagine that this paper is being read in
the winter of 1890. In that year General
Booth’s In Darkest England was published—
-a book that vividly depicted the contemporary social scene as it was experienced by
about half of the population of the country.
Here is one passage describing a slum
_quarter in Woolwich: ‘‘ The women living
and following their dreadful business in this
neighbourhood are so degraded that even
abandoned men will refuse to’: accompany
them home. Soldiers are forbidden to enter
the place, or to go down the street, on pain
of 25 days’ imprisonment; pickets are
stationed at either end to prevent this. The
streets are much cleaner than many of the
rooms we have seen. A policeman never
goes down this street alone at night—one
having died not long ago from injuries received there. The lowest class of all is the
‘girls who stand at the pier-head—these sell
themselves literally for a bare crust of bread
and sleep in the streets.’’ The Russian writer,
Dostoevsky, when he visited London, left
us this impression: ‘‘.... on Saturday night
half a million working men and women with
their children spread like a flood over the
whole town, for the most part gathering in
certain districts. All night, it is said, up to
five o’clock in the morning, they celebrate
their holiday, that is, they fill themselves
like cattle with food and drink and so make
up for the whole week past. The beerhouses are decorated like palaces. Drunkenness is everywhere, but it is joyless, sad, and
gloomy ; a strange silence seems always to
prevail. Only now and then do abuse and
brutal fights disturb this weary silence which
weighs upon you so heavily. The women are
in no way behind, and get drunk along with
their husbands while the children crawl and
run about among them. Many of these
husbands thrash their wives dreadfully.
The children of these people, almost before
they are grown up, go as a rule on the streets,
mingle with the crowd, and often do not
return to their parents. At the Haymarket
I-observed mothers who brought their young
daughters to trade with. Little girls, about
twelve years old, catch you by the hand and

THE SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT AND EUGENICS 55

beg you to come with them.” It was estimated that there were in those days 3,000,000
individuals who were paupers, homeless,

starving, casuals, criminals, lunatics and
prostitutes in the United Kingdom. Every
year there were 200,000 arrests for drunkenness. It is only fifty-nine years since the
sack of the West End and fifty-six years
since Bloody Sunday. Thousands of children
then slept in empty boxes and _ boilers
covered with tarpaulins and old sacks in the
Adelphi Arches, on barges, on the steps of
London Bridge, and in similar places in the
slums of other cities. Many of the School
Attendance Officers had to be accompanied
by the police when they entered the poorer
quarters of the towns. Seventy per cent of
the elementary school children had nits in
their head and 80 per cent were assessed as
dirty. About 20 per cent of adults getting
married were illiterate and signed their
names by mark. When the school medical
service was introduced—only thirty-five
years ago—one-quarter of the children had
defective eyesight, four-fifths exhibited
dental decay, while about one-quarter of the
children suffered in various degrees from
discharging ears, ringworm, rickets, malnutrition, nose and throat diseases and heart
and lung diseases. Lowndes, in his valuable
study, The Silent Social Revolution, quotes
one medical M.P. who told the House of
Commons: “ Day after day in East Bristol
I used literally to shudder in contemplation
of the fact that it was upon these rickety
shoulders that the burden of the Empire in
time to come would have to rest.”’ Little did
the school doctors dream that these very

‘children would, as adults, have to face nine

years of war and five years of economic
depression before they reached the age of 50.

It was only forty years ago that the broad
civilising influence of universal education—
one of the most potent factors in the social
environment—really began to make decisive
strides. I doubt whether, with all our
wisdom, we have as yet fully valued the allpervading, subtle and progressive effects of
education, mental discipline and school life,
on the character and biological make-up of
successive generations. It is a slow process
56 . THE EUGENICS REVIEW

4

‘for one generation of parents to pass on to
the next, through the formative influence of
family life, a rising standard of health and
education. We are only now beginning to
penetrate the deeper levels of home and
family training as our knowledge of psychology and physiology expands and sheds
its early extravagances. When we return to
our historical perspective we realise how
meagre our knowledge was at the end of the
last century of these influences, how little
we understood the mechanisms of health and
nutrition, how poorly we valued universal
education. It is a mistake to think that
universal education began to operate when
the Act of 1870 was passed. Twenty-five
years were to elapse before it applied to all
children, and even then—only fifty years ago
—the school-leaving age for over 75 per cent.
of the population was ten. And the teaching
‘was such that it was common for one uncertificated teacher to control a class of
470 to 120 children. Historians have remarked
on the fact that we were then sixty years
behind other Western nations in our provision for secondary and technical education.
Only forty years ago the supply of educated
adults was so inadequate that German clerks
were being imported into the City of London.
And when some of the teachers attempted to
improve the school syllabus they had to face
such letters as this one signed “‘ An Indignant
Parent ’’: “‘ Are we to be taxed in order that
the faith for which Ridley and Latimer
suffered may be crushed ? Let us expel this
cockatrice from our midst, Sir, and let the
flag of Britain wave unsullied in the breeze.
Sir, we were informed that our poor children
were to be taught reading, writing and arithmetic only. Now this schoolmaster teaches
them the contents of their own insides and
thus adds to the rudeness which is innate in
the lower orders. If the Author of the
Universe had meant us to know what our
livers are like, he would not have hidden
them away in security.”

The Changing Social Scene

This brief descriptive picture of health,
education and social conditions in the 1880's
and the 1890’s throws some light on the

context of Francis Galton’s work on heredity.
It is by modern standards an appalling
environment in which perhaps 75 per cent
of the nation lived, bore children, and died.
We cannot, whether we be scientist or layman, escape from being influenced consciously or unconsciously by the contemporary social climate and prevailing moral
values. Thus it was even with so profound
a thinker as Galton, and still more with
others who shared his views on the overriding importance of inheritance. At the end
of the century the birth-rate was twice as

high as it is to-day, and it has been estimated

that somewhere between 1891 and I911 the
fertility of the very poor exceeded that of
the well-to-do by perhaps 80 to 100 per cent.
It is probable that the class differential in
England was then at its maximum range.
The environmentalist is unjustified in condemning, by modern standards, Galton’s
inquiries without first understanding this
Victorian backcloth. Conversely, those who
hold strongly to-day the Galtonian viewpoint
are equally unjustified because they refuse
to evaluate the social history of the last fifty
years and because they ignore the immense
advances made by the social sciences. There
are still, despite Lord Horder’s book on
Obscurantism,* too many obscurantists about.

In this attempt to recapture the social
realities of fifty years ago we may, I think,
conclude that Galton found much to justify
his assertions. But Galton did not anticipate
that the great technological advances registered during the nineteenth century were
likely, sooner or later, to be paralleled by
similar progress in the study and diagnosis of
man. As I have already said, the certainties
of the nineteenth century, in economics,
medicine, biology and codes of behaviour,
were destined to become the problems of the
twentieth century. If it be held that Galton
was justified, then have the predictions that
he and others made been verified by time?
Has the quality of the nation been steadily
deteriorating since the 18g0’s? Are we
poorer to-day in intelligence, health and
capacity for citizenship than we were fifty
years ago? Has the existence during this

* Watts, 1938.
THE SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT AND EUGENICS 57

period of marked differences in the fertility
of rich and poor led to a decay in the inborn
endowment of the nation? Is it a fact that
the immense growth in State provision for
health, education, welfare, pensions and so
on has undermined responsibility and pauperized the nation? I submit that these
questions are important and relevant to-day,
first in order to understand the past, and,
secondly, so that we may march, with courage, into the future.

Do not let us, in considering our answers
to these questions, make the same mistake
as many of the Victorians in thinking that
we have reached finality in these matters.
The sciences of nutrition, of psychology and
of genetics, are still young ; we are only now
beginning to grasp first principles. What do
we know, for instance, of the significance of
the uterine environment and the period of
social training before intelligence tests can
be applied ? What do we know as yet of the
inheritance of intelligence ; of the transmission of the good genes ?

We know enough about the transmission
of certain bad genes to support a policy of
voluntary sterilization, under suitable safeguards, such as was proposed in the Brock
Report. We know that mental defectives,
whether their condition is genetical or the
result of acquired disease, cannot be desirable
parents ; and we believe that they, as well
‘as persons suffering from a few serious and
fortunately rare hereditary diseases, should
be relieved of the burden of their fertility.
But what can we know, in the vastly unequal
opportunities offered by a highly stratified
society, of the biological endowment and
potentialities of the great masses of our
fellow men?

It has been said that “evil has many
descendants”’; this is equally true of good.
Have we not still to harvest the biological
fruits of a slowly improving environment ?
How long does it take a rising standard of
health and education to leave its mark on a
new generation ? In short, how powerful are
the selective forces of a good environment ?
Ten days ago the Ministry of Labour registered for service women aged 50—many, if
not the majority, will have been born and

nurtured in the conditions I have described.
They have had a lot to put up with; nine
years of war and five years of unparalleled
depression, yet I do not discern any deterioration in comparing them with their grandmothers. I do not share the gloom of those
who look with fear on the fertility differential
to-day. Cattell, for instance, asserted in
1937 that in 300 years half the population
would be mentally defective. We do not
know for certain that the differential exists
to-day to any considerable extent, but it is
certainly smaller than it was fifty years ago.
But I am disturbed when I view the mortality
differential, because the social environment
is, or should be, under man’s control and,
therefore, stands first in priority. In my
recent book, Birth, Poverty and Wealth, 1
showed that despite an all-round improvement in infant mortality among all social
groups, the relative differences between, on
the one hand, the well-to-do and, on the
other, the skilled, semi-skilled and unskilled
workers, increased between I91I and 1931.
These greater differences were not discernible
in the first month of life when, as Sir Arthur
McNalty has pointed out, the effects of
defective stamina vite would be most influential. When, however, environmental
diseases are considered, the gulf between the
poor and the well-to-do rose from about
300 per cent in Ig11I to, roughly, 500 per
cent in 1931. These deaths were, and are,
preventable ; this inequality is unnecessary.
They were the product of an evil environment. If the lessons of the progress we have
made since 1890 are not wholly bad, then
we must not commit the mistakes that our
fathers made. If we wish to reap a richer
harvest—in terms of quality—in the future,
when the quantity of our population will be
declining, then it is for us not to be content
only with weeding out the demonstrably
unfit ; we must look equally to the improvement of the social environment. “ Can it be
denied,’’ wrote Matthew Arnold, “‘ that to
live in a society of equals tends in general to
make a man’s spirits expand and his faculties
work easily and actively ; while, to live in a
society of superiors, although it may occasionally be a very good discipline, yet in
382 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

general tends to tame the spirits and to make
the play of the faculties less secure and
active ? Can it be denied, that to be heavily

overshadowed, to be profoundly insignificant,
has on the whole a depressing and benumbing
effect on the character ? ”’

~ EUGENICS SOCIETY
Annual Meeting and Election of Officers and Council

HE ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING

was held at the Rooms of the Royal

Society, Burlington House, Piccadilly,
W.1, on Tuesday, May 23rd, 1944, at 4.30
p.m., with the President, Lord Horder, in
the Chair. The Honorary Secretary read
the notice convening the Meeting.

MinuTES. The Minutes of the Annual
General Meeting, held on July 13th, 1943,
which were-contained in the Annual Report,
copies of which had. been circulated to
Fellows and Members before the Meeting,
were taken as read and signed as correct.

ANNUAL REPORT. The Chairman presented
the Annual Report, and moved its adoption.
This was carried unanimously.

STATEMENT OF ACCOUNTS AND BALANCE
SHEET. These were presented by the
Honorary Treasurer.

Mr. J. P. Brander raised the question of
the legality, under Section 3 (9) of the
Soctety’s Memorandum, of the Grant of £250,
made in 1943, to the Family Endowment
Society; and he further proposed the
following Resolution: THAT in view of the
doubt felt by certain Fellows and Members
as to whether the policy of the Family Endowment Society in promoting the granting
by the State of universal children’s allowances is eugenic, it is recommended that no
future grants be made to the Family Endowment Society.

The matter was discussed at some length,
and the Resolution was put to the meeting ;
but no seconder being forthcoming, a vote
was not taken. The President undertook
that the legality of the grant already made
would be examined.

The adoption of the Accounts and Balance
Sheet, proposed by Mr. Chance and seconded
by Mr. Martin, was carried unanimously.

HONORARY OFFICERS AND COUNCIL FOR
THE YEAR 1944-5. The Honorary Secretary
reported that no replies had been received to
the notice inserted in the October-January
issue of the EucENics REVIEW, inviting
additional names for nomination to the
Council. :

Presidency. The Honorary Secretary said
that he regretted to inform the Fellows and
Members that Lord Horder’s tenure of office :
as President had, under Article 27, now
expired, and he paid a cordial tribute to the
invaluable services to the Society of the
retiring President. He was glad to say, however, that Lord Horder had consented to
become an Honorary President of the Society. |
A new President had not yet been appointed.

Retirements. Under Article 28, the following
were due to retire: Vice-presidents: Dr.
Julian Huxley and Lord Keynes. Council :
Under Article 30, the following were due to
retire : Lady Denman, Mr. Graham Hutton,
Mr. Lloyd and Mrs. Potton.

Honorary Officers.and Council for the year
1944-5 were appointed as follows :

President : Post not yet filled.

Chairman of Council: B. S. Bramwell,
M.A., LL.B., F.R.S.E. !

Hon. Treasurer: C. F. Chance, M.A.

Hon. Librarian: Miss E. Corry. | ce

Hon. Secretary: C. P. Blacker, M.A.,
M.D.

Vice-Presidents :
K.B.E., M.C.,

Sir Charles. Darwin,
M.A., Sc.D., F.RS.,
