G. H. LATHE
M.Sc., M.D., C.M., Ph.D., Professor of Chemical Pathology at the University of Leeds

Defective Molecules as a

Cause of Disease

O TWO OF US are entirely alike. Many of
Ne features on which we make this

everyday observation are chemical in
nature—the pigments of the eye and skin, the
structural peculiarities of the hair which make it
curled or straight, as well as the shape of the
head, and size of the body. I emphasize this
chemical individuality because in studying the
development of disease the central element is
often the individuality of the ill person. We all
know of the extreme variation in response to an
infective agent. Infection by the poliomyelitis
virus paralyses a few persons, produces a minor
illness, perhaps comparable to a cold in a much
larger number, and many are quite unaware that
they have been infected with the virus. Clearly the
presence of the organism is not the only major
factor determining the extent or type of illness.
The same variation in response follows a standard dose of toxin, or even inorganic poison,
like lead. It is also true of diseases of uncertain
origin. Thus perhaps one in twenty of us who are
exposed to “‘England’s green and pleasant land”
become arthritic. And of those who breathe the
atmosphere of Leeds, or of any of our large industrial cities, perhaps five in a thousand develop
cancer of the lung. In none of these cases are we
able to define the decisive factors which determine that some persons develop the disease and
others are free of it. To determine these is undoubtedly one of the central problems of
medicine.

* An inaugural lecture delivered in the University
of Leeds on February 16th, 1959, and published in
March, 1960, by the Leeds University Press. Price 2s. 6d.
It is reprinted by permission of the author and of the
University of Leeds.

I have chosen to discuss “‘defective molecules
as a cause of disease” because I am convinced
that recent work in this field is preparing the way
for a solution of many problems in medicine in
which constitution and predisposition play an
important part. This includes diseases of the newborn infant, in which the pattern is often simple,
because it is more extreme, but more important
are the many conditions of middle and old age,
which assume greater importance as nutritional
and infective diseases come under our control.

Archibald Garrod and Chemical Pathology

Fifty years ago the development of disease was
discussed largely in terms of structural changes in
tissues and organs. However, in 1908 Archibald
Garrod, then a London physician and lecturer in
chemical pathology at St. Bartholomew’s Hospital Medical School, pointed out, with prophetic
foresight, that there were four diseases which had
unusual features marking them off from all other
disease. Each was present from birth, lasted
throughout life without improvement or worsening, produced no great threat to health, and was
present in other members of the family. The four
conditions were albinism, alkaptonuria (characterized by the production of urine which turns
black on standing), cystinuria (the urine contains
excess cystine, an amino acid which may produce
stones), and pentosuria (the occurrence of an
unusual sugar in the urine). At the time Garrod
spoke biochemistry was just beginning to reveal
that chemical changes in the body take place in
many stages, each of which is facilitated by a
protein catalyst, an enzyme. He interpreted these
diseases as the result of a block in single stages of
metabolism. He saw then as “‘metabolic sports,

205

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1961, 52, 4.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the chemical analogues of structural malformations.” Later he suggested that in each disease
the metabolic block was due to the absence of an
enzyme.

The conception which Garrod formulated
underwent little change during the following
forty years, although additional inborn errors of
metabolism were noted. It would have been logical
for Garrod’s clinical prophecy to have been
developed by enzyme chemists, but they were preoccupied in working out the pathways of normal
metabolism and were probably discouraged by
the rarity of suitable clinical material. It so
happens that the next decisive step in the evolution of this concept concerned the pigment of
blood.

Sickle Cell Anaemia

In 1945 Dr. Linus Pauling, the American chemist,
became interested in a peculiar kind of anaemia—
sickle cell anaemia. It had been discovered in
1910 and was so named because in the venous
blood, but not arterial blood, the red blood cells
are transformed from flexible discs to irregular,
sickle shaped, rigid bodies. These are destroyed,
and affected individuals suffer from a marked
anaemia. This disease is present in about 1 in 500
American negroes. When sickle cell anaemia
was described to Pauling, he formed the hypothesis that the unusual behaviour of the red blood
cells was due to the presence of an abnormal type
of haemoglobin. He reasoned that when it was
deprived of its oxygen by the peripheral tissues,
the molecules aggregated into long rigid rods
which twisted the red cells out of shape. He and
Itano prepared some of the sickle cell haemoglobin and at first could find no difference from
normal haemoglobin. However, in 1949 they
announced that sickle cell haemoglobin behaved
differently from normal haemoglobin when
examined by the electrophoretic technique, in
which the dissolved haemoglobins are allowed to
migrate in an electric field. Examination of the
new haemoglobin revealed that it was almost
identical with the old, except for a less negative
charge—amounting to 2-4 charges per molecule.
A year later Dr. M. F. Perutz, at Cambridge,
showed that sickle haemoglobin, or haemoglobin
S as it is now called, was as soluble as the normal
haemoglobin, haemoglobin A, when oxygenated,

206

but much less soluble than A when oxygen was
removed. And even when freed from the red
blood cell envelopes haemoglobin S would form
crystal-like structures under conditions similar to
those of venous blood.

In the meantime it had been shown that the
sickle cell condition is inherited in a Mendelian.
fashion. The homozygous individuals are anaemic, while the heterozygous ones are not. The
latter have approximately equal amounts of
haemoglobin S and A. In their blood, sickling
does not occur, probably because the haemoglobin A interferes with the “‘crystallization’’ of
haemoglobin S.

Here then was an important extension of
Garrod’s work. The inherited disease was not a
mild one, however, and while Garrod spoke of
inborn errors of metabolism being due to the
absence of an enzyme, in sicklaemia there was
something abnormal—haemoglobin S_ where
haemoglobin A should occur. This raises the
question whether other, perhaps all, congenital
metabolic errors are associated with the substitution of defective molecules for normal ones. In
the case of sickle cell anaemia there is no doubt of
this, but where an enzyme is in question, we are
unable to say. Enzymes usually occur at tissue
concentrations of less than one part in a thousand, in contrast to haemoglobin which forms
30 per cent of the red blood cells. While the biochemist can prepare enzymes as crystalline, often
pure, proteins, in a tissue extract these proteins
are recognized primarily by their activity. Should
they lose this key property by malconstruction
they would appear, by usual tests, to be absent.
Up to the present time only in some microorganisms has it been possible to obtain indirect
evidence of the existence of enzyme protein
which is not biochemically active. This has been
done by immunological techniques.

Amino Acids
Proteins are composed of twenty different
kinds of amino acids joined together in chains.
In size they vary from a few dozen amino acids to
several thousands. The possible number of
variations is legion. A recent statement by the
Swedish Academy of Sciences refers to them as
“the most complicated things in the world.”

In considering the structure of proteins, it may
DEFECTIVE MOLECULES AS A CAUSE OF DISEASE

  

Vasopressin

FIGURE 1
The amino acid structure of the posterior pituitary hormones, oxytocin and vasopressin, of cattle. Individual
amino acid residues are shown as circles about the
abbreviated name of the amino acid.

be well to examine first some simpler materials.
There are some useful lessons to be learned from
studies of the polypeptide hormones produced by
the posterior pituitary gland. This gland is
situated at the base of the brain and produces
two hormones—vasopressin, named after its
capacity to raise the blood pressure, and oxytocin, which causes the uterus to contract. These
two hormones, known for half a century, have
recently been prepared in a pure form by Dr.
V. du Vigneaud of Cornell University, and he

Pig, whale
@EXx) Sheep
Horse

req

NH,

synthesized them. Oxytocin was first prepared
from beef pituitaries. It consists of a ring of six
amino acids to which is attached a side chain of
three amino acids. Vasopressin, from the same
animal, also has nine amino acids, like oxytocin,
but two of them are different, one in the ring,
and one in the side chain. The diagram (Fig. 1)
shows the structure of oxytocin, and the amino
acid substitutions which change it into vasopressin. This transformation does not involve a
complete loss of oxytocin characteristics—they
are reduced to 5-20 per cent of that of oxytocin—
but the effect on blood pressure is increased 100
times by this change. Thus amino acid structure
is the basis of physiological specificity—it
determines the organ which will respond to the
hormone. |

But an even more interesting aspect of amino
acid substitution appeared. Du Vigneaud’s first
extracts of oxytocin were from beef glands. Pig
glands gave an identical product. When pig
vasopressin was examined, however, a new
product was found, for the lysine in the side
chain (of beef vasopressin) is substituted by
arginine. Thus amino acid sequence is also the
basis of species specificity.

Oxytocin and vasopressin are small molecules
compared with proteins. Insulin is a small pro
PIII DIDI IDI I DOO Nit,

S
|
S

|

Caf vaay Gin) iy Leal Croy GisX Ser) HislLel Vall Giny Ala Ley Tre Val) CrsNGr}Gin) dea) Giy) PreKPng TYTN Pro\ Lays

Beef insulin

FIGURE 2

The amino acid structure of beef insulin. The substitution of the Ala, Ser, Val sequence of the small ring, which
occurs in four other species, is shown above.

NH, NH,

207

ER—D
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tein. The amino acid sequence of insulin was
defined in 1956 by Dr. F. Sanger and his group at
Cambridge. This molecule is about six times as
large as oxytocin and vasopressin. While the
posterior pituitary hormones have been taken
apart and reassembled insulin has so far only
gone through the dismantling phase. Like the
posterior pituitary hormones it involves a small
ring of six amino acids, but it has in addition a
large ring of twenty-seven amino acids. Sanger’s
group has examined the sequence of amino acids
in five species of insulin. Two, pig and whale, are
identical, and beef, sheep and horse differ from
them and from each other, as shown in Fig. 2. It
is particularly interesting that these differences
all involve three amino acid loci, which are side
by side in the small ring. It seems probable then
that the ring is necessary for the action of the
insulin molecule, but that its constituents are
immaterial (within limits, no doubt). Certain
parts of the molecule are more closely involved
in the biological action of insulin than others. A
pentapeptide may be removed from the phenylalanine chain and some activity still remains. The
available information regarding insulin strengthens the idea that substitution of individual
amino acids is important for biological function,
and also plays a part in evolutionary specialization. A vast amount of work is being carried out
at present on a number of small proteins and
polypeptides of biological importance. Our
knowledge in this field should soon be much more
extensive.

The insulin molecule is six times larger than
that of oxytocin, and rather more complicated.
The protein haemoglobin is about twelve times
the size of insulin, and the fact that the haemoglobin molecule consists of two identical halves
still leaves us with units differing by a factor of six.

The Haemoglobins

Dr. V. M. Ingram at Cambridge, who is the
foremost worker in this field, has been able to
locate the difference between haemoglobin A
and S, even though the entire sequence of 300
amino acids in the half molecule is not known.
He established the difference between the two
haemoglobin molecules by dissecting them
enzymatically and comparing the fragments.
These were spread out on paper by a combination

208

of chromatography and electrophoresis. A difference was then noted, for peptide no. 4 of
haemoglobin A was missing from the fragments
of haemoglobin S. Instead a new peptide was
observed. The sequence of amino acids which
Ingram found in the two peptides is shown in
Fig. 3. Each has nine amino acids and the difference between the two peptides, and therefore
between the two haemoglobins, is a single
amino acid. A glutamic acid residue in haemoglobin A is replaced by valine in haemoglobin S.
The loss of the acid group of glutamic acid
explained Pauling’s observation of a different
charge on haemoglobin S.

Pauling separated haemoglobins A and S by
the classical form of electrophoresis devised by
Tiselius. The success that attended this venture,
its importance for medicine, and the invention of
the much simpler method of “paper electrophoresis” resulted in a great deal of attention
being given to haemoglobin. In addition, the fact
that haemoglobin can be seen makes it doubly
easy to examine. In the ten years since haemoglobin S was described there have been found
more than twenty other forms of haemoglobin.
Moreover it has been known for many years that
at birth a large proportion of haemoglobin is
different from that of the adult. This foetal type,
haemoglobin F, which has quite distinct characteristics, gradually disappears from circulation
during the first weeks of extra-uterine life. Two
embryonic forms are also known. Several other
mammals also have foetal haemoglobins differing from the adult forms. The reason is unknown.
Thus there are at least twenty-five haemoglobin
types in the human species. Their analysis is a

SOSSCSSSS

Haemoglobin A

AAQOQOHOOA

Haemoglobin S$

FIGURE 3
The amino acid structure of peptide no. 4 of normal
haemoglobin (A), and of the corresponding peptide of
sickle cell haemoglobin (S).
DEFECTIVE MOLECULES AS A CAUSE OF DISEASE

particularly urgent task because of the information that will be obtained regarding the biochemical links between the genetic constitution
of the individual and the structure of the body.
The mode of inheritance of the main types of
haemoglobin is understood. They are inherited
as Mendelian factors, and each haemoglobin,
apart from F and A, is interpreted as a mutation
arising from an alteration to the chromosome
structure.

The haemoglobin half-molecule consists of
two polypeptide chains, alpha and beta. The
mutation producing haemoglobin S results in a
change of a single glutamic acid residue, out of
about 150 amino acids in the alpha polypeptide
chain. Glutamic acid is substituted by valine. In
haemoglobin C the same residue is altered, but
this substitution is by a lysine. Haemoglobin E
represents the change of a different glutamic acid
residue in the same alpha chain, to lysine. D,
probably involves alteration of the same amino
acid locus but the substituent has not yet been
identified. Two alterations to the beta chain have
been observed in haemoglobins D, and I. It had
already been predicted by Neel that there were
two genes determining the inheritance of haemoglobin. Ingram now suggests that one controls
the alpha chain and the second the beta chain.
The ultimate aim, of course, is to demonstrate a
relation between the structure of the genes and
that of the polypeptide chains.

The remarkable array of human haemoglobins
that have been described in the past decade raises
a number of important questions. It is quite
evident that there is much variety in our human
material. Any study of eye colour, or hair colour,
will testify to that, but usually this has been
explicable on the basis of varying proportions of
two or three constituents. The pigments involved
are generally relatively small molecules and not
many varieties are possible, as compared with a
large molecule like haemoglobin. Nevertheless it
comes as a surprise that there are so many forms
of haemoglobin. This protein is an exceptional
one, and its properties combine to make it
possible to demonstrate this variety. But there
would seem to be no intrinsic reason why its
variability should be greater than that of other
proteins. Certainly one would not expect less
variation if it were colourless, like most proteins.

Lacking more information one must assume that
other proteins are also extremely variable.

It is notable too that, while the first abnormal
haemoglobins were found because they produce
disease, many of those described later are not
known to do so. A number only contribute to
illness when they are combined with some other
haemoglobin abnormality, as in patients who
have both haemoglobin S and C. At the present
time less than half of the known forms are diseaseproducing, or disease-aggravating. Moreover, the
defect in the abnormal molecules of haemoglobin S does not affect the main function of
haemoglobin, which is oxygen transport. The
affinity for carbon dioxide does not appear to
have been examined. The failure of haemoglobin
S lies entirely in its insolubility when freed of
oxygen. The tendency of the molecules to aggregate is much greater than that of haemoglobin A
or of a mixture of the two. On the other hand
haemoglobin C will aggregate with S, forming
“‘mixing crystals.” It is interesting to note that
haemoglobin F, which is present in large amounts
at birth, protects the infant which is affected with
sicklaemia, because it will not form mixed
crystals in this way. Thus our knowledge of
haemoglobin S emphasizes that a biological
structure must be adjusted to all of the circumstances of its cellular environment, and not
merely serve the function which we may regard
as of prime importance.

The frequency with which abnormal human
haemoglobins appear in a population never
exceeds 2 or 3 per cent. The position is different
in other animals, for cattle and sheep each have
two haemoglobin “strains”? and _ individual
animals may have either or both. Mice appear to
exhibit some haemoglobin heterogeneity too. So
far as is known none of these protein variants are
associated with disease.

Human Proteins

Few human proteins have been studied very
fully. Electrophoretic analysis of plasma proteins
indicates that there is more than one haptoglobin.

Two types of f-isoagglutinins have also been

noted. The types are inherited. Scarcely any nonhaemoglobin proteins have been examined
systematically among other species than our own,
but f-lactoglobulin in the milk of cows is an

209
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

example. There are two variants of this protein,
and one or the other, or both, are produced by
lactating cows.

This survey of the uniformity and variation
among individual proteins has touched on a few
hormones, and one protein, haemoglobin, which
is specialized for carrying the respiratory gases.
One ought logically to move on to discuss
enzymes, since most of the proteins of the body
are of this type. As mentioned previously, the
subject of structural variation in enzymes is
largely unexplored, however. It is in much the
same undeveloped condition as the molecular
basis of heredity and protein synthesis was ten
years ago. Then one could scarcely have attempted to describe genetic and hereditary factors
in chemical terms, and knowledge of the synthesis of proteins was very rudimentary. Recently. progress has been particularly rapid in
these fields and in a short time we should know
as much about these subjects as we do about
sugar and fat metabolism, and a great deal more
than we do about calcium metabolism and the
mode of action of hormones.

:. Evidence from many sources indicates that an
important part.in the inheritance of characteristics is played by the chromosomes and the
nucleic acids which they contain. A sharp break
in the inheritance of body characteristics may in
‘the most satisfactory conditions actually be
visible as a break or defect in the chromosomes.
More frequently mutations are not associated
with a visible alteration, but one is inferred from
indirect evidence. This concept received very
strong support from experiments on the transformation of. bacterial types by exposure to
extracts (non-living, since they had been heated)
from. other types of bacteria. Moreover, the new
type. which had been produced in this way was
perpetuated in succeeding generations. This
observation was made by Griffiths in this
country in 1928. It was extended by American
workers who showed that the essential agent was
deoxyribonucleic acid, which biochemists usually
call DNA. The importance of DNA in more
differentiated organisms is shown by the relatively. constant amounts of DNA in individual
body cells of each species, and by the occurrence
of about half the amount in germ cells. Thus we
have a chemical parallel to the alleged biological

210

fact that in most organisms about half the
genetic influence is contributed by each parent.
Supporting evidence has come from studies of
virus structures, for these half-living things have
disposed of many of the attributes of life, but
retain in a highly developed form the capacity to
transmit their characteristics to succeeding
generations of viruses. A large part of the
viruses which infect animals is deoxyribonucleic
acid.

Deoxyribonucleic acid takes its name from the
sugar, deoxyribose, which with alternating
phosphate linkages forms the “‘backbone”’ of the
nucleic acid. Attached to each sugar residue is a
base. These bases are of two general types—
characterized by a keto or an amino group. The
ratio of these is approximately 1.

Earlier we have seen that the differences between the vasopressins and insulins of different
species, and the difference between the normal
and mutant forms of haemoglobin, depend on the
substitution of one amino acid for another. Accordingly, genetic change must be at least as
detailed as this. The chemical structure of the
genetic material must provide for the sequence
of twenty amino acids commonly found in the
proteins. There may of course be some intervening steps between the genetic material and the
body proteins. But a satisfactory hereditary
structure must satisfy other needs. Biological
observations necessitate that the molecules be
reproducible, as happens at each mitotic division
of body cells. In the production of gametes the
genetic material is halved. It must also be capable
of resuming the double structure with fertilization.

In 1953 J. D. Watson and F. H. C. Crick suggested a structure for DNA which, with a few
modifications, satisfies several of the above specifications. X-ray studies, on extracted DNA and
on the material in the heads of fish sperms, have
suggested a helical structure for it. Watson and
Crick consider that there are two corkscrew
nucleic acid chains coiled about each other so
that the keto and amino groups of the attached
bases become linked by hydrogen bonds.
Perutz has likened it to a spiral staircase in which
the. bases form the steps and the phosphate and
sugar chains form the banisters.

The part of the DNA structure which deterDEFECTIVE MOLECULES AS A CAUSE OF DISEASE

mines (directly or indirectly) the amino acid sequence is considered to be the bases. These are
paired, one being amino, and the other keto. It
has been suggested that a particular arrangement
of two or three base pairs forms the unique code
for each of the twenty amino acids in the body
proteins. Since it is assumed that each base in a
keto-amino pair has only one “‘opposite” type, it
will be understood that if one nucleic acid spiral
were separated from its partner it would have the
structure (base sequence) which could form the
basis for replication of a new partner identical
with the old. It has been suggested that separation takes place by unwinding. Moreover, this
motion, which separates the two chains, could
become the motion of uniting with new chains.

DNA molecules are variable in size, but a
molecular weight of 6 million is not exceptional.
Such a molecule would be about 25 A across the
helix, and about 30,000 A long for a molecular
weight of 6 million. It would contain about
10,000 base pairs. Assuming that three base pairs
are the signal or code for each amino acid, the
corresponding protein would have 3,000 amino
acids and a molecular weight of about 300,000.
Many proteins are of this size.

The mutations revealed by the variations of the
haemoglobin molecule each involve substitution
of one amino acid for another. Accordingly the
corresponding change in the DNA molecule
would consist of changes to two or three base
pairs. Larger structural defects, involving loss of
many base pairs or fragmentation of the DNA
molecule, would produce much larger mutations.

Much attention has been given to estimating
the size of the gene. This term was originally used
for the genetic material determining a body
character, such as height or colour. As more
became known of the factors determining a
character, it was realized that they could be very
complex. The idea of “‘one gene, one enzyme”
was then developed. It would seem now that the
minimal genetic change must involve one amino
acid or one peptide link. This would appear to
be a more logical genetic unit. Attempts to
estimate the size of the determining structure
have been based on the capacity of ionizing
radiation to produce mutations. Working with
micro-organisms, it has been possible to determine the relative position and frequency of

different mutations along a DNA chain. Benzer
has used this technique on a strain of viruses
affecting certain bacteria. According to him the
minimal size of a hereditary unit is about two
base pairs. The same study also showed : that
some sections of the DNA are ten to twenty
times more susceptible to mutation than other:
areas. The reason for this is not clear. :

Should future work confirm these suggestions
and observations, then genetic material is constructed on a very fine scale indeed. The physician
who diagnoses sickle cell anaemia is, in fact,
making a qualitative analysis of 10/g of matter
—a sensitivity which compares well with’ the
most refined measures of the chemical laboratory.

The way DNA determines the amino-acid sequence of proteims cannot be very simple, however. This becomes evident when it is seen in
relation to the mechanisms synthesizing protein
in the cell, for the DNA is confined to the nucleus
and as far as is known little protein synthesis
takes place there. The modern conception of the
cell is much more detailed than a few years ago,
thanks to the electron microscope and the separation of cell fragments by high speed centrifugation. In thinking of cell structure it may be well
to view it in relation to everyday objects. Let us
consider a single mammalian cell, say from the
liver, and suppose that we could increase the
diameter by about 2 million times. The single
cell would then have a diameter equal to this
lecture room, about 100 ft. At about the centre
would be another spherical body, the nucleus,
which would comfortably enclose the blackboard and bench top. Within this central nucleus
is almost all of the DNA of the cell. On this scale
these corkscrew-shaped molecules would be
about a sixth of an inch in diameter, while the
length would be rather variable—probably longer
than twenty feet. This size presents no problem
since the DNA molecules are probably coiled up.

The area outside the nucleus contains two
main structures—large sausage-shaped bodies
and smaller, more numerous, spherical objects.
The sausage-shaped bodies, called mitochondria,
would be of the order of twelve feet long and
three feet broad. Several scores of them are distributed at random through the extra-nuclear
jelly. They might occupy rather less than a fifth
of the extra-nuclear space. From their bio
211
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

chemical properties it is clear that much of the
equipment for generation of energy, through
stepwise oxidation of sugar and fat, is concentrated in them. This energy is stored in special
phosphate esters which diffuse to other parts of
the cell. Mitochondria certainly play some part
in formation of proteins, for the energy necessary
for this process is generated there. They may also
be the site of some protein synthesis, but a great
deal of evidence suggests that formation of
protein is most rapid in the smaller spherical
bodies, the microsomes. On the scale we are
discussing these would have a diameter of about
seven inches, and their number may be estimated
as of the order of 150,000 per cell. In the cell they
probably do not exist as separate structures, but
are part of a series of membranes which occupy
much of the interior of the cell. These membranes
have been called the cytoplasmic reticulum, from
their appearance in electron micrographs. Studies
with isotopes indicate that amino acids are more
rapidly incorporated in the proteins of microsomes than any other cell structure. Now these
small spherical bodies which synthesize the
proteins are a long way from the nuclear deoxyribonucleic acid into which is built the formula
or code determining the all-important sequence
of amino acids in the proteins. A clue to the
solution of this problem lies in the fact that
microsomes contain a large amount of another
form of nucleoprotein, namely, ribonucleic acid
(RNA). There is some RNA in the nucleus as
well, and, considered as a whole, the microsomes
of a cell contain about twice as much RNA as
there is DNA in the nucleus. The evidence incriminating microsomal ribonucleic acid as the
intermediary between DNA and protein synthesis is thus largely circumstantial, depending on
the fact that RNA is found at the site of the
crime. But in another context we know that
ribonucleic acid can determine amino acid
sequence, for the viruses affecting plants contain
RNA, rather than DNA, and it controls the
hereditary pattern of these viruses. The remainder of the virus particles is protein, and it is not
infective alone whereas RNA is.

_ If we accept the postulate that a single amino
acid locus is determined by three base pairs in
nucleic acid, whether DNA or RNA, it is possible
to calculate the number of different proteins

212

which the cell parts could synthesize. From the
amount of DNA in the nucleus, and assuming
that all is used for this purpose, 2,000,000
different proteins of 100,000 molecular weight
could be constructed. This is a large number
considering that we know of less than 400
mammalian proteins. In contrast to the nucleus,
individual microsomes appear to have a limited
repertoire of protein synthesis. If the amount of
RNA determines the number of proteins which
can be synthesized, then an average microsome
can make only about a score of different proteins (of 100,000 molecular weight). The cell
probably has a hundred times this number. Accordingly the microsomes of a cell must be
specialized in a way which other cell parts are
not. This has not yet been demonstrated experimentally.

Defective Molecules and Mutation

Turning now to the production of defective
molecules, there are thus at least two places where
alteration might occur in the normal pattern
upon which the cell proteins are constructed.
One is in the nuclear DNA, the other in the
microsomal RNA. Possibly some third intermediate stage is also involved, but this is as yet
unknown. Whether the microsomes ever participate in disease as independent units has not yet
been examined. One must note here, however,
the existence of that roving band of microsomelike bodies, which the bacteriologists call viruses.

Alteration of nuclear DNA will lead to a
change in the amino acid sequence of proteins
and this will be inherited by daughter cells, or by
offspring, if gametes are affected. In the latter
case, if the change is detectable it will be classed
as a mutation.

The first mutations to be observed were spontaneous ones. In 1928 Muller noted that exposure to X-rays greatly increased the frequency of
mutations. It is accepted now that all ionizing
radiation has this effect, which is dependent in
part on direct action on the DNA, and partly on
the indirect effect of reactive radicals produced
from the water of the cell. The native radioactivity of the cell constituents, notably
potassium, plays some part in producing the
spontaneous mutations. To this must be added
background radiation from the immediate
DEFECTIVE MOLECULES AS A CAUSE OF DISEASE

environment, and cosmic radiation from outer
space. Since 1895, when RGntgen discovered Xrays, man-made radiation has been increasing in
amount, and in the past fifteen years the whole of
humanity, rather than small sections, has been
exposed to the radioactive products of nuclear
explosions, to nuclear power station effluate
and the accidental escape of fuel breakdown
products. No accurate estimate of the effect can
be made, but it is now generally agreed that the
increase in mutation, most of which is disadvantageous, is very thinly spread through the
whole world population, making it unapparent
to the casual observer, yet in total reaching large
sums. .

The increased number of mutations attributable to man-made radiations is quite uncertain,
and estimates vary widely. Among citizens of
highly developed countries the most serious
effects are probably produced by X-rays. Another
factor probably also plays a part in the production of mutations, for in 1947 Auerbach and
Robson pointed out that a chemical, mustard gas,
was a mutagenic agent. Since then many others
have been discovered and a number, particularly
the nitrogen mustards, serve as therapeutic
agents. It is not improbable that certain natural
constituents of the cell are mutagenic, and it is
possible that cholesterol has this effect.

The variety of haemoglobins that have been
found, of which a few are disease producing,
suggests two conclusions regarding mutations.
Firstly, the number of mutations observed in
genetic experiments will depend on the method
of examining succeeding generations. The biologist generally looks at rather striking features
like colour. His attention would be drawn to a
mutation yielding mice with white blood, or
blood of some other colour. But it is clearly
possible for there to be scores, if not hundreds,
of varieties of red haemoglobin. Thus one may
expect the number of observed mutations, due to
the use of a refined examination of protein, to be
increased by perhaps 10 to 100 times. Viewed on
this scale, ionizing radiation may be much more
potent in the production of mutations than is
considered at present.

The second conclusion suggested by the variety
of haemoglobins, is that the widely held generality that most mutations are disadvantageous to

the species involved, and lead to increased illness
and eventually death, may have to be revised.
Apparently not all the mutations of haemoglobins are serious, and only a few are known to
produce anaemia. This is what might be expected from a biochemical viewpoint, for only a
few amino acids in each protein are necessary for
the known function of the protein. What the
remainder do is not clear. Considerable alteration to unessential parts of the protein molecule
might be possible without affecting its main
function, though a disadvantageous effect on
secondary properties, as seen in the low solubility of haemoglobin S, may occur. From our
present knowledge, about a fifth of the known
haemoglobin variants are disadvantageous. Perhaps the most important conclusion to be drawn
is that we are more ignorant than we might like
to think.

As we have seen, some modifications of the
DNA of germ cells will result in a new structure
in the offspring, and this will be passed on to
succeeding generations. Genetic studies indicate
that if the change is a significant one, it is likely to
be disadvantageous and will, in time, be eliminated by the death of affected individuals. Body
cells also become mutated and pass on their
altered constitution to daughter cells. This probably produces heterogeneity as the individual
ages. Cancer may involve a change of this type.
In neither instance has the homogeneity of
proteins been systematically examined, though
Putnam’s finding of a remarkable degree of
individuality among proteins produced by
myeloma tumours suggests that a search would
be well rewarded.

As the body is a very active chemical system
whose pathways are determined by highly specific
enzymes, it is to be expected that the most striking results of anomalous protein structure would
appear when individual enzymes are modified.
The number of possible diseases of this type is
probably large. In 1957 Dixon and Webb were
able to list 327 enzymes of animal origin. There
is reason to believe that most of these occur in
the human body and probably ten to 100 times
this number will eventually be found, though
many may be of little importance. A complete
defect of some enzymes, for example hexokinase,
would probably result in the intra-uterine death

213
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of the individual. How large a contribution
enzyme defects make to the intra-uterine wastage
of human reproduction, which is of the order of
20 per cent, is not known.

Before surveying present knowledge of enzyme
defects as a cause of disease it may be asked by
what test are we to conclude that a disease is due
to an enzyme defect. Here we may paraphrase
the second criterion which Koch used in defining
disease due to infection, and say that proof of a
single enzyme defect must rest on an examination
of the patient’s tissues in vitro, by a test which
depends on a single chemical reaction mediated
by an enzyme. By this criterion eleven pathological conditions have been defined during the
past ten years, as shown in Table 1. It will be
noted that only one of Garrod’s original four
conditions, namely alkaptonuria, can yet be
included in this group, and in this instance there
was a span of fifty years between formulation of
the hypothesis and its proof. There is a larger
group of diseases in which the evidence for single
enzyme defects is very strong, but the decisive
test for the enzyme in the patient’s tissues has
not yet been made. Taking these two groups
together, it seems probable that diseases due to
enzyme defects have been discovered for about
10 per cent of the known enzymes of the body.
In some areas of metabolism it is much higher.

Thus of the eight enzymes mediating the first
stages of carbohydrate metabolism (Fig. 4) four
defects have been noted. Defects in some of the
remaining four enzymes might be lethal in the
homozygous condition.

TABLE 1

ELEVEN PATHOLOGICAL CONDITIONS IN WHICH INDIVIDUAL

ENZYME DEFECTS HAVE BEEN PROVEN. IN NON-HAEMOLYTIC

NEONATAL JAUNDICE OF THE HUMAN OTHER ENZYMES MAY
ALSO BE UNDEVELOPED

YEAR OF
CLINICAL CONDITION ENZYME DEFECT PROOF
Methaemoglobinaemia Diaphorase I 1948
Hypophosphatasia Alkaline phosphatase 1948
Glycogen storage disease Glucose-6-phosphatase 1953
of liver and kidney (von
Gierke)
Apnoea from succinyl Pseudocholinesterase 1953
choline
Haemolytic anaemia due Glucose-6-phosphate 1956
to primaquin dehydrogenase
Galactosaemia Uridylyl transferase 1956
Phenylketonuria Phenylalanine-4hydroxylase of liver 1957
Non-haemolytic neonatal UDP-transglucuronylase 1957
jaundice
Congenital familial non- UDP-transglucuronylase 1957

haemolytic jaundice

Alkaptonuria Homogentisate oxidase 1958
Glycogen storage disease Phosphorylase of muscle 1959
of muscle

A good deal is also known about enzyme
defects in the metabolism of aromatic amino
acids, as the clinical conditions attributable to a

Glycogen

Phosphorylase *

* Branching || Debranching ae

enzyme

enzyme

Glucose-1-phosphate

Phosphoglucomutase

Glucose+ ATP—22—- en
* ee.
ra

Glucose

Phosphohexose

— = > Glucose-6-phosphate~—"““_»-Fructose-6-phosphate

Glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase

6-phosphogluconate

FIGURE 4
Initial stages of the metabolic pathways of carbohydrate metabolism. Diseases due to the absence of individual
enzymes have been described for those enzymes marked with an asterisk.

214
DEFECTIVE MOLECULES AS A CAUSE OF DISEASE

block in four of six stages have been recognized.
One of these is phenylpyruvic oligophrenia,
which, as its name implies, is associated with an

-extreme defect in intelligence. It now appears
probable that the brain damage is due to the
accumulation of unmetabolized phenylalanine.
This is an important disease as the heterozygous
condition occurs in 1 per cent of the population.
The brain condition probably can be prevented
from developing if an early diagnosis is made in
the 1 in 25,000 infants in whom the homozygous
condition appears.

The list of conditions in which enzyme defects
have been defined includes one enzyme (UDPtransglucuronylase) which may be defective
from genetic causes (in congenital familial nonhaemolytic jaundice, a disease marked by excess
plasma bilirubin, and damage to the brain) or
from retarded development of this enzyme (in the
much more common newborn jaundice, which
may also produce brain damage). This illustrates
the fact that the herditary make-up determines
the potentiality, but other factors may prevent
its realization. The possibility that slow development of this enzyme is inherited must also be
considered.

Three of the listed conditions illustrate the key
role which environmental factors may play. Thus
the haemolytic anaemia due to absence of
glucose-6-phosphatase dehydrogenase in red
blood cells only appears when some factor intervenes to oxidize the cell glutathione. Primaquine
and naphthalene metabolites do this. In this
sense moth ball poisoning is an inherited disease!
In the same class, but more serious, is galactosaemia. The homozygous infant is not ill when
born, it only becomes so when it is fed on milk
containing the sugar galactose, which it cannot
metabolize. Milk must be excluded from the
diet of the affected individual for the whole of
life.

The combination of genetic and environmental factors may be of great importance in the
pathogenesis of many diseases which are frankly
familiar in character. This interplay is probably
even more crucial in those diseases like diabetes
where constitutional factors are demonstrable,
but which up to the present have proved too
complex for us to understand.

A vast amount of information is now available

indicating that inherited traits play a part in the
production of disease. There are a number of
inherited conditions characterized by weird
morphological abnormalities like achondroplastic dwarfism, or ichthiosis. Many diseases of
uncertain origin like schizophrenia and diabetes
also involve inherited predisposition. The greatest contribution to ill health is probably in the
large number of ill-defined conditions, which
appear in middle and old age, like adiposity and
arteriosclerosis. All three categories probably
include simple problems of individual enzyme
defects, but environmental factors may operate
as well.

Thus we see that in a few instances it is now
possible to trace the outlines of the structural
basis of inherited disease from the parents
through to the tissues of the children. It has been
predicted by Professor Charles Dent that the
simple concept that I have attempted to sketch
will turn out to play the same unifying role in
medicine that the atomic theory played in
chemistry. How can this be, it may be asked,
when the diseases I have listed do not account for
even | per cent of illness ? The answer is, I think,
that we are still working on the periphery of the
subject. But already a pattern is appearing from
which we can see how to approach some of the
more complex problems of constitutional predisposition. |

Biologists have noted that hybrids—crosses of
markedly differing strains or species—are often
larger and more robust than either of their
parents. There is, I think, a parallel to this in the
growth of science. Advance is most rapid when
there is the interplay of two subjects, or contributions from independent disciplines. This is
abundantly true of the subject we have been discussing. Biological and chemical approaches,
together with the spur of unsolved problems of
human disease, have thrown into relief a whole
series of new aspects in each field. The amino acid
pattern of proteins is seen as the common basis
of physiological specificity, of inherited species
specificity, and of constitutional problems in
disease. Nature indeed works on a detailed
pattern in which everything may depend on which
one of twenty amino acids occupies one particular
amino acid locus in a protein.

I am convinced that this concept will prove to

216

ER—E
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

be a great help in mastering illnesses which now
appear to be outside our control. This concept is
also aesthetically satisfying. It emphasizes the
unity of the organism, while taking account of
the diversity of its parts. Thus we see that the
most varied signs and symptoms of disease, in
216

volving six or eight organs, can result from interruption to a single stage of metabolism, and
even from the replacement of one amino acid by
another in a single protein. This illustrates, I
think, the remarkable way in which chemistry
can simplify medicine.
