E. G. KNOX,
M.D., M.R.C.P.

Distributions of Uncommon
Disorders

HOSE DISEASES WHICH exhibit obvious

social spatial or temporal aggregations on

the one hand, or high familial concentrations on the other, supply good clues concerning
the existence and often the detailed nature of
environmental and genetic determinants. Perhaps it is because of this that many of those
diseases which we still do not understand are
sporadic in their occurrence, the relationships
between events apparently affording little evidence from which to infer their aetiologies. This
is particularly evident in childhood, congenital
malformations, tumours and the leukaemias
being the main examples of diseases in this
residual category.

Wherever a reasonable and testable hypothesis is devised, problems of this nature may be
attacked by the use of contingency methods and
the association between thalidomide and limb
deformities, radiation and leukaemia, leukaemia
and mongolism, and between irradiation of the
thymus and carcinoma of the thyroid are
examples of successful application. Indeed the
discipline of epidemiology, with the accepted
extension of its brief to non-epidemic disease, has
come to rely more and more upon contingency
methods, and less and less upon the study of the
space and time relationships between events.

Nevertheless, a general desire to extract more
from space and time data relating to uncommon
events makes itself heard from time to time. In
1937 Kellett commented upon the apparent
clustering of cases of leukaemia and since then
other statements of a similar nature have been
made in relation to this disease (Wood 1960,
Pinkel and Nefzger, 1959). In 1957 Pleydell
recorded data on the space and time distributions
of mongolism and other malformations in
Northamptonshire and reached a similar con
29

clusion. In none of these studies however has a
formal statistical validation been achieved,
mainly it seems to me, because the questions
asked of the data were in fact complex questions,
and were not sufficiently analysed and resolved
into their component parts.

An attempt to resolve the problem logically,
to develop a practical method of analysis, and to
apply the method to appropriate situations has
constituted a major part of a research programme, supported by the Eugenics Society, and
carried out at Newcastle in the University
Department of Child Health.

Resolution of the Problem

Attempts to define an “epidemic,” or “‘epidemicity” fall back upon the concept of “prevalence”
and its variation, and the variation is usually
conceived as a variation in time. When a series
of events is sparsely scattered relative to the
supposed frequency of any variation of its
prevalence, the concept of prevalence itself
breaks down and the situation is analogous with
the inappropriateness of the ordinary concepts of
“pressure” or of “wave forms” at very low
concentrations of gas molecules or at very low
intensities of radiation particles. When “‘prevalence” is inappropriate we must devise new
methods of dealing with “low intensity epidemicity” appropriate to individual events and the
relationships between pairs of events, in much
the same way as the physicist when studying low
intensities of radiation.

This could all be avoided by the addition of
greater geographical areas to a study of a
particular disease, provided that the variations
within that larger area were not out of phase.
Unfortunately this is a possibility which must be
taken into account, and although an epidemic is

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1963, 55, 1.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

usually conceived as a variation in time, it is
quite clear that peaks and troughs may occur at
different times in different places. In a disease
such as whooping cough this smouldering pattern may be such that a large area will fail to
show time variations evident on a smaller
geographical scale, and a long period of time may
fail to show the geographical concentrations
evident over a shorter period. In a less frequent
disease than whooping cough restrictions of
time or area take us into the low intensity
regions, while on the other hand attempts to
avoid these problems take us beyond the optimal
limits for the separate examination either of
time or geographical variations.

A form of solution to these problems is
proposed. If we examine all possible pairs of
cases from a series [n(n-1)/2 pairs for n cases]
and classify them both according to time apart
and distance apart, a contingency table may be
set up to show whether or not pairs which are
close in time are also relatively close in space
when compared with pairs further apart on the
time scale. The calculations are done by an
electronic computer programme which (a)
accepts dates and map references, (b) organizes

the pairs, (c) finds times apart by subtracting
dates, (d) finds distances apart by subtracting
grid latitudes and longitudes and applying
Pythagoras’ theorem, (e) prints a table in a form
which may be varied by means of a steering tape.

It becomes clear from a contingency table of
this kind that space-time concentrations resolve
themselves into three components (a) concentrations in time (b) concentrations in space (c)
space-time interactions. The last of these is
**Pleydell’s Problem” and the component which
this computer method particularly demonstrates.
Non-interacting space and time concentrations
will often be best demonstrated by conventional
methods but if sought on a pairs basis will need
controls for the spatial distribution and comparison with a calculable expected null distribution of pairs for time apart. Of course, the
epidemicity of any particular disease may be
manifest in any or all of these ways.

The analysis of all possible pairs still poses
unsolved and partially solved problems of assessing statistical significance and these are being
studied. At the same time an empirical experience of the pattern presented by different diseases
is being built up.

CLEFT LIPS AND PALATES IN NORTHUMBERLAND:
PROPORTIONS OF INTERVALS CLOSER THAN 4 KILOMETRES IN 100 DAY BANDS

|
0,20 ~ O —O
—t

0.19 >

rer

Le) X
-P

 

Proportion of pairs with distance less than 4 kilometres

4
|

-199 -299

) z

(7)

Ny

 

_
in

Intervals between pairs in days

390
DISTRIBUTIONS OF UNCOMMON DISORDERS

Application of Low Intensity Concepts

A number of examinations have now been made
and negative results have been obtained from
cleft palate, cleft lip with palate, hypospadias,
and for myeloid leukaemia. A positive result has
been obtained from lymphoblastic leukaemia in
young children and a result which is difficult to
interpret, but which may well be positive, has
been obtained for isolated cleft lip.

The result for the lymphoblastic leukaemias is
the simplest to interpret. We assembled all cases
of leukaemia in children under fifteen years of
age with onsets in Northumberland, Durham, or
on Tees-side (in the North Riding) between
January Ist, 1951 and December 31st, 1960.
There were 168 cases. Conventional analysis
demonstrated a seasonal variation of onsets,
with a summer maximum (May to October),
limited to the lymphoblastic leukaemias, and
agreeing in these respects with a demonstration
by Lee (1962) based upon National Cancer
Registrations. Conventional analysis further
showed that for the myeloblastic leukaemias the
risk per million population was higher in the
large towns and conurbations (over 50,000) than
in smaller towns and rural areas. We also found
that the urban rural differential applied to older
children (six and over) with lymphoblastic
leukaemia and that the seasonal variation applied
only to the younger ones (five and under) and
that the seasonal factor and the urban factor
therefore applied to quite different groups of
cases.

Computer analysis was then performed upon
the total group, the lymphoblastic leukaemias
under six years of age, the older children with
lymphoblastic leukaemia, the myeloblastic
leukaemias, and to various other groupings. The
findings were negative for the myeloblastic
leukaemias and for the older lymphoblastic
leukaemias and showed no evidence of an
interaction between the seasonal and urban
concentrating factors. However, there were
within the young lymphoblastic leukaemias four
pairs of cases which were within one kilometre
and within fifty days of each other. The null
expected value based upon totals under fifty
days and under one kilometre, was 0-49 and the
observed excess may be considered significant.
The eight children in the four pairs all had a

summer onset, suggesting that the seasonal
variation and the space-time interaction were
different manifestations of a common factor.

Analysis of cleft lip and palate gave a different
kind of result and the Figure gives, for Northumberland, the proportions of pairs closer than four
kilometres at successive 100 day interval-bands
up to 800 days. This study, too, was based upon
a ten-year ascertainment of clefts of lip and
palate for Northumberland and Durham. The
Figure presents separately those pairs involving
and those not involving a case of isolated cleft
lip. The x? test indicates a high degree of
statistical significance for variation in the first
group, but because pairs are non-independent its
validity in the circumstances is doubtful. However, if the variation is taken at its face value it
indicates local cycles of incidence, the frequency of
the cycle being of the order of two years and the
geographical radius within which cycles are in
phase being about four kilometres. Unfortunately
no confirmation of this was obtained with the
data from County Durham.

Cleft lip showed other aberrations not shared
by cleft palate and cleft lip with palate. Its incidence varied significantly between sub-areas of
Northumberland (although not Durham) and
between different years of the study and one may
postulate an epidemiological instability limited
to Northumberland and perhaps related to the
county’s great variation of concentration of
population. The proportion of cleft lips involved
in this interaction would probably not exceed
about 10 per cent of the total number of cases.

However, the significance of the pattern must
remain in doubt for the time being and awaits the
analysis of further sets of data in a similar manner and the further development of significance
testing for use with this technique.

Conclusions

The first applications of this method, as given
above have achieved two things. First they have
confirmed the existence in one set of data of a
feature of the epidemiology of leukaemia which
has been suspected previously on intuitive
grounds; the next stages here will be the testing
of other sets of leukaemia data in the same
manner and later stages will involve testing the
various possible explanatory hypotheses—

31
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

infective, toxic, etc.—which suggest themselves.

Secondly, the question has been raised of a
previously unsuspected pattern of epidemicity,
in certain circumstances, in the distribution of
isolated cleft lip. Problems of interpretation and
statistical validification are less satisfactory for
the type of pattern apparently demonstrated by
this malformation than in the simple interaction
demonstrated by leukaemia. Here again, further
sets of data need to be examined.

Unlike many new techniques of research this
method, by using electronic equipment, actually
reduces the amount of personal time and labour
expended upon the analysis of data. Indeed, the

32

main work is in collecting sufficient information
for analysis and feeding the machines with
material. It demonstrates also that further applications of computer techniques to epidemiological and other research may well be in
assisting the development of methods which
would not otherwise have been contemplated
rather than, simply, the automation of already
established techniques.

REFERENCES

Kellett, C. D. 1937. Arch. Dis. Childhood, 12, 239.
Lee, J. A. H. 1962. Brit. med. J. 1, 1737.

Pinkel, D. and Nefzger, D. 1959. ‘Cancer, 12, 351.
Pleydell, M. J. 1957. Lancet, 1, 1314.

Wood, Eileen E. 1960. Brit. med. J., 1, 1760.
