AN AMERICAN EUGENIST SPEAKS
By C. P. BLACKER, M.C,, M.A., M.D., ERCP.

R. OSBORN’S name is well known
to students of eugenics and populaA tion. His book, The Dynamics of
Population, written jointly with Dr. Lorimer,
has been widely read and universally appreciated. Dr. Gladys Schwesinger’s Heredity and
Environment, produced under his guidance
and editorship, is a standard work in our
library. At various European conferences—
for Mr. Osborn has been a frequent visitor
to this continent—his tall figure has been as
conspicuous as his lucid contributions to the
subjects under discussion. His gentle yet
firm demeanour as chairman of a sectional
meeting has been as welcome as his pacifying
and constructive proposals when the atmosphere was becoming stormy and tempers
were rising. At the Population Conference
held in Paris in 1937, when I last saw him,
he led the American delegation. Rarely can
a distinguished body of scientific men have
been better captained. It was a polyglot
conference that held strongly divergent
views. Upon one point, however, English‘men, Frenchmen and Germans agreed—that
the Americans were lucky to have such a
capable, tactful and influential leader.

Mr. Osborn has made the American
Eugenics Society what it is. At a time when
the movement was being subjected to
increasing criticism from without, and was
being internally weakened by dissensions
within, he came to its rescue. His sensitive
and balanced mind, his erudition, his critical
yet far-seeing judgment, his courteous and
gentle manners compelled respect. The
movement towards fragmentation was
arrested, American eugenists fell in behind
him, and have since acquired a unity which
they never had before. The relations between
our Society and his have been of the closest
and friendliest. For over two years, the
American Eugenics Society took about 400
copies of our REVIEW for distribution to its
members.

19

Mr. Osborn’s Preface to Eugenics* is not an
entirely easy book to read. It is not a book
for the person who likes an easy digest, and
wants sensational figures or entertaining
polemics. It is entirely devoid of irony,
pungency or wit. Yet it is a book which
every serious student should carefully study.
It is a book which, if I were now active in
my secretaryship of the Society, I should ask
every member of the Council to examine
critically and to write to me about.

The book is not easy to read because of
Mr. Osborn’s cautiousness and his predilection for conclusions founded on carefully
conducted investigations. As often as not,
these conclusions are presented in the form
of a Table or a Figure showing curves or
polygons. These require careful study, and
the consecutiveness of one’s reading is
interrupted. Indeed, Mr. Osborn’s exposition
reminds me of my experiences at Members’
Meetings of our Soczety. In the last ten years,
the Society has promoted and subsidized
much research. I used to make a practice of
using the occasions presented by our Members’
Meetings to enable the workers conducting
researches for the Socrety to explain these
researches and to answer such questions as
they might provoke in the minds of our
Fellows and Members. Not all research
workers have the gift of explaining the unavoidable complexities and pitfalls of any
piece of well-planned research in such a way
that members of the non-scientific public can
distinguish the wood from the trees. Not all
investigators have the lucidity and the
“common touch ”’ possessed by such men as
Mr. Caradog Jones or Dr. Fraser Roberts.
From my vantage-point on the elevated
platform of the Rooms of the Royal or
Linnean Societies, where I used to sit on the
Chairman’s left, 1 not infrequently saw
puzzled and mystified looks on the faces

* Osborn, Frederick. Preface to Eugenics. New York.
1940. Harper and Brothers. Pp. 312. Price $2.75.
20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

below me. The audiences, which consisted
mostly of lay men and women, were losing
touch with the speaker’s argument. They
failed to understand his terms or to follow
the meaning of his technical expressions.
They could not quite make out what he was
trying to establish ; or they could not see its
bearing on eugenics. Sometimes they were
mystified by the tentativeness of “expert”
speakers, or by their inability to make
confident genetic predictions. To most of our
lay members, it was clear enough that like
tended to breed like, and that we wanted to
breed from our good rather than our bad
genetic stocks. Yet by, say, the psychiatrist
describing his inquiries into the inheritance
of mental disorder, these obvious processes
were not made entirely clear, either as to the
manner or the certainty of their operation.
The speaker used formidable and incomprehensible words, and hedged himself about
with every kind of reservation before venturing on a prediction. The eugenist who
ardently wished to see the Society espouse
bold social policies was mystified and vaguely
irritated. He felt himself lost in the
labyrinths of “ science.’” Our meetings were
sometimes criticized for being too “‘ scientific.”
With these reactions of the layman’s mind,
Mr. Osborn is familiar. The layman, like the
animal breeder, takes it for granted that like
produces like ; he has observed that members of a family resemble one another, and
that certain traits run in families. He hardly
feels it necessary to inquire how much
hereditary and environmental factors separately contribute to the differences between
people. But Mr. Osborn feels it to be very
necessary. The subject has been carefully
investigated in studies, many of them recent,
of twins and of foster-children. These
studies are summarized and their results are
presented by Mr. Osborn in tabular or
graphic form. One of the most valuable
features of his book is that it teaches the layman to criticize and evaluate basic assumptions which may seem to him self-evident.
The book contains eight longish chapters,
in which the reader is gradually led up to
certain important conclusions on population
and eugenic policy. The first of these chap
ters deals non-technically with the physical
basis of heredity—the chromosome and the
gene. The fact is stressed that the identification of human genes has occurred almost
entirely in the field of diseases and defects.
There is no single gene which produces
health, intelligence, a good physique, a
balanced personality or a socially valuable
citizen. These, in so far as they have a
genetic basis, are the product of many genes
which have not yet been separately identified.
But there are single genes which produce
certain specific diseases, mostly rare; and
genetic hypotheses have been put forward
(with varying degrees of plausibility) to
account for the heredity of commoner mental
diseases and defects. The conclusion is
reached that hereditary abnormalities,
belonging to the sphere of negative eugenics,
are a problem of Public Health. Up-to-date
results of sterilization in the U.S.A. are given,
and a partial solution of the problem of the
carrier is discerned in the extension of the use
of birth control. Valuable results, it is held,
can be achieved by these means. “ Even
with our present knowledge,’’ writes Mr.
Osborn, “‘. . . it should be possible to reduce
the number of feeble-minded by 150,000
a generation for several generations, and
the number of schizophrenics and manicdepressives by possibly a like amount.”
(This estimate applies to the U.S.A. and not
to Great Britain.) New responsibilities for
the medical profession are visualized in this
direction.

The second chapter—the most difficult in
the book—deals with psychological studies
of heredity and environment. Investigations
are ably summarized in which heredity is
held constant and the environment varied
(studies of identical twins, which have the
same heredity, who were reared apart) ;
and in which the environment is held constant
and heredity varied (studies in the resemblances of foster children to their foster
parents and to their true parents). The
studies of Burks, Leahy, Freeman and Skeels

are reported, and the thorny question of the

distribution of intelligence in different racial,
regional and occupational groups is further
critically discussed. The difficulties of reachAN AMERICAN EUGENIST SPEAKS al

ing definite conclusions are brought out, the
chief one being that ‘‘ actual evidence on the
influence of heredity can be found only when
the environment is approximately the same
for two different groups.’’ Some evidence on
this problem exists and is discussed by Mr.
Osborn. It is found in cases in which children
from different occupational groups are
brought up together in similar environments,
such as is provided for illegitimate children
of known parentage by a foster home. The
results of these and other investigations lead
Mr. Osborn to an important conclusion as to
eugenic policy. A figure (No. 6) is given
showing the hypothetical distribution of
intelligence for three groups, in the form of
superimposed curves. The curve for the
entire population shows a mean intelligence
quotient of 100; that for a low occupational group has a mean of 96-7; that fora
high occupational group has a mean of
104°4. But the curves overlap one another
in a way which the reader of these words can
easily visualize. On each side of the mean
(I.Q.100) for the entire population are found
an equal number of people. There are an
equal number above and below the average.
Among the people in the upper occupational
group, there are more people above this mean
in intelligence than below it ; among people
in the lower occupational group, there are
more people below the same mean than
above it. But there nevertheless remain, in
the lower occupational group, a very substantial number of people (about 40 per cent)
above this mean. Mr. Osborn contends that
it wquld be eugenically more desirable, as
well as socially more practicable, to aim at
raising the fertility of the people i” all groups
who, in intelligence, are above the mean for
the entire population than to try to raise
the collective fertility of upper (and on the

whole more intelligent) groups at the expense 
of those lower and less intelligent.

In other words, the discrimination should
be between people within each group, rather
than between groups as a whole. The fact
is stressed that the average differences in
intelligence quotients between classes taken
as a whole are small compared to the differences between individuals within each of

these separate classes. The social policy here
implied is clearly free from the charge,
frequently heard from critics of eugenics,
that it reflects class prejudice.

The third chapter deals with numerous
problems included in the comprehensive
title, ‘“‘ Births and Deaths: The Background
of Eugenics.” The growth of world population, the balance of births and deaths in
primitive society, and the same balance in the
modern world are discussed ; and it is brought
out that the nations of western Europe, and
the United States, are on the threshold of a
period of natural decrease. Indices of population growth are described, and the reader
is introduced to the net reproduction rate.
The following generalisation has been painfully verified by the tragic events of to-day.
“World population trends are at present a
continuous threat to the orderly advance of
humanity. High birth rates are making for
continuous over-population in large portions
of the world, with a consequent demand for
more territory . . . The eugenic programme,
if it is to be ultimately effective, should
contribute to the ideal of a balanced distribution of births throughout the world.”

There follows an analysis of population

growth in the United States, which includes
a discussion of racial, regional and socioeconomic groups. Rural populations have
higher reproduction rates than urban ;
persons in low income-groups and of low
educational attainments have higher rates
than those more favourably placed. Women
with incomes of $3,000 and over have one
third the number of children of women on
relief. The encouraging fact—encouraging
because it points to an increase in voluntary
parenthood when conditions are favourable—
is noted that people in the highest economic
levels have appreciably more children than
those in the level immediately below them.
The same difference is found between the
“most successful’ and the “ least successful’’ graduates of Harvard, Princeton and
Yale. The former have more “ planned ”’
and wanted children than the latter. ‘“‘ Sound
population policy calls for an equalization of
births among the different occupational and
socio-economic groups ...so that each
22

may have the responsibility for bearing and
training its share, but not more than its
share, of the next generation.” Trends
of fertility according to intelligence are
examined, and the results of three studies
(Lentz, Fraser Roberts and a study of
Chicago children) are shown to agree in finding that the largest families are those which
comprise dull and backward children. Dull
and backward families, it is estimated, make
a contribution to the next generation so
large as would produce an appreciable lowering of the average intelligence in a single
generation. A lowering by 1-6 points of
I.Q. per generation is suggested by Dr.
Fraser Roberts’ figures for Bath. In happier
times, members of the Society have had the
privilege of hearing Dr. Roberts describe his
findings. Mr. Osborn sees an explanation for
these eugenically unfavourable rates in the
fact that the use of birth control has spread
to some but not to all members of the community. But the use of birth control is
increasing and, as has been seen, Mr. Osborn
favours its further spread by private and
public health agencies.

This argument is developed in the fourth
chapter, entitled ‘‘ Towards a National
Population Policy.’? The policy here envisaged, briefly, consists in abolishing, by
means of the spread of birth control, the
unwanted child, and at the same time in
stimulating, by State services in aid of
parenthood, the birth of wanted children.
The second of these aims can be more accurately described as that of- releasing the
parental instinct, which flows strongly in the
type of people we would like to see as parents,

from the economic and psychological im-_

pediments which to-day frustrate its fullest
expression. The effectiveness of birth control
is examined in the light of the late Professor
Pearl’s comprehensive and detailed study.
The growth of state aid to children is next
considered. The family allowance system in
France, the German population programme,
and the population policies adopted in
Sweden are in turn described. Of these
measures, the Swedish most appeal to the
author. The recommendations of an important Swedish population commission,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

appointed in May 1935, were largely translated into law during the session held in 1937
which came to be called the “‘ Mothers’ and
Children’s Parliament.” In general the
measures enacted by this Parliament
favoured the supply of goods and services
directly to children rather than the payment
of allowances or cash premiums to parents.
The spread of contraception was favoured ;
taxation was revised so as to provide larger
exemptions for parents; mothers’ and
infants’ health centres were established
(access is available without charge to all
social classes) and dental services were
organized ; free attendance at delivery was
provided ; free school meals of approved
vitamin-containing foods were made available ; and state subsidies for low-rent houses
were planned for families containing three or
more children. The commission also made
recommendations relating to education,
nursery schools, and recreational facilities,
but these have not yet been enacted into law.
The chapter ends with a review of child-care
agencies of the Federal Government of the
U.S.A. Mr. Osborn sees in the activities of
the Federal security agency, established in
1939, the potential elements of an eventual
population policy. These are growing up
under other names, and without relation to
any definite eugenic policy. Many of these
activities—those of housing, nursery services,
education and recreation—correspond to the
items on which recommendations were made
by the Swedish Commission. But in the
U.S.A., the bearings of these measures on
eugenic and population problems are not yet
appreciated. It is the task of the eugenist, as
seen by Mr. Osborn, to mould and orientate
them.

The fifth chapter, under the novel title
“ Eugenic Selection under the Influence of a
Favourable Environment,” sets forth what
I take to be the essence of Mr. Osborn’s
argument. A eugenically sound type of
human being should be one which is biologically well adapted to his environment.

.Human environments can, from the material

and social point of view, be good, indifferent
and bad. A type of human being which we
would like to see fully replacing itself is one
AN AMERICAN EUGENIST SPEAKS

which would be ready to have children if
these could be assured of an environment
wherein they would develop to their best and
fullest, but which would be deterred from
having children if the environment into which

they would be born held poor promise. The.

type here visualized is one which has strong
parental instincts but is also sensitive to the
future well-being of its children. It wants
children, but it also wants them, after they
are born, to have of the best. ‘ Under such
a process,”’ writes Mr. Osborn, “* the environment would be the selective agency . . . It
is not a ‘scientific’ policy, but it is a

scientifically acceptable policy, under which .

great progress could be made without having
to wait a long time, perhaps for science to
learn how to locate and define the human
carriers of superior and inferior genes.”
There are three essential steps in the development of such a policy. (1) A general improvement of the environment. A voluntary
system of eugenics cannot operate under
conditions of extreme poverty, ill-health,
ignorance and isolation. (2) No more unwanted children; complete freedom of
parenthood ; an extension of birth control
throughout the whole community. (3)
Eugenic education such as will encourage
births among parents most responsive to the
advantages of a good environment for their
children. §

This argument is, I think, not entirely
familiar to members of our Eugenics Soctety.
We have heard it argued by Dr. Julian
Huxley in a recent Galton lecture* that the
eugenist should welcome the creation of a
better and a more uniform environment
because it is only in a fairly uniform environment that inborn or genetically determined
differences in the members of a community
can properly reveal themselves. The environment should be equalized and improved
because we could then make a better genetic
diagnosis. Mr. Osborn’s argument is different. As is implied in the title of the chapter,
he sees in the creation of a favourable
environment a means of bringing out a
favourable eugenic selection. Such an environment will activate and liberate-the parental

*Eucenics Review. Vol. XXVIII. No. z.

23

instincts of people we would like to see
having their full quota of children—of people
who would prefer not to have children if the
environment promised badly for them. It is
because Mr. Osborn holds these views that
he has organized a series of conferences on
eugenics for members of socially active professions, such as teachers, recreationists,
nurses, doctors and social workers. These
conferences, together with some other
activities of the American Eugenics Society,
have brought upon Mr. Osborn the criticism
that his activities have seemingly been more
concerned with improving the environment
than the inborn qualities with which
eugenists are primarily concerned. But the
careful perusal of this chapter will, I think,
convince the reader that, despite superficial
appearances to the contrary, Mr. Osborn is
really just as concerned with inborn oF
genetic factors as any eugenist could wish.

The chapter ends with an interesting discussion of the distribution of families of
different size. Owing to biological infertility
or to the unremitting practice of birth
control, or in some cases to the fact that the
survey is made before the couple has had
time to have children, every community will
contain a proportion of childless families.
In the U.S.A., in 1929-31, 23:1 per cent of
families were childless, 12-1 per cent had
three children, 7-7 per cent had four
children, and 17-7 per cent had five or more
children. The total adds up to 249°8 children
per 100 married women. This is regarded as.
hardly sufficient for adequate replacement.
For this a figure of 262 children is deemed.
necessary.

The question arises of what can be regarded
as the best distribution of families of different
sizes. The Swedish Population Commission
would have liked to see 33 per cent of families
consist of three children, 27 per cent of four.
children, and only 5 per cent of five children.
Mr. Osborn gives reasons for regarding a
different distribution as more practicable.
and of equal eugenic value. He would like
to see, in an environment favourable to the.
rearing of children, as many as 15 per cent
of families producing five children or more ;
and he suggests lower percentages (18 and 19,
24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

respectively) for families of three and four
children. His desired proportions differ from
those now prevailing in the U.S.A. mainly in
this: that they would require that some
15 per cent-of couples now having large
families mainly through ignorance and isolation should have smaller families, and that
an equal proportion of families with socially
valuable qualities should have families of
five or more children. Such a variation would
permit of enough selection and differential
survival to produce eugenically valuable
results.

The sixth is a long chapter which deals
with what the author calls “ Psychological
Aspects of a Eugenic Environment.” A
fondness for children he believes to be largely
the product of a happy childhood and of a
warm yet balanced relation between the
parent and the child. People brought up in
such an atmosphere are, he thinks, more
likely to want children than those who have
been reared in an indifferent, unloving or
hostile atmosphere. An interesting example
is given of these contrasting child-worlds
from neighbouring tribes in New Guinea.
The professed ideals of Western civilization,
which is Christian in outlook, conform to the
requirements of parenthood. This outlook is
favourable to the family, and it inculcates
ideals (gentleness, love of children, etc.)
which produce a happy early environment
for children. Sections are devoted to the
influence of home and parents on the
development of character. Cultural influences should be directed to consolidating and
harmonizing the family. The difficulties of
“loosening ”’ the child’s dependency on its
parents, of avoiding cloying fixations and of
teaching self-dependency are described in the
light of the recently acquired knowledge of
child psychology. The experiences of the
parents before marriage, the inter-parental
relationship, the réle of the grandparents all
contribute. The part played by the school,
as it is and as it might be, is examined. The
importance of sex education, of the teaching
of biology in schools and of education for
marriage are described in well-written passages. And the influence for good of people
engaged in public services—the nurse, the

welfare-worker, the clergyman and the
doctor—is outlined. All these -influences
should help to ensure that children ‘“ who
show the highest ability, who are characterized by greatest capacity for adjustment to
the demands of our society, who are possessors of fine stable personalities, who are
healthy and who come from healthy parents
should be influenced towards early marriage
and should aim to rear large families.” The
‘* psychological influences ”’ described in this
chapter are all concerned with what, in our
Society’s statement of “ Aims and Objects,”
we describe as ‘‘ eugenic education.”

The last chapter but one, the seventh, deals
with the “ Eugenic Reorientation of Various
Social Policies.”” The argument is that there
are now visible in operation in Western
countries a number of social trends which
have other than eugenic objects. All of them
aim at improving the human lot. These can
be picked up and, without introducing any
essential change in their character, can be
applied to a eugenic ideal. The subject of
nutrition has received attention in the U.S.A.
and the prevalence of malnutrition and of.
under-nutrition among children in large
families has been noted. Reforms in housing
are needed, especially if we expect as many
as I5 per cent of couples to have five or more
children. Costs of medical care must be
reduced. So must the costs of having a baby.
The organization of recreational facilities is
somewhat an innovation in American life.
They greatly affect-the cost and convenience
of rearing children, and may therefore have
an appreciable effect on reproductive trends.
The subject is rather fully dealt with by Mr.
Osborn. So is the desirability of further research, especially into problems of population
and of human genetics.

The eighth and concluding chapter, a short
one, is a sort of summing up. Eugenics is no
panacea for human ills. It can only be put
effectively into practice when other and more
immediate human needs are cared for. The
ideals of eugenics are regarded as more
compatible with democratic than with
authoritarian forms of Government. Eugenics recognizes the value of the individual and inculcates respect for his uniqueAN AMERICAN EUGENIST SPEAKS | 25

ness. It recognizes and encourages human
variations, and does not aspire (as does the
German conception of race hygiene) to
breeding men of a given type for the service
of the state. Democracy is a necessary safeguard to eugenics as contrasted with the
dictator’s conception of race hygiene. “ But
on the other hand, it is doubtful whether
democracy can long continue in any society
except one so set up that the more competent
people in every social and occupational group
are favoured for survival.”” A society with a
declining sense of the uniqueness and value
of the individual, with a falling standard of
intelligence and of responsible citizenship, is
heading for the servile state and for submission to some power-loving demagogue or
‘Leader.

Such is the thesis of Mr. Osborn’s book.
At the request of Dr. Newfield, Ihave written
a long review, and have considered the
arguments chapter by chapter. Is it possible
to sum up briefly what is characteristic of
Mr. Osborn’s approach to Eugenics? I think
so. By what criterion, I can imagine Mr.

sborn asking, can we most usefully and

ractically define the characteristics to which
we attach eugenic value ? What sort of man
do we visualize the eugenically favoured
‘citizen to be? He should be healthy, longlived, intelligent, and adaptable to his
environment; he should have a stable and
balanced personality, with a strong sense of
social responsibility ; and he should have a
good heredity. He should come of a stock
which exhibits the same qualtties.as himself.
But all these various characteristics are
difficult to evaluate and measure on any
accurate or quantitative scale. The only one
which can be so measured is intelligence.
Very little, moreover, is known as to how
these qualities are inherited, and their
incidence among the offspring of two known
parents cannot be at all accurately predicted.
They are not the product of single genes. A
very long time may elapse before their
genetic basis is properly understood.

But many of them (and from the social
standpoint the most important) express
themselves confluently in an easily observable social adaptation. Eugenically favoured

couples establish good homes and bring up
their children efficiently and sensibly. They
are aware of the responsibilities of parenthood and of how hereditary and economic
factors contribute to their children’s welfare.
Their children are wanted, and the pregnancies are “ planned,” after due consideration has been given to these factors. The
healthiness of the couple and their heredity
are taken into account by them in this
planning. Their sense of social responsibility,
their adaptability to their environment and
their intelligence all have a bearing upon
their decision to have children, upon the
success of their marriage and consequently
upon the success they make of their home
and of the job of rearing their children well.
These are the people whom Mr. Osborn
regards as eugenically valuable, and whom he
wants to encourage by social and cultural
agencies to have large and planned families.
At all stages, this task should be made as
easy and attractive as possible. The tasks
confronting the demographer and social
reformer who want to promote a “ positive
population policy ’”’ have been described as
presenting themselves in three groups or
stages: the approach to marriage, the
process of child-bearing and the problems of
child-rearing. Mr. Osborn would like to see
the country’s public services doing their best
to help at all these three stages. The
approach to marriage could be facilitated if
it were made economically easier for young.
couples to marry early ; the process of childbearing could be smoothed over by efficient
and cheap maternity services ; and the task
of child-rearing (the most important and
complex of the three) could be eased in the
many diverse ways which he has considered.
By establishing conditions which are socially,
economically and culturally favourable to
the production of large and wanted families
in every class of society, a “ favourable
environment ”’ (see the title of his fifth
chapter) would be created in which the process of eugenic selection could operate. But
all this must be coupled with the maximum
possible dissemination of knowledge of birth
control throughout all social and occupational
classes. And this must be coupled with the
26

establishment of advice centres (part of the
public services) where guidance could be
obtained on all the problems of marriage and
parenthood, including the genetic problems.

I can imagine this programme being
criticized. It might be argued that to poor
couples in the economically lowest groups
it would provide a greater inducement to
have children than to couples in higher social
and economic levels. To this criticism, I
imagine Mr. Osborn would reply that no class
has a monopoly of eugenically valuable
traits. They exist in all classes, though some
people think, with quite adequate reasons,
that they are more widely distributed in some
classes and groups than in others. If properly
organised, this programme should provide an
equal inducement to people in all classes.
The critic would be referred to his third
chapter, where it was argued that the
eugenic discrimination should be between
people within each group, rather than between
groups as a whole.

Give to people in every group, however
ignorant, economically depressed or isolated
they may be, the knowledge of birth control,
and their pregnancies will cease to be haphazard and unplanned. Very few couples
indeed want to have children for whom they
cannot provide a happy home and a good
start in life. The people in each group (with
a few unavoidable exceptions, of course) who
will produce large, planned families will on
the whole be the most eugenically desirable.*

* There is one feature of the reproduction of very
feckless and improvident people which Mr. Osborn has
not mentioned. It is one which is impressed more
strongly on the doctor or social worker than on anyone
else. I refer to the influence of drink on the occurrence
of unwanted conceptions. In the words of Dr. R. L.
Dickinson, coitus interruptus ‘“‘is probably the most

primitive method of birth control, and the one that is

most extensively employed all over the world.”
Compared to other methods, it is known to be very
unreliable. And a large factor in its unreliability is that
introduced by the husband’s state of sobriety. Among
women of the London working classes, of whom I have
first-hand knowledge, coitus interruptus is not often
regarded as a method of birth control. If a woman
whose husband uses coitus interruptus is asked if she
practises any form of birth control, she will answer,
more often than not, that none is practised. If she is
then ,asked if her husband is “ careful,’’ she answers
yes. To this affirmative reply, she will sometimes add
three words from which a picture can be imagined of
how her children are conceived. They are, ‘‘ When he’s

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

There is another important feature of Mr.
Osborn’s general argument. He sees, in all
civilized countries, the growth of a variety of
social services which reflect a preoccupation
with the citizen’s general welfare. These
have at present no orientation at all towards
eugenics. Yet they all have in them the
makings of eugenically valuable policies.
The eugenist should, therefore, at this early
stage, make contact with the leading personalities in these developing services. These
“ leaders ’’ should be educated to the growing
importance of population changes and of
eugenic values. The eugenist is better advised
to make use of the forces of developing public
opinion and conviction which are now in
process of growth, and which, with but little
modification, can be directed into eugenic
channels, than he would be to try to create
a national eugenic conscience so to speak in
vacuo. Expositions of the subject in terms of
Mendelism and of class differences strike few
chords in the public mind. The terminology
is largely incomprehensible, and the outlook

sober.”’ I have seen something during my army life of
the last two years of how closely related is the problem
of venereal diseases with that of drunkenness. The
relation is as close as that of inebriety to motor
accidents, or to crimes of violence. I am certain that it
has an equally close relation to the problem of the unwanted pregnancy among people of the economically
lowest classes. The problem is only partly soluble
by providing the woman with a knowledge of methods
of birth control which she (and not her husband) can
use. The woman may be addicted to drink as well as
her husband. This happens often enough, when her
life is monotonous, her interests and intelligence
limited, and when spirits.are cheap, to constitute a
considerable social and eugenic problem. Even when
Mr. Osborn’s hope is realized that knowledge of
adequate methods of birth control has spread throughout the community from the top to the very bottom,
this problem will still remain.

There is probably no completely satisfactory solution.
In a eugenically well-educated community, voluntary
sterilization after several unwanted pregnancies would
be of some value. Another measure which I cannot help
thinking would be of substantial help would be to make
facilities for termination of pregnancy available for
such women. The facts (that the pregnancy was unwanted, and occurred when one or both partners were
under the influence of drink) can be fairly easily
elicited by the social worker or by the doctor at the
maternity centre. It would bea help if such a pregnancy
could be terminated on the double recommendation of
a doctor and a social worker. It is for these reasons
that I have always held that temperance reform has a

,vearing on eugenics. The question of voluntary
termination of pregnancy is not touched upon by Mr.
Osborn in this book.
NOTES AND MEMORANDA

can be regarded (often unjustly) as prejudiced.

I do not know if Mr. Osborn’s book is
easily obtainable in this.country at the

27

present time. If it is, it should be carefully
read by all Fellows and Members of ‘the
Society, and especially by those who are
prepared to lecture or speak on eugenics.

NOTES AND MEMORANDA

Obituary

WE much regret to record the death on
February 28th, 1942, of the Rt. Hon. Lord
Salvesen, LL.D., at the age of 85.

Lord Salvesen was called to the Scottish
Bar in 1880 ; he was a Judge of the Court of
Session, Scotland, from 1905 to 1922 and on
his retirement from the Bench was appointed
to the Privy Council. Lord Salvesen became
a Fellow of the Eugenics Society in 1923, and
served on the Council and as Vice-President.
He came of a very interesting Norwegian
family, intimately connected with shipping,
branches of which are to be found in all
countries bordering on the Baltic. Two such
branches have long been settled in Scotland,
at Leith and Grangemouth. A man of very
fresh mind, after his retiral from the Scottish
Bench he ‘became keenly interested in the
intricacies of Indian Wills coming before the
Judicial Committee of the Privy Council on
which he sat until lately. He was President
of the Scottish Zoological Society and a
generous benefactor of their beautiful gardens
at Corstorphine.

Mr. W. P. Pycraft died on May 1st at the
age of 74. He was for many years Assistant
Keeper of the Osteological Collections at the
British Museum (Natural History) and his
zoological studies are well known. Mr.
Pycraft became a Fellow of the Soczety in.
1924 and served on the Council from 1925 to

1935.

Dr. C. E. Goddard, O.B.E., who died on
January 31st, 1942, aged 82, was a Fellow of
the Society from 1931 to 1938; he was for
many years medical officer of health ofWembley, where he held a number of public

appointments and was active in the promotion of many measures for the advancement
of public health.

The Very Rev. Sir George Adam Smith,
who died in March 1942, at the age of 85,
became a member of the Consultative
Council of the Soczety in 1926.

Institute for the Scientific Treatment of
Delinquency

A sERIES of four fortnightly lectures on
Vocational Guidance by Miss M. B. Stott,
B.A., will begin on Friday, June 12th, 1942,
at 7 p.m. Ten lectures on The Development
of the Mind, by C. A. Mace, M.A., D.Litt.,
will begin at 2 p.m. on Saturday, June 6th,
1942. Further particulars may be obtained
from the General Secretary, 17 Manchester
Street, W.r. (Welbeck 6037.)

Mothers’ Clinics for Constructive Birth
Control

THE Headquarters and Branches of the
Mothers’ Clinics (all open daily from ro to 6)
have all carried on their work, and, particularly in London and in Cardiff, are more busy
than ever.

The London Headquarters three times
during the main blitz suffered severe
damage by enemy action, each time
after just having been patched up and somewhat restored. With the assistance of the
gallant nursing staff, however, they carried
on so that all visiting received the personal
help they came for.

Always since 1921 when the Mothers’
Clinic was founded, the pro-baby work of
