138 EUGENICS REVIEW.

acts to overcome resistance, V is the velocity of the force, and T is the
length of time that the force F continues to move at the velocity V,” is
not completely satisfactory, nor is the matter elucidated by saying (p. 3)
that “energy is the same thing as the Philosopher’s First Cause, and
includes what the theologians personify as God and Devil.” But the
fundamental fallacy of the argument is that because one organism can
expend more energy in a given time than another, therefore the first has
more energy, or energy at a higher potential, than the second. The horse
which can trot a mile in two minutes is compared with radium, in that
both exhibit an unusual power of expending energy, which requires
explanation. But the analogy clearly illustrates the fallacy, for radium,
as far as we know, contains no more energy than such an inert metal as
old; it differs, not in its stored energy, but in its power of giving it up.
o the two-minute trotter need not have any more energy than the cabhorse; it differs in being able to use it. Most of the book is devoted to a
study of the ancestry of trotting horses, dogs, cattle, and distinguished
men, which, the author maintains, proves that offspring born at the time
when the parent has accumulated the greatest store of energy, themselves
start life with the greatest amount, though it is difficult on physical
grounds to see how a spermatozoon can contain any considerable portion of
the energy stored by the father. The treatment of statistics is far from
satisfactory, and though the tables as they stand bear out the author’s contention that sons of older fathers and grandfathers have greater ability
than those of younger, it is doubtful whether with other treatment a
different result might not be reached. L. DONCASTER.

Conklin, EpDwWarD GRANT, Professor of Biology in Princeton University.
Heredity and Environment in the Development of Men. London.
Humphry Milford and Oxford University Press; price 8s. 6d. ;

pp. 491.

PROFESSOR CONKLIN’S book is of the semi-popular order, and is
apparently designed to acquaint the ordinary educated reader not specially
versed in biology, with the results obtained by biological science which
bear on heredity and on the nature of man. The style is admirably clear,
the language is as far as possible non-technical, and it is plentifully
adorned by Biblical extracts. Nevertheless, the contrast between this
book and Dr. Doncaster’s work, which we have just reviewed, is profound.
For whereas Dr. Doncaster puts before us the arguments in favour of and
against every point which he makes, so that to read his book is to obtain
an education in scientific method, Professor Conklin, who is an ardent
believer in Weismann and Mendel, asserts views in a most dogmatic way
on matters about which scientific opinion is sharply divided. Our hair
fairly stands on end when we find, in the second chapter, that he calmly
settles that profoundest of all questions, viz., the relation of body and
mind and dismisses mind as being related to body as function is to
structure. Then when Professor Conklin asserts that Weismann “ for ever
disposed of theories of pangenesis and the like by showing that germcells are not built up by contributions from the body and that characters
are not transmitted from generation to generation, but on the other hand
that there is transmitted a germ-plasm which is relatively independent of
the body,” we venture just as strongly to assert that Weismann proved
absolutely nothing. He strove to impose a theory on biology, and almost
at every point where he descended to details and where his theory could
be tested it broke down; its utter inadequacy may be seen in Weismann’s
attempt to explain by it the phenomena of regeneration. To assert
further, as Professor Conklin does, that the germ-cells produce the body,
but that the body does not give rise to the germ-cells, is either to quibble
or to go beyond the evidence. The germ-cells produce the body of the
succeeding generation, and part of this body consists of the succeeding
REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS. 139

germ-cells, but if the statement means anything it must assert the existence of “ germ-tracks,” that is, of lineages of cells descending from the
ovum and remaining quite undifferentiated till they produce the new germcells. In some few cases of animals of rapid life-cycle, such as insects
and small crustacea, there is evidence that the parents of the new germcells are set aside in the embryro from the beginning, but in many other
cases they cannot be detected till a much later period of development, and
they arise from epithelia, which are certainly differentiated tissues, as, for
instance, in Annelida. When Professor Conklin has settled the case in
favour of Weismann and Mendel to his own satisfaction, and proceeds to
apply his results to man, he rather shrinks from the cul-de-sac of hypercalvinism towards which his conclusions lead him. He tries to emphasise
the all-importance of environment, since after all the members of human
population are such a mixed lot that their hereditary potentialities are
likely to be on the whole similar, and the difference in the outcome will
be mainly due to environment.

Professor Conklin exhibits the common failing of accepting at facevalue all the work which his countrymen turn out, and so he swallows
Davenport’s assertion that “ feeble-mindedness ” is a Mendelian recessive,
oblivious of the destructive criticism that has been levelled at the treatment of “ feeble-mindedness ” as a unit factor.

Professor Conklin’s general conclusion that certain physical defects
are likely to reappear in offspring, and that marriages tending to perpetuate them should be discouraged, isin accordance with sound eugenic
principles, as is his protest against “race-suicide,” but his book as a
whole is rather special pleading for one particular point of view than a
scientific presentation of the evidence as a whole. E. W. M.

Jewett, FRANCES GuLick. The Next Generation—A Study in the

Phystology of Inheritance. Ginn & Co.; 1915; price 3s. 6d.; pp.

235. |
WE welcome this little book, dedicated to “ Boys and Girls, the Guardians
of the Next Generation,” as a valuable attempt to give in plain facts and
simple language an account of the main bases of our modern knowledge
concerning inheritance. The author, the writer of several books belonging to a well-known American series on hygiene, choosing some of the
most striking examples of Mendelian phenomena, introduces the reader to
the laws governing inheritance, and proceeds to show the useful application of these laws in raising new types of plants and animals. The
route by which organic progress has been achieved is outlined in a series
of chapters dealing with evolution and with the work of Charles Darwin.
Dr. Tower’s experiments on Leptinotarsa form the basis for a chapter on
the effect of changed environment upon species, and is dealt with in such
a way as to prepare the reader for consideration of and speculation upon
the human problem. Skilfully the author passes from general consideration of the beginnings of the next generation—the germ-cells—to the
special case of man, and proceeds to show how germ-cells may be
damaged by alcohol, and how the individual may suffer through the use
of tobacco. One appreciates the skill with which the author has taken
hold of difficult subject matter, and has given it in a simply-rendered
and very readable form, but this has led her to be too definite in statement upon points which are yet held to be debatable; more particularly
is this noticeable in that part of the book dealing with human inheritance
and with racial deterioration. At the same time, the emphasis is on the
right side, and should be well calculated to impress the adolescent mind
with the necessity for careful personal conduct, and ought to stimulate it
to further search for knowledge. There is a tendency towards sensationalism, again in the later chapters of the book, perhaps the effect of
giving selected, too striking, examples in brief unadorned sentences. One
deplores any attempt at sensationalism when seeking to enlighten
