DECLINE IN THE BIRTH-RATE AND
THE “FECUNDABILITY”
OF WOMAN.

By Proressor Corrapo Gini, President of the Italian Society of
Genetics and Eugenics.

The question of population is now being given a prominent place in
the statistical and economic literature of England (1), where the matter
is being investigated to the same extent as it was in France some few
decades ago in view of the anticipated arrest in the increase of the
population ; although the predominant and, in my opinion, exaggerated
pessimism of the English concerning the coming economic future of
their country causes many of them to consider the phenomemon from a
different point of view. And this is not surprising. France, as it was
already observed long ago, only preceded the other European countries.
on the parabola of demographic evolution, but even then in the organ-.
isms. of the countries in which the process was at work more slowly,
symptoms of a retarded increase of the population had appeared—
especially in England—and were noted and studied, which symptoms.
are to-day maturing. (2)

As was then'the case in France, so now in England the great
majority of students of the question incline towards the interpretation
that the decline in the birth-rate and the resultant slower increase of
the population are voluntary, and they refuse to recognise a subsidiary
biological cause. Perhaps, as I suggested in a former paper (3), this
interpretation conceals a secret hope, since a thing which is voluntary
may still be remedied; man has always shown great reluctance to.
admit that he is not the arbiter of the fate of his own species.

(1) See, particularly, the recent papers by BOWLEY in ‘‘Economic Journal,’’
June, 1924; by BROWNLEE in ‘‘Lancet,’? November, 1924, and in this.
ReEviEw, July, 1925; by BEVERIDGE in ‘‘Economica,’’ March, 1925; the
President G. UDNY YULE’s inaugural address to the R. Stat. Society (18th
November, 1924), and the discussion opened by T. H. C. STEVENSON aat.
the following sitting. To this argument refers also a paper by M. GREENWOOD which will shortly appear in ‘‘Metron’’ (vol. V., No. 2). Less
recent, but also full of interest are the two volumes published by the.
NATIONAL BIRTH-RATE COMMISSION, viz., ‘‘The declining BirthRate,’’ 1917, and ‘‘Problems of Population and Parenthood,’’ 1920,
Chapman and Hall.

(2) May I be allowed to refer to my book ‘‘I fattori demografici dell’ evoluzione
delle nazioni’’ [The demographic factors of the evolution of nations], Torino,
Bocea, 1912, pp. 93 and following.

(8) Cfr. ‘‘Il diverso accrescimento delle classi sociali e la concentrazione della
ricchezza’’ [The different increase of the social classes and the concentration of
wealth] in ‘‘Giornale degli Economisti,’’ January, 1909, para. X. The paper
was presented to the 2nd Meeting of the ‘‘Associazione Italiana per il Pro-.
gresso delle Scienze’’ [Italian Association for the Progress of Science], Florence,

1908.
DECLINE IN THE BIRTH-RATE. 25g.

Infreality, however, for those who investigate the matter more
closely, the interpretation of a voluntary decline of the birth-rate does
not in the least exclude the biologic explanation. There is no doubt
that the limitation of procreation is achieved by free-will, but could
it not also be possible that the will to delay marriage and to limit the
progeny gains the upper hand as the result of a weakening of the
reproductive instinct? (4). To raise a family, to surround oneself with
children is, from the individualistic point of view, a bad bargain : this is.
affirmed by popular intuition and is also proved by accurate statistical
computation (°). To rationalize reproduction, therefore, means.
inevitably to reduce it to a minimum insufficient to maintain the
species. Hence a reproduction sufficient to maintain or increase the
population can be explained only by instinct taking the upper hand
over reason. Now instinct can prevail more or less over reason, and
result in a more or less rapid reproduction, not only under the influence of external conditions which are more or less under the control
of reason, or under the influence of a greater or lesser steadfastness of
our reasoning power, but alsoas a consequence of the greater or lesser
development of the reproductive instinct or of mstincts related to the
latter.

Rather than to contrast voluntary and physiologic causes of the
decline of the birth-rate we should contrast internal and external
factors.

The ‘external factors can in their turn be divided into two.
groups according to whether they tend to call forth or to accentuate a
deliberate limitation of the birth-rate or whether they tend to determine a state of things in which the reduction of progeny occurs necessarily.

The first group of factors which could better be designated as

 

(4) Cfr. ‘‘I] sesso dal punto di vista statistico’’ [Sex from a statistical point of’
view], Palermo, Sandron, 1908, pp. 457-462; ‘‘I] diverso accrescimento etc.”’
op. cit., loco cit.; ‘‘Le leggi di evoluzione delle popolazioni’’ [The laws of the
evolution of populations] in ‘‘Economia,’’ December, 1924, p. 286.

(5) I dealt incidentally with this argument in my work ‘‘Problemi di economia
politica visti da uno statistico’’ [Problems of Political Economy as seen by a
Statistician’’] in ‘‘Annali dell’ Universita Commerciale Bocconi,’’ 1924, vol.
I. (efr. paras 15 and following), and in my address on ‘‘Le relazioni dell’
Eugenica con le altre scienze biologiche e sociali’’ [The relation of Eugenics to
the other biological and social sciences], held at the ‘‘Primo Congresso
Italiano di Eugenetica Sociale’? [First Italian Congress of Social
Eugenics] (Milan, 20-23rd September, 1924) and published in the transactions of the said Congress, and in ‘‘Rivista mensile del Comune di
Roma,’’ April-September, 1924 (cfr. para 15), and more purposely in the
communication ‘‘Sul controllo delle nascite’’ [On birth-control] to the ‘‘Sixth
International Neo-Malthusian and Birth Control Conference’? (New York,
25th-31st March, 1925), and published in ‘‘Difesa Sociale,’’ March-April,
1925. Professor A. PINO BRANCA is making at the Statistical Institute of
the R. University of Padua laborious researches on the cost and value of man,
from which results the confirmation that the cost of man is by far higher than
his value which may be deduced from the present value of his future work.
It is chiefly for nct having taken into due account the value of the labours
which the members of the family, and chiefly the mother, expend on the
bringing up of a man that the authors, who in the past dealt with this.
question, failed to grasp the importance of such a difference.
260 EUGENICS REVIEW.

voluntary, comprises the economic factor of a greater distribution of
property, inasmuch as the birth of another child reduces the resources
of the first ones, in a greater degree when the parents own a property,
and also the greater cost of bringing up the children, while
the available financial means remain stationary; here also enter the
technical factors consisting in the acquaintance with improved methods
of birth-control. In the second group of factors enter the restless
modern economic life which often necessitates more frequent absences
from home; the many and various satisfactions offered by progress
which make the need of sexual satisfaction less insistent; the greater
expenditure of nervous energy on the everyday occupations of life
which render the aforesaid sexual satisfactions less desired ; the greater
length of professional apprenticeship which delays the establishment
of a family.

Collaterally with these external factors stand the internal or
biologic factors which can also be distinguished according as they
affect directly either the reproductive apparatus or the psychic faculties. The first would consist in a lesser aptitude, due to organic or
functional causes, of the reproductive apparatus to fulfil its functions ;
the second might consist in a greater capacity of our intellect, to
reason, or in a weakening of the instincts related to reproduction,
namely, the sexual instinct, the wet-nursing instinct, parental affection, and also the religious instinct, inasmuch as the latter leads to
believe, without reasoning, in the good of having a numerous progeny.

Of all the above external or internal factors the only one whose
intervention may with probability be excluded in our days is that of
a higher development of human intellectual faculties as compared with
the intellectual faculties attained half a century or a century ago. On
the contrary it must be recognised that all the above enumerated
external factors have either arisen or have accentuated their influence
in this later period.

The majority of authors who investigate the causes of the decline
of the birth-rate observe that the intervention or the intensification of
such external factors is fully sufficient to explain the decline of the
birth-rate which has been noticed from about 1870 down to our days,
and they therefore consider it useless to have recourse to hypothetical
and uncertain factors such as the biologic factors appear to them to be.

Some add that it is impossible to attribute to physiological
factors the 20 to 80 per cent. diminution of the reproductive capacity
of the population which has occurred in many European nations.
They also say that by such considerations it would not be possible to
account for radical differences existing between populations descending
from one common stock as, for instance, between the French in their
own country and the French in Canada (6).

However, neither of these two objections is convincing.

The French in Canada descend from the lower, most prolific
classes of the population, and, on the other hand, they did not, as

 

(6) Cfr. for example, BEVERIDGE in ‘‘The Fall of Fertility among European
Races’’ in ‘‘Economica,’’ March, 1925, p. 20, and in ‘‘Discussion on Dr.
Stevenson’s Paper’’ in ‘‘Journ. of the R. Stat. Society,’’ January, 1925, p. 84.
DECLINE IN THE BIRTH-RATE. 261

neither did other colonial populations, subject their womenfolk to that
onesided and intensive selection based on personal beauty which, in
their country of origin, and, generally speaking, in all the more
advanced European countries, plays a considerable part and which, in
all probability, exercises an anti-selective influence on fecundity (7).

A rapid decline of the birth-rate does not preclude the physiologic
factors, chietly because the latter can only co-operate with the external
ones whose influence nobody even thinks of denying, and also because,
as it has been already remarked, instinct is hardly compatible with
reason, so that as soon as the latter comes into play the former rapidly
gives way in every respect (8). It is therefore only necessary to admit
that the generative instinct has undergone, if only aslight attenuation,
but sufficient to allow reason of taking the upper hand over it, in order
ta be able to explain the occurrence of a progressive decline of the
birth-rate leading to even more marked results than those so far noted.

Furthermore, the argument from economy of thought, which
must guide us in scientific constructions, fails, if we consider that
there are many other phenomena, either contemporaneous or of the
past, which cannot be explained by the intervention of exclusively
external factors in causing a limitation of the birth-rate, while they
agree with the hypothesis of biologic factors.

To Dr. Brownlee belongs the credit of having, as far back as in
198, called attention to these biologic factors (9), and of returning
subsequently several times to this argument (1°). He observed that
epidemics and invasions of certain animals, e.g. of locusts and rats,
evidently indicate that there occur in the diffusion of certain species
rhythmical movements which, it is but natural to suppose, must also
have their counterpart in the human species, and the existence of
which, in fact, must be recognised in the migrations of peoples (e.g.,
from Scandinavia and from Arabia) which occurred at certain epochs
and which then suddenly ceased. The demographic history of some
ancient and modern peoples (Roman Empire, England, Spain, France)
confirms the fact that periods of a rapid increase of the population
alternated with periods of arrest or of a slower increase. In his
opinion such alternations can be explained by a rhythmical course of
the aptitude of generative cells to propagate themselves, i.e., that
these cells accumulate energy which explodes at a given time to be

(7) Cfr. the above cited address on ‘‘Le relazioni dell’ Eugenica con le altre
scienze biologiche e sociali,’’ para 9.

(8) Cfr.also para. 15 of the said address, and the above cited communication ou
**Birth Control,’’ p. 16 of the reprint.

(9) ‘‘Germinal Vitality. A study of the growth of Nations as an instance of a
hitherto undescribed factor in Evolution,’’ in ‘‘Proceedings of the R. Phil.
Soc. of Glasgow,’”’ 1908.

(10) Finally in the paper ‘‘The present tendencies of population in Great Britain
with respect to Quantity and Quality’’ in this Review, July, 1925. See also,
among BROWNLEE’s more recent papers, those in ‘‘Lancet,’’ 1922, II., 228
(‘‘Restriction of Birth in relation to National Weal’’), and of 1924, Ist
November (‘‘On the question of Birth Control in some of its statistical
aspects).’’ Particularly interesting are Brownlee’s replies to the questions
of the ‘‘National Birth-Rate Commission,’’ reproduced in the volume
‘‘The declining Birth-Rate,’’ pp. 149-165.
262 EUGENICS REVIEW.

followed by a period of exhaustion; this rhythmical movement is
analogous to that which, according to Dr. Brownlee’s statement,
takes place in somatic cells, and determines, independently of any
external factor, an alternation in the individual development, of
periods of rapid and of slowed-down growth. In support of this
theory he points out that periods of greater numerical increase of
population coincide with periods of the appearance of individuals
eminent in the realms of thought and of action, a coincidence which
suggests a biologic cause of both phenomena.

I do not think I shall wrong my eminent colleague, with whom,
besides, as I shall show later, I incline to concur in his fundamental
point of view, in stating that his views are not shared by a large
number of followers(11). Perhaps this is partially due to the somewhat
mystic language in which he expresses his view, as for instance,
when he speaks of the storage and then of the explosion of reproductive
energy, as it is not clear to what concrete thing this corresponds ; but
it may also be due to the feeling that the periods of the more or less
rapid increase which have occurred in the demographic history of all
the peoples, are not accurately equivalent to the rapid decline observed
for the last half century, not properly in the increase of the population
{neither in some States in the rapidity of the said increase),
but in the number of births. AJ] that we know in regard to the movement in the past of the populations from which have arisen the nations
which now exhibit a crisis in their birth-rate, leads us to believe that
their birth-rate (although presenting cons iderable fluctuations) always
was high in the centuries gone by in comparison with its present day
level, and that the more or less rapid increase of these populations
essentially depended on their lower or higher death-rate on which, it is
but natural to admit, external factors had a decisive influence(!2).
History shows us with certitude that n former times a decrease occurred
in the birth-rate as rapid and as high as that which we have now observed
for some decades, and namely, in the Greek Republics and in
Rome (13); but that decrease marked the end of those nations, and
not a slowing-down of the rhythm followed by a revival. All the
indications which we possess concerning the French population (where
the decline of the birth-rate was already being felt at the beginning of
the last century, and which would cer’ ainly decrease if fresh blood were
not poured into it by immigration) lead us to think that in this case
the movement is continuous and not periodic.

In my opinion, the analogy with individual development may be
established, but only by the comparison of the actual phases of the
evolution of the European nations, not with a period of slowing-down
in the growth of the Ongena, but with the stage of maturity at tats

Dr. A. K. CHALMERS alone expressed ideas in armony with Dr. Brownlee’s

theory. Cfr. ‘“The declining Birth-Rate,’’ pp. 336-349.

(12) ‘The examination also of unpublished data on the movement of population
which occurred during several centuries in some Italian towns confirms me in
this point of view.

(18) For an analysis of the demographic evolution of Greece and of Rome see ‘'I
fattori demografici dell’ evoluzione delle nazioni,’’ op. cit. pp. 48-62.
DECLINE IN THE BIRTH-RATE. 263

turning point towards senility when the reproductive activity of the
cells of the organism is still sufficient to make good the losses, while
it is already the prelude of the following stages in which the phystologic balance will be in the normal condition of passivity which
characterises senile involution. I had the occasion of developing this
line of thought contemporaneously with Brownlee, and independently
of him, and I have taken it up again in various researches with some
additions and applications(14). May I be allowed to recall here the
arguments which militate in favour of my point of view.

Indeed, it appears quite natural that there should be an analogy
between the evolution of the somatic cells, in the development of
individuals, and the evolution of generative cells in the development
of nations, if we consider that both kinds of cells descend from a common
mother-cell ; the somatic cells and the generative cells differ essentially
from each other in that the first, being more exposed to the influence
of environment, are differentiated more rapidly, and in that, for this,
reason also, they lose more rapidly the faculty of reproducing themselves. It is, however, very difficult not to believe that the generative
cells also are subject to a similar, if much slower, differentiation
which leads, through the lapse of generations, to a reduced aptitude,
and finally to the inaptitude, of reproducing themselves at the same
rate as initially.

Various facts collected in different branches of science would appear
to corroborate this view, such as, in the first place, the rapid reduction,
and often the total extinction, of some species after extremely flourish-.
ing periods. Such a reduction is concomitant to a reduced variability of forms and, hence, to a lowered adaptability to environment.
There are exceptions, it is true, or at least apparent exceptions of
species in the evolution of which such a parabolic curve is not manifest,
but the possibility is not excluded that even such exceptions may be
explained in the future. Secondly comes the territorial distribution
of human races which clearly shows how the now predominating races,
namely, the white, yellow and black races, have, so to say, burst
their bounds and have driven the more primitive races to the less hospitable regions of the earth. The extremely interesting study of the
modern demography of these primitive races shows us that the latter
are but senescent races standing in a state of clear demographic
(14) Cfr. ‘‘Il sesso dal punto di vista statistico,’’ op. cit., 1908, pp. 455-462;

‘*I] diverso accrescimento etc.’’ above cited paper, 1909; ‘‘I fattori demo
grafici dell’ evoluzione delle nazioni,’’ op. cit., 1912; ‘‘Contributi statistici
ai problemi dell’ Eugenica’’ [Statistical contributions to the problems of
Eugenics], in ‘‘Rivista Italiana di Sociologia,’’ May-August, 1912, pp. 64-69
(Italian version, with addenda, of the paper ‘’The contributions of Demography to Eugenics’’ presented to the ‘‘First Eugenics International Congress,’’ London, 1912, and published in the 2nd volume of the Proceedings of
the Congress); ‘‘L’ammontare e la composizione della ricchezza delle nazioni’’
[The amount and composition of the wealth of nations], Torino, Bocca, 1914,
pp. 425-481; ‘‘Fattori latenti delle guerre’? [Latent factors of wars] in
**Rivista Italiana di Sociologia,’’ January-February, 1915, reproduced in the
book ‘‘Problemi sociologici della guerra’’ [Sociological problems of the war]
Zanichelli, Bologna, 1921; ‘‘Le relazioni dell’ Eugenica con le altre scienze

etc,’’ above cited address, 1924; ‘‘Le leggi di evoluzione delle popolazioni, ’’
above cited paper, 1924.
264 EUGENICS REVIEW.

passivity, or, at least, of instable demographic equilibrium which may
be unsettled by the least incident, and which, in the absence of an’
adequate revival, must lead to a numerical regression of their popula-.,
tion. And their history teaches us that their retrogression in comparison to the now dominating races has occurred, and still frequently’
occurs, without the intervention of concomitant external factors.
The same varieties, or families or stocks of the modern dominating
race:, when compared among themselves, exhibit numerous symptoms,’
at various stages of their evolution, of being endowed with a different’
capacity of diffusion, although the capacity of diffusion of each of them
is also subject, through time, to such variations that, speaking generally, it appears to be the weaker the longer the history of these families
or stocks. One can also recognize, not only through space but also
through time, a certain relationship between the rapidity of numerical
increase and the individual qualities of the populations, although, how-’
ever, the maximum of the first does not coincide with the optimum of
the second, also on account of the entirely comprehensible
influence of education and tradition(!5). It is an_ illusion,
founded on the study of the recent past of the white and
yellow races, to believe that the total population of the
earth is progressing numerically: this, perhaps, is only true
for the three aforesaid :aces. Eskimos, Redskins, Polynesians,
Australians, Maoris, Negritos appear, on the contrary, to be in a
state of regression, or just to maintain their position on the downward
curve thanks to the hygienic rules introduced by the whites. Even
the negroes, in some parts of their own territory , decrease in number(!¢).
Thus, there would be nothing surprising if a similar fate, in a more or
less remote future, were also in store for the white and yellow races,
and there is nothing strange in that some of their present day stocks.
which for a longer time have been on the ascending branch of the
parabola, are already now in a state of numerical decadence. This
appears the less strange since both pre-historic research and ancient
history show us, as already stated higher up, indubitable example: of
such decadence and subsequent disappearance of nations. In many
cases, besides, probably even in the majority of cases, the decadence.
and disappearance of a stock was masked by the fact that infiltrations.
from younger and more vigorous races occurred and served to fill the
blanks left by the older stock, so that a nation may have continued to.
exist under the same name and with the same cultural characteristics.
while a different blood ran in its veins(17). Probably some of the
examples cited by Brownlee of rhythmical movements in the reproduc-tion of populations may be referred to this masked substitution of some

(15) On this point see particularly, ‘‘I] sesso dal punto di vista statistico,’’ op.
cit., pp. 461-462, and ‘‘Le leggi di evoluzione delle p polazioni,’’ abovecited paper, p. 292.

(16) Cfr. H. ZIEMANN, ‘‘Beitrag zur Bevélkerungsfrage der farbigen Rassen’’
{Contributions to the population question of the coloured races], in ‘‘Metron,’”

vol. III , No. 1.

(17) Cfr., particularly, ‘‘Fattori latenti delle guerre,’’ above cited paper, para.
6, and ‘‘Le leggi di evoluzione delle popolazioni,’’ above cited paper, pp..
294-295.
DECLINE IN THE BIRTH-RATE. 265

stocks for others; some others, probably, to irregular variations
(which will be dealt with immediately) in the average
reproductive capacity of the families entering in the composition of the population. For, if from the consideration
of complex populations we descend to the study of single
family lines, we find that their evolution in the course of time
follows the same rules, i.e. a period of rapid propagation is followed by
a reduction and, frequently, by the disappearance of the name. At
first it was believed that this was a characteristic proper to families of
the nobility, but in studying the matter more closely it is seen that
such is also the fate of middle-class, and perhaps also of peasant
families, at least when from their original condition they rise to the
upper classes(18). Thus, the evolution of populations appears to be
the result of the evolution of individual family lines, in the same manner
as the development and involution curve of an individual soma
represents but the resultant of the reproductive capacity of the various
groups of cells of which it is composed. The latter also begin by
multiplying rapidly and then frequently die off, but their place is
taken by other cells until the movement of renovation slows down and
becomes insufficient for the maintenance of the organism. The
greater or lesser reproductive capacity of the cell groups or of the family
groups in the period of their maximum expansion determines transient
periods of rapid or slow increase of the body or of the populations;
these periods follow each other in an irregular rhythm, but they bear
a profoundly different character from that of the evolution parabola
described by the whole complex of the organisms or nations.

Besides all the above mentioned complex of facts and considerations which renders very probable a gradual attenuation of the faculty
of the generative cells to reproduce themselves, there are some other
facts which seem to prove more directly the physiological cause of the
limitation of progeny at the present time. The more frequent barrenness of the upper classes, the not less frequent cases of still-births
which occur in these classes, notwithstanding the greater ease of life
and the better means they possess to combat this evil, the frequent
impossibility amongst them for the mothers to nurse their children
themselves, the much acuter pains of child-birth than in the lower
classes, all these facts are as many indicators or manifestations of a
lowered aptitude to reproduction. Besides, this lowered aptitude can
also be explained. All we know on the causes of reproduction and on
the effects of domestication of species leads us to believe that a sump(18) See, (besides the well-known researches of P. E. FAHLBECK in ‘‘Der Adel

Schwedens’’ [The Nobility of Sweden], Jena, Fischer, 1902, and my researches

in ‘‘I fattori demografici dell’ evoluzione dellc nazioni’’ and in ‘‘L’ammontare

e la composizione della ricchezza delle nazioni’’, H. LUNDBORG’s paper
“The History of a Swedish Farmer’s Lineage as seen from a Race-Biological
Stand-point,’’ Stockholm, 1921, and the paper of P. P. LUZZATTO FEGIZ
on ‘‘I cognomi di 8S. Gimignano ” [The family names of S. Gimignano] shortly
to be published in ‘‘Metron,’’ vol. V., No. 2. For the theoretical considerations which gave reason to foresee an evolution of family lines, cfr., the
above cited works ‘‘Contributi statistici ai problemi dell’ Eugenica,’’ pp.
68-69; ‘‘Le relazioni dell’ Eugenica con le altre scienze etc,’’ para. 7; ‘‘Le
leggi di evoluzione delle popolazioni,’’ p. 287.
266 EUGENICS REVIEW.

tuous and easy life must weaken the reproductive power(!9). In this
respect the external factors are concomitant to the internal factors.

I must admit that the greater part of, if not all, the aforesaid
phenomena may also have, each one separately, other explanations ; but
these explanations, in their whole, would appear very complicated in
comparison with the simple and sing]: explanation, namely that of a
progressive diminution of the reproductive capacity of the generative
cells. Thus, in widening the field of the phenomena examined, the argu
ment derived from the economy of thought to which we alluded above,
turns precisely in favour of this sole explanation. We must not forget
that it is on this argument that we base some of our firmest convi tions,
for instance, that the earth revolves round the sun, rather than that
the sun with its other planets revolves round the earth. But we must
also admit at the same time that we must have recourse to this argument, as to an ultimate arbiter, only after having tested all the
other possible evidence.

In fact, the researches which I have been making for two years
have given rise to the hope that other evidence can also be tested. Such
evidence would provide the possibility of establishing a standard by
which to measure the physiological aptitude of married couples to
generate(2°). The study of this standard through time would allow the
dispute to be settled between those who affirm and those who deny the
existence of a biologic concause of the present day decline of the birthrate. This question not only has a great importance for demography,
for economics and for political sciences, but also it evidently presents
a great interest for eugenics, since it is clear that the position taken up
by the eugenist towards it will be quite different according to whether
the scanty birth-rate of certain peoples and in certain classes may be
regarded as purely the effect of free-will or whether it is on the contrary
the manifestation of a reduced reproductive power and the prodrome
of the decadence of individual qualities.

The method of measuring the physiological aptitude of a married
couple to generate is based on an extremely simple principle.

Let us take a group of n couples of married people and suppose
that all the wives are available for fecundation, and that all the couples
have the same physiological aptitude to generate. Let us designate by

(19) Cfr. in regard to all this, ‘‘I] sesso dal punto di vista statistico,’’ pp. 457-462,
and ‘‘Le leggi di evoluzione delle popolazioni,’’ pp. 286-287.

(20) Inthe following pages are summarized the methodological considerations and
the principal results given in the two papers presented to ‘‘Istituto Venetodi
Scienze Lettere ed Arti’’ [Venetian Institut of Sciences, Letters, and Arts], viz.:
‘*Prime ricerche sulla ‘fecondabilita’ della donna’’ [First researches on the
‘fecundability’ of woman] (Ist July, 1923), and ‘‘Nuove ricerche sulla
‘fecondabilita’ della donna’’ [New researches on the ‘fecundability’ of woman]
(13th July, 1924). Cfr. ‘‘Atti’’ of the said Institute, vol. lxxxiii., 2nd part,
pp. 315-344, and vol. Ixxxiv, 2nd part, pp. 269-308. Summaries of the
results were published in ‘‘Giornale di Biologia e Medicina sperimentale’’
[Journal of Biology and Experimental Medicine], August, 1924, and July,
1925. Tothese papers I refer the readers who may want more detailed explanations either of the method or of the data to which the applications refer. The
data concerning Amsterdam had not yet been published ; they have been taken
from the Statistical Year Book of that city. ,
DECLINE IN THE BIRTH-RATE. 267

p the probability that under such conditions one wife will conceive in
a menstrual period or, as we would say, the fecundability of the wife.
In order to give a concrete example, let us suppose that the number of
the couples considered is 1,000 and that the fecundability of the wife
is }. In such a hypothesis we shall have:

In the first menstrual period : |
1000.1 =250 conceptions.
In the 2nd menstrual period:

(1000 — 250) 1=1000.}.(1 — })=188 In the 3rd menstrual period :
(1000 -. 250 — 188) 4=1000.}.(1 -- })?=141 ,

In the 4th menstrual period:
(1000 —- 250 -- 188 — 141) 3=1000.}.(1 — }):=105 .
In the 5th menstrual period:
(1000 — 250 — 188— 141- 105)4—1000.4.(1--4)'= 79 %
and so on.

The number of conceptions occurring in the successive menstrual
periods after marriage would represent, in this hypothesis, a geometrical progression the ratio of which, in our example, would be 1— 4,
or in general 1—p, in other words it would be equal to the complement
to unity of the fecundability of the wives. The ratio of the conceptions in a menstrual period 7 to the number of conceptions in the preceding menstrual period 7—1 would, inthis hypothesis, serve to measure
(admitting that the number of observations is sufficiently large) the
fecundability of the wives available for fecundation.

There are certain States and towns that supply the number of
births according to the interval of time elapsed since the marriage,
and this interval is for the first periods shown in months. Supposing,
by way of a first approximation, that the months correspond to the
menstrual periods, and that the number of births in a given month is
proportional to the number of conceptions that occurred nine months
before, the series of births in the successive months of marriage starting from the ninth should also represent a geometrical progression ; or,
in other words, the ratio of the number of births during the marriage
in a given month starting from the tenth to the number of births in
the preceding month should be constant(2!).

In reality this does not occur, as shown by the following table in
which are assembled data relating to some Australian States and Berlin
which supply the indication in months of the interval of time between
the marriage and the birth of the first child during the two first years
of marriage.. In this table the expression

Xz —X3
100R
X; —-X,

indicates in per cents. the ratio of the number of births in the
month x, to the number of births that occurred in the preceding

 

(21) Really other hypotheses are implicitly included in this prevision. Their
bearing is discussed in ‘‘Nuove ricerche etc,’’ pp. 284-286. Some of these
hypotheses will be considered in the following.
268 EUGENICS REVIEW.

month x, of marriage. For instance, in the aforesaid countries
during the 9th month of marriage were born 33,546 first-born children,
and during the 10th the number was 28,270. The second number is
84.8 per cent. of the first.

TABLE I.

FIRST«BORN CHILDREN BORN AFTER xj —X2 MONTHS OF MARRIAGE.

(Australian Commonwealth 1917—-1921; Western Australia 1899—1915; New
South Wales 1893—1905 and 1916; Berlin (Kénigsviertel) 1894—1895.)

For x —x, = 9—10 10—11 11—12 12—13 18—14 14—15 15—16 16—17

Number of first born children 33,546 28,270 20,806 15,630 11,407 9,749 8,550 7,170

 

X2 —-—X3
1008 ( ) 84°3 71°8 77-0 %73°0 85-5 87.7 83-9 84:°8
X, —~-X2

For x; —x2 = 17—18 18—19 19—20 20—21 21-22 22—23 23—24

Number of firstborn children 6,079 5,828 4,654 4,220 3,670 38,801 2,694

 

Xa —X3
100R 87-7 87-4 90-7 87:0 86:9 81:6 ——
xX, —X¢2

The most outstanding fact is that the first ratio is higher than those
immediately following it; this may be attributed to the circumstance
that the frequent virginity of the wife reduces the number of conceptions during the first month of marriage, and also to the circumstance
that, according to the statement of gynecologists, the custom of travelling during the honeymoon increases the percentage of failures of pregnancy at the initial stage.

The following ratios, however, increase consistently, with the
exception of some fluctuations which may be plausibly attributed to.
the small number of observations. This is evidently due to the artificiality of the hypothesis of an equal aptitude of all the couples to.
generate ; in reality, this aptitude varies in every couple. In the first
month, it is naturally the wives whose fecundability is greatest that
conceive most frequently, and then, successively, a progressive selection takes place in respect to fecundability, so that it is to be expected
that the women impregnated must show, on the average, a lower degree
of fecundability the longer the interval elapsed between marriage and
the birth of the first child.

The varying degree of fecundability of the wives does not, however, constitute an insuperable obstacle to measuring their mean fecundability. It may be, indeed, easily demonstrated that while, under
such conditions, the ratio of the number of conceptions in a given
menstrual period 7 to the number of conceptions in the preceding
menstrual period 1—1 cannot give the measure of the fecundability of
the wives available for fecundation, it can nevertheless give the
measure of fecundability of the women that conceived during the
menstrual period +—1; it is sufficient, tothis end, to admit that the
DECLINE IN THE BIRTH-RATE. 269

fecundability of a woman does not vary materially from one menstrual
period to the next(22). The ratios

X, —X,
100R ( )
x, —X,
in Table I. serve, therefore, to measure the mean fecundability of the
groups of wives who bore their first children in the 9th to 24th months
of their marriage.

In regard to the first children born after two years and over of
marriage, the demographic statistics classify them by intervals of one
year and more. It will be easily understood, however, that the ratios
between the numbers of children born in consecutive years or in groups
of consecutive years are functions of the ratios between the
numbers of births in consecutive months, and it will not be difficult to
calculate, with some approximation. these second ratios from the
first(23). Thus we are in a position to measure the fecundability of
the various categories of the primiparae who bear their first child at
various intervals after marriage. It is impossible, it is true, by this
method to calculate the fecundability of the wives who bore their first
child in the first eight months of marriage, these children being, in all
probability, the fruit of pre-nuptial conception. But their fecundability can be estimated approximately by establishing somewhat wide
limits and bearing in mind that in such cases the fecundability must
be higher than in the wives who conceive in marriage. The weighted
average of th: measures of the fecundability obtained for the various
categories of married primiparae will give us the mean fecundability of
the married primiparae.

In the following table are given the results obtained for the Australian Commonwealth.

 

TABLE II.

FECUNDABILITY OF VARIOUS GROUPS OF PRIMIPARAE ACCORDING TO THE INTERVAL
ELAPSED SINCE MARRIAGE,

(Australian Commonwealth: 1908—1915 and 1918—1921).
Interval elapsed since Out of 10,000 first - Measure of fecundabilmarriage. born in marriage, were itv (in per cents).

born in the correspond ing interval.

 

 

0— 9 months 3315 30-——40
9—12 ,, 2528 27°0
1— 2 years 2522 17-7
2— 3 ,, 751 7:6
B— 4 ,, 346 3°5
4— 7 ,, 378 4-0
ed 100 3:0
10 years and m>re 60 2°5
10, 000 22-2—25:°5

The average fecundability of married primiparae stands thus, in
the Australian Commonwealth, between 26 and 22 per cent. This

(22) Cfr. for the demonstration ‘‘Prime ricerche etc,’’ p. 326, and ‘‘Nuove
ricerche,’’ pp. 282-288.
(23) Cfr. for the manner of proceeding ‘‘Prime ricerche etc.’’ pp. 327-333.
270 EUGENICS REVIEW.

result should be somewhat lower (by about 10 per cent.) if we take into
account the difference between the length of a month and the duration
of the menstrual period, which in our first approximation we left unconsidered.

I now pass to the comparison between different countries. I shall
exclude from calculation the first month of marriage owing to the perturbing influences mentioned above which, besides, have a considerably different effect in each country.

For the cities of Berlin and Dresden, the Kingdom of Saxony,
Western Australia, New South Wales, Victoria and Tasmania, for the
Australian Commonwealth considered as a whole, for New Zealand and
for 24 Italian communes we can calculate the mean fecundability of the
wives in the second month of marriage. As shown in the following
table it varies from 20 to 31 per cent., which limits may be considered
as narrow if we take into consideration that the number of observations
was for several countries very «mall.

TABLE III.
FECUNDABILITY OF PRIMIPARAE IN VARIOUS STATES AND TOWNS.
Years to Mean fecundability (in per cents.) of the

which the primiparae who conceived in the
State or Town. observations 2nd month 2nd to 8th 2nd to 14th
refer. of marriag: . month month
of marriage. of marriage.
Berlin (Isonigsviertel) -. 1894—1895 20-0 24-4 20°5
Dresden .. .. 1891—1908 29°5 —- ———
Saxony (Kingdom of) .. 1911—-1914 20-3 —_—-- —-Australian Commonwealth. 1917—192] 27°8 20-6 19-2
Western Australia .. .. 1899-—1915 26-6 22:7 20-2
y Todas Gog 7 C
N. South Wales .. oe 1800 Ir on 29-2 19-7
Victoria oe . .. 1898—1900
- pled 24-4 —
Tasmania... - .. 1905—1906 |
New Zealand a8 .. 1912—1921]1 22-7 —— ——
Italy, 24 communes . 1920—-1922 26°5 21-0 13: 6

For six of these countries the statistical data allow us to determine
the mean fecundability of primiparae during the period from the 2nd
to the end of the 8th month of marriage ; here the data are a little more
numerous, and the uniformity of results is greater as the fecundability
only varies from 20.6 to 24.4 per cent.; five countries, finally, allow
of determining the fecundability of primiparae during the period from
the 2nd to the end of the 14th month of marriage, and the regularity of
the results, owing to more copious data, is still increased, the fecundability varying between the very narrow limits of 18.6 and 20.5 per
cent. Most noteworthy is the fact that the fecundability of the primiparae who conceived in the early months of marriage is about identical in Germany, Italy, Australia, and New Zealand (countries in
which the birth-rate is very dissimilar), and is also almost identival in
the towns and in the whole States which greatly differ in the fecundity
of marriages.

This uniformity applies not only to the wives who have their first
child in the early periods of marriage, but also to all the married primiparae taken as a whole.
DECLINE IN THE BIRTH-RATE. 271

To this end it must be borne in mind that the fecundability is
identical if the distribution of the first born children according to the
interval of time elapsed after the first eight months of marriage remains
identical. Now, the table below shows that in Australia, in Amsterdam, and in Saxony this distribution shows only small differences
which, in their turn, may be attributed to a great extent to variations
in the number of marriages that took place in the preceding years.
Eliminating, for instance, the influence of this perturbing circumstance
in the comparisons between Saxony and Australia(the two countries
between which the diffcrences are larger), we find that the fecundability of the wives who bore their first child in the period from the
10th to the 12th month is 0.134 in Saxony and 0.166 in Australia, and
the fecundability of the wives who bore their first child in the second
year of marriage isg0.089 in Saxony and 0.093 in Australia. An
explanation of these residual differences may, on the other hand, be
found in the fact that in Saxony prenuptial conceptions are more frequent than in Australia, a circumstance which results in the elimination from the number of wives who will conceive at a subsequent period
of a larger proportion of women with a very high degree of
fecundability .

TABLE IV.

DISTRIBUTION OF FIRST-BORN CHILDREN ACCORDING TO THE INTERVAL ELAPSED
SINCE MARRIAGE,

Interval elapsed Australian Common- Town of Amster- Kingdom of Saxony
since marriage. wealth: 1908—1915 dam: 1910—19i3 1911—-1914.
and- and
1918—1921. 1916—1920.

9—12 months 378 352 318
1—-5 years 571 592 618
5-—10 years 42 48 52
Over 10 years 9 8 12

Totals 1000 1000 1000

Another very noteworthy result arising from Table V. is the fact
that after the first month of marriage the fecundability is not found to
be different as the age of the wives advances. In other words, after
the first month of marriage, the ovule of the *‘fecundable’’ but not yet
fecundated woman appears, until the occurrence of the menopause,
to have the same probability of being fecundated. In the first month
of marriage, on the contrary, the fecundability is less in the wives of
a more advanced age, probably owing to the greater obstacle to fecundation offered by their frequent state of virginity .

TABLE V.

FECUNDABILITY OF PRIMIPARAE ACCORDING TO THEIR AGE (in per cents.)
(Primiparae who conceive in the 2nd month of marriage).

Age Australian Commonwealth New South Wales
1907—-1914. 1893—1898.
Up to 25 years: 28-0 32°3
25 years to 34 29-4 26-8
35 and over 28-0 29-8

Averages 28-6 30-2
272 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Still more interesting, in regard to the question from which we
started in this paper, is the finding that the fecundability has not shown
any systematic variation in the Kingdom of Saxony from the biennial
period 1901—1902 to the biennial period 1911—1912, while the ratio
of the legitimate children to the general population or to married
women under 40 years old has diminished by 1/3. The results are not
noticeably modified by eliminating the influence of the variations in
the number of marriages from one period to another.

TABLE VI.

DISTRIBUTION OF FIRST-BORN CHILDREN ACCORDING TO THE INTERVAL ELAPSED
SINCE MARRIAGE.

(Kingdom of Saxony.)

Interval elapsed since First children born in the biennial period.
marriage. 1901—1902 e 1911—1912

0-9 months mR 7 498 517
9-12 ,, as se 169 154
1-3 years o . . 275 253
8-5 ,, ss ea a B4 46
5-10,, oe se oe 17 23
Over 10 years bs ws 6 6

Totals ws 999 999

This result may certainly appear to be opposed to the biological
interpretation of the decline of the birth-rate. But before coming to a
conclusion in this respect, it will be prudent to await the result of
researches which cover periods much longer than a decade. For it
might well be that the lowering of the physiological aptitude to procreate would not reveal itself immediately even if the decline of the
birth-rate may to a certain degree depend on the weakening of the
generative instinct ; such a weakening of the latter might be a prodrome
which may be followed after the lapse of a more or less lengthy time
by the manifestation of a lower organic or functional aptitude of the
reproductive apparatus. Let us not forget, indeed, that the observed
decade represents in Saxony precisely the first period in which the
birth-rate, which still was 33 per cent., showed a considerable decrease
there.

At present a number of other researches are being made. Some of
them are directed to measure the fecundability of the Hebrews in several
towns of Italy at various periods of the last century. In Italy, aselsewhere, the Hebrews have shown during the last century a rapid decline of
birthrate : in Padua, for instance, the average number of children born in
marriage, which was 4.7 in the period 1816 to 1825 sank to about 2.5
at the end of the century(24). It will be interesting to find whether a
diminution of the fecundability corresponds or not to this and
similar decreases which occurred in other towns of Italy. Other
researches concern families of the nobility and of sovereigns listed in
the Gotha Almanac. The data collected up to the present time in
(24) Cfr. my ;aper ‘‘Alcune ricerche demografiche sugli Israeliti in Padova’’

[Some demographical researches on the Hebrews in Padua] read at the R.

Academy of Sciences, Letters, and Arts of Padua ((llth June, 1916) and

published in ‘‘Attie Memorie’’ of the said Academy, vol. xxxii., part iv., pp.

467-485.
DECLINE IN THE BIRTH-RATE. 273

regard to the families of crowned heads, to families belonging to the
court circles in Germany, and to the ducal families of France, Belgium,
England, Ireland, and Scotland(2® ) show in regard to conception from
the 2nd to the end of the 14th month of marriage, a fecundability of the
wives equal to 18.7 per cent., which coincides exactly with the results
obtained for the various countries listed in Table IIT. I also hope to
obtain, thanks to the courtesy of the General Direction of Statistics in
France, the possibility of measuring the fecundability in some typical
French departments exhibiting a high and a low birth-rate. There are
departments in which, for many decades, the birth-rate has been insufficient, and in which, therefore, a lowering of the fecundability may
already be apparent. Evidently, if in these departments the fecundability were not found to be inferior to that in other departments or to
that in other countries, those who, like Brownlee and myself, suppose
the existence of a biological cause of the decline of the birth-rate should
have to revise their theories.

Before terminating, some observations appear useful on the bearing
of the method.

The method might theoretically also serve to measure the fecundability of groups of women who have already borne children. But in
reality the available statistical material allows of applying it only to
primiparae. It appears probable that during marriage, and after the
birth of the first child, the fecundability of the woman decreases, either
because of general infirmities contracted by the organism, or because
of defects having occurred in meantime in the reproductive apparatus, or
because of the natural exhaustion of the reproductive power. Certainly,
the possibility cannot be denied a priori that the fecundability of primiparae remains constant through time, and that, on the contrary, the
fecundability of the women who have already borne children decreases ;
but in reality, this appears difficult to admit while not excluding, but
rather maintaining, the possibility that the fecundability of primiparae may vary less, inasmuch as one of the manifestations of a weakening
of the reproductive aptitude may be that of a more rapid exhaustion of
this aptitude(26). It must also be noted that we started from the

 

(25) These data were obtained by Professor F. SAVORGNAN who kindly communicated them to me. They are taken from the same material which
Savorgnan used for his papers on the fecundity of the families of crowned
heads and of the nobility which have already been or are shortly to be
published in ‘‘Mctron,’’ vols. iii-iv-v.

{26) In my work ‘‘Indici di concentrazione e di dipendenza’’ [Indices of concentration and of dependence] in ‘‘Biblioteca dell’ Economista,*’ Torino, Unione
Tipografica-Editrice, 1910, pp. 140-146) demonstrated, by applying the indices
of dependence to matrimonial fecundity, that in the majority of the countries

xamined (Berlin, France, Sweden, Denmark, Finland; Norway forms an
exception) fecundity tends in the course of time to be more restricted to the
younger ages, or, in other words, it tends to decrease more rapidly as the
ngeadvances. In regard to Sweden the researches may extend over more than
a century ; they show that the decline is more rapid in periods of low than in
periods of high birth-rate. Such results are in agreement with those c btained
by BROWNLEE by Tait’s method for Scotland, England and Wales, and published in the July number of this Review. I consider, |:owever, the method
of indices to be preferable to that of Tait seeing that with the latter the results
are too much influenced by the birth-rates of married girls beween 15 and 19
274 EUGENICS REVIEW.

hypothesis that all the women considered were available for fecundation, and that therefore they were not addicted to birth-control practice. This is certainly true in the great majority of cases in respect of
wives who have not yet borne a child, but not for all. Let it be remarked, however, that the number of wives who have recourse to
infallible birth-control practices has no influence on the calculation,
admitting that on the average their aptitude to generate is not different
from that of the wives computed. For the end of measuring the
fecundability it is as if they did not exist. In this sense the measure
of fecundability may be said to be independent from the greater or
lesser diffusion of birth-control practices.

In reality, however, and this may appear as the weak point of the
method, the success of the birth-control practices is not infallible.
And now, what influence may this fact have on the results yielded by
the measure of fecundability? Ifthe wives who are addicted to birthcontrol practices without certainty of success had the same aptitude to
generate as the others, this would result in showing a fecundability
lower than the real one. On the other hand, it is probable that it is the
wives having a lower aptitude to reproduction, in whom, precisely
on this account, reason more easily takes the upper hand over instinct,
who have recourse to contraceptive measures; the adoption of contraceptive practices would thus tend to show a measure of fecundability
ereater than the actual one. These two circumstances thus tend to
eliminate each other, and the resultant effect may be quite negligible.

This, certainly, is a point which must be considered attentively
and cleared up if possible by further research. If such effects were
negligible, the measure of fecundability suggested by me would constitute, if I am not mistaken, an excellent measure of the physiological
aptitude to gencrate of married couples, and would supply us with an
efficient method of research to resolve the question we are investigating
of the causes of the declining birth-rate.

In any casc, it is certain that the regular uniformity of the results
so far obtained in regard to various countries, in regard to towns and
entire States, in regard to the same country at various epochs, and in
regard to the various ages of th: women deserves all our attention
and cannot fail to be highly suggestive.

CoRRADO GINI.
Padua, R. University, 10th August, 1925.

and betw-cen 20 and 24 vears of age; these rates also are frequently uncertain
both owing to the restricted number of married girls within these age limits,
and owiny to the strong influence which may be excrcised on their values by
the frequency of pre-nuptial conceptions. The Table on p. 211 of vol. I.
(1907) of the ‘‘>tatistique internationale du Mouvement de la population’’ published by the French General Direction of Statistics, shows
that the birth-rate for these groups of married girls varies from State to
State, evidently without any strict relationship to the fecund ty of married
women belonging to the other groups of age. It is scarcely necessary to add
that the fact that fecundity tends to be restricted to the younger ages, does not
by itself constitute an argument for excluding the possibility that the decline
of the birth-rate bears the character of a voluntary act; this fact, indeed, might
also be expected to result from the volun ary limitation of progeny, inasmuch.
as the latter occurs less frequently in the first years of marriage.
