THE KIN OF GENIUS—(D
A Study of the Families of Great Men

By W. T. J. GUN, F.R.Hist.S., F.S.G.

lished in the Eucrenics REviEw for July,

1928, an analysis was given of the relatives of 200 representative British men and
women of the past 400 years, showing that
as many as 137 of these had one or more
relatives, within the degree of second cousin,
who themselves had separate memoirs in the
Dictionary of National Biography (hereinafter referred to as D.N.B.). On the assumption that in the cases of those with two
or more such relatives, some general family
ability may be taken for granted, it is now
proposed, as suggested in the concluding
paragraph of the previous article, to give
some account of those of the Two Hundred
who can show only one such relative or none
at all, with a view to ascertaining how far
general family ability can be shown in these
cases.

Considerations of space make it desirable
to refer chiefly to the immediate ancestry
of the individuals in question, though in
some instances mention may be made of
other relatives.

The cases of those with one D.N.B. relative will be taken first, and it will be obvious
that where in those instances the D.N.B.
relative is himself an immediate ancestor,
further investigation is hardly needed.
Examples are afforded by Addison, Charles
Lyell, J. S. Mill, Brunel, Lord Roberts, and
W.S. Gilbert, the father of each of whom is
in D.N.B.—in at least two cases, Mill and
Brunel, being almost as notable as the son.
Next we come to Rodney, Palmerston, Archbishop Tait and Florence Nightingale, who
had each a grandfather in D.N.B., and to
Cardinal Manning who had a maternal uncle
in that work. It will be sufficient to state
here that in all these last five cases a good
deal of general ability among preceding relatives is discernible.

[i the first article on this subject, pub
The remaining members of the Two Hundred with only one D.N.B. relative should,
however, be considered at somewhat greater
length ; as in these cases the D.N.B. relative
either was a successor, or, if a predecessor,
was more remote.

ONE DISTINGUISHED KINSMAN

The following have one brother or sister
in D.N.B.—Purcell, Reynolds, Romney,
Humphry Davy, Cecil Rhodes.

PurceLL. The D.N.B. relative was a
younger brother Daniel, an organist and
composer. ‘The father was ‘‘ a gentleman of
the Chapel Royal,’’ and must have had some
musical ability. A son and a grandson of
Henry Purcell were also organists.

REYNOLDS. His father and his paternal
uncles were all scholarly men; a greatgrandfather, Henry Baker (in D.N.B.), was
an eminent mathematician. One sister,
Mrs. Palmer, is in D.N.B. as an author;
another, Frances, had some artistic talent.

RomneEy. His father, a cabinet maker
with an extensive business, showed great
mechanical ability, A brother, Peter (in
D.N.B.), was an excellent artist, but died
early of intemperate habits.

Humpury Davy. His paternal grandfather was a successful builder, the father an
accomplished amateur wood carver. The
brother, John Davy, physiologist, is in
D.N.B.

Ceci, RHopeEs. In the paternal line considerable money-making power had already
appeared, particularly in the great-grandfather, Samuel Rhodes. ‘The father was a
man of very determined character, while on
the mother’s side Rhodes was related to two
brothers, Edward and Robert Willson, both
in D.N.B., the one an architect, the other
a bishop. His immediate D.N.B. relative

245
246

is his younger brother, Colonel Francis
Rhodes.

REMOTER RELATIVES

The next group consists of those with one
cousin in D.N.B.; they are Pepys, Locke,
Swift, James Watt, James Bruce, and Leighton.

Pepys. The diarist came of a yeoman
stock, which in his particular line had been
rather going down in the world. From his
Pepys great-grandfather descended, however, that Edward Montagu, Earl of Sandwich, so prominent in the early part of the
reign of Charles II, and to whom the diarist
himself owed so much.

Joun Locke. The D.N.B. relative,
though somewhat remote, is sufficiently distinguished, Peter Lord King, Lord Chancellor, first cousin once-removed of the philosopher.. Locke himself came, however, of
very sound stock, both his. grandfathers
were prosperous commercial men, and his
father, an attorney and land agent, was a
man of marked ability in his callings.

JONATHAN SwiIFT. His immediate
D.N.B. relative, Dean Swift, could hardly
be described as a man of any real note,
and there is, in fact, little evidence of ability
in Jonathan’s near connections. On the side,
however, of his paternal grandmother he was
related to John Dryden, and the two men
have a joint descent from the Copes, a family
of versatile talent in the sixteenth century.

James Wart. His paternal grandfather
was a professor of mathematics; an uncle
made the first accurate survey of the Clyde;
the father, a most accomplished and versatile man, was provost of Greenock. A first
cousin of Watt’s mother, George Muirhead,
is in D.N.B.

JAMES Bruce. The explorer’s only near
D.N.B. relative is his first cousin, William
Gerard Hamilton.
father, James Graham, though not in
D.N.B., was a judge of the Scottish Court
of Admiralty; and somewhat more distant
relatives of the name of Bruce were for
several generations highly distinguished
Presbyterian ministers in Ulster.

His maternal grand- ©

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Lorp LEIGHTON. His D.N.B. relative
was his father’s first cousin, Edward
I’Anson, an architect. The father and the
paternal grandfather were eminent physicians, the grandfather being specially distinguished.

The next group has only two names :

RICHARD ARKWRIGHT. His son, in
D.N.B., was an exceedingly able man of
business. Arkwright himself was of humble
origin, but the father seems to have been
a highly reputable citizen; and an uncle,
who greatly helped the family, must have
been a man well above the average of his
station in life.

CHARLES DickENS. His son, Sir Henry
Dickens, potentially in D.N.B. But otherwise there is certainly a great absence of
obvious ability in the novelist’s family.
The father, ‘‘ Mr. Micawber,’’ was notoriously ineffective. Of the more remote
ancestry nothing seems to be known.

WELL-KNOWN SUCCESSORS

The following group had nephews in
D.N.B:

Joun Knox. The nephew of the same
name was a prominent Presbyterian minister of his day, as also were two further
John Knoxes, probably relatives, later in
the sixteenth century. But of the Reformer’s own ancestry very little is known,
except that he sprang from thoroughly
sound stock, as he himself used frequently
to remark.

Lorp MansFIELD. His D.N.B. relative was
his nephew Lord Stormont, a diplomatist of
some distinction. Springing as he did from
the landed classes, Mansfield had, however,
singularly few relatives of any eminence.
Though the connection is remote, it may be
of interest to remark that David Hume was
a fourth cousin, and that their common
ancestor, Sir Robert Carnegie, was himself
a man of note.

JoHn Bricut. His (potential) D.N.B.
relative is his nephew, the present Lord
Aberconway. Bright himself came of the
very best Quaker stock; both his parents
are described as far above the average, and
THE KIN OF GENIUS

his brothers and sisters as ‘‘ clever and
original.’’

The remaining two with one D.N.B. relative are:

Epwarpb Coxe. The relative in question
is his grandson, Roger Coke, a writer on
political economy. Coke’s case is somewhat
similar to that of the other great lawyer,
Mansfield; both came from the landed
classes, and both had hardly any near relatives of distinction.

JoHN FRANKLIN. His (potential)
D.N.B. relative is his great-nephew, the
recently deceased Lord Tennyson. In
Franklin’s case there is distinct evidence of
ability in the immediate relatives. His
paternal grandmother, a woman of great
energy, with the assistance of her son, the
explorer’s father, retrieved the family fortunes, which had fallen low. Of Sir John’s
brothers, one became a judge, another was
a Fellow of the Royal Society.

The total number of those in the original
list with but one D.N.B. relative is 29. Of
those only in five cases is the evidence of
ability among near relatives slight, namely,
those of Coke, Pepys, Swift, Mansfield, and
Dickens.

OTHER INDICATIONS OF ABILITY

We will now turn to the most interesting
division, the 63 out of the 200 who have no
ascertained D.N.B. relatives at all within
the assigned degrees. Even among those
there are, in several instances, obvious indications of ability among near relatives. It
is proposed to take these cases first.

SEBASTIAN CaBoT. He ought not really
to be in this division at all, as his father,
John Cabot, almost as great a navigator as
himself, should certainly have had a separate memoirin D.N.B. Two of Sebastian’s
brothers also took part in his voyages.

Ropert BLAKE. His paternal grandfather was a highly successful commercial
man; his father, though enterprising, did
less well as a money-maker. The Admiral’s
three brothers were all of note in their
respective callings.

ANTHONY VANDYKE. His paternal grand
247

father was a prosperous silk merchant at
Antwerp; his father a highly cultivated
man. His daughter, Lady Stepney, had
some artistic talent.

WiLiiAM Harvey. His father was a
well-to-do yeoman ; all his five brothers were
successful merchants. A nephew, Daniel
Harvey, was Ambassador at Constantinople.

ApaM SmitH. The father, Judge Advocate of Scotland and Controller of Customs,
was a man of marked ability. His mother’s
immediate relatives were mostly in the
army, but her great-nephew and Adam’s
heir, David Douglas, became a Scotch Lord
of Session.

Epwarp Gipson. His paternal grandfather was an exceedingly able man of business, on whose side there was a connection
with Lord Chancellor Hardwicke. Both
the historian’s paternal grandmother and
his mother belonged also to successful commercial families.

GILBERT WHITE. ‘The paternal line had
made money in commerce before turning to
the Church. On the mother’s side the
naturalist was related to Sir Edward Ford
(in D.N.B.), a man of great inventive skill.
Gilbert White’s four brothers were all successful in their callings, similar to the cases
of Blake and Harvey. ,

HENRY GRATTAN. His maternal grandfather, Thomas Marlay, though not in
D.N.B., was Lord Chief Justice of Ireland ;
while his paternal grandfather was Fellow
of Trinity, Dublin, and several other members of the family achieved success in their
professions.

Joun Fraxman. Of yeoman stock, his
father and a brother showed considerable
talent as modellers, and a sister rather
greater talent as a designer.

CHARLES Lams. He may appear in this
category owing to the abilities of his sister
Mary, clouded as these were by periodical
insanity. As in the very parallel case of
Dickens, there is, however, nothing at all
known of the Lambs’ ancestry to account for
genius.

RoBERT BROWNING. His paternal grandfather, a bank official, and his maternal
grandfather, a shipowner, were alike able
248

men of affairs. A paternal uncle wrote
minor historical works.

‘GeorcE Exot.’ She may be included
in this category on account of her father,
Robert Evans, a land agent, a man of quite
outstanding capacity in his calling.

JoHNn Ruskin. His parents were cousins;
the father was a very successful wine merchant, whose business capacity was undoubtedly inherited from his mother, Catherine Tweedale, herself related to the Ross
family, from which sprang the Arctic
explorers. The immediate Ruskin family
history is curiously like the Franklin.

GrorGE MEREDITH. His paternal grandfather, a tailor by trade, was an altogether
remarkable man, with abilities far above his
station in life. All his daughters, Meredith’s aunts, were extremely good looking
and married very well. The father was
wild and extravagant.

Lewis Carrout. His double greatgrandfather, who was Bishop of Elphin,
possessed a strong sense of humour. The
father, an Archdeacon, was likewise a man
of wit and humour; an uncle was a highly
successful barrister. The descent of certain
qualities is very evident in this case.

ARTHUR SULLIVAN. His father, an army
bandmaster, had exceptional musical ability
for his position. The mother, who was half
Italian, is stated to have sprung from an
artistic stock. A brother, Frederick, was
a man of very varied talents, which might
have come to full fruition had he lived
longer.

W. E. H. Lecxy. Of an Irish landed
family on the father’s side, but the
historian’s abilities were almost certainly
derived from the side of his mother, a
Tallents. Several of Lecky’s near relatives
of this family have been distinguished for
scholarship, though none have so far
appeared in D.N.B.

FROM UNKNOWN SOURCES

Of the 63 members of the Two Hundred
without near D.N.B., relatives, 17 have now
been considered, and in their cases some
immediate family ability clearly existed.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The evidence for such is less in the remaining 46, though in a few instances marked
distinction may be found in remoter relatives.

Consideration will now be given to those
46 cases, who will be taken in chronological
order.

CarpinaL WoLsEY. His father was a
tradesman of undoubted standing, but otherwise practically nothing is known of his
family connections.

Wittiam TYNDALE. ‘The origin of the
great translator of the Bible has never been
satisfactorily cleared up, though there is
little doubt that he was of gentle birth.

MaTTtHEW PARKER. ‘The father was a
fairly successful commercial man, and so to
a greater extent were a brother and a halfbrother. The Archbishop’s sons were described as “‘ hopeful young men,’’ but nothing much seems to have matured.

EDMUND SPENSER. ‘The father was a
journeyman in the cloth trade, but perhaps
a gentleman by birth. The connection with
the Spencers of Althorp has never been
proved.

BEN Jonson. His father is described as
a minister of religion, and may have sprung
from the Annandale Johnstones. The
mother is said to have been a woman of
vigorous character.

SHAKESPEARE. As is well known, his
father was a tradesman, fairly successful,
while his mother came of superior stock
socially. No real ability has ever been
traced among the relatives of the greatest of
all the Two Hundred. (Greatest, that is to
say, if he was really the author of the plays,
a matter on which varied opinions are held.)

Inico Jones. The son of a clothmaker in
rather straitened circumstances. Nothing
else seems to be known of his relatives.

JoHN SELDEN. His father was a yeoman,
who is stated to have possessed considerable
musical abilities.

In all these early cases the difficulty of
obtaining accurate genealogical information
is very great with regard to those who did
not belong to the landed classes.

Joun Pym. He came of an old landed
family, with, however, a commercial descent
THE KIN OF GENIUS

on the side of his mother, who was a granddaughter of Sir Richard Lambert, a Lord
Mayor of London. Otherwise there is little
evidence of ability in the connection.

Tuomas Hosses. His father is described
as a ‘‘ choleric and ignorant cleric.”’ An
uncle and a brother were, however, steady
and prosperous tradesmen.

Izaak WALTON. ‘The paternal grandfather was a bailiff, the father a tradesman
in good circumstances. A son (sub-memoir
in D.N.B.) became a prebendary.

GrorGE Fox. ‘The father was a fairly
prosperous weaver, the mother is stated to
have been ‘‘ accomplished above her
degree.”’

JoHN Bunyan. His father was a tinker,
but seems to have been rather superior to
the generality of that calling. The paternal
grandfather had been a metal merchant, and
a John Bunyan, probably an ancestor, is
found selling land in 1542, evidently in a
somewhat higher social position. Bunyan’s
own mother, Margaret Bentley, is stated
“to have come of people who, though
humble in station, were yet decent and
worthy in their ways.”’

Isaac NeEwron. His father sprang from
a race of small landowners. There was
probably more ability on the mother’s side;
her brother, William Ayscough, a parson,
was undoubtedly a man of culture. From
him descended Newton’s nearest D.N.B.
relative, James Hutton. It must be
admitted, however, that next to nothing is
known to account for Sir Isaac’s exceptional
genius.

EpMoND HALLEY. His father was a successful tradesman, as were other members
of the family, but there is no evidence of
great ability.

HANDEL. The paternal grandfather was
a hard-working coppersmith, the maternal
a Lutheran pastor. The father was a prominent barber-surgeon. The stock was clearly
sound, but unlike the cases of Purcell and
Sullivan, and still more Orlando Gibbons,
there is no record of other musical ability.

Pope. The paternal grandfather was a
parson, the father a well-to-do tradesman ;
the mother came of a family of small land
249

owners. The resemblance to Newton’s case
is very marked, and the same general observations apply.

WILLIAM HoGarTH. He sprang from a
race of Westmorland) yeomen, the father
becoming a literary hack. An _ uncle,
Thomas Hogart, was something of a dialect
poet.

SAMUEL JOHNSON. ‘There was a certain
amount of ability on the maternal side, but
more eccentricity ; one relative at least was
definitely a lunatic. The father, a bookseller, was a man of considerable mental
power, though unsuccessful in business.

Tuomas Gray. ‘The paternal grandfather was a_ successful merchant; the
father, a law scrivener, was brutal, but no
fool. On the side of the mother, Dorothy
Antrobus, there was far more culture, one
of her brothers was a Fellow of Peterhouse,
another a master at Eton.

Davip Garrick. The paternal grandfather was a Huguenot refugee, the father
an army officer. ‘The mother was daughtér
of a vicar choral, and it is probable that from
her side came artistic ability.

James WoLrFre. The paternal line had
military connections for several generations,
a great-grand-uncle was conspicuous in the
siege of Limerick in 1640. Edward Wolfe,
the father, is described as a quiet, goodhumoured man, not brilliant, but thoroughly

reliable. The mother, who came of a
landed family, had a more determined
character.

OLIVER GoLDSMITH. His immediate
relatives were nearly all Irish parsons,
cultured but improvident and _ feckless.
Goldsmith very clearly shared these characteristics.

James Coox. His paternal grandfather
was probably a John Cook who was an Elder
of the Church at Ednam in Roxburghshire.
The father was a bailiff and subsequently
a builder ; he was certainly not illiterate, as
has so often been stated. All the great
navigator’s sons died young; one, who was
at Merchant Taylors’ is described in the
School History as ‘‘a youth remarkable
for his equanimity, modesty and perseverance.”’
250

WaRREN HastinGs. He came of an old
family, connected with that of Martin
Frobisher the navigator, a family which
had, however, decidedly gone down in the
world. The father was unquestionably an
unsuccessful man, but Macaulay greatly
exaggerated his deficiencies. Two second
cousins once removed, Admiral Sir Thomas
and Sir Charles Hastings, both in D.N.B.,
renewed the lustre of the family name in
later years. |

EDWARD JENNER. He sprang from an old
landed family with many near relatives in
professions, cultured, but not specially distinguished.

RosBerRT Burns. Came of the soundest
Scotch farming stock, his father, ‘‘ though
unlucky was a man of notable enlightenment.’? The family were on the up-grade ;
one branch subsequently became eminent
contractors, while from another sprang later
Sir Alexander Burnes and James Burnes,
both in D.N.B.

Munco Park. ‘The son of a well-to-do
Scotch farmer. Little is otherwise known
as to the attainments of the family.

JoHNn CONSTABLE. His case is rather like
that of Mungo Park, though their actual
achievements differed so widely. The
painter’s father was a miller, a successful
and energetic man.

J. M. W. Turner. The father was a
barber, industrious and intelligent. The
mother, whose social position was somewhat
superior, became insane.

MicHAEL Farapay. His father was a
blacksmith of farming descent, the mother
a farmer’s daughter. The family were
essentially steady and respectable.

Joun Keats. ‘The father was an ostler,
but though the poet is always described as
of very humble origin, this is hardly true of
the mother’s side. She was daughter of
John Jennings, proprietor of the livery
stable where her husband worked; both
Jennings and his wife are described as much
above the average of their position; a son
became an officer in the marines. George
Keats, a brother of the poet, was successful
in commerce in America; a sister married

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a Spaniard and their son, Valentine Llanos,
attained some note as an artist.

THOMAS CARLYLE. The paternal grandfather, a farmer, was fiery and irascible,
but a great reader. The father, a builder,
was a man of considerable ability in his own
line. Of his mother Carlyle said, ‘‘ She
came of the fairest descent, the pious, the
just and the wise.”’

RICHARD CoBDEN. Both parents came of
good yeomen stock, the mother was superior
to the father in force of character. The
paternal grandfather had been bailiff of
Midhurst.

Davip LivincsTone. His paternal grandfather, a Highlander, who could trace his
line back for several generations, used to
say that he “‘ had never heard of a member
of his family who was a donkey.’’ The
father, a tea dealer, was a great reader and
conversationalist, and the maternal grandfather, David Hunter, a tailor, was a man
of very similar type.

G. F. Warts. The father and paternal
grandfather were both musical instrument
makers; the former is described as “ refined but ineffectual.”’

Joun TynpaL_. His father, who came
of a family of small Irish landowners, was
a man unlucky in life, but of marked intellectual qualities.

RICHARD Burton. A Burton great-uncle
was Bishop of Killaloe and the father of an
admiral of some note, from whom the present Lord Dunsany descends. ‘The
explorer’s own father was a reckless and
improvident man.

A. R. Watiace. His paternal grandfather was an innkeeper ; the father, a man
of kindly disposition, was unsuccessful in
life. The mother’s grandfather had been
Mayor of Hertford. A brother was a fairly
successful engineer.

J. H. Speke. He sprang from old landed
stock in almost every direction, but there is
no evidence of any special ability among his
ancestry. The explorer’s own qualities
were, however, quite clearly those of the
best type of country gentleman.

Hoiman Hunt. His father, a warehouseman, is said to have had some taste in art
THE KIN OF GENIUS

and literature.
engineer,

Joun Mitiars. The father, of an old
Jersey family, was noted for his good looks
and charming manners, and was a fair musician and artist. A half-brother on the
mother’s side, Clement Hodgkinson, won
distinction as an explorer in Australia.

Lorp WoLSELEY. Of a family, like that
of Wolfe, with many military connections.
A brother, Sir George, attained general’s
rank. A Wolseley great-grandmother
brought in a descent from two of the most
intellectual families that Ireland has produced, the Molyneux and the Usshers.
Through the latter there is a relationship
with Wellington, and it is interesting to
note, that, as in the case of Dryden and
Swift, the joint stock from which the two
great generals were descended was notably
superior.

Wiiti1aM Morris. ‘The father was a
successful commercial man ; on the mother’s
side there was musical ability and all-round
culture.

Henry Irvinc. Of yeoman stock, with
notable force of character on the mother’s
side. ‘Two sons became well known actors,
though it may perhaps be doubted if they
would have come to the fore, but for their
father’s career.

H. M. Stanity. This great explorer was
undoubtedly a foundling, the only one
among all the Two Hundred. In the circumstances it is probable that his powers
of leadership were derived from the side of
his unknown father.

This last division, 46 in number, includes
nearly all those of the Two Hundred who
sprang from the humblest walks of life.
The most obvious instances are George Fox,
Bunyan, James Cook, Robert Burns and
Faraday, to whom Mungo Park, J. M. W.
Turner, Keats, Carlyle, and Livingstone
may perhaps be added. ‘The only other
really striking case of this kind among the
whole ‘Two Hundred is George Stephenson,
who had two D.N.B. relatives, a son and a
nephew. In practically every other instance
some degree of previous culture can be

A son is now a prominent

251

adduced, H. M. Stanley’s case is, of course,
peculiar.

THE ODDS—3 to 1 IN FAVOUR

The last 46, again, include nearly all
those where distinction among near relatives
may be regarded as lacking. The round
number of 50 might be made up by the addition of Edward Coke, Pepys, Swift, and
Mansfield, already referred to. The fifty
thus arrived at are roughly those of the
Two Hundred who lack distinction among
near relatives, as against 150 among whom
such distinction is found in greater or less
degree. On this basis the chances in favour
of distinction among near relatives of great
men is found to be three to one.

From the short descriptions that have
been given of all the 50 cases in question, it
will, however, be abundantly clear that
absence of actual distinction does not imply
inferiority of stock. Nothing is more evident from a study of the families of great
men, than the overwhelming number of
cases of descent from obviously sound stock.
Instances of anything that can possibly be
called degeneracy are rare indeed, if not
absolutely non-existent. The insanity of
Lamb’s sister, of Turner’s mother, and of
one or two relatives of Samuel Johnson are
very isolated examples. Probably the worst
showing in this respect is afforded by,
Byron’s relatives, coupled, however, with
a good deal of ability; certainly the poet’s
father was, so far as is known, the worst
morally of any of the fathers of the Two
Hundred. Very few indeed of these fathers
can be shown to be actually below the average; those of Hobbes, Gray, Warren Hastings, Burton, and Meredith seem to have
been rather reprehensible characters, and
others no doubt were quite ordinary ; but the
general standard was unquestionably high.
In several cases the father was palpably
inferior to the paternal grandfather.

GENERAL ABILITY THE RULE

The evidence for the descent of specialized
talent is very scanty. Particularly among
poets and painters, it is rarely possible to
252

discern from whence their talents came.
They were due no doubt to some exceptionally fortunate combination of germ plasms,
and it must be remembered that little or no
record would as a rule remain of moderate
amateur skill among ancestors, in such
directions as poetry or painting. All we can
safely say is that a sound stock, at any rate,
is necessary for the production of a genius.

Much more evident than the descent of
any specialized talent is the advantage of a
mixed descent, not too exclusively aristocratic, using that word in its ordinary signification, nor yet too exclusively the reverse.
Among the cases that have been analyzed
in this article, a descent from moderately
successful commercial or moderately suc
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

cessful professional men recurs again and
again. Moderate as opposed to great success
in commerce seems to be especially requisite.
Great wealth is apt to stifle the energies of
the descendants of those who acquire it ; the
rare exceptions are found among statesmen,
of whom Peel and Gladstone are the most
striking examples.

While there are a few cases where the
fallen fortunes of a family have been restored; and many more among those not
analyzed in this article where the ancestors had already achieved much, the general
tendency may be summed up as follows:
From ancestors who did small things well,
sprang descendants who did great things
well,

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XX, No. 4.
