EVOLUTION BY SELECTION

The Implications of Winter's Selection Experiment*

By “STUDENT”

the Origin of Species it was generally

held by those who accepted Darwin’s
reasoning that species originated by the
accumulation of small variations in the
same direction under the influence of
natural selection; and the occurrence of
large ‘ mutations,’ such as the Ancon
sheep, was perhaps rather overlooked. The
rediscovery of Mendelism, however, has
tended to emphasize the latter portion of
Darwin’s work, rather to the exclusion of
the former, until it is actually held in
certain quarters that the selection of small
differences can only lead to small, or at all
events strictly limited, changes of type.

Yet it cannot be denied that, apart from
colours and other ‘fancy’ points,
actual improvement of domestic animals
has usually proceeded by just this accumulation of small differences.

If I am not mistaken, the view that selection is limited can be traced back to
Johannsen’s work, where he showed that
from an ordinary stock of beans there could
be isolated a number of ‘ pure lines,’ which
differed from each other in the mean weight
of their seed, but within each of which no
appreciable genetic variation in seed weight
could be detected.

His work has led to a_ considerable
advance in the selection of cereal seed,
since it is quite certain that for practical
purposes ‘ pure line’ seed will behave in
much the same way as if the plants were
propagated vegetatively; they will start
growing together and will ripen together,
and their seed will-be uniform and behave
uniformly in its turn. Yet Johannsen,
working of course with  self-fertilizing

'OR some time after the publication of

* Winter, Floyd L.: ‘ Continuous Selection for
Composition in Corn,’ Journal of Agricultural
Research, July-December 1929. Pp. 451-75.

the:

material, found pure lines, not a pure
line. Obviously, therefore, mutations had
occurred with sufficient frequency to produce them; and, given time, it may
be supposed that even in self-fertilized
organisms progress could be made merely by
selecting the extreme pure line, waiting
for a mutation, selecting again, and so on.
Tedious work—but for the Origin of
Species there is now plenty of time.

From a practical point of view, however,
the plant breeder cannot afford to wait for
favourable mutations; he cross fertilizes—
and so in most cases does nature. Now
until experience has been accumulated, the
results of cross-fertilization are unpredictable; but very soon certain facts begin to
emerge—‘‘ Tall is dominant to dwarf,’’
‘Two rowed is dominant to six rowed,’’
and so forth, and such things attract attention and rather obscure other equally
important facts. Cross a ‘‘ dense’”’ and a
‘“lax ’? variety, and among the ultimate
progeny may be found plants ‘“‘ denser ’’
than the ‘“‘dense’”’ parent and “‘ laxer ”’
than the ‘“‘lax’’ and almost anything
between. Cross high and low protein, and
the same overlapping will be found when
the first mix-up has sorted itself out.

Try to explain this on Mendelian lines
and it will soon become obvious that even
in self-fertilized plants there must be a
tremendous variety of genetical make-up;
one or two relevant genes will be quite
inadequate to explain the facts, ten or
twenty will complicate the calculation, but
will be none too many. Perhaps it would
be better to postulate 200-300 and reduce
the problem to mathematics.

Since characters which do not affect the
survival of the organism are not encountering selection, an ordinary cross-fertilizing population must be expected to accumu
293
294

late among all its members very large
numbers of genes corresponding to such
unessential characters. In ordinary times
these would roughly neutralize one another,
each individual carrying a mixture of
genes which would produce variation in
opposite directions, so that only a limited
genetic variation would result; but with a
change of environment this reservoir of
genes would serve a very useful purpose
as raw material for selection : some characters, formerly neutral, would then affect
survival and all those genes which produce
favourable somatic variation would tend to
be preserved while their opposite numbers
would be eliminated. Thus the accumulation of small variations in the same direction
could proceed far beyond the original range.”

That such a state of things does indeed
exist seems to be indicated by Winter’s
paper, to which I am now drawing attention. This describes a very determined
experiment carried out on “‘ corn ’’—i.e.
maize. Now maize is commonly crossfertilized; unless cross-fertilization takes

* Perhaps this argument may be clarified by an
illustration. Suppose during a period when height is of
no particular importance to an organism two hundred
small mutations have succeeded in establishing themselves in equilibrium, each of which affects height to
an equal extent, say, 1 mm. We may represent the
first gene as either a,, present, or b,, absent, the second
as a, or bz, and so on. Then any individual will contain
either a, a,, a, b,, or b, b, and the proportions in which
these possibilities occur will be assumed for the sake of
illustration to be 1-2-1; similarly with the other
subscripts, so that the distribution of individuals
according to the numbers of “‘a’’ genes which they
contain will be in proportion to the coefficients of the
binomial (a? + 2ab + b*) or of (a + b)®,

The standard deviation of this binomial distribution
is 10, so that although it would be possible for an
individual to contain the “a’’ genes in any number
from o to 400, yet in practice even a population of
100,000,000 would be very unlikely to outrange
140—260 corresponding to 120 mm. of height between
the highest and the lowest individual, less than one
third the possible range.

If now we imagine only the highest half of the
population to mate (at random) we should get a rise in
“a” content of 8 in the mean value, to 208, while the
standard deviation and range would hardly be altered,
so that the process could be repeated, a further rise of
8 mm. obtained and so on until the mean would rise
well beyond the value of the original extreme individual: and all this without fresh mutations. Of
course this illustration has been simplified to the point
of absurdity, but it may serve to exhibit the possibility of such potential variation.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

place, the stock is apt to die out—which
makes pure line selection very difficult.
Nevertheless much may be done by mass
selection, and it is with mass selection that
Winter was concerned.

Premising that he selected continuously
for twenty-eight years, from 1896-1924, it
is perhaps best to quote his description of
the procedure verbatim :

One hundred and sixty-three ears of a
variety known as ‘‘ Burr’s White ’’ were
used as foundation stock from which selections were made in four different directions,
namely for high oil, low oil, high protein
and low protein.

These four strains were carried on in the
same way. In the high protein, for
example, twenty-four ears highest in
protein were selected for seed and planted
in an isolated plot, each ear in a separate
row. ‘These ears were harvested separately
and the seed for the next crop selected
from the ears which were found to be
highest in protein. Nine years later the
system was modified somewhat in an
attempt to prevent loss of vigour by inbreeding. Alternate rows were detasselled
and seed was selected only from the
highest yielding detasselled rows. In 1921
this system was again modified to reduce
the amount of inbreeding. Two seed ears
were taken from each of the detasselled
rows regardless of yield.

The high oil, low oil and low protein
tests were similarly conducted, selection
being made each year of ears highest in
oil, lowest in oil and lowest in protein,
respectively.

For a proper appreciation of the work
the original paper should be consulted, but
only a few figures will be necessary to
display the interest of the results :

I will deal with the figures giving the
percentage of oil, which are the more striking, but the facts are similar in the case
of the protein.

(1) Two strains have been selected, one
which has a mean percentage of oil about
twelve times the standard deviation of the
original population above the original
mean, and the other about seven times
below. As illustrating this, the minimum
value in the High race during the last five
EVOLUTION BY SELECTION 295
PROTEIN
Mean Value. Standard . . ,

Year. Per Cent. Deviation. Lowest Variate. Highest Variate.
1896 8-3

High 7 x Low High Wi X Low High /“\, Low High 7 <4 Low
1897 10°99 10:63 1-16 8-3 8-2 13°6 14°0
1898 10-98 I0*49 1°22 I° aa 97 75 14°9 13°4
1899 11-62 9°59 1-28 8-4 6-7 14:8 13°I
1920 | 14:01 7°54 1°79 “89 9°5 6-0 17°4 10°5
1921 16°66 Q°I4 1°84 I°35 9°4 6:6 18-8 I3°4
1922 17°34 7*42 1°24 "70 12°6 6°1 20°6 9°6
1923 | 16°53 6-48 I-41 ‘73, | I3°1 5:0 19°7 9°4
1924 16:60 8-38 I-19 I-17 14°6 6-1 19°2 11°8

OIL
Mean Value. Standard ;

Year Per Cent. of Oil. Deviation. Lowest Variate. Highest Variate
1896 I 3°9 6-0

High 4 x Low High Low High /\_ Low High /\ Low
1897 4°79 4°10 38 "29 3°6 3°4 5°7 4°7
1898 5°10 3°59 48 "32 4:1 3°2 6-7 4°8
1899 5°65 3°85 "42 32 4°3 2°8 6°5 4°6
1920 9:28 1:80 52 21 7°8 I-o 10°6 2°4
1g2I 9°94 I°7I -66 - “15 8-4 I‘O II-7 2°3
1922 9:86 I-68 "54 “19 8-7 °9 11-3 2:2
1923 10:08 1°58 °65 "24 8-3 Iver 11-8 21
1924 9:86 I°51 *61 "22 8-4 ‘9 II°7 2°2

 

 

years is considerably higher than the maximum value found during the first four
years and, on the other hand, the maximum
value in the Low race is even more
markedly below the lowest in the first four
years.

(2) Although the standard deviation of
the high race has risen and that of the low
has fallen during the experiment, it would
be hard to say whether on the whole there
has been a decrease or an increase in variability owing to the selection.*

*Dr. Rasmussen of Svalof, has pointed out to
me that this might perhaps be explained by an
exaggeration in the environmental effect when acting on plants enfeebled by inbreeding. But the
steady rise in oil percentage right up to the end of
experiment seems to require an almost undiminished
genetic variability.

We may assume the variance to be composed of two parts, one inherent and therefore subject to selection, and the other
environmental, or ‘‘ fluctuating,’ and
therefore a hindrance to selection. Just
what proportion we should allot to each of
these we have no sure means of judging,
but in both cases the latter is, I believe,
likely to be very large. Incidentally it may
perhaps account in both cases for the
obvious correlation* between the mean and
the standard deviation.

In any case the inherent part of the
variation had of course a smaller standard

*It is reasonable to suppose that a given variation in environment would produce greater variation
in a high genetic stock than in a low one.
296

deviation than that observed for the whole,
perhaps much smaller, so that the movements of the means were, respectively,
more than twelve and seven times this
‘‘inherent ’’ standard deviation. Hence
either the possibilities of variation latent
in the original material were enormous or
a steady stream of favourable mutations
was maintained to carry the means along.

In any case, these results cannot be
explained on the basis of a few easily
detected genes. But by reducing the problem to the simplest possible basis—starting
from the intensity of selection, the rate of
movement of the means at first, and the
difference between the initial and final
values of the mean—it is possible to make
some sort of calculation of the minimum
number of genes which might allow of so
large a change by repeated selection. And
I find that the order of these numbers is
100-300. ‘There is little indication, however, that selection had yet reached its
limit after twenty-eight years, and we
should probably be within the mark if we
assumed that the number of genes affecting
oil (or protein) content in Burr’s White
Maize may run up to thousands.

But if we have thousands of genes, continuous selection in one direction may, in
fact must, result in progress almost without limit (at all events until the progress
itself induces counter-selection as perhaps
it does in the case of low oil content) for
although the selection will reduce the
number of genes there will be time for fresh
mutations to occur to keep up the possibility of further selection.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
To sum up: Winter has in this experi
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ment succeeded, by continuous mass selection, in producing two races of maize, one
of which has more than twice, and the other
less than one-third, the normal oil content.

In a character so influenced by environment the progress has, of course, not been
uniform in its manifestation ; but it appears
to have been comparatively so genetically,
and shows little or no indication that it has
reached its limit in either direction.

It does not appear that such steady progress could be obtained with less than
hundreds of genes affecting oil content and
it seems not unlikely that there are
thousands. In any case it is clear that the
possibilities of continuous selection of
small variations for the formation of new
species are likely to be very much greater
than would appear merely from a consideration of Johannsen’s work on pure lines,
which was carried out on a self-fertilizing
organism.

And so we reach the conception of species
patiently accumulating a store of genes, of
no value under existing conditions and for
the most part neutralized by other genes of
opposite sign. When, however, conditions
change, unless too suddenly or drastically,
the species finds in this store genes which
give rise to just the variation which will enable it to adapt itself to the change.

It follows that the change appears to
have produced the variation which it has
merely selected from among those potentially present. Thus we can reconcile the
view held, amongst other people, by the late
Walter Heape, that the environment produces the required variation, with the older
Darwinian selection of random variations, to
which it appears at first sight to be diametrically opposed.

~~

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 4.
