CORRESPONDENCE.

THE MEASUREMENT OF INTELLIGENCE.

To appreciate fully the greatness of the work of MM. Simon and Binet,
it is necessary to recall the state of psychology when their epoch-making
investigation first saw light. At that time, the “ mental tests,” initiated
by the genius of Galton and taken up with characteristic energy in the
United States, had so lamentably disappointed expectations as to have
sunk into a general by-word of scorn.

By this one great investigation the whole scene was transformed. The
recently despised tests were now introduced into every country with
enthusiasm. And everywhere their practical application was brilliantly
successful.

Few people, however, seem yet to have realised how curiously disproportionate has been the accompanying success on the side of theory.
While psychological practice has been revolutionised, no benefit appears
to have accrued to psychological science. All agree that the tests are
admirable; but no one is able to say what it is that they test.

Most striking of all, perhaps, is their total incompatibility with the
views always previously uttered by M. Binet himself. The latter had held
the current view of psychologists, that mental ability admits of analysis
into a certain number of basal powers, such as judgment, imagination,
memory, etc. Accordingly, every test used by him had been elaborately
devised so as to represent one of these basal powers. But in the historic
work executed, together with M. Simon, this abruptly and completely disappears; all the basal powers are, without a word of warning or explanation, thrown overboard. A large number of tests are brought forward,
conspicuous, indeed, in ingenuity, but wholly miscellaneous in character
and random in combination.

We must, consequently, be grateful to M. Simon for having brought
forward this point and for resolutely facing the difficult question, “ What
does the scale of intelligence which we propose, measure?” We are
bound, not merely to listen to his answer with respectful attention, but
also to co-operate with criticism and suggestion. His answer runs:
“The scale measures the intelligence as a whole without analysing it.”

Surely this is a proposition which cannot lightly be accepted. When
a child has run through the dozen or so ingenious little performances devised by MM. Simon and Binet, has arranged his weights in order,
memorised his numbers, interpreted his pictures, and so forth, is it conceivable that he has thereby exhausted his whole vast gamut of mental
ability? After all, the complete series of tests is but a small fraction of
all those before and since constructed by the myriad of workers in the
same field. And all the tests hitherto dreamt of by anyone at all are
but as drops in the ocean when compared with the infinitely varying manifestations of intelligence of any child from minute to minute in the
course of ordinary life. Half an hour, or many hours, of experimental
testing can no more cover “the intelligence as a whole” than a single
flower-pot can represent the entire flora of the earth.

In this dearth of explanation on the part of those who have been so
splendidly successful in practical application, an appeal may be made to
another series of investigations which have been going on simultaneously
with those of MM. Simon and Binet, and which have had for their
object, not the immediate practical application of the tests, but the discovery of the very point here in question, the nature of the ability tested.
Each of these two lines of investigation furnishes a peculiarly happy and
indispensable supplement to the other.
CORRESPONDENCE. 313

The answer reached by this second line of investigation is simple, but
of wide-ranging consequence. It says that the intelligence employed in
any mental performance must be analysed into two factors. The one is
different for every different kind of performance or test; it seems to be
identifiable with the neural structure in the brain specifically subserving
that particular performance. But besides this specific factor, there is also
a general one, always the same whatever the performance; this general
factor in ability seems to be represented physiologically by the free
energy of the whole cortex of the brain, or some still wider neural region.
This analysis of cerebral action into the two factors, neural structure and
neural energy, was clearly enunciated 12 years ago by no less an authority
than Dr. Mott.?

This result, gained wholly independently of the work of MM. Simon
and Binet, nevertheless fits it like a glove. An explanation is at once
supplied for the success of their extraordinary procedure in casting all
the old basal powers to the winds, and, instead, pooling together tests of
the most miscellaneous description. For if every performance depends
on two factors, the one always varying randomly, while the other is constantly the same, it is clear that in the average the random variations
will tend to neutralise one another, leaving the other, or constant factor,
alone dominant.

This constant factor, or general mental ability, or free energy of the
whole cerebral cortex, is, therefore, what the tests of MM. Simon and
Binet really measure. The specific abilities, on the other hand, are left
by them practically untouched.

Our explanation does not merely serve to gratify the natural human
craving for intelligibility. It readily inspires a great number of most
important practical consequences. Great as has been the value of the
Simon-Binet tests, even when worked in theoretical darkness, their
efficiency will be multiplied a thousand-fold when employed with a
full light upon their essential nature and mechanism.

C. SPEARMAN.

THE EUGENIC ASPECT OF THE EMPLOYMENT OF MARRIED WOMEN: A REPLY.

It is well to point out at the commencement that we are interested in
Marriage only as it forms the foundation of family life, and are not concerned with so-called neo-malthusian marriages. That the best energies
of married women should be devoted to the interests of home and family is
@ proposition about which there is not likely to be any difference of
opinion. It is otherwise when, as pointed out in the note in the EUGENICS
REVIEW for July, we are obliged to choose between a home-life whose
very possibility depends upon the extraneous economic labour of the
women and no home at all. Encouragement of homes which depend
upon the economic labour of both parties will no doubt cause a rise in
the marriage rate, but the price paid for this is the absentee mother, for
she is only enabled to become a mother because for the best part of her
time she is absentee. The creation of social custom on this matter would
seem to be more easy than on many another, for marriage supported by the
earnings of both parties offers many of those attractions which appeal to
the temporary and immediate convenience of mankind to the prejudice of
its permanent welfare. It is said, however, that otherwise these women
would remain single; we must therefore consider what we should be
losing by such a state of affairs. The note proceeds :—‘ Among wageearning women those who have proved their efficiency by earning their
living at skilled work are probably superior in energy and intellectual
capacity to the remainder, and, as the excess of women over men makes
it impossible for all women to marry, it is just those who should not be

1 Journal of Mental Science, 1902, October.
