REVIEWS OF BOOKS

Japanese. Perhaps some humane Mikado might make this book compulsory reading for
those who too readily strike doctrinaire attitudes about the intellectual abilities of American
Negroes and whites. JAMES MAXWELL

PSYCHIATRY

Lidz, Theodore, Fleck, Stephen and Cornelison, Alice K. Schizophrenia and the Family. New
York, 1965. International Universities Press (London, Bailey Bros. and Swinfen). Pp. 477.
Price 90s.

DO PARENTS By their behaviour play any part in causing schizophrenia in their children?
Or, to put the question in a more constructive form: if the children are by their natures
predisposed to schizophrenia, can the parents do anything to reduce the chances of the
disease?

The question is relevant because we know that heredity only accounts for a proportion
of the causation of schizophrenia, and very little of the remaining proportion has been
accounted for. Parental behaviour, possibly of a type associated with a schizophrenic
diathesis in the parents themselves, is a factor which must be considered, along with others
such as extrafamilial influences during upbringing (e.g. school and peer relationships),
stress at the time of onset of the disease (e.g. unsuitable vocational or marital situation),
and what Waddington in The Strategy of the Genes* has called “intangible internal sources
of variation” or “developmental noise’.

To assess the importance of family upbringing, it is really necessary either to vary the
upbringing experimentally (for instance by allocating “‘high risk” families randomly to a
group given special training in child rearing and a control group) or to study children
brought up apart from their biological parents. The former has not been attempted. The
latter is fraught with practical difficulties in most countries, and only recently has relevant
information become available. Karlsson reported in The Biological Basis of Schizophreniat
that children of schizophrenics brought up in foster homes are no less likely to develop
schizophrenia than those reared in the schizophrenic milieu; and Shields in Recent Developments in Schizophreniat has assembled evidence to show that the schizophrenia concordance
rate for MZ twins reared apart does not differ much from that of MZ twins reared together.

In the absence of any definite knowledge, it is not surprising that widely divergent
views have been held. The approach of Professor Lidz and his colleagues is of particular
interest because it is so different from the mainstream of psychiatric thought in this country
(although it has affinities with our Existentialist school). Extending the theory and methods
of psychoanalysis from the individual to the family, they take the view that schizophrenia
is a defence against an intolerable life situation, an escape into delusional beliefs, which
however is not possible for everyone, but only for those who have been brought up in a
family atmosphere of irrational thinking.

The object of their investigation was to explore the families of schizophrenic patients
in depth, to see what sort of family psychopathology they could find. The probands were
seventeen young upper-class schizophrenics admitted to the Yale Psychiatric Institute, and
they and most of the members of their families had intensive investigation, in many cases
weekly for several years. The authors must surely be justified in their claim that this is the
most intensively studied series of families ever reported for any reason.

They found that practically all the first degree relatives were abnormal. Many were
overtly schizophrenic, others were severely obsessional or alcoholic. As there was no control
series of families, it is idle to speculate on why they found a very much higher incidence of

* 1957. Allen and Unwin.

t 1966. Charles C. Thomas. ; .
t Ed. A. J. Coppen. Royal Medico-Psychological Association.

123
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

abnormality than is usually reported. Perhaps most families, at any rate of schizophrenics,
would yield similar results under such intensive scrutiny. On the other hand, it may be that
colleagues who referred patients to the Yale Psychiatric Institute were aware of the interest
in family therapy, and sent along cases in which they felt the whole family needed attention.

Not surprisingly, in view of the extent of individual pathology, the disturbances in
family relationships were widespread. In fact, every family showed serious abnormalities
in virtually every aspect of family life which was examined.

The most meaningful question that we can ask of the material is why the patients
rather than their siblings developed schizophrenia. The authors’ conclusions on this point
are of great interest. First of all, opposite sexed siblings tend to escape because the influences
which are pathogenic for sons do not always affect daughters, and vice versa. Then in half
of the cases the mother had been able to provide proper ‘mothering’ during the infancy of
the sibling, but not during that of the patient. In some cases, for one reason or another, the
patient became the family scapegoat. In most families, it was clear that the healthy sibling
had been able to escape the family situation in some way, either by leaving home early,
or by remaining aloof. It is particularly interesting that this quality of aloofness seemed to
protect from schizophrenia, since it is normally considered a part of the schizoid personality
and thus associated with a predisposition to the illness; an interesting personality/environment interaction appears to be operating here. The ability of the children to escape physically from a disturbed family is evidently most important, and may depend to some extent
on social class; in the studies carried out in 1910 by Elderton and Pearson* on the effect of
parental alcoholism on the children, one of the main findings was that the children of the
affected families spent more time playing in the streets.

The book is a collection of papers, many of which have been published before, dealing
separately with such topics as the fathers, the mothers, incest problems, “‘Marital schism and
marital skew’’, “The transmission of irrationality”. This format is probably responsible
for some of the weaknesses of the book. There is, for instance, no attempt at a coherent
exposition of the families, and only a very imperfect account can be obtained by skipping
from paper to paper with the aid of the index. We are told that the view of the families
tended to change greatly as the years of investigation progressed; for those of us who have
to be satisfied with a brief appraisal of patients and their families, 1t would have been useful
to know at which stage of investigation the various pieces of information were obtained.
About the agreement between the accounts of different family members there is little
information, nor has much attempt been made to measure, or even to describe systematically, the various types of family interaction. But by far the most disappointing thing about
the book is the scanty nature of the raw data. There is an abundance of theoretical discussion, illustrated in an anecdotal manner from the case reports; but the data is insufficient
for the reader to satisy himself about the validity of the authors’ conclusions, let alone to
test his own hypotheses. We might have expected the case histories of the probands and a
description of the families to come out in a second volume, were it not for the despairing
statement, “‘we are turning .. . to other related studies not because we have exhausted the
data but because it has exhausted us, and it is time for us to be finished with it’’.

These future studies are described in the last chapter. The main one is a longitudinal
study of families who have a high risk of producing a schizophrenic offspring. This research
requires the identification of such high risk families, and the group is at present concerned
with the development of tests such as the Object Sorting Test to perform this function.
Four papers describing preliminary work along these lines are included in the present volume
and the methods look promising.

Regardless of the final answer to the question posed at the beginning of this review,

* Eugenics Laboratory Memoirs, Vol. X.
124
REVIEWS OF BOOKS

work with the families of schizophrenics is of great importance. The present tendency is to
encourage schizophrenics to live at home rather than in hospital. This inevitably puts a
great strain on their families, and it is vital that we should increase our knowledge of how
the parents may be helped to manage their sick and probably very difficult children. The
subject of the schizophrenic and his family has recently been most ably reviewed.*

JOHN PRICE

ANIMAL BREEDING

Lerner, I. Michael and Donald, H. P. Modern Developments in Animal Breeding. London
and New York, 1966. Academic Press. Pp. xi+294. Price 63s.

MICHAEL LERNER HAS, already, a substantial reputation as an author and when it became
known that he was collaborating with Hugh Donald to write another book on animal
breeding there was pleasurable anticipation as to the results that this association of Berkeley
and Edinburgh would produce. It is unlikely that many who have been awaiting this book
will be disappointed, because it represents such a highly successful attempt to relate the
theory of animal breeding to its practice. More than this, the relationship is achieved in a
context of the demands that are now being made on agricultural science and technology to
meet the increasing pressure on world food supplies. The economic and social perspective
that has been created gives this book a very different character from that of any other
that has been written on animal breeding and the consequence is that it is going to be
expecially valuable reading for students of animal science. It is true that they will get more
genetic theory from other books but it is unlikely that they will find reading which will give
them a better sense of the challenge that faces them in their professional careers.

There is another group which will also benefit from reading this book; it consists of
those who have a responsibility in framing policies in animal breeding, government officials,
for instance, livestock authority employees and members of breed society councils. One of the
useful features of the book is that it is written in such a way that Part II, which relates to
the theory of animal breeding, can be skipped by those who lack the training necessary for
its full comprehension, without detriment to their understanding of subsequent chapters
which are primarily concerned with the practice and future of animal breeding.

It is interesting in this connection that members of the British Cattle Breeders Club
were advised to read Chapters 5-7 to provide a background for the discussions at their
recent winter meeting. It is to be hoped that they all read Chapter 7 for it is such a wellbalanced account of the functions and failings of breed associations and of the possible
parts they can play in future developments of animal breeding. Certainly it is a critical
account but it is not written in a manner to give offence, even to the reactionary unless he is
completely lacking in a sense of logic.

There is at least one very interesting statistic in the book. It takes 625 lb. of algae to
make 1 Ib. of Eskimo with a loss in the attenuated food chain of 99-84 per cent of the original
available energy. It is possible that this figure compares favourably with that for the grassbeef-human chain when one takes in account all the breeding overheads in specialized
beef production. One wonders, when there are 5,000,000,000 mouths to be fed, whether we
will be able to afford the luxury of anything but by-product beef. Certainly the prospect for
the year A.D. 2000 is a grim one unless we really get down to the twin tasks of family limitation and more efficient land use. This book makes a very worthwhile contribution to the
second of these tasks in giving a balanced account of the breeding problems that are associated with the development of more efficient livestock systems. It is bound to be widely read
throughout the English speaking world. M. MCG. COOPER

* Brown, G. W. 1967. In Recent Developments in Schizophrenia (Ed. A. J. Coppen). Ibid.
125
