EUGENICS REVIEW

 

Editorial Offices: The Eugenics Society,
69 Eccleston Square, London, S.W.1.
(Telephone— Victoria 2091.)

Editor for the Society—Maurice Newfield.

“Eugenics is the study of agencies under
social control that may improve or impair
the racial qualities of future generations
either physically or mentally.”

 

LEONARD DARWIN,
1850-1943

AJOR LEONARD DARWIN, our
M beloved Honorary President, died at

his home, Cripps’s Corner, Forest
Row, on Friday, March 26th. He was the
fourth and last surviving son of Charles Darwin and Emma Wedgwood ; and throughout
his long life he displayed the intellectual
activity and versatility, the high qualities of
character, and the dedication to public
service which have been the common heritage
of his distinguished family.

Leonard Darwin was a soldier, scientist,
member of parliament and author. The
diversity of his interests and talents are
reflected in the oddly unrelated titles of his
books, which include, besides his fundamental contributions to eugenics, such subjects as’municipal trading and bimetalism ;
in his appointments to the staff of the
War Office Intelligence Department and as
instructor at various staff colleges ; in his
service on scientific expeditions, including
those concerned with the transit of Venus
in 1874 and 1882; and in the distinction
with which he filled the offices of president
of the Royal Geographical Society, chairman
of Bedford College for Women, and chairman

of the Professional Classes War Relief Commission. Not even the characteristically
modest record which he contributed to Who’s
Who could quite slur over these few moments
in a life exceptionally rich in influence and
achievement ; or the fact that the University
of Cambridge conferred upon him the wellearned honorary degree of Doctor of Science.
A man totally devoid of ambition, as all
who knew him testify, he could not altogether
escape the fate of having greatness thrust
upon him.

It was characteristic of Leonard Darwin
that he had to be persuaded, against strong
resistance, to succeed his cousin, Sir Francis
Galton, as President of the Eugenics Society.
He was too modest to acquiesce easily, but
once convinced that in this position he could
forward the cause of eugenics he plunged
himself into the work, and in a critical period
in the Socizety’s fortunes, from I9g1I to 1928,
he formulated its policies and ideals, and by
his writings and the influence of his personality did much to make them acceptable
to an unsympathetic, misinformed and often
highly suspicious public.

From the start he was prominent among
those who believed that the objectives of
the Soczety should be limited, at any rate in
its difficult formative years, to matters on
which all eugenists could agree: to the
creation of a public opinion favourable to
the promotion of fertility among those who
could enrich the biological endowment of
posterity and to its restriction, by sterilization or other means, among those whose
contribution to posterity could be spared.
This does not mean that he was indifferent
to the influence of other than inborn
genetical factors upon the physical and
mental qualities of future generations ; and
indeed much of his Galton Lecture for 1929,
the last occasion on which he addressed the

109
IIo

Socselty in person, was concerned with the
eugenic evaluation of social changes. But
some differentiation of function seemed to

him essential, and he felt that the Eugenics ©

Society would do better to devote itself
exclusively to the study of man’s heredity
than to cumber itself with the problems of
his personal and social environment, on
which there were organizations that could
speak with a more expert and certainly a
more united voice.

“T suggest,’’ he said in his Galton Lecture,*
“that we should devote our energies almost
exclusively to the propaganda side of the
question ; because I believe that the ways
of science will always prove to be so far more
pleasant than any attempt to force unpalatable truths on an unwilling public
that, if both are admitted, the propaganda
side of our work will not survive in the
struggle for existence within the Soctvety ;
Just as, according to Gresham’s Law, light
money, being generally preferred by purchasers in times gone by, always tended to
drive heavier coin out of circulation; if I
may, for this purpose only, compare science
to an inferior currency.”

It is true that in recent years eugenists
have given increasing attention to matters
which Leonard Darwin and his generation
preferred to leave alone ; but who would say
that in the conditions of their time theirs
was not the wiser course? If the infant
Eugenics Society has not emphasized the
role of heredity as a determinant of phenotypical characters, the prevailing assumption
that the differences between men reflected
merely the differences in the circumstances
of their lives might have continued to hold
the field. Today, without risk of misunderstanding, we can stress the biologically
selective influence of factors in our social
and economic life ; we can contemplate the
problems of nature and nurture in explicit
terms, not as antithetical factors but as
variables within conditions that can be
defined, with increasing precision ; but that
we can do so is a debt we owe to those who,
like Leonard Darwin, first made a social

*EuGENIcS REVIEW, 1929, 21, 11.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

issue of the problem, even if they lacked, as
indeed we still lack ourselves, all the
material for its solution.

Eugenics is not an immutable doctrine
and we should not esteem it a virtue if we
pursued tomorrow the same policies as serve
us today. While holding firmly to our ultimate purpose, which finds expression in our
profound conviction that man by taking
thought can add a cubit to his stature, we
endeavour now, as in the past, to adapt our
ideas and programme to the realities of a
changing world. Leonard Darwin would
have demanded nothing better of us. Always
tolerant of intellectual differences he followed developments in the Soctety’s outlook
and activities as closely after his retirement
as before ; but he no longer took the initiative in influencing them and neither expected
nor asked that they should accord with his
own preferences. He had laid the founda
tions securely and was content that his suc
cessors should build on them in their own
way. It is our duty and privilege to continue
the work he so well began, setting ourselves
the same task as that to which he devoted
his life, and which he fittingly described as
“the advancement of mankind in the
future.”
* * #

Lord Horder, President of the Eugenics
Society, writes :

The passing of Major Leonard Darwin in
his ninety-third year impels some of us who
were his associates in the work of the Eugenics
Society to accord him an affectionate and
dutiful Farewell. Affectionate, because to
know the man, even a little, was to love
him ; dutiful, because he was to most of us
the master and we were his pupils. A pilgrimage to his home in Sussex, even for a
few hours, was always a stimulus and an
inspiration to those who have tried to carry
on his ideals: both physically and morally
Leonard Darwin was the Sage: he not only
looked wise, he was wise. His seventeen years’
presidency of the Society set an example
that is very difficult to follow and impossible

to excel. :
* * *
LEONARD DARWIN, 1850-1943

sir Charles Galton Darwin, Vade-S restart
of the Eugenics Society, writes :

Though my recollections of my uncle go
back to my earliest days, it is rather the
later times that I recall, especially many
visits during the last twenty years to his
house on Ashdown Forest. He retained to
the very last a continuing interest in the
theory of evolution, and of course in eugenics,
and it always seemed to me that he combined
very successfully this enthusiasm with a
modesty which prevented him, as an old
man, from intruding his views in such a
way as to cause serious embarrassment to
the later generations. He would write out,
in his wonderfully firm handwriting, some
ideas he might have, perhaps on a point in
evolutionary theory, and would say, “I
expect this ought to be torn up, but I would
like to know what you think of it.”

In many people of extreme old age there
is a tendency for recent times to fade from
the memory, so that the conversation perpetually harps back to earlier years. There
was nothing of this in him. He kept his
interest in current affairs to the very end,
and in particular followed with interest the
careers of all his family and relations. It was
even rather hard to get him to talk of the
days of his youth, and though I sometimes
prompted him to speak of it, there were not
many personal reminiscences of his father.
He once described how Huxley, staying at
Down, would try and shock the boys with
anatomical stories. He used sometimes to
talk of his military career, with reminiscences
of Woolwich which included the name of
Kitchener, and I remember him once saying
that all the things he had done at the Staff
College had-had no connection with anything like war. He would also sometimes
talk about his time in Parliament, recalling
speeches of Gladstone and others.

Though he used to say that he had never
had any scientific education, I should say he
had all the outlook of a scientist, and that he
would have accomplished even more than
he in fact did, if he had not been obsessed by
a modesty as to his own abilities which often
made him fear to tread where others were
quite willing to rush in.

* se

*

Iir

Mr. B. S. Bramwell, Chairman of Council,
Eugenics Society, writes :

I first met Major Darwin shortly after the
last war in our old quarters in Lincoln’s
Inn Fields. I had written an article which
was published in the EUGENICS REVIEW and
he asked me to join the Council. On the
death of Mr. Howard Hazel, he accepted my
offer to undertake the duties of Treasurer.
Our finances depended very largely on an
annual gift of £1,000 from a friend of his,
who was always referred to as “ the anonymous donor.”” This was Mr. Twitchin, and
if it had not been for his personal confidence
in Major Darwin, it is at least doubtful if
the Society would have been the happy
recipient of the Twitchin bequest. On his
retiring from the Presidency, he felt that
his successor must be relieved from much of
the donkey work, if we were to obtain a man
of eminence still actively engaged in his life’s
calling. He therefore.suggested making a
Chairman of Council. As the holder of this
new office, I was indebted to him for much
profound and far-reaching advice. His
knowledge of the subject was immense ; he
had been in at the start and had undertaken
work for Sir Francis Galton as far back as
the time when he was a sapper subaltern.
His knowledge of men was equally wide.
One could hardly mention anybody without
finding that he had sized up not only his
intellectual stature but also his character
and temperament, matters often of equal
importance. Sanity and caution always
marked his outlook. As against this, his
family and sapper associations gave him an
independence of thought not always to be
found in more conventional circles. His
larger work, The Need for Eugenic Reform,
I think bears out these statements., His
smaller book, What is Eugenics?, ts an
excellent introduction to the subject, and one
Edinburgh Professor of Medicine presents a
copy of it each year to all the members of his
class. It would be idle to deny that his views
have not always found favour in every class
of the community, but his most severe critics
are those whose grudge is really against
Providence in having made men different
and not equal. How much wiser was a remark
IIz

of Miss Jennie Lee in a recent broadcast that
perhaps the rewards of intellect may be too
great. Many of us feel that he did not
receive the public recognition he deserved.
True, he received a Doctorate of Science
from Cambridge, but we should have liked
to see him a Fellow of the Royal Society, as
were his three brothers. Also, like them, the
recipient of some State recognition. However, in spite of one puckish gleam of humour
when Mr. Oscar Browning was made an
O.B.E., these latter are generally highly
conventional and dull.

It was delightful to travel down to Cripps’s
Corner and to seek advice from the fresh
mind of the nonagenarian. Alas, no more.
A life well spent. .

* * *

Dr. C. P. Blacker, General Secretary,
Eugenics Society, writes :

When I became General Secretary of the
Society twelve years ago, Major Leonard
Darwin had ceased to take an active part in
its affairs. That is to say that he never
attended Council Meetings, or came to our
Galton dinners. Nor did he wish to influence
the policies of the Society despite the favourable change in its fortunes brought about by
Mr. Twitchin’s legacy which suddenly made
us rich. Mr. Twitchin had been his friend and
admirer, and it was entirely due to Leonard
Darwin’s influence that the Soczet#y came into
the whole of his considerable estate.

Yet it is true to say that eugenics, together
with the activities of the Society, remained
Darwin’s chief interest. Sir Bernard Mallet
who, on his nomination, had succeeded him
as President, was keenly aware that we owed.
everything to him. Darwin had gathered
round himself, among the Honorary Officers
and Council, a band of distinguished and
loyal helpers; he had steered the Society
through many difficult controversies ; his
leadership had been gentle, wise and firm.
The world-wide respect which his name compelled was more than matched by the
affectionate regard of those who sat at the
meetings over which he presided. No one
knew this better than Mallet, who bade me
keep in close touch with him and to consult
him over all problems and difficulties.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

I followed his advice at the time and have
continued to follow it since. My correspondence with Darwin was voluminous ; aad up
till the war I used to visit him regularly every
three months. I frequently took with me to
see him persons who could supplement or
correct my account of the Soczety’s projects
and activities, and my talks with him in his
study at Cripps’s Corner are among my happiest recollections. In the course of the last
ten years, when he grew a beard, he came to
have a striking resemblance to his father as
he was depicted in his last portrait ; and I
seemed to detect an equally striking resemblance in character. It is difficult to describe

this without fulsomeness. Leonard Darwin

had a perfect courtesy for everyone, irrespective of age, station or attainments. This
was revealed in personal contacts no less
than in his allusions to people in conversation. He was completely devoid of the
egotism and vanity which are sometimes
disappointingly disclosed in eminent men.
He retained till the very end an alertness of
mind which continued to belie his selfdisparaging belief that age and infirmity
were impairing his judgment. But his most
notable characteristic was his remarkable
fairness and openness of mind, and it was in
this that his resemblance to his father seemed.
to me most striking. My views on the
genetic and social basis of eugenics, while in
general conformity with his, differed in
emphasis. I believed less than he did that
eugenically desirable qualities were segregated in social classes, and this difference
had implications affecting policy. We discussed these matters at length in letters and
in conversation. His attentiveness and
receptivity to arguments which were sometimes at variance with his outlook were an
unfailing source of delight. It is not often
that one meets people who genuinely regard
controversy as a means of reaching truth.
Leonard Darwin conveyed to one this
approach more directly and convincingly
than anyone I have ever met; and it was
perhaps in this respect more than any other
that he made one feel that, in his presence,
one might be listening to his father. His
views have been vigorously and sometimes
LEONARD DARWIN, 1850-1943

bitterly attacked. I have often wished that
his detractors had a fraction of his genuinely
scientific spirit, and of his integrity.

I think that I was the last person connected with the Soctety to see him. During
my three years in the army, we maintained
our correspondence. We exchanged several
Jetters about Mr. Frederick Osborn’s book,
Preface to Eugenics, by which I had been
much impressed. We exchanged views about
the war, in whose favourable outcome he
always believed, and about the policy of the
Society. He firmly supported the decision of
the executive committee to slow down
activities and to refrain from dissipating our
financial resources. One of the first things I
did on leaving the army at the beginning of
October 1942 was to pay him a visit at
Cripps’s Corner, The journey on October 12th
presented war-time difficulties, and I had a
ten-mile bicycle ride to and from Three
Bridges. But we had an hour’s talk in his
study as of old. His kindness, his warmth,
his courtesy, and the feeling of welcome he
gave me were unchanged; and it was
astonishing that, at the age of 93, his faculties
were so alive. But the death of his wife had
saddened him, and he now looked his years.
As I said good-bye at the door of his house, I
had a presentiment that this might be my
last visit. |

I have known very few men who inspired
in equal measure such respect and affection
as he; and I count my friendship with him
as both a privilege and an education.

* * *

Dr. R. A. Fisher, Galton Professor of
Eugenics, University College, London,
writes :

No more fitting memorial to Major Darwin’s lifelong concern for eugenics could be
found than in his masterly book, The Need
for Eugemc Reform. To it speakers and
writers on the subject will for long turn. for
wise counsel, and for a penetrating analysis
of all aspects of eugenics, especially in its
practical application.

It is one of the difficulties of the subject
that eugenics exercises a potent attraction
for cranks of various kinds. All the more
valuable is the sober judgment, detached

113

reasoning and well-weighed earnestness of
this really great book.
* * * ;

Mrs. S. Neville-Rolfe, Honorary Secretary
to the British Social Hygiene Council, writes :

In the death of Major Darwin the country
loses one of its wise men and a great gentleman.

As one who worked with him very closely
over a long span of years (from 1909 to 1918)
and since then has been privileged to maintain the ties of friendship, the loss is also
personal. Major Darwin was a second father
in his understanding, guidance and training
of a willing amateur to public service.
Looking back over the early years when, as
President and Honorary Secretary of the
then Eugenics Education Society respectively,
we drew together a band of volunteers to
bring the principles of eugenics into public
consciousness, one realizes the care and
patience, the strength and gentleness with
which he drove his team of willing workers
towards the objective.

I well remember in 1912, on the occasion
of the First International Eugenics Congress,
held at the London University, South Kensington, with Mr. Arthur Balfour making the
speech of welcome at the opening dinner and.
The Times giving full reports of the sessions,
with what satisfaction he was able to say,
“we have now put eugenics in the public
eye and made it respectable! ”’

It is a good example of his moral courage
and intellectual integrity that when some of
us wanted the Eugenics Education Soctety to
raise the problems of venereal diseases—at
that time an entirely taboo subject, and its
damage to posterity unknown to the general
public—Major Darwin, while seeing the
danger to the infant Eugenics Society, recognized the importance of checking the preventable damage—although he did not
consider the prevention of venereal diseases
to be technically a matter of eugenics. Under
his Presidency the first steps were taken
from the Eugenics Education Society to
secure the appointment of the Royal Commission ; the majority of the commissioners
were members of the then Eugenics Education Society’s Council, and though he
114

personally had a great distaste for the
subject, Major Darwin presided over the
first meeting at which the provisional
executive of the National Council for Combating Venereal Diseases was-appointed and
remained for a number of years its Honorary
Treasurer.

The kindly side of his character took >

greater pleasure in another endeavour in
which he, Sir Theodore Chambers and I
worked together to give practical effect to
a positive aspect of eugenics. At the outbreak of the last war, a number of the professional classes, a socially selected group of
a proved standard of intelligence, were in
acute economic difficulties. To bridge the
war period through maintaining continuity
in education, through maternity accommodation and assistance and in many other
ways—as Chairman of the Professional
Classes War Relief Council he guided an
early experiment in social welfare related to
social biology.

Intellectual integrity, courtesy and kindliness are to my mind the characteristics that
stand out in memories of Major Darwin.

x * *

Mrs. C. B. S. Hodson, Honorary Secretary
to the International Human Heredity Committee, 1930-9, writes :

On learning the news of Major Darwin’s
passing, I thought back to the period when
I was working under him, and the time
before. There may never be another opportunity given me to express gratitude for that
time, and this can best be done in the simple
statement of intimate facts. Being one of
those happy people whose occupation is
concerned with their chief aspirations, I
know that I owe this mainly to two men:
first Sir Edward Poulton, who made it
possible for me, late in college days, to begin
studies in science, and then to Major Darwin
(to whom Sir Edward “ handed me on”’ as
it were), who led me to concentration on
human biology, and brought my mental
devotion to evolution into proper relation
to problems of society.

There will be in the U.S.A. a keen sense of
the loss of a leader. Were it not war-time,
one would also hear many tributes to his

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

friendship and wise captaincy from Europe,
and not least from our enemies’ country.
Here at home it is not generally realized
how widespread and penetrating was his
influence outside this country.

Brevity forbids even a bare outline of the

growth of the International Federation of

Eugenics (earlier the International Eugenics
Commission) which brought Major Darwin
into relations with America and the Continent over a long period, of which the beginnings go back to that dim age “‘ before
the last war.”” That can be learned from
records. His influence, and the directions it
took, are less easily recognized from that
history ; nor can one clearly disentangle in
the position at any given moment how much
is due to his guidance, and how much to
other factors in development. These are the
things one would like to see recorded.

Throughout Western Civilization Charles
Darwin was a name to conjure with, and his
son was accepted with a great respect before
he was known personally. Major Darwin
treasured affectionately what was a tribute
to his father, but most cleverly evaded any
reflected glory falling on himself. The result
gave him contacts entirely personal; he
became known and respected for himself ;
respect grew into affection on the part of
those who had frequent opportunities of
seeing him, and thus his views prevailed—
often against considerable potential resistance.

Major Darwin had no illusions about the
many differences distinguishing countries
and peoples; and he realized how much
minute points of custom and outlook
dominate the emotional attitudes of their
nationals. Thus he never fell into the mistaken attempt to rationalize, still less to
ignore, these potential points of division.
For all these national (or local) features, by
courteous recognition, he showed a kind of
“international respect,’ so that the suspicion of British national superiority could
not arise. It may be added that this same
awareness of differences, applied to personal idiosyncrasies as part of the human
make-up (coupled with the respect which
knowledge of the hereditary inevitableness
LEONARD DARWIN, 1850-1943

thereof entails), made his personal relations
entirely devoid of snobbery. The celebrity
meeting him, lost his feeling of reliance on a
great name, and became a man ; the humble
and unknown individual felt the compliment
of being accepted as of interest in and for
himself and reacted with new confidence ;
insincerity could not long persist in this
atmosphere, indeed that was the one quality
which evoked laughter or scorn.

It was not alone these personal characteristics which brought about a united federation of the previously warring nations, all
still sore, or full of inimical feelings, sooner
than one first dared to hope. There was wise
policy in each detail of the common business.
Those who were being gently led, rarely
suspected the inflexible purpose patiently
at work through each detail of election to
membership, each conference programme,
even in the selection of the social entertainments which played their part in the international intercourse. Here, generosity in
money matters played its part, that is at an
angle where it often remained hidden, and
could in no way interfere with the desirable
financial independence of the Federation.

One point of far-seeing policy has in the
event had special importance, and it was a
policy that often caused criticism—namely,
that the group should never discuss practical
eugenic measures. Papers and work were
strictly limited to theory, scientific aspects
of problems, and research. It is in the realm
of practical measures that the national
emotional outlook and prejudice play the
strongest part. Insuperable divisions would
rapidly have wrecked any true international
collaboration had these ever been mooted ;
research, on the other hand, proved a fruitful
soil for joint work, and it is the side of the
Federation’s life which still bears fruit, under
other dress, in more than one direction.

Here may be mentioned the outstanding
aspect of eugenic science constantly reiterated
by our leader: this was selection, which
was in Darwinian evolution theory the
instrument playing on the material of
variation and heredity. A search for the
factors at work in human selection was a
goal steadily kept in view, so that practical

Irs

measures of social selection might eventually
be wisely chosen and applied. Natural
selection seems to be a touchstone of any
thinker’s power of reasoning ; social selection has proved to be an indicator of the
individual scientist’s courage and independence of thought. It is proof (if proof were
needed) of his large measure of this quality,
combined with scrupulous honesty.

Major Darwin’s lectures and addresses
were no more “ popular’”’ abroad than at
home ; his conscientious care for accuracy
in detail of fact and language prevented that
lightness which makes a speech easy for the
hearers. Long preparation went to making
the fullest use of every chance of teaching.
When, however, some extemporary unprepared occasion arose, humour, pleasantness
and ease were never lacking, while the
habitual sincerity made complimentary remarks and ‘“ votes of thanks” from him
ring true in a way that made of these trivialities amongst his foreign friends coins of
value ; it was a largesse that did much to
unify a group of singular variety.

I hope he knew to the end how much of
his work persisted—though so much of what
he would have wished to see come about
awaits posterity, perhaps our grandchildren ?
His modesty would prevent his desiring,
much less claiming, his real share in the
advances of the knowledge of the biological
side of Man’s life, whereby alone human
evolution can escape another period of
frustration ; his singular wise patience knew
no pessimism, focussing on the vision ahead ;
when his part was played he could wait
content. I think he trusted “those that
come after’”’: it will take all our powers to
be worthy of that trust.

* # *

The Hon. Mrs. Grant Duff writes:

Major Leonard Darwin was President of
the Eugenics Society for nearly twenty years,
and no one was ever more delightful to work
with. He combined the qualities of efficiency
with human kindness and understanding to
a rare degree, and it was this combination
which made serving under him a real
privilege. He was whole-heartedly devoted
to the cause of what in America is called
116

‘“‘ human-betterment,”’ and we call eugenics.
He never spared himself in his efforts to
make the laws of human heredity understood
by those they so deeply concern, not only in
his own country but throughout the world,
for no one knew better than he did that these
questions concern all humanity. His example
was an inspiration and working with him an
education which not only caused others to
give of their best unstintingly and untiringly,
but made their efforts a true happiness.

When he retired to the country he was
deeply missed ; but his help and encouragement were still always accessible, both to
correspondents and to all who went to Forest
Row to visit him. He kept his clear faculties
to the end of his ninety-three years, and now
his loss is irreparable.

* * *

Lady Chambers writes :

It is with pleasure that I shall always
remember the years I served under Major
Darwin with the Eugenics Education Society
and the happy days when everyone was
filled with enthusiasm and the single-hearted
desire to educate the general public to underStand the import of the laws of heredity.

Major Darwin was our loved President

 

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION
“ For the promotion of knowledge of the course of legislation in different countri i in the
trl re lates te tae ee bs meg verte a

President: The Rt. Hon. S. M. BRUCE, C.H., M.C.
Chairman of the Executive Committee : The Rt. Hon. Lord MACMILLAN, G.C.V.O.

Honorary Secretaries: C. E. A. BEDWELL, Esq.

Profeseor H. C. GUTTERIDGE, K.C.

Annual Subscription - -~
Address: 28 Essex Street, London, W.C2

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and for seventeen years he guided us all.
Mental honesty was an outstanding feature
of his life and, therefore, he always gave a
fair hearing to all who served under him.
I can never remember him other than
courteous, no matter whether he agreed
with the views being expressed or not. His
patience and clear exposition often converted his opponents.

When the last war broke out and Mrs.
Neville-Rolfe (then Mrs. Gotto) and Sir
Theodore Chambers started the Professional
Classes War Relief Council and were established in Princes Gate (lent to them by Mrs.
Pierpont Morgan), Major Darwin willingly
accepted the invitation to become Chairman
of the Council, and for some years he gave
his wise and sympathetic help to the work.
He shared the views of the founders as to the
eugenic value of the project, designed to
encourage parenthood and to give help to
those carrying good stock through the
tribulations of the war period.

I cannot finish my small tribute to his
memory without a mention of his quiet sense
of humour, which often gave us much
enjoyment. I shall always be thankful that
I knew him and grateful for all he taught me.

   
   

States.”

 
     
     
 

Qne Guinea

    
