Three Hundred Years of Demography

of records of births, marriages and deaths

are of great antiquity, these particulars
were collected in the early days for practical
purposes such as taxation and the establishment
of legal title to property, and not in order to
study population for its own sake; and although
there was philosophical speculation about
population questions in ancient times, it was
unaccompanied by any numerical investigation.
It was not until the year 1662 that anyone went
so far as to analyse some vital statistics in order
to see what they revealed, or to pursue speculation about population to the point of making
quantitative estimates. In that year the Englishman, John Graunt, published his book, Natural
and Political Observations ...upon the Bills of
Mortality, and in so doing became the founder
of two sciences; statistics and demography. By
drawing up the first life table, he was also one
of the originators of actuarial technique.

The tercentenary of this remarkable beginning
has recently been celebrated in various ways:
for instance, articles on Graunt and his work
have appeared in a number of publications. A
special dinner was eaten, in a City Livery
Company Hall, by leading scientists and insurance men. Above all, the Royal Society held a
two-day Symposium in honour of Graunt, who
was indeed one of its first Fellows; the meetings
were organized by two Fellows of the Eugenics
Society: Dr. P. B. Medawar, F.R.S., and Professor D. V. Glass. Ten papers were read and
some of them touched upon eugenic subjects,
although the main interest was demographic.

Here is a complete list of the papers in the
order in which they were read:

John Graunt and His work (Professor D. V.
Glass);

);

Actuarial Methods of Mortality Analysis (Dr. B
Benjamin);

Some recent trends in Public Health (Professor
J. N. Morris);

The bearing of Demography on the study of
Fecundity (Dr. L. Henry);

Genetical aspects of Human Infertility (Professor
L. S. Penrose);

Genetical Demography (Professor K. Mather);

\ LTHOUGH CENSUS-TAKING and the keeping

Concepts of Random Mating and the Frequency
of Consanguineous Marriages (Dr. J. Hajnal);

Factors associated with Age at Marriage in
Britiain (Professor E. Grebenik and Miss
Griselda Rowntree);

Demographic Aspects of “Mental Disorder (Sir
Aubrey Lewis);

Norms for Family Size in Underdeveloped Areas
(Professor R. Freedman);

There was a discussion on each paper and
at the end of the Symposium Professor F. W.
Notestein made a closing statement which was
also discussed.

Glass’s very interesting account of Graunt’s
life disclosed some new facts uncovered by his
recent researches in addition to giving a clear
survey of existing knowledge. Born in 1620, the
oldest child of seven or more in the family of a
city haberdasher, Graunt was himself apprenticed at the age of sixteen into the same trade.
He rose rapidly, and held many civic (and
military) offices; he acquired considerable
culture, moved in a distinguished circle and,
after the appearance of his book, was elected
to the recently-formed Royal Society.

Bills of Mortality were weekly statements
usually showing the sex of each deceased person,
and giving some indication as to age and cause of
death; they exist for 1592-95 and for the years
from 1603 onwards. Graunt analysed these
lists in a critical way, by no means accepting all they showed, and drew from them far
more than a count from time to time of the
numbers of the deceased in each area. With
their aid he estimated the size and trend of
population, and the distribution of people
according to the lengths of their lives; he took
an interest in births, marriages, migration and
statistics of households.

At the time of the Great Plague and Great
Fire, Graunt apparently suffered financial and
other losses, and soon retired; he died in 1674
after a period of hard times. He did not publish
any other significant work. It may well be that
his lack of a formal education, his practical training and his capable mind are responsible for his
work, so original in its day and pregnant for

17

ER—C
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the future of man’s scientific interests and
achievements.

In the discussion following the reading of
Professor Glass’s paper, Mr. M. E. Ogborn—
the Joint Actuary of the oldest Society to transact scientific life assurance, whose bi-centenary
fell in 1962—drew attention to an exhibition
of old prints and documents which was then
being displayed in the Royal Society’s Library.

Dr. Benjamin is one of the Chief Statisticians
of the General Register Office and in his contribution he was able to give a comprehensive
survey of methods of demographic analysis
of mortality and their development in recent
years. He paid a tribute to those who had
brought about significant advances in the study
of the subject since Graunt’s time, and in
particular to William Farr, who had himself
addressed the Royal Society in 1849. Dr.
Benjamin also wrote an article entitled “‘Measuring the World’s Population Explosion” which
appeared in the New Scientist for November 1,
1962.

In the discussion on Dr. Benjamin’s paper,
Mr. R. E. Beard outlined the course of some
current research in which he seemed likely by an
ingenious process of analysis to account for the
trend of mortality from lung cancer, in terms of
variations in the proportion of smokers and in
the average amount smoked, including an
explanation of sex-differences in this respect.

Professor J. N. Morris, of the Medical
Research Council’s Social Medicine Research
Unit, said there was evidence that coronary
thrombosis and lung cancer had reached their
peak as causes of death in the middle-aged male
population. Optimism that saturation point
had been reached in these two important and
serious diseases was justified because of the
apparent stabilization of the incidence of lung
cancer in men under sixty and the fact that
there was no increase of coronary thrombosis
among doctors, whose figures had been the
highest.

Professor Morris examined trends in mortality
in infancy, adolescence, middle life and old age.
It was disappointing, he said, that there had
been no appreciable fall in infant mortality
in spite of twelve years of the National Health
Service and that there had been no narrowing

18

of the proportionate differences in these rates
between social classes for the past fifty years.
The working classes made less use of the health
service, reported pregnancies later, and used
the Hospital Services less than the others.
Britain was behind Holland and Sweden in
reducing infant mortality. Professor Morris
said that figures for chronic sickness of men in
their sixties had been rising steadily since 1951.
He believed that there should be more study of
disease in relation to social patterns and
conditions.

Dr. Louis Henry was not able to be present
at the Symposium, but his paper was read in his
absence. He has been responsible for many
ingenious developments in the statistical study of
fertility, and on this occasion was showing
how population and registration statistics may
be used in the measurement of fecundity. Dr.
Henry considered that differences in fecundity
may well exist between populations as well as
between individuals; variations in social behaviour patterns, e.g. in the length of the lactation period and in periodic taboos on intercourse, have an important effect even where
contraception is practised.

Professor Penrose’s study of the genetical
aspects of human infertility was concerned with
the inheritance of particular defects in the reproduction system, while Professor Mather was
concerned with the wider, statistical aspects of
population genetics. Both emphasized the
difficulty of assessing gene-frequencies in a
group of people and the importance of genetic
studies of large samples of human populations.
In a stimulating discussion, the subjects touched
upon included the rate of foetal mortality and
the problem of apparent correlations between
family size and intelligence. Dr. Wallis Taylor,
of Manchester University, made the interesting
suggestion that genetical information should be
collected at the next national census. He
suggested, for example, that it would be of
value to know the total number of sons and
daughters of the father of each family (thus
giving the sex-ratio) and that a tally of information on blood-groups (where they were known)
would also be useful.

After an interesting analysis by Dr. J. Hajnal
of the prospects of consanguineous marriages in
THREE HUNDRED YEARS OF DEMOGRAPHY

random mating, in which he constructed some
statistical models showing the expected frequency of cousin marriages, Professor Grebenik
gave some of the preliminary results of a marriage survey he organized with Miss Griselda
Rowntree three years ago. In an attempt to
identify major social factors in the lowering
of the age at marriage, 3,000 men and women
between the ages of sixteen and fifty-nine—some
married, some not—were interviewed on a
national scale by a poll organization. Among
the findings were that the brides of professional
and managerial men continued to marry at
later ages than those of other men, and that in
recent years the marriage age of daughters of
professional men had fallen more sharply than
that of other sections of the population.

The survey also showed that 41 per cent of
daughters of non-manual families marry sons
of manual workers, and 27 per cent of the daughters of manual families marry sons of nonmanual workers. Pre-nuptial conceptions were
most prevalent when both parties were from
manual families, and in the unions of women of
manual families with non-manual men. Lengths
of engagements appeared no shorter in the
1950s than in the 1930s. Professor Grebenik
said that in his view the knowledge of the
possibility of limiting the fecundity in marriage
had had greater influence than anything else
on the lowering of the marriage age.

Sir Aubrey Lewis discussed the many difficulties involved in assessing the full incidence
of mental disorder of various kinds among the
whole population, and surveyed the most significant studies on this topic. Some emphasis was
placed, in the discussion, on the influence of
geographical location and social environment
upon mental disease.

In the last paper of the Symposium, Professor
Freedman gave a list of the available gross
reproduction rates and other measures of
fertility for the economically emergent countries.
The reproduction rate varied from 2:1 in Chile
to 4-2 in the Cocos Islands. He discussed the
significance of these figures and the effects of
“emergence” upon them, showing how the
norms for family size were adapted to conditions
of high mortality, and that as mortality fell the
norms tended to adjust themselves. But the

complete social life of a tribe or nation, and
the role of everyone in it, was involved, and:
the transition could hardly be a rapid one.

The Symposium was fittingly concluded by
the distinguished American demographer, Professor Notestein, who is the President of the
Population Council, founded in the United
States in 1952. He stressed the need for more
demographic research, more money to promote
it and more collaboration between natural and
social scientists. |

Now that three hundred years of demography
have been celebrated, what of the future? The
prospects have been surveyed in an article
in the October 1962 issue of Population Index
the quarterly published by the Office of Population Research at Princeton University and the
Population Association of America. The article
foresees that demands for demographic information and studies will increase and that the real
need for these services will grow even faster in
the emergent countries than the services themselves. This seems a reasonable expectation, as
also does the suggestion that an increasing
proportion of research effort will be devoted
towards questions that relate to social, economic and population policy, and less to theory.
It does seem likely, and desirable, that the trend
away from abstraction and towards a detailed
examination of the relevant facts, which has
already transformed some branches of the subject, should extend itself to embrace the question
of interrelations between economic and demographic development. These interrelations are
evidently vital for the whole future of mankind,
because they will determine how soon the present
harmful explosion of population can be harnessed. The article refers to this movement
towards the measurement of new factors and
suggests also that the demographer will combine
his services more and more with those of the
sociologist, the psychologist and the economist,
perhaps even performing these roles himself
as well.

All these reasonable projections into the future
represent continuations of current trends. But
fortunately the possibility cannot be excluded
that another Graunt will arise to discover things
hitherto unimagined and so completely transform the course of demographic science.

19
