SOME RECENT LITERATURE ON
POPULATION PROBLEMS

By DAVID V. GLASS

HESE works, selected from the
highly interesting literature on various
aspects of population which has been
published within the past few months,
have been grouped together in a general
review, not merely for convenience but
because they are in a real sense complementary to each other. Dr. Kuczynski’s
book* covers the widest ground, but still
omits any study of vital statistics other
than those provided by the governments of
Western nations, or of differential fertility,
while it does not attempt, except in a few paragraphs in the concluding chapter, to apply
the results of the methods with which it is
concerned to estimating future populations.
The first gap is filled by Professor Krzywicki’s bookt on Primitive Societies, the
second by the new and extended study of
Edin and Hutchinson,f while three estimates
of the future population of England and
Wales have been computed by Dr. Charles.§
When Dr. Kuczynski produces a new book,
the task of the reviewer is not to criticize
but to find terms of praise which are adequate without offending against the code of
academic decorum. Dr. Kuczynski’s latest
book is, perhaps even more than his others,
a magnificent piece of work. As is to be
expected, it contains a number of important
modifications in statistical method, but its

* Kuczynski, R. R.: The Measurement of Population
Growth (Textbooks of Social Biology). London, 1935.
Sidgwick and Jackson. Pp. 255. Price 12s. 6d.

¢ Krzywicki, L. : Primitive Soctety and tts Vital Statistics (Publications of the Polish Sociological Institute).
London, 1935. Macmillan. Pp. 589. Price 2os.

{ Edin, K. A., and Hutchinson, E. P.: Studies of
Differential Fertility in Sweden (Stockholm Economic

Studies). London, 1935. P.S. King. Pp. 116. Price
7s. 6d.
§ Charles, E.: The Effect of Present Trends in

Fertility and Mortality upon the Future Population
of England and Wales, and upon its Age Composition.
London and Cambridge Economic Service (Special
Memorandum No. 40). London, 1935. Pp. 19. Price
58.

primary intention is to survey the known
techniques of analyzing population growth,
and it focuses the author’s wide statistical
experience on the subject. The work includes
an interesting history of the science of demography, and does not forget that extremely
important question, the accuracy of the
statistics with which we have to deal.
Having evolved a number of appropriate
methods of determining the reproductive
capacity of a population, we are still faced
by the problem of obtaining reasonably
adequate and accurate data. So far as the
first point is concerned, most countries have
not yet included the age of the mother in
their birth-registration forms, and appear to
prefer the application of highly ingenious,
though imperfect, techniques necessitated
by such an omission to the simple task of
adding a question to the birth certificate.
The second deficiency is to be found no less
frequently in the various systems of registration. In Eastern countries this is, of
course, to be expected, since it is extremely
difficult to deal with populations which
contain a large proportion of illiterates, but
among Western nations, where governments
have been collecting such data for many
years, it is time that these defects were
remedied. They still exist, however, for
apparently in the United States there is
hardly a State in which birth registration is
not inadequate. In Oklahoma and Tennessee,
to cite Dr. Kuczynski, 40,930 and 51,881
births respectively were registered in 1929-30,
while the census of April Ist, 1930, gave the:
numbers of children under one year of age
at 51,634 and 56,335 for the two States. In
New York State, on the other hand, 217,628
children were born in 1929-30, while the
census only reported 185,734 children under
one year of age. Part of this difference may
have been accounted for by internal migration, but this does not cover the whole

297 298

gap, and in fact it is evident that both the
collection of vital statistics and of census
data are incomplete and show a significant
margin of error. If this is the case with
modern statistics, how much less accurate
must be the estimates made for past times
and for countries where the official mechanism is less effective. It would have been very
valuable to have had Dr. Kuczynski’s
opinion on the population estimates made
by various statisticians.

This section, however, forms only a small
part of the book ; the major part consists of
an examination of the methods which have
been and are still used for estimating the
vitality of a population.

By this time it should be fairly obvious
that the Net Reproduction rate is the best
available method of measuring a country’s
ability to maintain its numbers. Standardized birth- and death-rates, though they
are still frequently used, give no indication
of changes in reproductive capacity, and are
very often more distorted and inaccurate
than the crude rates themselves. Dr.
Kuczynski shows this by a number of
illustrations. Moreover, although Dr. Kuczynski has not made the particular application himself, it is easy to work back from
the net reproduction and, if it is below
unity, calculate the increase in fertility or
decrease in mortality necessary to restore
equilibrium.

M. Sauvy, in an article in the Journal of
the Statistical Society of Paris,* explains this
very simply. It involves either multiplying
the fertility rates of the population by the
reciprocal of the Kuczynski rate, or decreasing mortality by the coefficient 8, where

B= — T being the Gross Reproduction

rate of the population, and t the Net rate.
This formula shows clearly how small the
result of decreasing mortality would be at
the present time, for with a Gross rate of
1-o (the rate for England and Wales in 1933
was below 1-0), the Net rate could only be
raised to unity if mortality between the

* Sauvy, M.: “ Sur les taux de stabilisation d’une
population,”’ February 1934.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ages of o and 50 years were completely
suppressed! For England to-day, no amount
of reduction in mortality would be sufficient
by itself to restore equilibrium.

The Net rate is, of course, affected by
changes in the marriage habits of a population. In France, where fertility in each age
group is lower than in this country, the Net
rate is probably higher, because of the
greater amount of marriage. This is not
shown in the Net rate, but it can be detected
by Dr. Kuczynski’s Nuptio-Reproduction
rate, which was first explained, I believe, in
an article in Economica in 1935.* It involves
the addition to the Net rate of a Table of
Female Marriage Probability, such as that
computed for Germany in Ig1I, and the
omission of illegitimate births to unmarried
women.

There are only two points on which I
should like to offer some criticism. First,
the Net Reproduction rate measures the
replacement of the potentially fertile section
of the population, not of the whole population. This is not to its disadvantage, but it is
a fact that needs emphasizing and is not
mentioned by Dr. Kuczynski himself. It
requires emphasis because, in a population
which is still showing the effects of past high
fertility, stabilizing the number of potentially
fertile women means Teaching a total population considerably higher than that in
existence at the time. In Germany, for
example, there were 16-112 million women
aged 15 to 45 years, in a total population of
65°579 millions. Given the mortality rates
of 1933, Maintaining 16-112 million potentially fertile women would require a stationary population of about 78-7 millions, while
a stationary population of 65-579 millions
would contain only 13°44 million women
aged 15 to 45 years. The annual number of
births required to maintain the two populations would be very different. The Net
Reproduction rate can, of course, be adjusted
to meet both cases, but in its original form
it is important to remember its implication.

Secondly, I should have liked to see some

* Kuczynski, R. R.: ‘“‘ The Decrease of Fertility,’
Economica, May 1935.
SOME RECENT LITERATURE ON POPULATION PROBLEMS

mention of Dr. Burgd6rfer’s index* in The
Measurement of Population Growth. Although
it is not so refined as Dr. Kuczynski’s rate,
and gives no indication of changes in specific
fertility, it is often more easily applied. It
is based on the true death-rate, derived from
the Life Table in the same way as Dr.
Kuczynski’s true death-rate, and has the
great advantage of simplicity in the calculation of either the true-replacement quota
(that is, of the potentially fertile female
population) or of the replacement quota of the
whole population ; while it can be applied in
cases where the statistics do not permit the
computation of a Net Reproduction rate.
The latter rate requires the use of specific
fertility data as well as of a Life Table, but
Dr. Burgdoérfer’s index needs as its basic
data only the Life Table, the number of
potentially fertile women, and the size of
the total population. But the omission of
this index is only a very minor defect in a
book which, though it purports to be a textbook, merits the title ‘‘A Handbook for
Registrars-General.”’

The vital statistics of primitive societies
still remain largely unknown quantities.
This, however, is the fault of the subject
itself, not of Professor Krzywicki, who, in
his new book, has presented some very
valuable work. The author has spent over
thirty years in making a complete survey of
the literature of primitive communities, and
here presents the results.

With the anthropological aspects of the
problem I am not qualified to deal, but it is
obvious that our knowledge of the population questions concerned is, to say the least,
highly inexact. To give an example: in a
footnote on page 76, Dr. Krzywicki quotes
Thomson’s estimates of the Maori population in the ’fifties of the last century, the
total amounting to not very much more than
50,000. Now between 1835 and 1853 there
were thirteen estimates of the Maori population, and since these vary between 60,000
and 160,000, it is scarcely possible to arrive
at a reasonable average estimate. In 1860,
the Maori war broke out and the population

* See Burgdorfer: Dey Geburtenriickgang und seine
Bekampfung (1929) for a detailed explanation.

Cc

299

was reduced, though by how much is not
known, nor, since the first reasonably
accurate native census was not carried out
until 1916, is it known whether the apparent
decline in the native population between
1850 and 1896 was a real decline.* What is
perhaps the most important aspect of
primitive statistics, the question whether or
not the number of primitives have fallen
since the early nineteenth century, therefore
remains vague and uninformed.

Nor is the question of general fertility
more clearly illuminated, as is shown by
Professor Krzywicki’s data on the age at
which Australian aboriginal women have
their first child. Twenty-four references are
given in the Appendix, the age reported by
observers varying from under twelve to
about twenty years. On the basis of these
facts Professor Krzywicki says, ‘‘ in other
words, an Australian woman, on an average,
becomes a mother at about the age of fourteen.’’ The conclusion hardly seems justified,
for as Professor Krzywicki himself writes
later in the book, “every one of these
figures (of vital statistics for primitive communities), taken apart from the others, is
open to serious doubt.’’ His general conclusion about the various estimates, is,
however, ‘‘ that in spite of their originating
in different regions and from different
observers, they mutually confirm each other
by the uniformity of their purport; all
unanimously indicate that, at the lower
stages of culture, the number of living
children is smaller than that to which preWar European conditions have accustomed
us.”” This seems probable in view of the
extent to which the sexual intercourse of
married couples is limited by various prohibitions. In spite of the unsatisfactory
nature of the data at his disposal, Professor
Krzywicki’s book has great value, for it deals
with the subject in the fullest possible detail
and presents sociologists with a wealth of
interesting suggestions.

Docent Edin is best known to English
readers by his studies of differential fertility
in Sweden. In his recent book, written in

* See New Zealand Census ,1926, Vol. XIV, ‘‘ Maori
and Half-caste Population.’ ’
300

collaboration with Dr. Hutchinson, of Harvard University, he presents the results of
three investigations into that question. The
first deals with the difference between urban
and rural fertility in the Malar Counties and
shows the balance to be heavily in favour of
the more rural areas, due to the large proportion of agricultural workers present
there, the latter showing the highest occupational fertility in all communities. The
second two studies are, however, the most
interesting and deal with fertility in
Stockholm itself.

Docent Edin’s article on the same subject,
published in the EUGENIcs REVIEW, January
1929 (page 258), gave rise to a good deal of
discussion, for it showed a situation differing
markedly from that generally found in
other countries. Stockholm appeared to
show a positive correlation between economic
status and fertility, whereas, apart from the
examples quoted by Lorimer and Osborn,*
the correlation is found to be negative. The
controversy which arose has caused Docent
Edin to re-examine his data, and he comes
to the conclusion that not only is there a
positive correlation between income and
fertility in Stockholm, but also one between
education and fertility.

How far can this result be accepted ?
It is true that a number of investigations
has shown that the very rich have larger
families than the less rich, and there is also
some presumption that, with the more
widespread application of contraceptive
knowledge, the differentials between economic and social classes are closing up. But
when Docent Edin’s results were first published, Professor R. A. Fisher pointed out
that they referred only to married fertility
and that while this might not be important in most Western countries, de facto
marriages had long been customary in
Scandinavia, and illegitimacy was very high.
In the studies of the Malar Counties, and of
Stockholm families for the period 1919 to
1922, births to unmarried women have been
entirely excluded, although the authors
admit that in Stockholm nearly 28 per cent.

* Lorimer and Osborn: The Dynamics of Population,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of the births during the period examined
were illegitimate (page 65), and add, ‘‘ While
it is not possible to make a social classification of illegitimate children . . . it may be
assumed the social differential would be
considerably changed if computed in terms
of total rather than intramarital fertility.”’
But that is really the point at issue, and
unless allowance is made for illegitimacy the
results are not acceptable.

In the final study, an attempt is made to
discount the factor of illegitimacy, in full
realization of the fact that not only would it
give undue weight to the fertility of families
in higher economic classes, by excluding a
considerable proportion of the children born
to wives in the lower income groups, but
also because the birth of illegitimate children
may seriously reduce the fertility of a
succeeding marriage. But the adjustment
made does not seem adequate, for it consists
in analyzing the fertility of families in which
the wife was not known to have had children
before the observed marriage. Apart from
the fact that the investigators are not
certain that no children were born previous
to the marriage, it is obvious that this
procedure, by eliminating 1,590 of the 6,629
wives whose fertility was analyzed, has
omitted what may be the decisive section in
affecting the social differential. It appears
to me that the only method of obtaining
comparable figures for the different economic
and social classes in Stockholm would be to
recognize apparently permanent but still
unlegalized unions as marriages, for they are
such from the sociological point of view, and
include the number of children they produce
in the totals examined. Unless this is done,
no conclusions can be drawn from the
investigation. .

One other point appears to me to be
important. On page 63 it is explained that
the purpose of the studies was to make
comparisons of specific fertility rather than
of total reproductivity. But surely it is
scarcely possible to make class comparisons
without computing total reproductivity rates,
and the most suitable way to do this might
be to apply the Net Reproduction rate to the
material collected. The difficulty is, of
SOME RECENT LITERATURE ON POPULATION PROBLEMS

course, to compute Life Tables for the different social and economic strata, but even the
use of Gross Reproduction rates would yield
a more interesting result than customary
fertility data. The addition of Female
Nuptiality Tables would greatly increase the
value of the inquiry, but here again there are
very considerable difficulties. The obvious
solution, and one that may well come about
with the growing public interest in population
questions, would be to include differential
Nuptiality and Life Tables in the census as
part of the general data to be collected.

In 1932, M. Bunle published an article in
the Journal of the Statistical Society of
Paris* in which he pointed out that estimates
of future population were of relatively small
value because actual population growth
always deviated from the estimates, no
matter how carefully they were made. He
quoted Professor Savorgnan as saying, in
support of this contention: ‘‘ Ces calculs

. constituent un travail de Sisyphe
qui n’est admirable que par l’effort ténace
avec lequel on tente de fixer le regard dans
VYimmensité ténébreuse de l'avenir.” M.
Bunle’s remarks are perfectly correct so far
as the relation between estimates and the
actual course of population growth is concerned, but there are a number of other
factors which, in spite of that defect, still
make population estimates extremely valuable. In the first place, the general public
still tends to believe that the population will
continue to grow indefinitely, and fairly
detailed estimates provide the best means for
correcting their opinion. Secondly, it is
important to discover what would happen if
certain trends in fertility and mortality
persisted, and how long it takes for a population to arrive at the margin of decline, once
the Net Reproduction rate has fallen below
unity, though this, of course, depends upon
the extent to which the effects of past
fertility are making themselves felt. Finally,
with a series of hypotheses it is possible to
reduce the margin of error in the estimates,
particularly for relatively short periods, and

 

* Bunle, H.: ‘‘ Prévisions Démographiques.”’ Société
Statistique de Paris, November 1932.

301

an analysis of population changes for twenty
years into the future has a real value for
industrial and governmental enterprise. |

All these merits are to be found in the
estimates of the future population of England
and Wales, which have recently been computed by Dr. E. Charles. Three hypotheses
have been used. The first assumes that fertility and mortality will continue at the same
level as in 1933, the second that fertility and
mortality will continue to fall in the manner
suggested by recent experience, fertility
becoming stabilized by 1985, and the third
that fertility will rise to the 1931 level
while mortality will continue to fall.

The second estimate seems nearest to
what may probably happen, and on that
basis the population will reach a maximum
of 40-655 millions in 1940, and then decline,
falling to about 28-857 millions by 1980.
By the latter date the age composition of
the population will have undergone a radical
change, the proportion of children aged o to
14 years being 6-05 per cent. of the total,
compared with 23-25 per cent. in 1935, and
persons aged 60 years and over forming
32°63 per cent. of the population, compared
with only 12-45 per cent. in 1935. The
difficulties caused by a fall in numbers would
thus be accentuated by a decline in the
proportion of active men and women. On
the second hypothesis, for example, the
composition of the population in 2035 would
show only 39:28 per cent. aged 15 to 59
years, compared with 57°75 per cent. aged
60 years and over, and Dr. Burgdérfer had
already pointed out, some years ago,* the
dangers of such a situation.

The only point in Dr. Charles’s estimates
which can be criticized is that the specific
fertility rates for England and Wales in 1933
have been calculated on the assumption that
the distribution of births among women of
different ages was the same as that for
Sweden in 1931. The actual difference may
be serious, but the fault lies not with Dr.
Charles but with the inadequacy of our own
system of birth registration which makes
such assumptions necessary.

* Burgdérfer, F.: Volk ohne Jugend, 1st edn., 1932.
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVII, No. 4.
