118 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

=

i=
x, - Ar SEs a: «é
eit RM ( | 6) Y Y i
4
LL NY

, a a he "

& OY ep sec 4 - yy 0

Y ye Hy ip i y
f’ /

A

UL
Ay

ya

“ LET THE WEDDING
PROCEED ”

PS
eS

NN

WY
SSS SS ; Wy
WS

 

Sr

. = SSA =
aemcec e
| CR ‘ |
wel
: i NS
—_———___ SS a
Ye Awe c
, a) AYA

Wy

Jee

= ON ice

Wt
\)
iN

WIS
\ x ‘. © ; pets
\ Ve ae
Ss p Neg }

=<

—

 

To Mrs. Alec Tweedie from W. K. Haselden

THE FIRST INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS CONGRESS, LONDON, JULY 1912
THE PRE-MARITAL HEALTH SCHEDULE
AND THE PRESS

By C. P. BLACKER, ™.D.

that the Society was engaged in preparing

a Pre-nuptial Health Schedule became
known to the outside world, and a considerable interest was evinced by various newspapers. Telephone calls were frequently put
through both to myself and to Dr. Stella
Churchill and various announcements of a
misleading character appeared in the Press.
Publicity was further given to the proposal
by a public address delivered by Dr. Killick
Millard, Medical Officer of Health for
Leicester, who has long been a keen supporter of the project. The Press comments
on Dr. Millard’s speeches all referred to
health certificates. For reasons set forth in the
January issue of the REVIEW (page 275), we
regard this as a misleading term, since nowhere in the Soczety’s Schedule is the doctor
asked to certify anything. Many of the newspapers, moreover, have represented the
Soctety’s proposals as being compulsory, and
in this way a good deal of misconception has
arisen. We did not take steps to correct
these errors, feeling that they could be corrected when the time came for the Schedule
to be issued. Considering, as may be seen
from the cartoon reproduced in this issue,*
that the subject had already been discussed
in 1912, the little extra delay could hardly
do serious harm!

On the morning of February 6th, 1936, a
Press reception was arranged in the Society’s
Library. This was attended by representatives of the following papers: British
Medical Journal, News Chronicle, Daily
Express, Datly Mail, Press Association,
Scotsman, Daily Telegraph, Times, Evening

[: the course of the past year, the fact

* The cartoon was kindly given to the Society by
Mrs. Alec Tweedie and the copy from which the block
was made was signed and given to her by Mr. Haselden.
We are indebted to Mrs. Alec Tweedie for the gift of
the cartoon and to Mr. Haselden and the Daily Mirror
for their courtesy in allowing us to reproduce it.

119

Standard, People and Sunday Chronicle. To
the representatives of these papers copies
of the Schedule were given, and I outlined
briefly its intentions and scope, afterwards
inviting questions.

The National Press

The reception accorded by the Press the
next day was in general satisfactory, and
the aims and purpose of the Schedule were,
on the whole, fairly and accurately described.
Most of the announcements were serious,
though some were written in somewhat
flippant or jeering terms. Thus the News
Chronicle had a heading, “‘ Marriage Doctors
Soon: Wedded Bliss Schedule for Engaged
Couples”; the Newcastle Evening Chronicle
of February 8th had a paragraph entitled
‘‘ Wedded Bliss—One Shilling.’’ One or two
papers, notably the Western Daily Maul, still
insisted on referring to the Schedule as a
certificate. Several leading articles or
editorial notes upon the Schedule appeared.
These were mostly couched in terms of
qualified approval. Eugenists seem to be
regarded by the editors of many of our daily
papers as dangerous cranks whose proposals
should be received with cautious reserve.
Occasionally, however, more or less by accident, some eugenists may make reasonable

“suggestions. Thus, an editorial occupying a

column of the Western Datly Press ended as
follows: ‘‘ There is undoubtedly much more
in a happy or an unsuccessful marriage than
comes within the ken of the Eugenics Soctety.
Nevertheless, so long as that body does not
promise more than it can perform, or seek to
impose its tenets on a bashful population, its
endeavours in the cause of healthy marriage
may be regarded with sympathy and goodwill 33

The Soctety’s proposals produced a letter
in the correspondence columns of the Dazly
I20

Herald. The writer remarked that a “ vitally
important question missed by these learned
people of the medical profession is the
standard of living, which causes more misery
and ill-health than hysteria, neurosis and all
the other nervous complaints put together.”’
An editorial note in the Southern Daily Echo
of February roth conceded that “the
Eugenics Society certainly have a certain
amount of logic on their side in this matter.
They have common sense, too. Even though
we may not believe in all their theories or the
ideals for which some eugenists stand, many
of us in these days will be prepared to agree
that the unborn have their rights, and that
a healthier race would not be too dearly
bought at the expense of a little common
sense introduced into the sphere usually
sacred to romantic glamour.”

Cavalcade devoted a full page to an
appreciative notice of the Schedule in the
issue of March 7th.

The Medical and Scientific Journals

The two most important medical weeklies,
the Lancet and the British Medical Journal,
gave us full notices. An annotation in the
Lancet of February 15th ended as follows :
“It is clear that the Eugenics Society in
issuing these Schedules is in no way trying
to override the functions of the practitioner,
who is in fact made the central agency
through whom they will be distributed. The
Society will not communicate with individual
applicants and indeed will come into the
picture only when its help is needed on a
genetic problem. We believe that family
doctors who have not hitherto given much
attention to these problems will welcome
assistance in dealing with them.”

The British Medical Journal complimented the Committee on its work and remarked in the course of an appreciative
notice: ‘‘ The whole scheme and the literature accompanying it have been framed with
great care to avoid the tender susceptibilities
with which such a subject is surrounded.”
An editorial in Mother and Child says: “‘The
wide basis upon which the Schedule has been
established is wholly admirable, and if this
scheme can be extended it will do much to

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

further the ideals of preventive medicine.
Further education of public opinion is
essential to success and all who undertake
propaganda on behalf of the maternity and
child welfare movement can undoubtedly do
much to encourage the public to regard the
Pre-marital Health Examination as a reasonable and thoroughly desirable measure.’’

In the Medical Officer of February 2gth
appeared a mildly disparaging leading article.
The writer says of the Schedule: “ This is a
most elaborate document which, in our
opinion, would defeat its object... . Our
criticism of the Schedule is not meant to be
destructive. We gave it a practical test of
trying it out on ourselves and some
colleagues. We did not get far before we got
into difficulties. At the end we decided
unanimously that none of us was fit to marry,
or even to live, which may be true, but not
helpful. Our conclusion was that in its
present form the Schedule fails from overelaboration; that a person about to be
married would be harassed if not terrified of
it, and that only those for whom it is unnecessary would submit to the ordeal. A
much simplified form would be of greater
utility.”

I confess to having been surprised when
I read this review. Before issuing the Schedule I gave it to six non-medical persons asking
them to fill up Parts I and II as they would
do if they were contemplating marriage.
Part II, which deals with previous medical
history, was filled up in an average of 44
minutes by these six people. Part I took an
average of eight minutes, but none of the six
persons in question had, at the time of filling
up the Schedules, knowledge of the dates
and causes of death of all the relatives of
whom this information is tentatively asked.
The important and comprehensive question
with which Part I ends was filled in quickly
and without difficulty by them all.

Some of these points were made by Dr.
Stella Churchill in a latter published in the
correspondence column of the Medical
Officer on March atst, 1936.

In the issue of April 15th of the Medical
Press and Circular appeared a long leading
article entitled ‘‘ Health Examinations before
THE PRE-MARITAL HEALTH SCHEDULE AND THE PRESS

Marriage.’ This consisted of a review of the
facts set forth in the two articles entitled
“Fitness for Marriage’? and ‘ Laws on
Health and Marriage’ which I wrote for
the April and October 1935, issues of the
REVIEW, and concluded with a brief notice
of the Soczety’s schedule.

Perhaps the most satisfactory notice
which appeared in any journal was a leading
article published in Nature (April 4th, 1936).
“ The Eugenics Society,” the writer said, “ is
to be congratulated for having prepared a
scheme of voluntary pre-nuptial health examinations which is meant to help the family
doctor. . . . Without doubt the scheme is
a most excellent one, not so much because,
through its help, either the practitioner or
the board of specialists will be able to offer
compelling advice to any given individual
or pair, but because it can, and probably
will, encourage the development of a eugenic
conscience (though probably only in the
middle class where such a conscience already
exists), and furthermore because, if properly
employed, it can be the means of adding
greatly to our knowledge concerning the
reasons for the success or otherwise of
marriage in individual cases, and of the
incidence and mode of inheritance of pathological characters in mankind. But two
things must make the working of the scheme
difficult. One is that exceedingly few medical
men of the present generation know anything
of sexual psycho-pathology or of the principles of genetics, and the other is that our
knowledge of human genetics is exceedingly
slight and most imperfect.

‘‘ However, the project is a step in the right
direction, right in the sense that it, a purely
voluntary scheme devised by a private
society, is undoubtedly an intelligent anticipation of what will be, in the not too distant
future, a compulsory scheme backed by law.
The State is bound, in its own interests,
sooner or later to place its sentinels at the
portals of birth, for it is by this route that
most of our undesirables enter the realm.”

The publications of the Eugenics Society
have not hitherto been well received by the
Catholic Press. In the Catholic Medical
Guardian (April 1936) a notice of the

I2I

schedule appears above the signature
V. E. M. B., who writes: “This effort is
worth while, as is anything which arouses
public opinion to a realization that the very
best is required for parenthood if the race is
to ‘make good’; the best for our triple
make-up, physical, mental and spiritual.
. . . The proposed form seems to be unduly
cumbrous and the B.M.A. and especially its
section of General Practitioners, who come
into intimate contact with the people as
their family doctor, should be asked to
collaborate in the drawing up of an adequate,
but simpler, form and in fixing a suitable
fee for the doctor’s services. The
booklet Health Examination before Marriage
seems calculated to be provocative of useful
thought in those for whom it is written if
they can be induced to read it.”’

Some Criticisms

I will conclude this review by quoting the
only two actively unfavourable Press comments. In the issue of Truth, dated February
26th, there appeared an editorial entitled
‘“ Marriage and the Millennium.” The writer
said: ‘‘ The Schedule is designed exclusively
for voluntary use, and the Soczety expresses
the opinion that in this country compulsory
health examinations such as exist in Germany
and Turkey would be as much out of place
as compulsory sterilization. I congratulate
the Eugenics Society upon its forbearance,
but I am afraid, as I turn over the pages of
the document with which it has supplied me,
that I cannot also congratulate it upon its
common sense.”” Some of the questions
asked in the Schedule are then jeeringly
quoted out of their context, and the writer
concludes: “‘ The trouble with the eugenists,
as with most other cranks, is that they will
not look at human nature as it is, but continue hopefully to hold up an ideal pattern
to which they expect human nature to
conform. This is the root error of the people
who believe that they can educate men and
women out of their prejudices.”

The other journal which adopts a hostile
attitude is one from which we might have
hoped for better things—The Post-Graduate
I22

Medical Journal, edited by Professor Leonard
Finlay. The following is the notice in full:

“We cannot imagine a better example of
the value of eugenics in the prevention of
disease than that of deaf-mutism, which is
discussed by Dr. James Kerr Love on p. 92
of the present issue [that of March 1936].
Indeed, as Dr. Love points out, selection of
parentage is our only means of preventing
one of the greatest calamities that can befall
an individual. There are, of course, one or
two other conditions, e.g. hemophilia and
muscular dystrophy, in which the same precautions are equally applicable, and we are
convinced that the Eugenics Society would
be well advised, in their endeavours to educate the public, to concentrate their attention on such instances where their suggested
measures would meet with indisputable
success rather than to dissipate their energies

  

of Iowa).

ne eee nS are

~ CHARACTER anp PERSONALITY

An International Psychological Quarterly
Edited by C. E. SPEARMAN

Contents of June 1936 issue

SOME SOCIAL-PSYCHOLOGICAL DIFFERENCES BETWEEN
UNITED STATES AND GERMANY. By Kurr Lewin (State University

SOME RECENT CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE THEORY OF PSYCHOMETRY. By Wivutam STEPHENSON (University College, London). |

WAR AND PACIFISM: SOME INDIVIDUAL (UNCONSCIOUS)
FACTORS. By Epwarp GLovER (London.)
DYNAMICS OF THE GESTALT PSYCHOLOGY, Part IT.
McDoucati (Duke University).
RECENT RESEARCH ON UNITARY MENTAL TRAITS. By Kart J.
Ho.zincEr (University of Chicago).
I. P. PAVLOV (1849-1936). By M. J. Serejsky (Moscow).
Subscription price 7/6 per annum; Single copies 2]LONDON: GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD

40 MUSEUM STREET, LONDON, W.C.I

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

over a wide field of more or less problematical questions. In this latter way failure
of their prophesies is bound to result and
harm to, and distrust in, the value of
eugenics can only follow. This word of
warning is surely called for in view of the
Society’s latest announcement, even although
it is reputed to have the support of certain
eminent physicians, that they are now prepared to give advice regarding the contracting of happy marriages.”

I should be very grateful to readers of the
REvIEw for criticisms and suggestions on our
Schedule. Members of the Society are invited
to send for the Schedule and to try filling it in
as they would if they were about to get married. I should be much interested to know if,
as a result of doing this, they come to the conclusion that the Schedule is too elaborate or
needs modification in any other respect.

   

 
   
     
   
   
   
   
   
    

By WILLIAM

     

 
       
   
     
 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVIII, No. 2.
