R. W. PARNELL

M.A., D.M., M.R.C.P., Research Physician, The Warneford Hospital, Oxford.
(External Staff of Medical Research Council).

Physique and Family Structure

HEN LAST I SPOKE to your Society

(1952), on the subject of recording

human constitution, I mentioned that
there was hardly a topic of social interest from
murder to matrimony on which records of
constitution do not touch, and cannot quicken
interest. I have not spent the intervening years
studying murder, but I have examined certain
aspects of marriage. Among these are the
variety of human matings, the kinds of children
born to different unions, the varying sex ratio
of offspring, their individual attitudes, performance at school and university, sexual
interest and activity, tendency to marry or
remain single, and variations in family size.

The study of eugenics has proceeded by
attempting to avoid what is defective: but in my
view more emphasis is needed on a positive
outlook which might lead to the birth of a better
population. Any possibility of bringing this
about by conscious endeavour depends on the
definition of attainable good qualities: it is not
enough to say what is wanted, we need better
understanding of how to achieve it. But before
this we need knowledge of what normally
happens. People may be less shy now than they
used to be of undressing their minds in public,
but imagine, if you can, a stockbreeder refusing
to look at his stock physically, and you may be
surprised at the notable absence of reliable
records of physique in most human biological
studies.

The method of classifying physique that I
shall use stems from modification of Sheldon’s
system of somatotyping. The modification consists of employing physical anthropometric
measures of bone, fat and muscle. These bring
greater consistency of typing by different
observers, for they add sharper definition to

* A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics
Society 0 on March 18th, 1959.

7§

types and thereby increase confidence in the
procedure of somatotyping, which when carried
out by photography alone provides no final
court of appeal beyond subjective opinion.
Details of these technical modifications may be
found in my recent book on Behaviour and
Physiquet and I need not therefore devote more
time to describing them here in greater detail.
There, too, you may find an account of a pilot
study of the parents and children in forty-five
families: this was the main stimulus for the
further survey about which I want to tell you
this evening. Somatotyping is now pretty widely
known, but for anyone who may not be familiar
with it, let me just insert one or two introductory
notes, including, in particular, a description of
the somatochart about which much of the discussion must inevitably revolve, and without
which the gist of what I have to say may not be
understood.

Somatotype is expressed as a three-numeral

index of body build descriptive of the amount of

endomorphy, mesomorphy and ectomorphy
according to Sheldon’s definition, each being
measured on a seven-point scale with maximum
7 and minimum 1. This index is an abstract
concept describing the genetically determined
path through life that is expected for a healthy
individual of a particular build. However, we
can more easily measure people than abstract
concepts that are difficult to define with precision, and so I shall speak of a phenotype index
comprising three scores on seven-point scales,
the first for fat, the second for muscularity, the
third for linearity of build.

The somatochart is a map on which the
various indices may be plotted. People of similar
physical appearance with similar indices are
found close together, those with widely differing

t London, 1958. Edward Arnold.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, June 1959, 51, 2
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

patOMORay,

      
   
   

CHILDREN OF FaT PaRENTS

(F4+x F4 @
we
/

CHILDREN OF THIN
PARENTS # an
(F3?- x F3?-) of po

on

@6
02

fy,
MORI Pomona

FAMILY STUDY.

FIGURE l.

Illustrating the difference in physique
among children of fat and thi
parents.

A SCHEMATIC TWOLDIMENSIONAL PROJECTION OF THE THEORETICAL SPATIAL RELATIONSHIPS AMONG THE KNOWN SOMATOTYPOS

physiques appear far apart. It is a tripolar chart,
the three poles indicating extreme development
in each component with minimum scores in the
remaining two, e.g. the extremely fat 711,
extremely muscular 171, or extreme in linearity
117. The mid-point is 444 and represents individuals of near average measurements and thus
balanced proportions of each component. The
three main sectors of the somatochart, F, M, L,
cover primary dominance of Fat, Muscularity
or Linearity; the small letters f, m, 1 indicate the
secondary dominance in the sub-sectors. In
arriving at component scores, allowance is made
for changes in subcutaneous fat and weight
brought about by age.

Pilot Family Study

Let us start then with the distribution of parents
in the pilot family study already mentioned
(Behaviour and Physique, p. 50, Somatochart 11).
The fathers are mostly distributed in the more
muscular sectors of the somatochart sectors Mf,
MI and Lm, but there are a few others, five in
sector Lf, one in sector Fl and two in Fm. The

76

distribution of mothers, on the other hand, lies
mostly in the dominantly fatter sectors Fm, Fl
and Lf, together with some in Mf, but none as
it happens in the thin muscular sectors Ml and
Lm. This is what is found when the same
standards of measurement are used for both
men and women.*

Variety of Matings. The first point of importance we may notice is the great variety of
matings encountered. Considered in terms of the
six sub-sectors (omitting central 444 for the
moment) there would be 36 possible kinds of
matings. Actually eighteen of these were found
among the forty-five pilot families, and the
largest number of one kind was seven, between
MI men and Fm women. Twelve theoretically
possible matings are not represented in the
sample because no Ml or Lm women were
present. It is evident that before any adequate
grasp of the variety of human matings can be

* The arguments in favour of common standards are
described by W. H. Sheldon (1954) in Atlas of Men. The
need for some correction of the women’s distribution is
discussed in Behaviour and Physique, p. 25.
PHYSIQUE AND FAMILY STRUCTURE

obtained, very large numbers of families must
be examined. The process of selecting a mate is
not so specific, in the sense that one kind of
person always choses one kind of mate, that the
natural history of mating can be greatly simplified, or that we can afford to ignore the real and
recognizable variety that exists. On the other
hand, human mating is anything but random,
however desirable that might be from a statistician’s point of view. I doubt, too, if there is
much biological meaning in the concept of an
average matriage.

Variety of Children. At this point I should like
you to vizualize a muscular father type Ml (163)
and a fat mother type Fm (731). Imagine if you
will what kind of children would be born to
these parents, assuming some degree of family
likeness. Now, as a contrast, consider father
type Lf (415) and mother type Lf (2326) and
recreate in your mind’s eye a new picture of
family likeness among their children. One may
doubt the two families would look much alike.

“Line Principle’. The findings in the pilot
survey have been reported in detail in Behaviour

CHILOREN OF MUSCULAR PARENTS
(M4+« M44)

CHILOREN OF WEAKER
PARENTS
M32- x M32-)

FIGURE 2.
Illustrating the difference in physique
among children of more muscular
and less muscular parents.

Otome

and Physique, p. 46. Broadly speaking one may
summarize them by saying that about one-half
of the children appeared to fall on a line drawn
between their parents on the somatochart; that
about one-quarter fell clearly at some distance
from this line, and in the remainder there was
doubt about the relationship in likeness. These
findings serve as a stimulating start in a new
field, but it is obvious at this stage that the exact
mathematical relationships underlying these
happenings have not been clarified, although
one might anticipate something of the kind
discovered, from the assumption that half the
child’s genes are contributed by each parent.
Difficulties in interpretation arise for several
reasons. First, the exact genetic equivalents of
male and female somatotypes are not known, if
indeed they can be, and some doubt exists
therefore about the exact position for plotting
them on a somatochart.* Secondly, the somato
* Equivalent percentile ranking as suggested by W. H.
Sheldon (1954, Atlas of Men, p. 16) would ignore any
sex differential in pre-natal mortality; as will be seen
later there is evidence that differential mortality occurs.

phtOMORry,
wh

|

FAMILY STUDY.

an

 

< et?
OM oR og acon 00

sis
@ 3

A SCHEMATIC TWO-DIMENSIONAL PROMECTION OF THE THEORETICAL SPATIAL RELATIONSHIPS AMONG THE KNOWN SOMATOTYPES

3—ER

77
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

CHILDREN OF LINEAR PaRENTS “*X™

(L4+xt44) @ LoN
CHILDREN OF NON-LINEAR fe" M |

PARENTS =

(L3- x L3-) of” 
a0
= a3
@ 2 ae per)

0 I0

 

0
. +O
"Q
:Q—

enoncn .

  
  

FAMILY STUDY.

LINEARITY.

FIGURE 3.

Illustrating the difference in physique
among children of linear and nonlinear parents.

@ 6
O04

& SCHEMATIC TWO.DIMENSHONAL PROJECTION OF THE THEORETICAL SPATIAL RALATIONSHIPS AMONG THE KNOWN SOMATOTYSSS,

typing of young children is not easy (the children
in this survey were seven years old), and there
are further difficulties because the phenotype
distribution of the children (Behaviour and
Physique, p. 50) is more central than that of their
parents, due most probably to their as yet
incompletely differentiated growth in fat and
muscularity. To overcome some of these difficulties it is clearly desirable as a next step to
measure a group of young adults together with
their parents, for the typing of adults is more
reliable.

There are two other findings from this pilot
family study which seemed important enough to
require further investigation at the earliest
opportunity. The first was family size, the second
the sex ratio of children born to different kinds
of mating.

Family Size. With regard to family size, the
first clue was that the marriage of the four Mf
mothers to M fathers produced seventeen children, whereas at the other extreme seven Fl
women produced only fifteen children, giving
an average of 2-1 children per family compared

78

with more than four children per family among
the most muscular mothers. This clue was
followed up on data from 393 women mental
hospital patients over thirty years of age: in them
significantly larger families were found for
women with higher ratings in muscularity.

Sex Ratio of Children Hypothesis. Reports of
variation in the sex ratio of children born under
a particular star or other special set of circumstances go back a long way in history..Most have
proved unfounded, so that to enter discussion of
a topic of such ill repute must test the temerity
of any serious investigator. It was with misgivings therefore that I viewed the earliest
suggestion from the pilot survey that the body
build of parents might influence the sex ratio of
their children. I was encouraged to report the
results, however, because confirmatory findings
were unearthed when examining the sex ratio of
the children born to 337 mothers and 171 fathers
who had been seen and questioned specifically
on the sex of their children in course of a survey
of mental hospital patients. From the three sets
of data a tentative hypothesis was formulated
PHYSIQUE AND FAMILY STRUCTURE

that the mating of muscular men and muscular
women tends to produce an excess of boys, and
that fatter and less muscular men and women
tend to produce more girls.

Summarizing what has so far been said it will
be seen that there are four primary features in
family studies that demand further investigation.
We need:

(1) to establish the recognizable variety in human

matings;

(2) to establish the form and variety of children
born to particular kinds of matings;

(3) to examine the fertility of specific kinds of
marriage;

(4) to further confirm and, if possible, establish
the reasons for variations in the sex ratio
among children from particular matings.

All four appear to deal with fundamental facets
of human biology, and it was the imperative
need to gather further information on these
topics that led to the survey of some 900 university students’ families which I want to
describe now.

The Birmingham Survey
For some years past it has been customary,

Sons oF FATHERS 462 & 5*4/*
MARRED TO MOTHERS
4422 & 54/2

FIGURE 4.
Illustrating the distribution of sons
who considered both parents to be
“pyknic’’.

 

through the kindness of Dr. R. H. Bolton, to
include a phenotype assessment at the routine
health examination of all students entering
Birmingham University. It has proved possible
with two measurers and two clerks, working at
two minute stations, to measure the entire
University entry (740 men and 224 women last
year) during the course of one week. In 1958 a
third station was added at which each student
was invited to choose from a set of nine standard
three-view photographs that which most closely
resembled his father’s physique: then from a
second set of photographs he chose the one
most closely resembling his mother’s. The
following is a list of phenotype photographs
included in each series.

 

Fathers Mothers
No.1 462 432
No. 2 544 14 5 4 1}
No. 3 5 244 - 64241
No. 4 235 3 344 33
No. 5 335 5 343
No. 6 4 145 §24
No. 7 344 334
No. 8 143 54 233 5
No. 9 1 147 242 6
ON BiHAM SURVEY, 1958.

of "N\ &
oY “

 

et
puoowonrne

A SCHEMATIC TWO-DIMENSIONAL PROJECTION OF THE THEORETICAL SPATIAL RELATIONSHIPS AMONG THE KNOWN SOMATOTYPES

79
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

SONS OF FATHERS 344 MARRIED oN
TO MOTHERS “4 Y y
Ow
an
/’32
“a
m

Lo

 

oa

OMe ta ng

B'HAM SURVEY. 1958.

 

 

FIGURE 5,
Illustrating the distribution of sons
who chose Father type 344 and
Mother type 334 as nearest their
parents’ physique.

A SCHEMATIC TWO-DIMENSIONAL PROAICTION OF THE THEORETICAL SPATIAL RELATIONSHIPS AMONG THE KNOWN SOMATOTYPES

Now the question uppermost in your minds is
likely to be: ““What reliance can one place on
students’ estimates of their parents’ physique—
in fact, can one place any reliance on their
guesses, when admittedly a proportion approaching one-third will say they have never seen their
parents either nude or in a bathing costume?”
The range of physiques in the photographs was
limited deliberately to preclude too many extreme types, because it was felt that parents of
this kind would be comparatively rare, and
secondly that students would be less willing to
identify their parents with anything so extreme.
The range is still wide however, and it should be
remembered that it is not necessary to see someone undressed to decide whether they are linear
or obese. In undertaking the survey the basic
argument ran as follows: If students are completely unable to select correctly corresponding
photographs, their errors will randomise and
lead to non-significant results; they will not
confirm expectations based on the pilot family
survey. Significant confirmation of expectations
will only be obtained in so far as photographs

80

are correctly chosen, and similar relationships
are present. The results will yield at best a
minimal statement of any underlying truth.
That the survey proved worthwhile will become
clear from the results, but it is important to keep
in mind the likely limits of accuracy. No one will
deny the immense advantage of being able to
collect so large an amount of family data in so
short a time. The subsequent development of a
family photograph test for use with mental
hospital or other patients depends not only on
the information gathered about normal family
backgrounds, but also on the accuracy with
which photographs are chosen, and this must
therefore be considered next. It will be estimated
here by considering the results of homo- and
heterogeneous matings.

Homogeneous and Heterogeneous Matings

Figures 1, 2 and 3 illustrate the phenotype distributions of children born to homogeneous
matings where both parents were rated four or
more in a particular component. Table 1 shows
the proportion of children rated 4 or more in any
PHYSIQUE AND FAMILY STRUCTURE

component who spring from four different kinds
of marriage: where both parents were rated 4 or
more, where both parents had 34 or less, where
the father was 4 plus and mother 3} minus, and
lastly the converse. The last two may be described as heterogeneous matings, and in these
the proportion of 4+- children is, as one might
expect, close to that for the sample as a whole.
A higher proportion of children from homogeneous matings are like their parents. Similar
proportions of 4+- children were found in the
pilot and Birmingham surveys, 45:9 per cent
and 45-0 per cent respectively from heterogeneous matings. But the proportion from homogeneous matings which rose to 76:5 per cent in
the pilot survey, rose only to 59 per cent in the
Birmingham survey. In short, the errors in
photographic estimates appear to reduce the
efficiency of this technique by roughly a half
compared with when parents are measured as
well as the children. The true difference between
the results of homogeneous and heterogeneous
matings may, of course, be greater than this.
One must remember, too, that efficiency in this

SONS OF FATHERS 344 MARRIED
To MotHers 53°3

SHOWING 24 WHO ASSESSED o7
THEIR OWN PHYSIQUE

CORRECTLY.

FIGURE 6.
Illustrating the distribution of sons

kind of test may be greatly reduced by halfpoint errors in the measurements of students
themselves; errors of this degree are to be
expected in somatotyping, and the cut-off at
4++, 34— is near the centre of the scale where
subjects are most numerous.

Matings Illustrated

In many ways it is easier to illustrate genetic
influence on family likeness than to give a comprehensible yet concise enough account in
numerical terms. Figure 4 illustrates the families
of marriages between Fathers 462 and 5341} and
Mothers 4442 and 5414. Here we have a group
of marriages between what may be described as
pyknic men and pyknic women. Twenty-one of
the twenty-eight sons were rated 3} or less in
linearity. Only one was a pronounced ectomorph.

Figure 5: Father 344 x Mother 334. The sons
congregate closely near the parents.

Figure 6: Father 344 x Mother 5343. Here the
twenty-four sons are plotted who assessed their
own physique correctly. They congregate very
closely. To estimate one’s own physique is, of

fal ™

 

who chose Father type 344 and a oN “as e
Mother type 5343 as nearest their w= os ® .*
parents’ physique. Twelve who failed F a a e
to assess their own physique correctly i os sas ‘© oo
are omitted (see text.). Pr - _ +
il. fee
zo a i” se
aA
9a
aa ™
5, ms en
*“"oecene ma

A SCHEMATIC TWO-DIMENSIONAL PROJECTION OF THE THEORETICAL SPATIAL RELATIONSHIPS AMONG THE KNOWN SOMATOTYPES

8x
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ptONOOPiy,

 

 

Sons or Fatners 344 & 335 wns B'HAM_ SURVEY, 1958.
MARAIED TO MOTHERS OO / |

ia

Lo

 

FIGURE 7.
Illustrating the distribution of sons
who chose Fathers type 344 and 335
and Mother type 2426 as nearest their
parents’ physique.

A SOHEMATIC TWO.DMMINSIONAL PROJECTION OF THE THEORETICAL SPATIAL RELATIONSHIS AMONG THE KNOW SOMATOTYDES

course, a different exercise from telling other
people’s build, but the remaining twelve sons
who were poor judges of themselves may have
been less good judges of their parents too, for
their distribution was rather more scattered.

Figure 7: Fathers 344 and 335 x Mother 2426.
This represents two sets of marriages between
men and women of linear build. Most of the
sons are linear too, but there is some drift in the
distribution towards fat. The exact reason for
this is not clear, but it may be that some sons
credited their mothers with greater slenderness
than they really possessed.

Figure 8: Father 462 x Mother 2426. Here we
have the distribution of sons from matings of
almost polar opposite builds. It is a smallish
sample but it is notable that the sons are
distributed apparently evenly along a line
between father and mother. They do not
congregate, as the general distribution does,
near the centre of the chart, half-way between
the parents. If in time a larger sample can be
gathered, it may become possible to decide
between the natural distribution that would
characterize multifactorial inheritance, and the
more even distribution suggesting segregation
of characteristics belong to only a few genes.

I hope I have said enough to convince you of
genetic influence on body type, and also that in

82

somatotyping we have a useful instrument for
investigating the inheritance of body shape.

Other Aspects—Sex Ratio in Students’ Families
Now I want to turn to other aspects of the

survey. You will realize from the fact that two

sets of nine photographs were employed that the
possible number of different matings in this
experimental design totals eighty-one. The
variety of matings reported was actually sixtysix. The total number of sons whose parents
were alive and sufficiently well known to identify
was 605.* Thus the size of samples of individual
matings was usually small—too small, for
instance, to study the sex ratio of their children
in a satisfactory way. But it is possible to look
at the proportion of brothers and sisters of
students who claimed that their fathers had one
particular build (see Table 2). Bearing in mind
the hypothesis mentioned earlier that more
muscular fathers tend to have more sons, and
fatter men more daughters, the fathers were

* Those whose parent’s likeness lay between two photo
' graphs have been excluded from the analysis.
PHYSIQUE AND FAMILY STRUCTURE

grouped in this way. A significant excess of sons
was found for more muscular fathers as anticipated, and more daughters were found in the
families of fatter men. The sex ratios encountered
range from seventy-six for the children of fatter
men, to 123 for those of the more muscular.
The difference reaches the 2 per cent level of
significance. In the pilot family study sex ratios
showed greater variation, ranging from 62
to 181, but we have already seen how much less
efficient students’ photographic estimates may be
than actual measurement.

The implications of these admittedly surprising
findings are considerable, for if we assume that
the numbers of potentially male and female
sperm are equal, the disparities in sex ratio must
arise subsequently, either before fertilization, or
later by means possibly of sex-linked lethal genes,
by failure at implantation or through miscarriage. Should we speculate that male determining
sperm from muscular men are more active and
therefore reach their target first? Their heads
are smaller than the female kind, and even a
short head would count, without a photo finish.

SONS OF FATHERS 462 MARRIED = t80MOnry,
mH
TO MOTHERS 2226.

FIGURE 8.
Illustrating the distribution of sons
who chose Father type 462 and
Mother type 2}26 as nearest their
parents’ physique.

 

Such a notion fits the facts where there is an
excess of boys, but where there is an excess of
girls it would not, and it would be necessary then
to postulate some perhaps unlikely quality in the
vaginal medium to confer aquatic superiority on
the larger headed x sperm. If sex-linked lethal
genes are postulated, a similar double argument
with certain genes lethal to girls, and others
lethal to boys, would need to be advanced. On
the whole it seems more likely that some differential failure in implantation, or differential in
miscarriage rate, must be sought as explanation.
These suggestions are not, of course, incompatible with the usual slightly masculine sex
ratio found for the sample as a whole.

Evidence from the Somatotype Distribution

We know there are limits to muscularity for
women, and also fewer endomorphic men: this
lack of balance in somatotype distribution could
be due, in part, to sex hormonal differences in
growth, but I see no reason to suppose it must
be due to this alone. If more girls are lost from
matings between muscular parents, we should be

4oN

B'HAM SuRVEY, 1958.

316

ono

«
acneene

 

yoo

& SCHEMATIC TWO-DIMENSIONAL PROJECTION OF THE THEORETICAL SPATIAL RELATIONSHIPS AMONG THE KNOWN SOMATOTYPES

83
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

yesOnORDy, ‘
THe Ten COMMONEST MATINGS. SON: B'HAM

& SCHEMATIC

 

left with an excess of boys in this area of the
somatochart. If potentially weak or mesopenic
sons of mesopenic parents do not survive in
adequate numbers, then an excess of endomorphic girls in this area would be the consequence. This is the situation as we know it.

At present there is no satisfactory data on
abortion rates from various matings, nor of the
sex ratio of abortuses. The topic as a whole is
linked to rates of fertility, but where planned
parenthood predominates, very close links are
unlikely if parents stop once they have achieved
their wishes. In such a situation, any differences
found may be tied more closely to temperamental
wishes than to fertility itself. We can examine
variations in family size in a moment, but first
let us look at certain interesting features in the
frequency of different matings.

Common Matings

Figure 9 shows the ten commonest matings
found. Their numerical size ranges from thirtysix to seventeen, and it is not surprising to find

84

 

RVEY, 1958.

FIGURE 9.
Illustrating the ten commonest
matings. (For met description see
text.

PRORCTHION OF THE THEORETICAL SPATIAL RELATIONSHIPS AMONG THE KNOV@N SOMATOTYPES

that the central photograph in the mothers’
series (type 5343, which was chosen altogether
184 times) figures in five of the ten commonest
unions. Similarly, the mid-range photograph for
fathers, type 344, appears in four of the com
monest marriages, one of which with mother

5343 has already been mentioned. The last three
common marriages were with mother type
34434, though I suspect 4344 may be nearer the
real centre of her distribution. If my suspicions
are correct, there is only one common mating in
which the mother is strongly dominant to her
husband in the second component, muscularity:
this is mother 5333 x father 4145, and its
frequency here may be related to the fact that
we are dealing with a university sample. It is
much commoner, as one might expect, for
husbands to be dominant in muscularity.
Certain parents are conspicuous by their absence
from the commonest matings: they include
peripheral types such as fathers 54414, 524,
1147, and 1435, and mothers 64241 (chosen by
only two men out of the total of 605 students),
5414, 4442, 524 and 2335. Their infrequent
PHYSIQUE AND FAMILY STRUCTURE

appearance is mainly due to the fact that they
are less common in the population.

Parental ‘‘Incompatibility’’

Now by way of contrast, I want to show you the
ten matings where “incompatibility” was commonest. But let me hasten to explain what is
meant by incompatibility in this context.
Temperamentalcompatibility, ormorecommonly
incompatibility, is commonly mentioned in
connection with the breakdown of marriage,
and if temperament is reflected in physique this
would be an interesting topic for investigation
in this way. Here it has a rather different meaning. Each student was invited confidentially,
anonymously and voluntarily to enter whether
in his view his parents got on together ‘“‘very
well”, “fairly well” or “not so well”. The
proportion answering “‘not so well” was small.
The overall proportion answering “fairly well”
was 22 per cent, and the frequency for different
matings was separately calculated. In the group
of ten plotted here (see Fig. 10) as “most
frequently incompatible’, the proportion was

THe TEN MATINGS MOST
FREQUENTLY INCOMPATIBLE, So
(RELATIONSHIP “Fain ONLY’
$6 PER CENT). ©” /% m
an

FIGURE 10.
Represents the ten kinds of marriage
where it was most often stated that
the parents got on together only
“Fairly Well’’.

56 per cent. Among these marriages it is interesting to note that there are eight in whom the
mother is equal or dominant in muscularity.
There was one (father 53414 x mother 334) in
whom the usual direction of the marital axis was
almost completely reversed, and lastly there is
the mating of father 335 x mother 2426 which
represents the union of two strongly dominant
and, I imagine, extra-sensitive ectomorphs.
None of these less compatible matings appears
among the ten commonest mentioned above. I
bring them in here to draw attention both to the
important temperamental influences closely
bound up with physical attributes, and because
of the hold temperament has on our everyday
lives.

Family Size

Let us return now to the study of family size.
The range in family size among eight mothers of
different build was from mother type 34434 with
2:1 children per family up to mother type 5414

with 2-6 children, and mother type 524 with
average family size of 2-8. This variation, if we

B'HAM SURVEY, 1958.

  
 
 
 

 

A SCHBMATIC FWO-GIMENGIONAL PROMCTION OF THE THEORETICAL SPATIAL RELATIONSHIPS AMONG FE KNOWN SOMATOTYSES

4~—ER

85
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

‘THe IO MATINGS COMMONER
THAN EXPECTATION.

    
 
  
 

25 PER CENT OF THE

FULL SAMPLE Cn -6 “Te

AND

  

. |
*"heag ou “ss
ia tMOOMOR Dag :
G'R. © COMPARATIVE RATIO.

3
ALSO FATHER 1°35 MOTHER 54]
4125

  

B'HAM SURVEY, 1958.

 

   

5323

FIGURE 11.
Shows the ten kinds of marriage that
were commoner than expectation in
this university sample.

& SCHEMATIC TWO-DIMENSIONAL PROJECTION OF THE THEORETICAL SPATIAL RELATIONSHIPS AMONG THE KNOWN SOMATOTYDES

employ a chi squared test with 7 degrees of
freedom (omitting the small sample of mother
64241) is not significant (y 3 = 4-56). However,
if instead of pooling the records from all women,
we examine the children born to women of one
particular kind of physique, say 5343, who
marry men of varying build, not only is the range
of average family size greater—from 1-6 to 3-4
depending on the father—but the results tell a
significant story in spite of the total sample
reduction from 605 to 184. The eight kinds of
husband, given 7 degrees of statistical freedom,
give x 7 = 8-9 which yields a greater probability of significance, although it still does not
quite reach the 5 per cent level. Regrouping
adjacent husbands, however, in three groups,
fat-linear (Lf), muscular-linear (Lm) and nonlinear gives x 3 = 6°1 which is significant at 5
per cent: or alternatively, comparing fathers of
type 4145 with the rest shows that when a
woman of type 5343 marries a man of this build
her chance of having a large family is significantly smaller.

86

Statistical Dilemma

This set of figures illustrates the kind of dilemma
into which the current fashionable use of
statistics may land us. Valuable as statistical
methods are, indispensable indeed when rightly
applied, their blind application to larger and
larger samples of pooled data is capable of
erasing important evidence of individual happenings. When a man and woman marry and a child
is born in their likeness, orderly biochemical
events of unparalleled, if not miraculous, complexity occur under the name of growth. It is
well nigh impossible to overrate the biological
significance of this, whatever you think of the
social significance of the birth of a baby. Yet no
valid statistical argument can be based on one
case. We have seen, too, how the sex ratio of
children may be close to unity for the population,
but once the critical way to segregate matings
has been spotted, the overall ratio splits into two
significant and opposing tendencies. Similar
situations constantly recur in population studies,
where populations maintain their distribution in
size and shape in self-adjusting equilibrium.
PHYSIQUE AND FAMILY STRUCTURE

Centrifugal movement with regard to the distribution in one generation reduces the chances of
finding a more peripheral mate and thereby
increases the probability of centripetal movement
in the next generation. By pooling alternate
generations, individual genetic action is obscured
in a semblance of stability.

Eugenics and University Selection

I indicated at the outset that for eugenics to
become more positive than negative, greater
knowledge is needed of what ordinarily happens
when A marries B. The conscious avoidance of
uncommon defects is by nature rare. Let us
assume, however naively, for purposes of
argument that eugenists would like to see large
families of intelligent children capable of
profiting by a university education. On this
assumption, let us examine what kinds of
mafriage are commoner than expectation in
families sending their children to university.
Knowing the individual numbers of paternal
and maternal photographs chosen by the
students, it is possible to calculate the expected
proportions for each particular type of marriage.
Since the actual numbers are known too, it is a
simple matter to identify those marriages which
are commoner than expectation among students’
parents. Any consistent bias in students’ photographic estimates is here excluded because
expectation is based on the actual numbers of
photographs chosen.

 

FIGURE 12.

Illustrates graphically the relationship
between university entry and family
sizein students of particular physique.

Mothers of Academic Families

The results are extremely interesting and they are
illustrated in Figure 11 where you may see eight
of the ten matings which appeared most often
compared with expectation. They concern 151
of the total of 605 sons. There is a remarkable
tendency for mothers to be linear, and also much
more linear than their husbands. If you were to
assume that the median woman 5343 is likely
to make the best mother, the one most fit for
motherhood on the grounds that such women
have survived most often in the population, then
you would have to assume that linear mothers of
university students, although they may be
among the best, are less often so. Yet linear
mothers have, it seems, a special contribution to
make, in this case to academicity. Any departure
from the population mean survives, if it does,
presumably because of some intrinsic merit, but
in so doing it is usually accompanied by diminished fertility, otherwise the balance of the
population would be disturbed. So let us next
examine the size of families of students of
different body build, and the proportion of each
build in the university population.
Somatotype—Family Size—University Entry
This we can do most easily in graphic form (see
Figure 12). On the vertical axis is the proportion
of families with three or more children, on the
horizontal axis the proportion of students which
each of the six main physique sectors contributes,

3 eo 1,23 etetents..

ie t& 1e 2~
Fer cent te University from each seetar.

> - & & 10> 1%

87
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to the university population. (In this case independent data is taken from the student entries in
1955 and 1956 combined.) In the bottom lefthand quadrant you find central Fl phenotypes
with small families contributing relatively few
university students. Top left you find MI students,
more especially peripheral ones, members of
large families sending but few to the university.
Bottom right we find the phenotypes most often
arriving at university. Both phenotype groups
are linear, but the Lf types have notably few
brothers and sisters. Lastly, in the top right
quadrant we find central Ml and Mf physiques,
the only groups from larger than average
families who in addition reach the university
more often than you might expect. Now, I do
not deny that these constitutional findings are in
part the result of environmental conditions,
indeed they are recognisably the result of the
current machinery of academic selection by
successive examination hurdles at the age of
eleven and later. This machinery picks out
conscientious linear children by a process that I
have described in more detail elsewhere.
(Behaviour and Physique, p. 53 et seq.) But there
are genetic factors too, as the greater frequency
of linear mothers indicates, as well as the effect
of parents’ build on that of their children. It is
evident that taking all in all something like a
negative correlation exists between family size
and academic aptitude, quite apart from the fact
that interruptions in a large family may later on
increase the difficulties of study, and the two
influences combined may lead to poorer intellectual performance. Successful selection for
both family size and intelligence could be achieved
by concentrating on central muscular boys, the
all-rounders good at games and work, but it is
said to take all types to make a world, and it
should be clear by now that concentration in one
field commonly leads to dangers, diminished
family size or other risks, some of them doubtless
unforeseen. Population studies are needed not
only for their own sake, or to expose the weakness of present society; they are needed to
indicate where present strength lies and future

88

understanding will be found. If anyone should
feel dismay at these trends, or think that his
genes have sinned against him more than he
deserves, then he or she should remember that
he or she may be an exceptional person with
merits in some other direction.

TABLE 1
FAMILY STUDIES
Pilot Birmingham
Family Survey| 1958 Survey
Children Children

Like Unlike| Like Unlike

Homogeneous matings
Father4+ x Mother4+ | 22 8
Father34— x Mother3$—| 27 7

Subtotal like parents 49 15
Proportion like parents 76°5 per cent

208
309 181

$17 359
59-0 per cent

178

Heterogeneous matings
Like Father 4+- 15 25
Like Mother 4+ 19 15

Subtotal like 34 40
Proportion like 45-9 per cent

The calculations were made for each component

separately and then pooled to obtain an overall

measure of the difference between the two
classes of mating.

277 326

146 190

423 516
45-0 per cent

 

TABLE 2

SEX RATIOS OF BROTHERS AND SISTERS
OF STUDENTS

Birmingham Survey, 1958
Brothers

Men

Sisters

Fathers 462
more 2353
muscular 333

1435
Fathers
more fat 54414
than 5244
muscular 4145

All Fathers

 

More muscular vy fatter fathers
x? = 7:817** Sig. = 2:5 per cent level
