SIR JULIAN HUXLEY, M.A. D.Sc., F.R.S.

The Impending Crisis"

this audience that this conference has two

functions—one to discuss the population
crisis and the other, to honour Margaret Sanger.
Margaret Sanger, as you all know, is a great
woman, whose work has blossomed out through
the decades since she initiated it—first of all, her
work for birth-control in the interest of individual
compassion and justice, then her work for
family planning, which soon branched out to
become a social movement of great importance,
and took root in other lands, and finally is today being transformed to a world-wide movement concerned with population the world over.

As regards the Impending Crisis of Population,
your Chairman has reminded you that I am a
biologist; accordingly I shall try to take the
broad view of an evolutionary biologist, who
must try to look at things in the light of the
enduring process of evolution of which we all
form a part. Seen in this light, the population
crisis is part of a very critical period in the history
of the world.

Thanks to the new vision which we have
attained through the knowledge explosion
which has gone on parallel with the population
explosion in the last half-century, we have a new
vision of our destiny. To-day evolution in the
person of man is becoming conscious of itself.

I do not want to amplify this at great length.
I would remind you, however, that all reality is,
in a perfectly genuine sense, evolution; that
biological evolution on this planet has been going
on for nearly 3,000 million years, and that
in the course of that period life has advanced
(not only increased in variety, but advanced in
organization) so that its highest forms, instead
of being submicroscopic, tiny, pre-amoebic

| ‘IRST OF ALL I want to begin by reminding

 

* A speech at the Conference on the World Population
Crisis, held in conjunction with the World Tribute to
Margaret Sanger on May 11th and 12th, 1961 in New
York City. The occasion was sponsored by the World
Population Emergency Campaign, and Sir Julian
Huxley was Chairman of the International Committee of
Sponsors for the World Tribute.

units, grew larger and more powerful, and after
hundreds of millions of years, vertebrates, then
land vertebrates, and eventually the final dominant type, now spreading over the world—man.

And man is now, whether he likes it or not,
and indeed whether he knows it or not (but
it is important that he is beginning to know it),
the sole agent for the future of the whole
evolutionary process on this earth. He is responsible for the future of this planet.

Now to come back to the present crisis. I
would describe the present crisis as one in which
quantity is threatening quality, and also one in
which the present is threatening the future.
Before we make up our minds what we ought to
do in the present crisis—it is no good just getting
into a flap and saying that we ought to do something—we must try to find what our ultimate
aim is as agent or leader of evolution on this
earth.

Surely, it isn’t just power. Surely it isn’t just
to eat, drink, and be merry, and say, “ Well,
what’s posterity done for us? To hell with
posterity!” It isn’t just mere quantity of possessions or mere quantity of people. Nor is it
only preparation for some rather shadowy afterlife. I would assert that it must be to hold in
trust, to conserve and to cultivate the resources
of the earth and the resources of our own nature.
And so our aim should be to increase the richness of life and enhance its quality.

‘Fulfilment ” is probably the embracing word:
more fulfilment and less frustration for more
human beings. We want more varied and fuller
achievement in human societies, as against
drabness and shrinkage. We want more variety
as against monotony. We want more enjoyment
and less suffering. We want more beauty and
less ugliness. We want more adventure and
disciplined freedom, as against routine and
slavishness. We want more knowledge, more
interest, more wonder, as against ignorance and
apathy.

We want more sense of participation in some
135

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1961, 53, 3.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

thing enduring and worthwhile, some embracing
project, as against a competitive rat-race, whether
with the Russians or our neighbours on the next
street. In the most general terms, we want more
transcendence of self in the fruitful development
of personality; and we want more human dignity
not only as against human degradation, but as
against more self-imprisonment in the human
ego or mere escapism.

If we look at the present scene in the light of
some such vision as this, what do we see? I
might begin by telling a little of what I saw in
Africa last year. I was sent there to report to
UNESCO on the conservation of wildlife and
natural habitats. And in the wonderful Queen
Elizabeth National Park in Uganda the animals
had been so well preserved that the hippos were
over-multiplying and had trampled down the
margins of the lakes and the channels; they had
eaten up all the surplus food, and in fact were
destroying their own habitat. The point I want
to make is that man is now busy destroying his
own habitat.

As Professor Harrison Brown will tell us,
man has been over-exploiting the natural
resources of this planet and has been ruining its
soils and doing all sorts of other unpleasant
things to it. He has wasted enormous amounts of
resources which he ought to have conserved. He
has cut down the forests and caused floods and
erosion. As Mr. Fairfield Osborn put it in the
title of his book, he has plundered our planet.
(Can we expect another book from him, with
the title Our Blundered Planet?) And so we are
well on the way to ruining our own material
habitat.

The further point I want to make is that we are
beginning to ruin our own spiritual and mental
habitat also. Not content with destroying or
squandering our resources of material things,
we are beginning to destroy the resources of true
enjoyment—spiritual, aesthetic, intellectual,
emotional. We are spreading great masses of
human habitation over the face of the land,
neither cities nor suburbs nor towns nor villages,
just a vast mass of urban sprawl or subtopia.
And to escape from this, people are spilling out
farther and farther into the wilder parts and so
destroying them. And we are making our cities
so big as to be monstrous. They are growing to

136

such a size that they are becoming impossible
to live in. Just as there is a maximum possible
size for an efficient land animal—you can’t have
a land animal more than about twice as large as
an elephant—so there is a maximum possible
efficient size for a city. London, New York, and
Tokyo have already got beyond that size.

Mr. Chagla has said that civilization has
already imposed a grievous burden on the
future. I entirely agree. We have to try to lighten
that burden and in any case to prevent its getting
heavier. To take another metaphor, man is
losing his claim to be the lord of creation, and is
in danger of becoming the cancer of the whole
planet. Not a very nice prospect, but a perfectly
genuine one. In the message which the Australian
scientists sent to this conference, they made a
profound and depressing remark that unless we
took some care, the peoples of all countries all
over the world would soon become underprivileged.

To look at the crisis more specifically, first of
all there are nearly 3,000 million people on
earth. Whatever happens, there will be about
6,000 million people by the end of the century,
well within the lifetime of many of our children
already living. Even at the present moment,
over half the world’s population are under-fed,
under-healthy, under-housed, under-wealthy,
under-educated and in general under-privileged.
There is an immense gap between the “haves”
and the “have-nots,” the privileged and the
under-privileged; and the gap is widening instead
of narrowing.

The world’s present rate of population-increase
is something phenomenal. It is about 50 million
a year, and increasing every year both for simply
arithmetical reasons and because the compound
interest rate of increase is still itself increasing.
That means the equivalent of one good-sized
town every twenty-four hours—a hundred and
forty thousand odd. If you like to think of it in
terms of minutes, it is the equivalent of ten baseball teams complete with coach every minute.
And yet there are people who have so little
quantitative sense that they talk of getting rid of
our surplus population by sending them off to
other planets!

Then there is the other great myth of the present day, that this crisis can be solved by
THE IMPENDING CRISIS

Science—Science with a capital S—a sort of
mystical magician. “Science will find a way.”
Well, it’s not finding its way very well at the
moment; Japan, for instance, has done a wonderful job in bringing its population rate of increase
down, but it is still increasing at nearly 1 per
cent per annum and is already bursting at the
seams. Science is not finding a way to make our
traffic problems in big cities much easier. And it
is completely unable to cope with the appalling
problems of health and housing in great overlarge cities in under-privileged countries, such as
Calcutta.

Then there is the point that our Chairman
made with reference to what Mr. Eugene Black
has recently said—the point that science cannot
find a way of successfully industrializing underdeveloped countries if their birth-rate is too
high. That is one of the important points that
has emerged from careful economic studies.
In order to industrialize an under-developed
country, you need a great deal of capital and
a great deal of human skill and expertize. If you
have too many human beings to feed, house,
educate and service, that capital and skill will be
used up in looking after the growing generation,
and you won’t be able to industralize.

This comes out very clearly in the study of
possible industrialization in India by Professors
Coale and Hoover in which they pointed out that
unless India got its birth-rate down by about
50 per cent in the next thirty-five years or forty
years, it would never be able to break through
to a_ successful, advanced, industrialized
economy.

The same sort of thing applies even to
developed countries. You can’t develop your
educational system adequately if too many
children are coming along. I noticed in the paper
that the classroom deficit in the United States
had not been reduced but had actually increased in the last year of the last administration.
I was once Director-General of UNESCO, and
there we are all the time struggling to keep up
with the enormous deficiencies of educational
systems all over the world: how can we do this
when increasing floods of new children are
coming along all the time?

One thing that science could do would be to

discover better methods of birth-control. That
indeed is the key to the whole matter. Physiological and medical science has already brought
about what we may call “‘death-control,” with
the result that population is exploding; but it
has not done the necessary converse of this—
discovering what to do about birth-control. I
would say categorically that the control of
population by means of birth-control applied on
a large scale, is a prerequisite for anything that
you can call progress and advance in human
evolution, even in the immediate future.

The time has now come to think seriously
about population policy. We want every country
to have a population policy, just as it has an
economic policy or a foreign policy. We want
the United Nations to have a population policy.
We want all the international agencies of the
U.N. to have a population policy.

When I say a population policy, I don’t
mean that anybody is going to tell every woman
how many children she may have, any more than
a country which has an economic policy will
say how much money an individual businessman
is going to make and exactly how he should do
it. It means that you recognize population as a
major problem of national life, that you have a
general aim in regard to it, and that you try
to devise methods for realizing this aim. And if
you have an international population policy,
again it doesn’t mean dictating to backward
countries or anything of that sort; it means not
depriving them of the right (which I should
assert is a fundamental human right) to scientific
information on birth-control and it means help
in regulating and controlling their increase and
planning their families.

It was said that there are three countries which
already have a population policy. Actually there
are at least six: India, Pakistan, Japan, Singapore, Barbados and Puerto Rico. They have population policies, and in some cases they have been
reasonably successful. It is most important that
these countries should be given every aid in
pursuing these policies.

When it comes to United Nations agencies,
one of the great scandals of the present century
is that owing to pressure, mainly from Roman
Catholic countries, the World Health Organization has not been allowed even to consider the

137
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

effects of population density on health. It is
essential and urgent that this should be reversed.

-There is great frustration in the minds of
medical men all over the world, especially those
interested in international affairs, who, at the
cost of much devoted labour, have succeeded in
giving people information on how to control or
avoid disease. Malaria in Ceylon is a striking
example. As a result of all this wonderful scientific effort and goodwill, population has exploded,
and new diseases, new frustrations, new miseries
are arising. Meanwhile medical men are not
allowed to try to cope with these new troubles on
an international scale—and indeed sometimes
not even on a national scale. I think I am correct
in saying that even in this advanced and civilized
country there are two States in which the giving
of birth-control information, even on medical
grounds, is illegal.

It is essential that this whole question of
population policy should be raised in the United
Nations itself. The U.N. Assembly should be a
forum for airing this major problem of our times.
It is already a forum for airing other major
problems—disarmament, atomic warfare, and
so on. We must not, out of deference to religious
or national or political prejudice, put our heads
in the sand or pretend that the problem does not
exist. We must get it discussed in the most public
way in the world’s greatest forums.

I do not want to stand between you and the

138

remaining speakers. I would simply like to go
back to where I started and repeat that we must
look at the whole question of population increase not merely as an immediate problem to
be dealt with ad hoc. We must look at it in the
light of the new vision of human destiny which
human science and learning has revealed to us.
We must look at it in the light of the glorious
possibilities that are still latent in man, not
merely in the light of the obvious fact that the
world could be made a little better than it is.
We must also look at it in the light of the appalling possibilities for evil and misery that still
remain in evolving human life.

This vision of the possibilities of wonder and
more fruitful fulfilment on the one hand as
against frustration and increasing misery and
regimentation on the other is the twentieth
century equivalent of the traditional Christian
view of salvation as against damnation. I would
indeed say that this new point of view that we
are reaching, the vision of evolutionary humanism, is essentially a religious one, and that we
can and should devote ourselves with truly
religious devotion to the cause of ensuring
greater fulfilment for the human race in its future
destiny. And this involves a furious and concerted attack on the problem of population; for
the control of population is, I am quite certain,
a prerequisite for any radical improvement in
the human lot.
