BIOLOGICAL HAZARDS of NUCLEAR FISSION"*

‘By J. EF. LOUTIT, D.M., ER.CP.
Medical Research Council Radiobiological Research Unit, A. E. R. E., Harwell

R. President, Ladies and Gentlemen,
M I have already made my excuses to the

secretary in the preliminary negotiations that went on between us, but I feel that
I must make some further excuses to you.
I can in no sense be regarded as an authority
on eugenics, still less on genetics, but in
virtue of a practice in experimental radiobiology one comes to know a little about
the subjects of one’s colleagues. Within the
Radiobiological Research Unit we have
geneticists of various sorts who are undertaking the present research work in this field.

Principles of Nuclear Fission

The title I am speaking to is “‘ The Biological Hazards of Nuclear Fission,’ and,
if J may, I shall write in one line the principles of nuclear fission.

25TJ +1 n—> 9A + 148 + 21n
If one has a fissile atom like uranium,
235[), and bombards it with a neutron, one
gets fission of the uranium atom. This
produces daughter-products, which can be
called A and B, and more neutrons than
were put into the reaction. One starts with
236 mass units on one side and ends up with
236 on the other side. The daughterelements are born with mass numbers of
about go and about 140, and the excess of
neutrons produced by the reaction permits
continuation of the process as a chain
reaction.

The daughter-elements, fission-products,
are unstable and highly radio-active. In
virtue of their radio-activity they decay to
different elements of the same mass number,
emitting beta particles and _ frequently
gamma rays as well, and this continues
until stable elements are ultimately formed.
Therefore whole chains of radio-active atoms

* A paper read at a Members’ Meeting of the Eugenics

Society on October 19th, 1955.

are formed as a result of this fission-process,
and it is mainly from these radio-active fissionproducts that the hazards of the process,
from the biological point of view, arise.

   

= Sa

      
     
  

FISSION YIELO IN PERCENT
6
i

Hin oe a
HAG

———— ESSER
Se eee eee eee ee
ee eye lille me ce op da Nie Pe eigen

yt
i
0? it
70 $0 90 09 no "0 190 0
MASS NUMBER

Figure 1.—Yield of fission products from U5 as a
function of mass number. [From J. Amer. Chem. Soc.,
1946. 68, 2437.]*

From Figure 1 it can be seen that the massnumbers, 90 and 144, of the fission-products
A and B are not constant. Plotted vertically
are the percentages of the atoms formed
against horizontally their mass-numbers.
The graph is bi-modal with peaks at massnumbers between go and 100 and around
140. The fission-products, therefore, in
greatest atomic abundance are in that part
of the periodic table where you may have
elements with mass-numbers of 100 or so
and 140 or so.

Ionizing Radiation

This process of fission is something relatively new in our history. It extends back,
as you know, for a matter of ten years or
slightly longer; but we have had experience >

141

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October, 1956. 48, 3.
142

with radio activity and with ionizing radiation, alpha and beta particles and gamma
rays, for the last sixty years. Thus both
physically and biologically we have an
accumulated experience of this form of
physical energy. We know, first of all from
accidents, that these radiations are highly
damaging to persons operating high-energy
machines or to those handling radio-active
substances. The early physicists and the
early radiologists came to suffer themselves
from the tools they were using. Further‘more, even without accidents, wé have
learnt that chronically excessive exposure to
radiation leads to disease. This has been
seen in man clinically and in animals in the
experimental laboratory. The lesions that
historically were the first to be detected
were superficial. In those early days of
X-ray machines, the energies of the rays
produced were very much lower than is
the rule now. The radiations were thus very
much less penetrating than those of modern
machines, whose X-radiations are comparable
physically and in their biological action with

y-rays. |

Effects of Radiation on the Individual

The early workers using soft X-rays
suffered mainly with damage to the hands.
Heavy overdosage with X-rays causes burns
which in appearance are quite similar to the
ordinary thermal burns with which we are
all familiar. The great difference between
radiation-burns and thermal burns is that
the radiation-burn takes longer to manifest
itself—not a matter of minutes as in the case
of thermal burns, but frequently a matter
of days before it shows up as a redness or a
blister — and equally it is slower to heal.
The result of the healing is seldom as good
clinically as the result of the healing of a
thermal burn.

In addition to. the acute effect, one can
also get from continued over-exposure to
radiation of this sort a chronic form of
dermatitis, and Figure 2 shows the hands
characteristic of the radiological worker of
some forty to fifty years ago. This man was
a radio chemist and his first essay into radium

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

chemistry was about 1905. These were his
hands in 1954, so he still manifests the
damage which is characteristic, but he has
fortunately managed to avoid losing all his
fingers, as many radiologists have done.

The characteristic lesion is a thinning or
atrophy of the skin, with patchy thickening

 

 

Figure 2, a and b.—Hands characteristic of the radiological worker fifty years ago.

and warty proliferation, and deformation
of the nail due to malnutrition of the nailbed. Later the atrophic areas may crack and
give trouble in healing. The warty processes
may go on from simple warts to malignant
cancers of the skin. This man has suffered
in this way and various digits or parts of
digits have had to be amputed.

This is the manifestation, acute and
chronic, of the superficial damage to the
skin, but when one is working with penetrating radiation like gamma rays one finds
not only are the hands involved, because
they are closer to the source, but there is an
effect on the deeper tissues and on the body
as a whole. This manifests itself chiefly in
certain tissues which are more radio sensitive
than the rest of the body. Notable amongst
these is the bone marrow, which is the site of
manufacture of the red blood corpuscles and
white blood-cells. Thus with over-exposure
~. . BIOLOGICAL HAZARDS OF NUCLEAR FISSION

 
   

<*
Boek <n ®
ta IS SAE i a

*

 

Dae eE
Ses

”

' * i :
Ri:

es
te

wz

ee
;

Figure 3.—Section of normal bone marrow.

to hard radiation, both acute and chronic,
severe damage to the bone marrow may
occur, resulting in atrophy of this tissue
also.

Figure 3 is a histological section of reasonably normal bone marrow, and the dark
spots are the nuclei of the cells of an active
marrow producing both red and white
elements for the peripheral blood, but
Figure 4 shows the atrophy of marrow as a
result of radiation. The active cellular
material is reduced to a few small strands
and the vast bulk ‘of the marrow-space is
filled with extravasated blood.

Finally, if one avoids both the acute and
sub-acute effects of damage to the marrow
one is liable, as with the hands, to get a
malignant transformation of the bloodforming tissue, the condition of leukaemia.

Figure 5 shows the appearance of the
peripheral blood in a case of leukaemia.
There are far more white cells (leukocytes)
in proportion to red corpuscles than there

 

Figure 4.~-—-Atrophy of marrow due to radiation.

should be and most of the leukocytes are of
atypical malignant form.

I have noted that radium workers such
as chemists were exposed to the gamma
rays emitted by the radium and could be
affected by the radiations penetrating from
without, but before the hazards were properly appreciated these men were also subject
to the risk of getting the radium inside them
either by inhalation or ingestion. Radium
being an element like calcium is absorbed
from the lungs and the intestine and is then
deposited in bone. : |

Most of our knowledge concerning internal
contamination of the body with radio-active
materials is derived from the medical
history of the luminous dial painting industry
in America. It was the practice there of the
operatives, who used this luminous paint
made of radium salt and zinc sulphide, to
use a paint brush and, like children, they
pointed the paint brush with their lips.
Therefore, as the paint in this case contained
144

 

Figure 5.—-Peripheral blood in a case of leukemia.

radium sulphate, they got radium on their
lips and inevitably swallowed some. Consequently a few years after the beginning
of this industry in the United States there
was a series of deaths amongst the present
and past radium dial painters. |

Figure 6 shows the sort of things that
happened when radium was deposited in
the bones. It caused irradiation of the bone
marrow, so that the most severely affected
cases died with aplastic anemia. The less
severely affected cases suffered with bone
disease, which resulted in spontaneous fracture of the bones. Here you see a thigh bone
in which there is an old spontaneous fracture
with malunion, and a recent fracture.

As in the case of the hands, so with the
bones also, this chronic form of disease is
likely to lead on to cancer of the bone.
Figure 7, taken from an American publication, shows a case of one of these dial painters
with a malignant growth of the jaw. This
person was assayed physically and found to
contain only 14 micrograms of radium, so
that even minute amounts, by ordinary
chemical standards, of radioactive substances
like radium can cause a cancer.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW —

In 1942 came the practical demonstration
of the efficacy of the fission process for
nuclear reactors, and within a few years for
atomic weapons. In the case of reactors, the
knowledge of the hazards from the luminising industry and from industrial and medical

 

Figure 6.—R6ntgenogram of right femur showing
two pathologic fractures, one united and the other with
non-union. [From Martland, H. S. Amer. J. Cancer,

1931. 15, 2435.]*

radiology was put to good use, and as far
as we are aware there have been no overexposures in routine ,reactor operations
either in the United States or in this country.
We know, however, from occasional accidents arising in the use of experimental

-assemblies and from the effects of the

atomic weapons in Hiroshima and Nagasaki
that fission, uncontrolled from the point of
view of health and safety, can cause overexposure to radiation.

The medical history of the populations of
Hiroshima and Nagasaki has now been fully
recorded both by the Japanese themselves
BIOLOGICAL HAZARDS

“and by the'Americans. As with radiotherapy, - In which large doses of radiation are given to
various parts of the body as treatment, we
have: initially following massive doses a
state we call the radiation syndrome. If we
exclude colossal doses which can result in
sudden death, radiation with doses of
several hundred units (réntgens) leads within
a few hours to “ radiation sickness’ with
nausea and vomiting. If the doses are not

 

Figure 7. Chronic radium poisoning in a person
containing only 1°5 micrograms of radium. (Evans,
R:D. J. Indust. Hyg. 1943. 25, 23.]*

too large that initial stage subsides, but
several weeks later the effects on the bone
marrow and other radiosensitive tissues
becomes manifest. From this there may be
recovery if the dose is not too great.

In addition to damage to bone marrow
there is damage to the gut, another radiosensitive tissue, and to the generative glands,

testes or ovaries. Compared with the effects |

on the bone marrow and gut, which may
determine life or death, the effects on the
gonads may be of less immediate significance
but to the survivor of considerable importance. Damage to the reproductive glands
leads rapidly to early sterility, or to a
severe degree of infertility, and may lead to
permanent sterility. I would stress, of
course, that sterility and impotence should
not be confused. Some rather loose thinkers
and talkers are apt to do so—even as others
confuse weapons and reactors. The threat
of impotence has led to anxiety in the worker

OF NUCLEAR FISSION. ° 145
in many industrial fields but there has never
been any suggestion that I know of, that
over-exposure to radiation, either acute or
chronic, can lead to impotence, but it can
certainly lead to sterility.

In Hiroshima and Nagasaki there have
been, as well as acute manifestations,
delayed effects in those who were héavily
exposed at the time and who may or may
not have had symptoms such as those I have
described and from which they subsequently
recovered. These delayed effects are similar
to those seen from over-exposure to occupational radiation. Just as leukemia has
occurred in the occupationally over-exposed,
so many of the survivors of high doses of
radiation at Hiroshima have subsequently
died from leukemia. |
_ Again; many of the survivors who received
high doses have since suffered from cataract
—opacity of the lens of the eye. The lens
is thus a radiosensitive tissue.

Women pregnant at the time of these
explosions, if they did not abort—and some

of them did for many good reasons, only one

of which: was radiation—in a few instances
bore children who were microcephalic. This
has also been reported following radiotherapy of pregnant women, which is
occasionally necessary.

Genetic Effects of Radiation

Lastly, we have the possibility in irradiated
people of gene-mutation. Here I come. to
the ground with which you are probably
more familiar than I; but it seems to me,
who in matters genetic is but an informed
layman, that here is a subject of which the
horrors have been over emphasized. I have
purposely, up till now, talked about what
I think of the horrors of radiation, the
effects of. over-exposure on the individual.
In genetics we seem to find a subject which
is charged with emotion, and even the most
sober scientists have on occasion seemed to
regard the genetic effects of radiation as
spelling doom. August personages have
pontificated on the horrors that are in store
for us. Politicians have had to take the
matter up and the Press have found in this a
146

sensational new story. From some of the
journals one gets the impression that we
are Gadarene swine rushing to _ racial
destruction.

How true is this picture that we get from
the popular Press and what do we really
know about the facts of the genetic situation?
There are two aspects from which we can
approach this in a scientific fashion, from the
physical aspect and from the genetic aspect.
So let us try to keep to the simpler things
first, the physical aspect. |

The world is radio-active to a material
extent. If it were not, we would not have
uranium, radium, thorium and other naturally radio-active elements, and I understand
that the world is getting less and less
naturally radio-active with time as measured
in geological terms. Nevertheless, in spite
of this natural radio activity we seem to have
evolved from primordial protoplasm up to
our present state. .

As well as the uraniums, the radiums and
the thoriums in the earth, we have a certain
amount of natural radiation reaching us from
outer space. This is known as cosmic radiation.

Lastly, right inside ourselves we have
radio-active material. Potassium is one of
the essential elements of intra-cellular protoplasm and a small fraction of natural
‘potassium is radio-active. Thus, in spite of
radiation from outer space, in spite of
radiation from the earth around us, particularly bricks and concrete, and in spite of

radiation from potassium inside us, we have —

become what we are.

This dose of radiation can, by modern
methods, be readily measured. In areas
such as London near sea level without
granitic rock it amounts to about three units
(rontgens) per generation, but there are
areas in which the natural radiation is much
higher. At high altitudes, the Andes,
Himalayas and so on, the component of dose
from cosmic radiation rises considerably.
Similarly there are areas with outcrops of
granite and similar rock where there is much
more radio-active material than in sedimentary rock. Therefore in the various parts
of the inhabited earth there is a range of
natural background radiation to which

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

different populations are exposed. This: may

vary from place to place by about a factor
of three, so that while we here have about
three units of radiation per generation, in
other places this may rise to about ten.

In spite of that, we have not yet detected,
maybe for want of looking, any deleterious
genetic effects in these areas where there is a
high’ natural background. There is a key
there. I repeat, we have not looked, and I
think that now the genetic effects of radiation are more generally apprehended we
should forthwith take every step within our
power to look at populations, our own and
others, and particularly those living in these
areas of high natural background.

What do we know about the genetic
aspects?>—Here we are on much more uncertain ground. First of all, shall we say,
just as there is a natural background of
radiation so there is a natural background of
gene mutation. Each of our genes, as far as
we know, is mutated periodically at an
extremely low rate. We do not know
necessarily the relation between this natural
rate of mutation of individual genes and
natural radiation. We know from the
experimental animal, and the experimental
plant, and the experimental bacterium, and
the experimental virus that one can put up
the rate of mutation by irradiating the
animal, the plant, the virus and so on.
Therefore it seems a universal law that
radiation stimulates mutation. |

In the case of the insect and the plant and
so forth we can measure the amount of
mutation per unit of radiation dose, and in
most of the species of plants and animals
that have so far been investigated we find
that, in order to double the natural rate of
mutation, something like thirty to fifty
units of dose of radiation is necessary. If
we apply that figure to man, which is
perhaps a dangerous extrapolation, we would
conclude that one tenth of the natural
mutation was due to natural radiation.
However, there are geneticists who rightly
claim that man, with his longer life span and
his longer generation time, cannot arbitrarily be compared with insects whose
generation-time is a few weeks, or with
BIOLOGICAL HAZARDS OF NUCLEAR FISSION

bacteria whose generation time is a few
minutes, and they claim, in the absence of
evidence to the contrary one cannot: exclude
that all natural mutation in man is due to
ionizing radiation. If all the natural mutation of man were due to the natural radiation, then the doubling dose in man’s case
would be about three rontgens. However, as
the doubling dose for several different forms
of life including at least one mammal, the
mouse, is found by experiment to be about
thirty rdntgens, this view is perhaps
pessimistic.

Are there other agents besides radiation
which can cause mutation? Undoubtedly
there are. Increasing daily are the discoveries
of chemical mutagens, and amongst these
we have coal tar products. One rather nonserious journal has suggested that, if hitherto
we had had only nuclear energy as a source
of power, coal on being discovered to-day
would have been hailed as a wonderful
boon, as it was only necessary to burn the
stuff to get energy. I would answer, also
in lighter vein, that there would be those
who would claim that coal with its carcinogenic by-products would be lethal to the
individual and lethal to the race by virtue
of the mutagens.

We still cannot assess how the natural
incidence of cancer in the individual, or the
natural incidence of gene mutation in the
race is related to exposure over the years to
known chemical mutagens such as the coal
tar products. Moreover, there are many
other factors of which we still are largely
ignorant. We do not know in the case of
man, as we do from genetic and cytological
studies of some lower animals, how many
genes we have to mutate. Assessments can
be made and reasonable answers given
between 10,000 and 100,000; thus, as with
the mutation rate, so with the number of
genes we have assessments which vary by a
factor of ten. Two factors of ten can
together make a factor of 100 by which we
can be in error. On the physical side we
know the variations to within a factor of
two or three, so that the physical data are
relatively firm compared with the genetic
unknowns.

147

In Drosophila, the fly that geneticists
conveniently study, to a considerable extent
the function of the genes is known. In man,
only about a dozen or so genes with a
specific single action are identifiable. Most
of our characteristics I am told, our size and
shape and colour and our intelligence, are
controlled by many genes, so that the
mutation of one gene in such a complex is
not likely to have any detectable immediate
effect. While we can score some gene
mutations by the appearance of a characteristic disease or abnormality, determined by
that gene, in most instances gene mutations
pass entirely undetected. But we are what
we are in virtue of our complexes of genes—
and we believe that we have evolved to this
state by a process of selection of the good
and profitable genes and by elimination of
the deleterious genes.

We have heard, and we still hear, much of
natural selection. If I understand aright,
this has largely been investigated in the.
wild, and in the wild nature selects for
strength and cunning. Under modern conditions of civilization—even primitive civilization—nature must select for characters and
properties which are not necessarily the
same as those in the true feral state. Physical
strength, fleetness of foot and keenness of
sight are not as important to civilized man
as to primitive man in the struggle for
existence. With increasing knowledge and
civilization natural resistance to disease is
not the factor that once was necessary to
allow man to reach the age at which he could
reproduce. By advances in sanitation and
improved public health, by new discoveries
in clinical medicine and the basic sciences
we must in recent centuries and decades have
markedly altered the desirable criteria for
ourselves as individuals. We must now be
capable of even greater variation than ever
before in the history of natural selection.
With populations under altering environment there must be a continual change in
the properties for which there is positive
selection, and I take it that the properties
that we regard to-day as desirable may not
be so in even one hundred years from now.
148

I hope that in the future generations,
either naturally or artificially, we will select
for increased mental ability, perhaps for
increases of those desirable personal characteristics which are difficult to define but
which make for tolerance and for general
peaceful living; so is it a bad thing that
there is a possibility of an increased mutation? With an increased mutation rate we
will more quickly attain the equilibrium
of the particular type selected and if change
in our physical and mental characteristics is
desirable with change in environment, a
certain increase in the mutation rate, I
postulate, may not be the horror claimed in
some quarters.

However, if we regard radiation as a real
horror, if we do not accept my thesis that a
slight increase in mutation rate may be good
rather than bad in a changing world, then
we have to consider what we have already
got in the way of radiation other than
natural background or present-day atomic
energy. With our improved civilization we
are certainly getting radiation from other
things as well, and we have to decide
whether, like atomic energy, we want them,
whether they are beneficial and whether
their benefits are greater than their defects.

I have talked about X-rays. We have
made an analysis of the national dose of
radiation that we are getting from diagnostic radiology. At the present time that
dose is many times that which we are getting
nationally from the atomic energy pro
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

gramme. Do we want to give up diagnostic
radiology, or do we say that the benefits
of diagnostic radiology outweigh the possible
genetic hazards? We have television sets,
we want bigger and better television sets,
and that means that higher voltages will be
involved. Even television sets emit radiation. It is minute to the individual, but if
every family has a television set this will
contribute a not incalculable amount of
radiation to the whole population. Do we
regard television as something to be desired,
or something that should be scrapped
because of its potential hazards on the
genetic side?

Each day we are going in aeroplanes
which fly faster and higher, and the higher
up we go, and the more people who go up
there, the more we are exposed to cosmic
radiation and the higher genetic dose of
radiation we will be getting. Do we want to
go higher and quicker, or are we satisfied
with trains and ships? Do we regard high
altitude flying as a modern benefit, or do
we regard it as a genetic hazard to our race?
These and other problems will have to be
considered along with our atomic energy
programme. We have to add diagnostic
radiology and high flying, and luminous
dials of watches to the atomic energy programme. We have to decide which contributes most to our standard of living, which
are the things we want to keep in our future
life, and balance them against our potential
genetic hazards.
