HUMAN TEMPERAMENT’

The Development of Methods for Assessing, It
By P. E. VERNON, M.A.

SCIENCE of eugenics must depend

very largely on the accumulation of

accurate, objective knowledge about
human beings. For our discussions of
heredity and of the differences between
individuals or the various social classes can
hardly progress without a broad basis of
anthropometric and psychometric facts.
During the past fifty odd years systematic
measurements have been made of certain
physical characteristics of men and women,
and for about half that time we have also
been able to gauge with considerable exactitude the mental qualities that we call
‘intelligence.’ Indeed, the individual tests
first devised by Binet, and the group tests
for which America is mainly responsible,
constitute one of the most important instruments or methods that we possess in our
large-scale studies of mankind. The present
writer is by no means wholly satisfied with
the techniques and some of the interpretations which have been put upon such test
results ; but he does not intend to devote this
paper to their criticism. In spite of their
drawbacks, we need only turn to the Wood
Report of 1929 on mental deficiency to
realize how valuable they have been in the
advancement of our relevant scientific
knowledge.

But it is obvious that intelligence tests
are only the first step; we are already
capable of measuring almost any of the more
specialized aptitudes, mechanical, musical,
mathematical, or medical, and so on. And
yet the affective factors of temperament and
personality,f and of interest still seem to be

 

* The writer expects to publish shortly a fuller
account of the psychological topics summarized in
this paper, under the title: The Experimental
Approach to Personality.

{ The definitions of these terms, temperament
and personality, are still very uncertain. The
former is more commonly used in England, the

beyond us. Why is it that we find it so
difficult to approach these social, emotional,
and conative traits with scientific methods ?
They are probably more important than
abilities in determining human inter-actions
and adjustments, as Professor Bartlett has
pointed out in an earlier number of this
journal.¢

Actually the main source of our difficulties
would seem to lie in the ambiguity of the
temperamental qualities or personality traits
which we so glibly attribute to one another.
If no two people agree exactly in their views
of a third person’s temperament, and if they
do not know what they mean by the descriptive epithets which they apply, we can
hardly expect to reach the stage of measuring these qualities. Anthropometric dimensions of the body or the head are perfectly definite ; any two investigators obtain
practically the same measurements of
height, weight, etc., from the same individuals. Even ‘ general intelligence ’ comprises certain types of behaviour which can
be rather readily recognized or agreed upon
by different investigators. But what do we
mean when we say, for example, that
Napoleon was ambitious, forceful, a born
leader? ‘The average Englishman and the
average Frenchman, at the beginning of last
century, had entirely different views about

 

latter in America, to express much the same concept. American readers are, indeed, advised to
substitute ‘‘ personality ’’ for
throughout this paper. Rather than enter into this
controversial field, the writer would refer to a
summary by G. W. Allport and himself, in the
Psychol, Bulletin, 1930, Vol. 27, 681-688. Of the
definitions quoted there, Schoen’s is fairly satisfactory, namely, ‘‘. . . the organized system, the
functional whole or unity, of habits, dispositions
and sentiments that mark off any one member of
a group as being different from any other
member... .’’

+ Bartlett, F. C., Temperament and Social Class.
EUGENICS REvigew, April 1928, Vol. 20, No. 1.

‘temperament ”’

Cc 325
326

him. To his mother and his brothers
Napoleon’s characteristic traits must have
seemed very different again. It is a poor
explanation to say that people at that time
were prejudiced, and that now we know
better what was his real temperament. Why
should we be any more right than the people
who actually came in contact with him?
Furthermore, there is any amount of
evidence which proves that our traits vary
enormously in the estimation of different
observers ; the child has quite distinct temperaments in the eyes of his friends at
school, his teachers, and his relations at
home. Every person who observes him can
only obtain a partial idea of what the child
is like; the observer’s opinion is based on
a limited acquaintanceship, and he is very
apt to jump to conclusions, or to obtain a
generally favourable or unfavourable impression and to be influenced thereby in all
his judgments. ‘The schoolmaster who says
that a certain boy is pugnacious may be
basing his judgment on a few fights with
schoolfellows ; but the chances are that the
boy does not work hard for the master, so
that the master’s dislike of the boy has been
projected into his judgments of other
qualities. ‘The master has no idea how the
boy behaves outside school. He may be very
submissive and retiring at home. Perhaps
the master teaches classics, and the boy is
thoroughly bored by classics, though very
much interested in mathematics. He works
hard at the latter subject, and creates a
much more favourable all-round impression
in the mind of the mathematics master.
Here we have a commonplace illustration
of those permutations of human _interrelationships which are constantly occurring
in our everyday lives. It serves to show
that temperamental qualities are exceedingly indefinite when contrasted with
physical characteristics and mental abilities.
A person may be pugnacious at one time,
timid at another; pugnacious according to
one observer, merely energetic to another.
This is not because the person himself is
inconsistent or unintegrated, but simply
because our judgments of his temperament
are over-simplified abstractions which can
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

not take into account all the multiplicity of
conditions that affect any particular piece
of behaviour.

But to return to Napoleon ; why is it that
we agree rather closely nowadays in our
judgments of his temperamental qualities?
The answer would seem to be that we know
the facts of his life history, that he won such
and such battles, that he said such and
such words, that his contemporaries said such
and such things about him. It follows, then,
that if we can obtain a sufficiently comprehensive view of how a person behaves during
every phase of his existence, we achieve
some objective justification for our views of
his temperament. Napoleon’s ambition is
an unmistakable quality, because the events
of his hfe conform throughout to this
descriptive epithet. It is not necessary to
ask whether the ambition was some biophysical thing or entity which he himself
possessed. The facts are that his behaviour
towards society, and the behaviour of other
people towards him, more often than not
fitted this particular trait-name. We are
entirely ignorant of the neuro-physiological
structures of his brain which actually determine this consistent type of behaviour ; the
trait itself is a purely hypothetical and
somewhat tautological assumption. We can,
if we like, say that Napoleon possessed the
trait of ambition, but this explains nothing
more than does the statement that an
animal defends itself because it possesses an
instinct of self-preservation. What we are
interested in, as scientific students of human
or animal nature, are the facts of behaviour
to which we give the instinct-names or the
trait-names.

What are the bearings of this point of
view on the measurement of temperament?
The main conclusion is that traits are not
quantitative, unified variables, like the
cranial dimensions. It is certainly unsound
to say that one person possesses a certain
amount of pugnacity, or timidity, and that
another person possesses half, or double that
amount. ‘Traits cannot be measured in the
same sense as lengths and weights are
measured. For heuristic purposes we may
have to express these qualities in the form
HUMAN TEMPERAMENT

of quantitative scores, but we should never
forget that such scores are artifacts, not
scientific measurements. ‘The most effective substitute that we can offer for strict
measurement is what is called sampling.

For example; if we desire to obtain a
measure of an individual’s timidity, we first
devise a number of test situations to which
some people will respond with timid, others
with fearless behaviour. ‘The individual’s
reactions in these situations give us a
number of samples of his temperament.
Secondly we may present him with a
questionnaire or ‘ paper and pencil test.’
This questionnaire contains, say, fifty
questions about his past behaviour under
conditions which were likely to stimulate
him to fear or bravery. After each question
three or more possible answers are provided; one of these indicates very timid
reactions, another very bold reactions, the
others are intermediate. If the individual
is sincere, he will check the answer to each
question which best describes himself. By
means of simple statistical methods, an
appropriate score can be found for each
answer. And by summing all the individual’s scores, we obtain a sample of his
opinions about his own timidity.

Thirdly, we ask other people who are well
acquainted with the individual to estimate
his timidity on some standardized scale.
Here again we shall obtain better results if
we get them to score him on the basis of
objective behaviour, which they have
actually observed in the past, rather than on
the basis of their personal subjective impressions. And we should try to get hold of
acquaintances who will have diverse slants
or viewpoints about him. His schoolfellows’
judgments will afford us one quite useful
sample of opinion, but different samples
ought to be collected, say, from his sisters,
his employers, and others who have observed
him in different phases of his existence.

Now, owing to the peculiarly complex
nature of temperament, we are not only
unable to apply strict measurements, but
also we possess no absolute units, like
inches, pounds, or seconds. An individual
with an intelligence quotient of 50 is not

327

half as intelligent as the average individual
with an I.Q. of 100. These figures merely
express, in arbitrary and unequal units, the
relative difference between the level of
intelligence of the first individual, and the
average level or norm of the total population. Similarly, in order to deal with the
results of our samplings of timidity, we
have to express them in terms of their
distribution in a group of individuals. We
must therefore apply all the methods mentioned in the previous paragraph, and any
others that occur to us, to a large group of
persons whose background and age are
approximately similar. We can then give
scores to each individual on each sample, in
terms of his standing relative to the average
of the group.

Suppose, then, that we now possess these
scores on, say, ten different samples of
behaviour or of opinion, for each member of
our group. We proceed to find by correlational methods to what extent the samples
“hang together’ or are associated consistently. We take, for example, the
opinions of the schoolfellows of our group of
subjects, and compare them with each
individual’s own opinions, as expressed in
his answers to the paper and pencil questionnaire test. We shall find some, but by
no means complete agreement. If the
correlation coefficient of 1.0 is taken to represent perfect agreement, and a coefficient of
0.0 is taken to represent no agreement at
all, then we are likely to find an intermediate figure, of about 0.3 to 0.6. This
indicates a general tendency for those
individuals who think that they behave
timidly to be regarded as timid by their
friends, although there are many exceptions. Similarly, we intercorrelate all our
samples, and we shall find (according to the
present writer’s experience) that the
average degree of overlap or association
between any two samples will be a correlation coefficient of 0.2 to 0.4.

That the average intercorrelation is so
small need not surprise us. Some psychologists who have worked with tests and ratings
of traits have concluded that the tests are
useless, because two measures of (nomin(328

ally) the same trait fail to agree closely with
one another. Still more frequently investigators have asserted that generalized, consistent types of behaviour, i.e. traits, do
not exist. ‘They find that a boy may be
timid at school (according to one sample)
and bold at home (according to a second
sample). They therefore think that the boy
possesses a number of discrete timid and
bold habits of response, and that he reacts
in a specific way to the specific situation
quite independently of his reactions to other
similar situations.

But the fault really lies not in the inconsistency of the boy, but rather in our conventional, over-simplified verbalisms. In
ordinary conversation we speak of traits
or temperamental qualities as distinct
entities, assuming thereby that a person
whom we call timid would be timid
under any and all conditions. Professor Spearman, meeting with the same
belief in the field of intelligence, has demonstrated the incorrectness of this ‘ oligarchic’
theory.* Our samples do not intercorrelate
highly because we have, of necessity,
abstracted each sample of behaviour or
opinion and isolated it from the total context which gave it its full meaning. A
hypothetical example was given above of a
boy who was called pugnacious and troublesome by his classics teacher, who disliked
him, but was given high marks for good
conduct by his mathematics teacher. The
reason for this was that the boy happened
to be more interested in numerical than in
verbal work. But if we merely abstracted
the opinions of the two teachers without
making any inquiry into the reason for his
apparent differences of behaviour, we should
naturally obtain contradictory samples. In
other words, the expression of each sample
as a numerical score severs from the sample
the various conditions and factors that!
originally determined it.

It is difficult to explain this argument
except by the use of metaphors. Each
sample, as it were, approaches the individual’s temperament from a rather narrow

* Spearman, C. E., The Abilities of Man. lLon
don: Macmillan. 1927.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

angle. One might say that the investigator
who applies the samples is viewing the
individual through a number of narrow
slits. ‘The separate scores (from tests and
ratings) only cover a small part of the
meaningful whole of his temperament.
Hence no two samples can be expected to
overlap at all closely, unless the two slits
are also close together, that is, unless the
two test situations are very similar in meaning. Again, the individual’s reputation in
the eyes of two school friends will be very
similar ; but his parents see him from a very
different angle. So that while the father
and mother may agree with one another,
they could not be expected to agree to any
great extent with the opinions of his friends.
In terms of correlations we usually find that
two friends or two parents may correlate
with one another as highly as 0.7 to 0.8, but
that friends’ ratings often correlate with
parents’ ratings to o.3 or less.

The next step is now quite obvious,
namely to combine as many diverse samples
as possible. ‘The present writer calls this
sum of a number of tests and ratings a traitcomposite. He has found in his own work
that it undoubtedly corresponds much more
closely to the tratt-name than do the results
of any single sample. Some of the samples,
we generally find, correlate, on the
average, much more highly with the rest
than do others. It may be that the test
situations in the ‘ poor’ samples entirely
failed to evoke the timid-brave type of
behaviour, or else that the non-correlating
opinions or ratings were obtained from
people who lacked sufficient acquaintance
with the individuals in our group. Thus it
is often necessary to eliminate some of the
‘worst’ sets of scores, and to retain only
the half-dozen or so which give the highest
average intercorrelation. But one has to be
very cautious at this stage, since the
elimination of the more diverse samples
necessarily narrows the scope of one’s traitcomposite.

Take an example which is familiar to us
all, that of intelligence tests, which apply
essentially the same methods as those outlined in this paper. It is well known that
HUMAN TEMPERAMENT

group written tests (Analogies, Completion,
Vocabulary, Arithmetic, etc.) intercorrelate
very closely. And it is usual to select for a
battery of group intelligence tests only those
tests which do depend, as we say, on the
higher mental processes. But by concentrating in this way on almost purely verbal
tests, and excluding tests of a more practical
type, we narrow the final score to a measure
of what is mainly a verbal type of intelligence. ‘These scores do indeed predict with
considerable accuracy the  individual’s
future scholastic achievements, because
scholastic work is also largely verbal. But
they have much less application to future
intelligent behaviour in the more practical,
or social, or other fields. The same diffculty is found, in an intensified form, in
tests of temperament. If, for example, we
find that our samples of opinion tend to
intercorrelate much more highly than our
samples of objective test behaviour, it is
probable that all our raters who gave us
these samples of opinion were somewhat
similarly biased. And a _ trait-composite
which includes only the opinion samples is
almost certain to be ‘ off-centre.’

The writer is therefore very doubtful
whether the purely statistical criterion of
high average intercorrelation is capable of
giving us satisfactory composites. Numerical results by themselves are generally
equivocal and ambiguous. For we should
not forget that a score on one sample of
behaviour is an abstracted symbol for part
of a complicated reaction of the individual.
From this total meaningful reaction to our
test situation we have selected only the
partial aspects or elements that can be
objectively measured. The fundamental
limitation of the strictly scientific or the
statistical approach in this field is that it
cannot record all the variety of factors which
enter into any particular test response.
Thus it would seem justifiable to apply
interpretative, subjective criteria in building up these partial samples into a meaningful trait-composite.

In one series of experiments, the present
writer gave some fifteen hours of temperamental tests to 25 undergraduate subjects,

329

and so collected over a hundred samples of
behaviour or opinion for each subject. As
many different methods of approach were
employed as possible. During the experiments he came to know the subjects rather
well, and the series concluded with a clinical
interview with each subject. At this interview the writer showed to a subject all his
outstanding high or low test scores, and by
means of personal conversation tried to find
out the meaning or psychological significance of these scores. The test results are
but ciphers ; it is necessary to consider what
they actually show in each single concrete
individual. In this way logical relations
between the overlapping tests were built up,
and the interpretative synthesis of results
went hand in hand with the statistical
synthesis. It was then found that about 80
sets of scores fell naturally into a number of
groups or types of reaction, i.e. into traitcomposites. Each composite contained from
5 to 8 different samples, including some
objective test reactions, some opinions of
external observers, and some opinions of the
subjects themselves. In-addition to general
or abstract intelligence, the following
trait-composites were thus established as
psychologically meaningful, and statistically
consistent.

Practical or mechanical intelligence

Quickness-slowness

Impulsiveness-caution

Sociality-asociality

Leadership or ascendance-submissiveness

Dependability and persistence or
efficiency

Emotionality of the deep or repressed
type

Emotionality of the broad, overt, or unrepressed type

Radicalism-conservatism

AZsthetic interests

Scientific interests

General integration or maturity of
character.

Most of these seemed to represent rather
closely the trait-names by which they are
called, though the impulsiveness and
330

emotionality composites were less satisfactory, statistically and logically.

We must return again to the statistical
treatment. A simple concrete example may
help to explain it. Suppose that you saw
an individual, X, at a party, sitting alone
and not talking, you might assume that he
was an unsocial, introverted person. You
might or might not be right; for instance,
if he happened to be feeling very unwell at
the time, your judgment might not be
justified. But suppose that you saw X ina
large number of other situations, always
exhibiting the same general ‘type of a-social
behaviour, your conclusion would be very
much strengthened. In fact, the more
samples of his behaviour in society that you
observed, under the more diverse conditions,
the sounder would be your generalization.
But only if you had an infinite number of
such samples could you be certain that he
was always what you call unsocial.

The statistical methods used in the
writer’s research try to follow out this
illustration by defining the trait in question
as the average of an infinite number of
samples. Any one sample or observation
has a certain predictive value with respect
to this infinite number, but two tests of the
same predictive value, when they are combined, are clearly better than one. It can
be shown that when six samples intercorrelate to +.24, then the theoretical validity
of the trait-composite (i.e. of the sum of the
six sets of scores) is +.8z. Theoretical
validity means the probable correlation of
the composite with the infinite number of
similar samples. In the present writer’s
investigation, this was a typical result.
Most of the trait-composites which were
established, even in this preliminary work,
were thus found to measure with quite fair
consistency the behaviour of the subjects in
situations of the general types covered by
the trait-names.

Now, the great obstacle that has been
encountered by most investigators of tests
of temperament has been the difficulty of
finding a criterion or a means of showing
that the test measures validly what it sets
out to measure. Intelligence testers have

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

been more fortunate, since they can take as
their criterion either age differences (Binet),
or scholastic performance. Many psychologists tried to correlate their temperament
test results with ratings, using these ratings
as the best available criterion. ‘This is
obviously unsound, since the ratings are
just as likely to be biased (off-centre) as
the tests. The sampling method, as advocated in this paper, avoids this difficulty
by what is called internal validation. The
sum of all the available samples is taken
as the best possible criterion, since it
approaches most closely to the desired
infinite number of samples. Hence it is
that the validity of our tests or opinion
samples is shown by the extent to which
they ‘hang together’ or are positively
correlated with one another.

We can apply to our results a further
check of a qualitative and quantitative
nature. If several trait-composites are
established, then we are sure to find that
any two separate composites will overlap to
a greater or lesser extent. Just as in
ordinary life we would naturally expect the
impulsive person to be also rather quick in
movement, or the a-social person to be
rather submissive and lacking in leadership
qualities, so we should expect to find a positive correlation between the total scores on
all the quickness and impulsiveness samples,
or the totals on the sociability and leadership samples. Sometimes, then, we can
decide on the satisfactoriness of a composite
by the degree to which it correlates meaningfully with any other composites that are
available. As far as possible it is desirable
to make up composites which are relatively
independent. But just as all temperamental
trait-names tend to overlap in meaning, so
we should look for a certain statistical
overlap of composites.

It is impossible in a short paper like this
to go into the various technical complications, and the theories of temperament
which led to this method. Nor is it possible
to discuss here the connection between this
approach and the ‘eclectic’ principles
upon which Spearman works in his measurement of general and specific factors of intelHUMAN TEMPERAMENT

ligence. The sampling technique, though
adopted mainly from the work of Professor
M. A. May, of Yale University, closely
resembles Spearman’s pooling of tests.*
But since we encounter far greater complexity and indefiniteness in the sphere of
temperamental traits than when dealing
with intellectual factors, it seemed inadvisable to apply Spearman’s more elaborate
statistical methods.

The main object of this paper is to
recount the difficulties rather than the
achievements of measuring temperamental
traits for practical purposes. At the moment
it is only possible to outline what is perhaps
the most promising approach to a scientific
study of the affective and conative tendencies in human beings. And yet some points
of direct relevance to eugenics have already

“May, M. A., Statistical Methods in Personality
Study. J. Amer. Stat. ASS., 1931, 168-174. An
explanation of the differences between the sampling
technique and the methods of Spearman and Kelley
will be given by the writer in a later publication.

Cf. footnote (*) p. 325.

331

been established. May and Hartshorne,
using essentially the same methods on a
more elaborate scale, have shown that the
character trait of honesty-deceit probably
has a considerable innate basis.f In other
words, by sampling the honest-deceptive
behaviour of a large number of brothers and
sisters, they have demonstrated that there
is as much resemblance between the composite scores of pairs of siblings as there is
between their intelligence scores.

But we must be content to progress
slowly. There are no simple and easy short
cuts, no methods of direct and certain
measurement in the field of temperament. A
great deal of laborious analytic testing and
rating with large numbers of individuals is
necessary before we can decide on the most
satisfactory trait-composites ; and this quantitative, psychometric research must be
synthesized by clinical observation and
common sense.

+ May, M. A. and Hartshorne,

Resemblance in Deception. XXVII.
Nat. Soc. Stud. Educ., 1928, 2, 161-178.

H., Sibling
Yearbook

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 4.
