THE PREVENTION OF CRIPPLING

T a luncheon held on July 22nd Mr.
A iesen Burrows spoke of the work
of the Central Council for the Care of
Cripples. Mr. Bramwell was in the Chair and
in introducing the speaker he said that as a
subject was more closely examined it became
more complicated and not more simple. To
a layman this was the case where the influences of heredity and environment were
concerned, and Mr. Bramwell suggested the
analogy of architects’ plans, which in the
hands of workmen would be translated into
a house or ship ; it depended on the workmanship whether it was a good or bad house
or ship. He thought the terms ‘ design and
workmanship ’’ might be more comprehensible to many people than “nature and
nurture.”’

Mr. Jackson Burrows first dealt with the
eugenic aspects of crippling. ‘‘ I propose,”
he said, “‘ to start with a couple of definitions,
which I am afraid is a dangerous beginning
as inviting somnolence or stimulating revolt.

First, it may, or may not, have occurred to
you what is the derivation of the word
‘cripple.’ This is supposed to be a corruption of the word ‘creeple,’ a person who
creeps, but for our purpose we ought perhaps
to include a wider range of persons, namely
all those who have not full use of their
skeleton or muscles. You will find that our
interest extends also to those who might
lose the full use of these structures, failing
treatment, namely potential cripples.

The other word that I want to define is
‘ orthopaedics.’ Now this is not, as is so
often supposed, a mixture of Greek and
Latin, having something to do with the feet,
but is derived from two Greek words meaning
the straight child. So you will see that the
emphasis is on health and not on disease, and
on prevention as well as on cure. For many
years orthopaedic surgery has been understood to mean the treatment of adults as
well as children. I define the word ‘ orthopaedics’ because it has to do with the medical
side of the welfare of cripples. There are also
big administrative and educational sides of

81

this work, and its success depends largely
on the extent of the co-operation between
non-medical and medical workers. It is
important to realize that only a small
minority of cases of crippling are associated
with mental defect ; and that it is usually
possible to render even the severely crippled
useful and happy citizens. My talk to-day
will be concerned with prevention of crippling, with due reference to the eugenic
question, and the ways in which established
cripples can be helped.

One cannot discuss the prevention of
crippling without saying something about
the causes.

1. Congenital infection. Syphilis alone
requires mention. Congenital syphilis never
was a common cause of crippling: it is now
a very rare one, in consequence of the vast
diminution in the incidence of the disease
in the last fifty years from better education
and better treatment.

2. Congenital disturbance of development.
One example is club-foot, which is a special
deformity quite unlike that which appears
on the wrappers of certain detective novels ;
another is congenital dislocation of the hip.
Manifest familial occurrence of these conditions is exceptional, and it is doubtful if
the question of forbearance from childbirth
should often arise. There are numerous
conditions, notably of the hands and of the
feet, which are commonly hereditary, but
most of them are insufficiently important to
justify eugenic control. |

3. Congenital predisposition. There are
certain crippling diseases to which patients
are born with a predisposition. One example
is haemophilia, the scourge of certain
dynasties. Here as you know there is a sex
linkage, the women transmitting the disease
and some of the sons showing its manifestations. Another example is one of the diseases
in which the bones are unduly brittle. There
are several curious and tragic forms of
paralysis which slowly progress until they
become so generalized as to result in death.
Many of these are hereditary, but most
82 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

members of affected families are seemingly
unaffected, so that eugenic methods would
therefore be difficult to enforce, though there
is an almost unanswerable case for their
application in certain instances. All these
diseases are relatively uncommon, and there
remains the fact that very few crippling
conditions are hereditary and _ therefore
claimants for eugenic control.

4. Environmental diseases. It is obvious
that diseases arising from a bad environment
might be controlled by eugenic methods so
applied as to prevent the birth of children
into a bad environment, but in fact the better
way is to alter the environment, or, if this is
impossible, to modify its effects. In fact the
incidence of wholly or partially environmental diseases has been enormously diminished by these other methods. A case in
point is rickets, which in our lifetime has been
a very common cause of crippling ; nowadays
a severe case of rickets is almost a rarity.
Surgical tuberculosis was formerly one of the
great causes of crippling. It is still an important cause but it has greatly diminished,
largely because of better habits of life. There
is unfortunately every expectation that this
war, like others, will increase its incidence.
About one-fifth of cases in this country we
know to be due to the drinking of infected
milk, and the corollary is that one-fifth of
all cases of tuberculosis of bones and joints
could be eliminated if pasteurization of all
milk were enforced, as it is in some parts of
the world. It seems paradoxical that, before
the war, the Government should have instituted a widespread campaign for increasing
the consumption of milk, without taking
effective steps to ensure that this should be
rendered harmless. The dangers of a bad
milk supply are no less real, if less obvious,
than those of a bad water supply.

5. Rheumatism. Under this head we have
a varied group of conditions some of which
may be described as crippling. They are so
widespread as to constitute an important
economic, as well as social, problem; and
in spite of a large amount of research
the prevention and treatment must still be
regarded as notoriously unsatisfactory as a
whole.

6. Infantile paralysis. Although the cause
of this condition is known there is at present
no satisfactory method of prevention, in spite
of much research. The disease is notifiable,
but its curious epidemic behaviour does not
readily lend itself to control. Early and
prolonged orthopaedic treatment is exceedingly important for the prevention of deformities and the improvement of function.
At one time this treatment was greatly
neglected, and in many localities this is
unfortunately still the case. In some areas
the patient is the responsibility of one local
authority while he remains infectious, and
of another when he ceases to be infectious ;
this does not aid efficient treatment.

7. Accidents. Domestic accidents form an
important group. The incidence of accidents
due to industrial processes and to the motor
car is more easily controlled. Industrial
accidents have been greatly diminished by
factory legislation, but there is still no room
for complacency. With the toll of the
roads you will be only too familiar. Much of
the crippling from accidents arises from
severe fractures, the treatment of. which,
contrary to common supposition, may be very
difficult. An attempt is being made at the
present time to improve the organization of
fracture treatment so that the patient should
come as early as possible under the care of
an expert working with suitable facilities and
able to supervise treatment until recovery is
complete.

8. Legislation. You will be surprised at my
including legislation as a cause of crippling,
especially as I have already referred to
legislative activities which have the reverse
effect. The defects in the Workmen’s Compensation and Employers’ Liability Acts do
in fact create cripples by producing a state
of mind which prevents recovery of injured
workmen who would otherwise be restored
to their former powers. Time forbids my
elaborating this statement, but it would not
be contested by anybody who has to do with
treatment of injured workmen or with the
medico-legal problems which arise. Fortunately the whole question of workmen’s
compensation is now under consideration by
a Royal Commission, before which the Central
THE PREVENTION OF CRIPPLING 83

Council for the Care of Cripples has given
evidence. Mr. R. C. Elmslie, chairman of the
Council’s executive committee, was a member of the Commission until, a year ago, his
much regretted death left the Commission
without a single medical member. In this
country workmen’s compensation makes no
provision for medical treatment, and for this
the injured workman is largely dependent
on charity.”

Mr. Jackson Burrows then went on to
speak of the work of the Central Council for
the Care of Cripples, which, he said, was a
voluntary body. concerned primarily with
the prevention of crippling, with its cure or
physical amelioration in cases where it has
not been prevented, and finally é¢ducation,
vocational training, employment and general
welfare coupled with medical treatment.
Serious work for cripples was only a thing of
the last fifty years and it was not until after
the last war that active measures were taken,
the most valuable being the establishment of
school medical inspection and maternity and
child welfare centres. Theoretically this
should mean that a potential cripple could
be picked out at any time between birth and
leaving school. It was important that after
school crippled children should pass on to
vocational training centres, but, though there
were centres doing excellent work, there were
too few of them.

Vocational training was also applied to
adult cripples, though these were less
adaptable than children. Many cases being
the result of accidents, the patients could
not always be sufficiently restored for return
to their own work, but in many other
instances gradual work at a rehabilitation
centre enabled the man to return to his own
trade. Unfortunately there were only two
or three of these in the whole country.

The system for the medical care of cripples
which has been sponsored by the Central
Council was one in which the country was
divided into areas, each having a central
orthopaedic or general hospital with outlying clinics in the surrounding country, so
that, after a period in hospital, treatment
could be continued near the patient’s home.
Local authorities, which varied greatly in the

extent to which they carried out their legal
obligations, were not obliged to do anything
for non-tuberculous cripples, unless destitute.
The Central Council co-ordinated voluntary
and official effort and attempted to secure
official action in fields which were closed to
voluntary activity. The Central Council also
administered the Lord Nuffield Fund for
Cripples.

Discussion .

Replying to a number of questions at the
close of the talk, Mr. Jackson Burrows said
that air-raid casualties had not entailed a
very great deal of extra work ; he reminded
his audience that they did not exceed the
number of road accidents. As to the proportion of crippled children in the population,
these amounted to between five and ten per
thousand, including persons needing treatment and who could be cured. No relationship had been established between congenital
deformities and attempted abortion ; reliable statistics of the latter were difficult to
obtain.

It was too soon to say what would be the
effects of evacuation on crippling diseases.
The break in treatment was always unfortunate, and, as far as after-care was concerned,
sight had been lost of a number of patients.
From the financial point of view there was
frequently a difference of opinion as to
whether the home or evacuation area local
authority was responsible for the cost of
treatment. Another query referred to the
financing of rehabilitation centres for injured
workmen ; these were almost entirely run by
employers, such as the London Midland and
Scottish Railway and the Midland Colliery
Owners Association, who carried their own
insurance. It was not possible to interest the
insurance companies in the financing of such
schemes because under the present law they
were compelled to lower the rate of premium
if they made more than a certain profit out
of workmen’s compensation. It was therefore not worth their while to assist in the
rapid restoration to work of the bulk of
injured workmen.

Mr. Bramwell thanked the speaker most
warmly for a very interesting lecture.
