EUGENICS AND CONSANGUINEOUS
MARRIAGES"

By ANTHONY M. LUDOVICI

E live in an age in which science

is extremely powerful, almost as

powerful as religion once was. But
a free-lance scientist like myself is sometimes
left wondering whether science is not often a
mask behind which the old powers of magic
and religion may still be seen grinning. One
piece of magic which I propose to divorce
from my science is the gratuitous segmentation of the human organism into body and
mind (soma and psyche) ; and contemplating
the problem of culture on this basis, I find,
a priori, that culture, in so far as it is social
harmony and order, must be the product of
an ordered, harmonious man. If, moreover,
I turn from the social chaos of to-day back to
the origins of the most harmonious and
orderly cultures, I suspect, without inquiry,
that the people who created these cultures
must have been unlike us at least in this, that
they were harmoniously constituted.

INBREEDING IN EARLIER CIVILIZATIONS

Turning from these a priori conclusions to
fact, we find not only that these early cultures were extremely harmonious, but that
their power and influence have been so great
that our own culture owes what little beauty
and harmony it possesses entirely to them.
A further interesting fact is that all these
early cultures arose in naturally or artificially
confined areas—in islands like Crete and
Japan, peninsulas like India, Greece, and
Italy, naturally enclosed areas like Peru,
Mesopotamia, and Egypt, and more or less
artificially enclosed areas like China and
Palestine—where broad-mindedness, the universal brotherhood of man, the love of one’s
neighbour, and other superior forms of claptrap were unknown. Furthermore, we know
that where intercourse with the outside

* The substance of a paper read before the Eugenics
Society on July 18th, 1933.

world, with the neighbour, is checked, the
secluded people are condemned to inbreeding
and close inbreeding ; indeed, in the only
cultures that have left a permanent mark on
the world, we find not only inbreeding, but
also a strong conscious tendency to keep
apart, to segregate. This tendency caused
not only a frontier of prejudice to spring up
between the secluded nation and the world,
but also a series of frontiers within the
nation itself, dividing off classes and castes, so
that within the inbred mass, smaller inbred
classes were formed.

It would seem as if men who had acquired
a set of special qualities possessed an instinct
to keep aloof from anyone who could adulterate these qualities. In healthy cultivated
man, this instinct is so pronounced as to be
a matter of common knowledge. Even
among the primitive peoples, it has been
noticed by scores of observers. Among the
peoples principally responsible for civilization
—the Egyptians, the Jews, and the Greeks—
the abhorrence of the stranger was so great
that the very word for stranger was a term of
opprobrium. And each of these peoples was
not only inbred but incestuous.

Can there be any connection between these
sets of facts—the fact that these peoples
created our civilization, the fact that they
lived in enclosed areas, and the fact that
they were closely inbred and incestuous?
There is a marked prejudice against consanguineous and particularly against incestuous matings in the modern world. Is it
possible that like other superstitions, like the
belief in the superiority of the psyche over the
soma, it is based on ancient magic ? If it is, it
is important to get rid of it, because the
people who were responsible for civilizing the
world were probably greater than a people
like ourselves who have left nostone unturned
in order to decivilize it.

147
148

GENETICS OF BREEDING

Breeding is the process of producing a new
individual by the conjunction of two germ
cells, male and female. In random-bred
stocks, the hereditary equipment of the
couple is different. Each contains factors or
developmental determiners of a kind different from the other. In mixed breeding,
therefore, one can picture the process of
their conjunction as an intermingling of wools
not only of different sets of colours, but of
different quality; and, as in random-bred
stocks there is always latent in the germ
plasm much that is deleterious, we must
imagine some of these wools as_ being
diseased or morbid.

Mixed breeding from a pair taken at
random in an unstabilized stock has three
principal results. It may, by a stroke of luck,
produce a new individual who is harmonious,
i.e. who presents a symmetrical pattern, and
who is free from morbid manifestations ; it
may, and usually does, produce an individual
who is inharmonious ; and if, by a similar
chance conjunction to that which united the
health-determining factors in the lucky
individual, the ill-health determining factors
happen to unite, it may produce an individual
with some more or Jess grave morbid manifestation. It should, however, always be
remembered that even the lucky individual
who looks healthy and sound in a randombred stock, bears in his hereditary equipment
the deleterious elements common to the
stock which produced his less-fortunate
brothers.

In inbred stocks the hereditary equipment
of the breeding pair is the same—i.e. except
probably for sex, each has the same factors
for determining the characters of the progeny.
Moreover, since inbreeding favours the
mendelizing out of determiners for developmental defects, and since, in an inbred stock
which has reached stability or become completely homozygous, morbidity-determining
factors have been eliminated, the new individual, except in the case of a morbid
mutation, is unlikely to be morbid. He is
likely to be harmonious and healthy, his
morphological characters afford some definite
indication of his hereditary equipment, and

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the health and physical harmony of his offspring become a more or less calculable
certainty if he is mated with his like.

If, however, inbreeding occurs in a stock
hitherto random-bred, it must be obvious
that, since deleterious factors are always
latent in the germ-plasm of such a stock,
similar morbid factors may be brought
together by joining a male and female of the
same family. This, it is true, quickly eliminates the “ unlucky strokes,’ and purifies the
stock. But the process may be expensive.
Its expense will be proportionate to the
amount of latent morbidity in the stock.

It is important to remember, however,
that random-breeding and mixed breeding
do not eliminate bad hereditary factors from
a stock, but merely cover them up. While
inbreeding does not create bad hereditary
factors, but merely tends to bring them out.

This is roughly what science has to say
about the two methods of breeding. It was
all perfectly plain eighty years ago. If the
biologists of the nineteenth century had
looked at history and life, they would have
seen that Nature was, as far as we can tell,
almost everywhere striving by inbreeding to
produce the desirable state of homozygosity,
and had implanted instincts in Man and most
beasts to that effect.

CONSANGUINEOUS MATING IN ANIMALS

What about the actual practice of Nature
and the breeder of animals? In the first
place, we know that the closest inbreeding
occurs in some plants—for example, the
common blue violet, garden beans, the many
species of the small evening primrose—in
which the egg-cells are fertilized by pollen
produced by the same individual. Selffertilization is also the rule in wheat, oats,
and the majority of other cereal crops—the
most important of cultivated plants. The
process cannot, therefore, be attended by
evil results, at least to these plants, otherwise
they would not be with us to-day.

Turning to animals, we find in them no
instinctive safeguard against incestuous mating. Reproduction in rats, mice, rabbits and
other rodents, according to Dr. Briffault,
takes place without any regard for relationEUGENICS AND CONSANGUINEOUS MARRIAGES

ship, and these animals are notorious for their
fertility and vigour. Among antelopes incestuous matings are the rule. The African
reedbuck, for instance, has two young at a
birth, male and female, which mate together
when mature. Only when one happens to die
by accident does out- or cross-breeding occur.
Brehm Strassen says this is true of the
smaller antelopes also, and MacDonald says
it is true of the red deer. Lyddeker claims
brother and sister mating for the tiger.
Among African buffaloes, Seton says, breeding occurs mainly among the immediate offspring of the same cow. The cattle from La
Plata in the Falkland Islands, not only
quickly multiplied from a few individuals,
but also broke up into smaller herds according to colour, and the close inbreeding out of
which the race sprang was thus intensified by
the animals’ own instincts. Rengger reports
the same conditions of horses in Paraguay
and Circassia. Darwin himself, after enumerating a number of cases of close consanguine
ous mating in cattle, sheep, and antelopes,

says ‘‘almost all the animals as yet mentioned
are gregarious, and the males most frequently
pair with their own daughters, for they expel
the young males as well as all intruders.”

According to Dr. A. C. Brehm, the nature
of the troop among monkeys makes constant
matings between the head of the horde and
his daughters, sisters and other close relations
wholly inevitable, and in fact among all polygamous animals, whether gorilla, wild boar,
or elephant, the leading male must enjoy the
favours of his daughters, grand-daughters,
and great-grand-daughters, so long as he is
able to keep other males away. Nor, as Huth
points out, does the incest cease when he is at
last turned out ; because the first in the field
will most probably. be his own sons and grandsons.

A new, and recently authenticated, case of
naturally determined incest, appears to have
been discovered by the British Museum
Expedition to the Gobi Desert in 1929, when
a bird, the Edérnis Pterovelox Gobtensis, was
found, which hatches twins at each birth, a
male and a female, and these same individuals
later mate and are monogamous. We also
know the rabbits of Australia, the pigs of

149

New Zealand, the cattle of South America—
all offspring of a few individuals let loose on
the soil. According to Harnady a classical
example of a stock of animals bred from only
three ancestors is afforded by the red deer of
New Zealand. The original three specimens
were introduced from England in 1864, and
only ten years ago the herd numbered 5,000.
Yet they show no signs of disease but are
indeed superior in vigour and constitution
to the original parent stock.

THE EXPERIENCE OF BREEDERS

The evidence from the practice of experienced breeders conclusively points to the
best results being obtained from the closest
inbreeding.

But, just as natural selection eliminates
individuals which are the outcome of two
polluted streams becoming confluent in consanguineous unions, so the wise breeder,
imitating Nature’s way, carefully weeds out
unhappy specimens. If morbid or lethal
factors still exist in the stock’s germ-plasm,
and they happen to come together from both
sides in the mating of close relatives, then
instead of a confluence of rivers of pure
water, a confluence of impure streams
occurs, which results in a stream doubly
contaminated.

But it is remarkable that owing to the
ethico-theological superstition against inbreeding and incest, bad and ignorant
breeders have, until recently, always ascribed
to close inbreeding fer se, and not to the
pollution of the confluent streams, the
disappointing results of their methods—so
much so, indeed, that not only Darwin, who
consulted many such ignorant breeders, but
countless other authorities, took it for
granted that inbreeding must be bad, particularly as it was forbidden by the Table of
Affinities.

Settegast, in 1868, in Germany, took an
even stronger stand than Darwin against inbreeding, with the result, as Kronacher
shows, that for fifty years nobody ever heard
of a reputable breed of German cattle or
horses. And it was only when de Chapeaurouge and Lehndorff reversed Settegast’s
I50

theological prejudices that Germany began
once again to produce reputable strains of
animals.

Apart from all theorists, however, knowledgeable breeders all over the world have
from time immemorial practised inbreeding,
accompanied by careful selection. As long
ago as 1823, N. H. Smith, a famous breeder,
long resident among the Arabs, wrote: “I
cannot say how often an incestuous breed
may be carried on before degeneracy occurs,
as I am not aware of that being the case in
any instance, and experience is in favour of
breeding from son and mother, father and
daughter.’’ And it is this incestuous stock
that has given our race-horses some of their
finest qualities. The Clydesdale breed of
horses, as Calder shows, is also closely inbred,
80 or go per cent. of the horses in the recent
volumes of the Shire Stud Book going back
in direct line to three stallions, living 60 or 70
years ago—William the Conqueror, Lincolnshire Lad, and Matchless. Among dogbreeders, de Chapeaurouge produced a closely
inbred stock of pugs with complete success.
N. H. Gentry reports from America a successfully inbred stock of Berkshire pigs,
while a Dutch landowner recently reared a
stock of middle white breed without any evil
results from one imported boar and two sows.
Kronacher, starting with one male and three
females (a mother and two daughters) bred a
stock of ordinary goats, in and in for eight
generations, without any loss of size, physical
development, milking capacity, fertility or
vitality. Indeed their fertility tended to
increase. And he declares that in this case he
practised no selection whatever.

In cattle the success of close inbreeding is
so startling that Darwin felt compelled to
suggest that some exception to Nature’s
supposed law against incest must have been
made in their favour! The famous cow
Restless came of the most persistent inbreeding. The bull Bolingbroke, with his
half-sister Phoenix, produced the bull Favourite. Favourite, with his mother, produced
the cow Young Phoenix, a celebrated animal.
With his daughter, Favourite then produced
the famous bull Comet. He was then put to
his daughter’s daughter, and again to his

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

daughter’s daughter’s daughter. The product
of this last union had 93°75 per cent. of
Favourite’s blood in her, and was put to the
bull Wellington, who had 62°5 per cent. of
Favourite’s blood. This union produced
Clarissa, an admirable cow, who with the
bull Lancaster (having 68-75 per cent. of
Favourite’s blood in his veins) produced the
celebrated cow Restless.

FURTHER EXPERIMENTAL DATA

Such was the practice of Nature’s experienced breeders when Darwin wrote the
first authoritative book on breeding, and yet
so great was the ethico-religious bias of the
day that, although he recognized crossing as
a cause of degeneracy, he concluded that too
close consanguinity must lead to weakness,
sterility and greater susceptibility to disease.

Overlooking a good deal of what experienced breeders said, and all the historical and
anthropological evidence, other nineteenthcentury scientists seem to have been influenced by the cases where the inbreeding of
tainted stocks had, of course, led to bad
results. Moreover, they performed experiments of their own, which, astonishing as it
may seem, without exception proved that
inbreeding was harmful, thus confirming the
following of Darwin’s findings :

(a) That the consequences of close inbreeding were loss of size, constitutional vigour, and fertility.

(6) That the crossing of animals and plants
not closely related was highly beneficial and even necessary.

Recently these conclusions began to be
doubted. In 1916 Professor Castle stated
that he had successfully bred Drosophila,
brother and sister, for 59 generations, without obtaining any diminution in either vigour
or fertility. Moenkhaus crossed the same fly,
brother and sister, for 75 generations, without
harmful consequences. Hyde and Schultze
achieved the same result with mice. Castle
tried rats, and Popenoe guinea-pigs, and both
concluded that no deleterious effects could be
ascribed to the system of mating. King
experimented with white rats, mating brother
and sister regularly for 22 generations, and
EUGENICS AND CONSANGUINEOUS MARRIAGES

among these inbred rats some were obtained
which proved actually superior to the stock
rats from which they had sprung. The males
were 15 per cent. heavier, and the females
3 per cent., while the fertility was nearly 8
per cent. higher.

Commenting on these experiments, Rice
says: ‘‘ These results lead to the very
definite suspicion that the earlier investigators unconsciously selected the animals in
such a way as to lead to the diminished fertility and vitality, or else even used defective
strains in their experiments.’’ According to
Crew, ‘‘ Consanguinity itself is no bar to
mating. If inbreeding results in disappointment, all that has happened is that that
which previously was hidden in a heterozygous stock has now been brought to the surface. Inbreeding is only disastrous if the
ingredients of disaster are already in the
stock. If inbreeding exposes the undesirable,
it equally thoroughly emphasizes the desirable, and the desirable will breed true when
complete homozygosis in respect of these
characters is attained.”” Thus to be successful, inbreeding must be attended with the
most rigorous selection.

As a formula for the respective effects of
inbreeding and out- or cross-breeding, I
suggest the following :

Inbreeding canalizes and isolates health
and desirable qualities, just as it canalizes
and isolates ill-health and undesirable qualities. Cross-breeding conceals and spreads illhealth and undesirable qualities, and thus
contaminates desirable stocks. But it also
tends to improve poor or degenerate stocks
at the expense of sound stock.

INCEST IN MAN

In discussing the problem in relation to
Man, it is interesting to recall how far the
endogamic instincts of cultivated human
stocks led to intensive inbreeding within
certain groups. In Egypt, in addition to the
national endogamy which forbade mixing
with the foreigner, incestuous unions prevailed both among the people and within the
ruler groups. In the golden age of the Theban
Empire, seven kings in the Eighteenth
Dynasty married their sisters ; in the Nine
151

teenth all but three did so ; in the Twentieth
every king married his sister. Kings married
their sisters in the Sixteenth, Thirteenth and
Twelfth Dynasties, and as early as the
Fourth. And when the Lagidae ruled Egypt,
they could not afford to disregard this
ancient custom. Thus Cleopatra, whose wit,
beauty and intelligence are proverbial, was
the daughter of a brother and sister, greatgrand-daughter of another brother and sister,
and a great-great-grand-daughter of Berenice
who was both cousin and sister to her
husband. Egypt declined only when her
endogamic fences broke down.

Persia, strictly endogamic, had an incestuous royal house, and the Magian aristocracy
married their mothers, daughters and sisters.
According to Robertson Smith, the Phoenicians, and according to Périer the Assyrians,
were regularly incestuous, as were also the
Scythians and the Tartars. The Jews, also
an endogamic people, were surrounded by
nations who were all mating consanguineously
for the sake of purity, and probably health,
too. It is likely, therefore, that at least the
aristocrats among the Jews also practised
incest, in spite of the table of prohibited
degrees. Incestuous practices are known to
have been common in the Siamese aristocracy, among the Arabs who allowed them
down to Mahomed’s time, and among the
Burmese, Cambodians and Mongols.

In Britain, as late as the fifth century, we
find Vortigern marrying his own daughter.
Nor could the practice have been condemned,
since the issue of this sinful union was none
other than St. Faustus. According to Strabo,
the ancient Irish married without distinction
their mothers and sisters, and Heineccius
tells us it was customary for the ancient
Germans to marry their sisters. There is
overwhelming evidence that the Peruvians
were strictly endogamic. The proud Incas,

refusing to mix their blood, married their

sisters ; and.it is said that the soldiers and
nobility customarily followed the royal
example.

As to more recent instances of incest
among human beings, I have collected
accounts of no less than thirty primitive
communities in which incest was practised
152

when they were first visited, but here I can
do no more than refer to them, as also to the
monographs of authorities like Shapiro,
Rodenwaldt, Fischer, and Voisin on such
closely inbred, though originally crossed
stocks as the Pitcairn islanders, the Kisar
Hybrids, the Bastards of Rehoboth, and the
people of the island of Batz, all of whom are
examples of almost contemporary experiments in human breeding with close consanguinity without harmful results. Concluding his study of the hybrids of Kisar,
Rodenwaldt says: “‘ We are surely entitled
to conclude that men in the past have been
too hasty in ascribing to the consequences of
consanguinity what were really the result of
environmental influences.”’

Thus we have seen that Man, like some of
the animals, seems to have an instinct
impelling him to canalize qualities acquired
with pains. It seems as if it were a law of
Nature, not, as Darwin thought, to have
crosses, but to avoid them. Even in those
tribes and races where incest is illegal, we
often find the rulers or chiefs deliberately
infringing the prohibited degrees to keep their
blood pure. For instance in Burmah, marriage with half-sisters is forbidden, but the
King always marries his half-sister. In Siam
the people may not marry nearer relatives
than third cousins, but the King may marry
his sister and his daughter. The same is true
of the higher classes in Cambodia, of the
chiefs of the Marianne and Ladrone Islands,
in Hawaii, Nukuhiva, Tahiti and Madagascar, and it was also true of the Northern
American Indians of New England. In fact,
as the Kalmucks say, ‘‘ Great folk and dogs
have no relatives.”” Nor are the people addicted to these practices degenerate or diseased ;
on the contrary, all travellers comment on
their great vigour and beauty.

There is even a case of a people living,
more or less in a state of Nature, who,
according to Sir Basil Thomson, are actually
benefited by inbreeding. Among this people
—the Fijians—those stocks which have
adhered to the ancestral custom requiring
first-cousin marriages, are very much the
superiors from every physical point of view
of those who no longer practise, or else forbid,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

first-cousin marriages, and the latter are even
said to be dying out, while the former have a
higher birth rate and greater vitality.

According to Junghuhn the Bataks of
Sumatra, who also habitually marry their
first-cousins, are the finest people in the
Indian Archipelago. The chiefs in Polynesia
and New Zealand have all been noticed for
their superior height, looks and vigour. And
throughout Polynesia the closest consanguinity occurs in mating among the chiefs.

There can, therefore, be but little doubt
that Man is as capable as some of the animals
of thriving on close consanguineous matings,
if the streams that become confluent are
pure ; in fact that when once a human stock
has become quite pure close inbreeding is
the only means of maintaining it so.

BIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF MISCEGENATION

I cannot enter now into the history of the
controversy that has raged between the
advocates of inbreeding and their opponents.
I cannot do more than affirm that none of
the ancients had the faintest notion that it
could be condemned on biological grounds.
Even to-day hardly any two authorities
agree as to why inbreeding and incest were
condemned among many peoples, at least for
the populace, and profound students, like Sir
James Frazer, Ernest Crawley, Malinowski
and Freud, account for the condemnation,
each in his own way.

The moment, of course, that men began to
think biologically, it is easy to see why they
were prompt in ascribing to divine wisdom a
rule which, when broken by badly tainted
stocks, appeared to lead to havoc. They
reasoned that the havoc was due to the consanguinity, and did not know it was due to
the confluence of two tainted streams. And
thus, arguing backwards, they justified
pseudo-scientifically a rule that had once
arisen for no biological reason whatever.

What do inbreeding and outbreeding or
cross-breeding respectively mean to the
health of a people ? It is impossible to separate the psychological from the physiological ;
but Charles Darwin and many others, who
contrive to do so, agree that outbreeding,
EUGENICS AND CONSANGUINEOUS MARRIAGES

cross-breeding and miscegenation are injurious to the mental and moral qualities of
a race or variety.

Random breeding may destroy mental
harmony by combining in one individual
emotional reflexes which may be, and often
are, conflicting. In this sense, the extreme
random breeding of to-day is probably not
unconnected with the increase in mental
instability and possibly,'too, with the increase
in insanity and mental defectiveness. In
fact, it is probable that to-day not one of us
knows the supremely exalted and exhilarating feelings of a being who is thoroughly
harmonious and healthy because he is inbred.

The chief effects of miscegenation on the
constitution are: firstly, degeneracy, by the
reversion that is induced; secondly, dysfunction and disease owing to the production
of individuals whose bodies are discordant
jumbles of parts from various unlike stocks ;
and thirdly, increasing morbidity, owing to
the fact that there is no canalization of
disease, none of health, and deleterious
hereditary factors are spread even among
sound stocks. Let me take these in their
order.

Darwin and others have shown that outbreeding and cross-breeding lead to reversion,
or at least to the loss of acquired characteristics, which is the same thing. This has been
demonstrated in pigeons, ducks, horses and
other animals. Darwin claimed that it was
so in Man. It may, as Otto Seeck maintains,
have caused the rapid decline of the ancient
Greeks and Romans. But I think I have said
enough to show that culture and civilization
have been almost exclusively the creation of
inbred stocks, and therefore to lead to the
view that the present age of extremely
random breeding must or should be an age
of disintegration and decay.

The fact that out- and cross-breeding must
lead to ill-health often of the most obscure
and undiagnosible kind, by producing discordant individuals—or to put it moderately,
the fact that miscegenation and random
breeding cannot lead to such perfect health
as inbreeding and incest—has not yet been
recognized by medicine, but it soon must be.
And here I suggest an enormous amount of

153

fresh light remains to be shed on the etiology
of dysfunction.

Any intelligent man facing the facts could
have come a4 priori to the conclusion science
is reaching to-day. For, if breeding is the
conjunction of two cells and their production
of a new individual can be pictured, as I
pictured it in the opening, as the intertwining
of two sets of wools, then it seems elementary
that, if harmony and beauty are to be the
result, the wools should come from parents
who, apart from sexual differences, have at
least the same hereditary equipment. Otherwise something inharmonious must result,
something in conflict with itself not only in
the morphological sense, but also in instincts
and impulses as well; and in a living
organism, discord and disparate parts mean
ill-health, mental instability, degeneracy.

“ DISHARMONIES ” DUE TO OUTBREEDING

The evidence confirmatory of these views
is very disquieting. For example, Professor
Lundborg tells us that in the lower jaw alone
two parts can be inherited independently :
the angle of the jaw from one parent and the
chin from the other. He further declares that
there are at least four different parts of the
nose that can be inherited independently, and
that cross-breeding, or out-breeding, frequently leads to defects in the endocrine
balance of the body. Davenport and others
have found that the size of the jaw and of the
teeth can be independently inherited. But,
as Davenport points out, and as was obvious
to me twenty years ago, if parts of the jaw
and nose can be inherited independently,
why not other parts of the body, so that
when the parents are unlike, or display any
disparity in build, size, or constitution, there
may follow all kinds of disparities in the
organs—a heart too small or too large, a liver
out of all proportion to the intestine, and so
on. And Davenport, in studying the miscegenation in the North and South of
America, says that this is what actually
happens. In this population there are tall
men with internal organs too small, or circulatory system inadequate, and short men
with similar disharmonies.
154

In Hirschsprung’s disease, which leads to
stubborn constipation, the colon is out of all
proportion to the size of the sufferer; in
congenital dislocation of the hip, a condition
which, according to Bryn, is unusually
common among miscegenated stocks, there
is a disproportion between the ball of the
femur and the socket in the pelvis. Dr.
Kathleen Vaughan and others think that the
fundamental cause of obstetrical difficulty is
lack of accord between the foetal head and
the maternal pelvis; while the condition
known as heterochromia also gives rise to
trouble in one eye.

But these are extreme cases. How much
of the subacute and chronic dysfunction we
see to-day may not be due to less pronounced
disharmonies of this kind, because of our
rooted bias in favour of mixed and random
breeding ?

Although to-day in England and Europe,
we may be no longer concerned with actual
races, but only with populations, within
these populations the utmost confusion of
types prevails. There is complete confusion
of different sizes, shapes and symmetries.
And this “ biological proletariat,’ forbidden
incest, and led by magic prejudice to avoid
even cousin marriages, cannot help producing
generation after generation of people who
must inevitably suffer from all the consequences of mental and bodily disharmony.
True, Rodenwaldt discovered that there
appeared to be a limit to the independent
inheritance of psycho-physical characters.
He says that he was led to ask the question
whether a limit did not exist to the characters
which remain correlated in crossing, and to
the characters which crossing allotted at
random.

But even if, on his authority, we conclude
that psycho-physical characters are as a rule
handed on in groups which prevent a too
frequent occurrence of lethal combinations,
on his own showing, an enormous number of
psycho-physical characters are inherited
independently, and can therefore combine in
the child of disparate parents to produce all
kinds of mental and physical maladjustments
—a fact confirmed by Lenz, Lundborg,
Fischer, Ruggles Gates and others.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

A further reason for condemning out- and
cross-breeding is that they disseminate
taints; they do not get rid of deleterious
factors. Darbishire’s experiments have
clearly shown that a recessive gene, although
it may be associated with its dominant
allelomorph for generations, and made inactive, is not influenced by this long association and loses none of its effectiveness. So
that random and mixed breeding, in addition
to causing psycho-physical disharmony,
merely covers up tracks and hands on
deleterious factors. In a biological proletariat like the population of modern England,
in which most stocks possess the utmost
variety of morbid factors, mixed breeding
merely conceals taints until the cumulative
effect produces total degeneration or lethal
disease. As Professor Castle says: “ Continuous crossing only tends to hide inherent
defects, not to exterminate them, and inbreeding only tends to bring them to the
surface, not to create them.”

PRACTICAL PROPOSALS

I suggest, therefore, not only that we are
in need of a purification of our stocks, but
that by prolonging our present method of
random and mixed breeding, we are merely
living on, and destroying, the health capital
still represented by our uncontaminated
stocks. While there is yet time we must
canalize our healthy streams and canalize our
morbid streams. And if we cannot compel
the unhealthy not to breed, and cannot
guarantee the healthy spouses worthy of
them, let us at least encourage both lots to
marry their like or else make them do so.

The simplest way to accomplish this end
is not to found research councils and then to
wait patiently until endless experiments at
last provide the criteria for artificial human
selection—for this process may last so long
that at the end of the work we may be too
degenerate to wish to avail ourselves of the
knowledge derived from it. The simplest
way is to break down the barriers now preventing the mating of close relatives, to make
it plain to all that these barriers are based on
magic, and to spread a new feeling and a new
prejudice through the world, which will be
EUGENICS AND CONSANGUINEOUS MARRIAGES

against the marriage of unlike or unrelated
people.

This policy would have the effect of
immediately canalizing desirability and undesirability, and would straightway separate
the sheep from the goats. True, the deaths
from disease and the incidence of insanity in
the unsound stocks would be heavy, and it
would require the utmost courage to go on.
But English people do not usually lack the
courage to pursue the things they want. The
question is, do they really want health and
sanity ? Or are they already too debilitated
to care?

Between 1925 and 1930, 29,132 people
were killed in England and Wales by motor
vehicles of all kinds; 5,319 of these were
children under ten. In spite of this high and
utterly futile death rate from cars, there has
been no national protest. Why? Because
English people want cars, and are quite prepared to see 30,000 other people sacrificed in
five years in order to get what they want.
But do English people want health and
sanity to the same degree? Are they prepared to sacrifice constructively and usefully
more people than they now sacrifice uselessly
for the motor car? It may be doubted. —

There is no reason, however, to suppose
that it would necessarily be an expensive
experiment in the healthy stocks. The
investigations of G. H. Darwin into the
results of first-cousin marriages, even among
random-bred and deeply contaminated stock,
revealéd a surprisingly low incidence of
morbidity. In fact, he discovered that the
percentage of offspring from cousin marriages
to be found in asylums is no greater than the
percentage of offspring from non-related
persons ; and as regards fertility, he found
that the balance was slightly in favour of
cousin marriages.

Truth to tell, from the point of view of
sound eugenic policy, while incestuous mating might immediately be encouraged among

155

tainted or morbid stocks, so that disease and
deleterious hereditary factors should become
canalized as soon as possible, it would
probably be wise to delay for a generation or
two an immediate recourse to the closest
consanguinity in sound stocks, because of the
fear of over-rapidly isolating strains with a
too limited set of desirable qualities; and
for such stocks it would probably be advisable to be content with using pressure to
obtain as many first-, second-, and thirdcousin marriages as possible for a little while.
But for both schemes, a new and very
enlightened attitude will have to be adopted
by modern mankind, and much latter-day
magic will have to be axed. For it is probable
that a scheme of canalization of disease and
health would not be practicable without
artificial selection accompanied by legalized
infanticide for the worst products of the
diseased stocks.

Many years ago, long before a number of
the facts I have laid before you were known
to me, I read a paper before the British
Society for the Study of Sex Psychology, in
which I answered affirmatively the question :
Would a revival of incest not be the salvation
of modern man? I was, of course, jeered at.
But it may interest you to know the views
of an eminent biologist on this very point.
Writing in 1927, Professor Crew of Edinburgh said: “ Inbreeding is only disastrous
if the ingredients of disaster are already in
the stock. Inbreeding will purify a stock, but
the process may be most expensive. It would
seem to be a fact, sufficiently secure for the
foundation of sociological practice, that
incest between individuals of undoubtedly
sound stock is a sound biological proposition.”

But it may be a long time before mankind,
in these democratic times, so hopelessly
under the sway of magic, will see the wisdom
of this course.

———— aa

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 3.
