A. M. THOMSON
M.B., Ch.B., D.P.H., Honorary Deputy Director, Obstetric Medicine Research Unit

(Medical Research Council), University of Aberdeen

Maternal Stature and Reproductive

Efficiency

HE ASSOCIATION BETWEEN good

physique, good health and good food has

long been recognized, and is one of the
central themes in Lord Boyd Orr’s classic
monograph, Food, Health and Income’. Orr
recognized that dietary and other environmental
improvements can do more than permit the
individual to attain his full inherited capacity
for growth and health, but did not concern
himself about differences of growth potential.
For example, he noted that, in Africa, the wellfed Masai were much taller than the ill-fed
Kikuyu, but did not ask whether part at least
of this difference might be genetic.

During the last war, Orr was appointed as
Chairman of a Committee to study the problems of infant mortality in Scotland. The report, Infant Mortality in Scotland? stressed the
importance of defective diets as causes of poor
maternal health and physique, and hence of
conditions such as prematurity, low vitality of
the infant at birth, and inability to breast-feed.
Professor (now Sir) Dugald Baird was a
member of the Orr Committee and in his own
researches looked for an index of health and
physique. The measurement of stature had the
merits of simplicity and objectivity and began
to be undertaken as a routine part of antenatal
examination in Aberdeen. In a series of preliminary reports':234 it was shown that the rates
of delivery by Caesarean section and forceps
and the foetal mortality rates were lower, and
the birth weights of babies higher, in tall than

* Part 2 of a paper read at a Members’ Meeting of
the Eugenics Society on May 20th, 1959.

in short women. The measurement of stature
in our antenatal clinics has long ceased to be
an academic exercise; it is recognized to give
valuable help to the obstetrician in forecasting
the probable course of events.

Stature and Reproductive Efficiency

In Aberdeen, the interpretation of such trends
is not obviously complicated by differences of
race, and the simplest hypothesis is that groups
of short women contain proportionately more
stunted individuals than groups of tall women.
This idea was strengthened by Professor Baird’s
colleague, Dr. R. M. Bernard,® who in 1952
reported the results of X-ray pelvimetry in 100
women under 5 ft, and 100 women over 5 ft.
5 in. in height. Naturally, the pelves of the short
women were generally smaller than those of the
tall, but the crucial finding was that thirty-four
of the short women had a flattened pelvic brim,
as compared with only seven of the tall women.
It is accepted that the normal shape of the
pelvic brim is round or ovoid, and flattening
probably represents a distortion similar in kind
to, though less in degree than, the gross flattening found in women who have suffered from
rickets. Since flattening of the pelvic inlet
increases the risk of difficult labour, it is not
likely to be a variant of normal growth. An
interesting by-product of Bernard’s study is that
exactly similar differences were found in the
pelves of tall and short males. Indeed, the
triangular, so-called “android”, pelvic brim is
almost certainly a form of flattening, a sign of
stunting and not of masculinity.

The data I am now about to present refer to

167

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1959, 51, 3.
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

26,589 births in Aberdeen.* Though not all of
the mothers had finished growing, the proportion in the younger age-range is small, and we
have verified that the trends I am about to
illustrate are not altered when the younger
women are excluded.

Figure 1 gives the prematurity and perinatal
death rates in all women measured, and demonstrates a fairly steady decline with increasing
stature.** Similar trends are present within
each parity and in age-groups within parities.

FIGURE 1

[PERINATAL MORTALITY AND PREMATURITY RATES (%).
25,958 single births all pregnancies Aberdeen city.

PREMATURITY

can a a= ape
PERINATAL
3 MORTALITY

A

 

bd oo ot 2 2 “ os oe ov

Rates per cent of prematurity (birth weight 2,500 g. or
less) and of perinatal deaths, according to maternal
stature. All Aberdeen maternities.

From now on, to simplify interpretation, I
shall speak of the primiparae only. This is the
largest and most important category, comprising over 10,000 births. All mothers have at
least a first baby, and by concentrating on

INCHES

* The data are for all legitimate single births to
women resident in the city of Aberdeen. Records
were used of first births during the decade 1948-57,
and of second and later births during 1950-57. Social
data required in some analyses were not recorded
routinely before 1950. Maternal heights were not
recorded in every case, but the losses range only
from 1°1 per cent in primiparae to 5:3 per cent in
women having a fourth or later baby. The exclusions
do not seem to have been selected in any particular
way, and certainly cannot account for the trends
described in this paper.

** Prematurity is conventionally defined in terms of
babies weighing 2500 g. or less at birth, and does
not connote any particular period of gestation.
Perinatal deaths comprise stillbirths and deaths in
the first week of life.

158

primiparae we can eliminate problems arising
from the association between social class and
size of family.

Table 1 confirms and extends the preliminary
findings of Baird. If short women have a higher
incidence of contracted pelvis than tall women,
we would expect to find in them a higher incidence of difficult labour due to disproportion
between pelvis and the baby. Allotting a cause
to difficult labour becomes less easy among
primigravidae in the older age-groups, among
whom the decision to deliver by Caesarean
section is often weighted by considerations such
as infertility. I have therefore excluded primigravidae aged thirty years or more from Table
1. The rates show steep gradients with height
for perinatal deaths attributed to birth trauma,
Caesarean sections undertaken primarily because of disproportion, and difficult labour of
mechanical origin.f It can be said that a primigravida over 64 inches in height will practically
never have to be delivered by Caesarean section
on account of disproportion, while more than
4 per cent of primigravidae under 60 inches in
height will require Caesarean section for this
reason alone. The trends shown in Table 1
would no doubt be steeper were it not for the
facts that small women tend to produce smaller
babies than tall women and are, as a group,
somewhat younger, so that they are less prone
to disordered uterine action in labour.

TABLE 1

INCIDENCES OF DIFFICULT LABOUR AND CAESAREAN SECTION
DUE TO MECHANICAL CAUSES, AND OF PERINATAL
MORTALITY DUE TO BIRTH TRAUMA, IN PRIMIPARAE AGED
UNDER 30 YEARS. NUMBERS OF BIRTHS AND STILLBIRTHS
ON WHICH THE RATES ARE BASED ARE SHOWN IN
PARENTHESES (SEE FOOTNOTE tf, BELOW).

Difficult Perinatal
Labour due Caesarean Deaths attrito mechanical Sections for butable to

Maternal causes disproportion Birth Trauma
Height (per (per per
(inches) thousand) thousand) thousand)

—60 82:2 (925) 43°6 (963) 8-6 (963)
—62 37:0 (2,349)  10°8 (2,510) 6:0 (2,510)
— 64 25°4 (2,790) 4-2 (3,070) 5-2 (3,070)
— 66 12°8 (1,635) 0-0 (1,862) 2-7 (1,862)

66+ 9-1 (548) 0-0 (680) 0:0 (680)

In view of the evidence of pelvic contraction

+ The rates for difficult labour are based on confinements in hospital. The available information on
domiciliary confinements does not permit the accurate
classification of difficult labours.
MATERNAL STATURE AND REPRODUCTIVE EFFICIENCY

in a high proportion of short women it is not
surprising that perinatal deaths due to birth
trauma show a clear association with maternal
stature. But Table 2 shows that a similar
association is present in perinatal deaths due to
other causes; the general trend shown is reflected in most individual cause-groups, such
as deaths due to unexplained prematurity, preeclampsia, ante-partum haemorrhage and foetal
malformation. It is evident therefore that, whatever the nature of the delivery, the foetus of a
short woman has lower vitality and is less likely
to be well-grown and to survive than that of a
tall woman.

TABLE 2
PERINATAL MORTALITY RATES PER 1,000 BIRTHS, ABERDEEN
PRIMIPARAE, 1948-57. NUMBERS OF DEATHS ON WHICH
THE RATES ARE BASED ARE SHOWN IN PARENTHESES.

Mortality due to:
Maternal
height Birth All other All causes
(inches) trauma causes
—60 6 (9) 44:8 (47) 53-4 (56)
—62 5-7 (16) 28-7 (81) 34-4 (97)
— 64 5-2 (18) 26-2 (90) 31-4 (108)
66 2:3 (7) 22:6 (49) 25°4 (55)
66+ 20°6 (17) 21-8 (18)

The data I have shown are samples of the
range of phenomena in which tallness can be
shown to connote “‘merit’’, in the sense of more
physiological childbearing. I could also show
you, for example, that tall women are more
likely to bear twins than short women, and that
their twin babies are more likely to survive.
This is in line with the fact that larger, and
better-fed, sheep are more likely to have twin
lambs than smaller and less well-fed sheep.'4
The evidence extends beyond the phenomena of
maternity; for example, the study of a sample
of Aberdeen mothers has shown that, in each
social class, tall women tend to obtain higher
scores in intelligence tests than small women.* 13

Stature and Social Class

We know that short women are much less
common in the upper than in the lower social
classes, so the next step is to analyse the data
by social class as well as by stature. Husbands’
occupations, grouped according to the Registrar-General’s standard classification, have been
used to indicate social status.

Figure 2 shows the prematurity and the
perinatal mortality rates in primiparae, by

height and social class. The numbers in some
groups are rather small, and the patterns are a
little irregular, but, since similar patterns are
shown by multiparae, three general conclusions
seem to be tenable.

FIGURE 2

MATERNAL HEIGHT, PREMATURITY AND PERINATAL MORTALITY IN HUSBANDS’ SOCIAL CLASSES
First single pregnancies, Aberdeen city, 1948-57.

» Prematurity rate %.

 

A] 60 a @. 63 “4 65 66 a
Maternal height in inches.

70 Perinatal mortality per 1,000.

 

s9 60 ol a 6 4 6s 64 0

Maternal height in inches.
Rates of prematurity (per cent) and of perinatal mortality

(per thousand) according to maternal stature and
husbands’ social class. Aberdeen first single maternities.

1$9
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

First, at each height, there is a social class
gradient in the expected direction. Thus, at
height 62”, the prematurity rate in social classes
I and II is about 6 per cent and in classes IV
and V about 11 per cent. Primiparae of height
about 61” in classes I and II and 64” in classes
IV and V have similar prematurity rates, about
8 per cent. I shall not speculate here about the
possible meanings of such differences but obviously they have considerable practical importance as well as great theoretical interest.

Second, the slopes of the three lines are
roughly parallel throughout the greater part of
the height distribution; there is certainly no tendency for the influence of height to be less in
some social classes than in others. This finding
greatly complicates the interpretation of the
meaning of stature in relation to reproductive
efficiency. It can, I believe, be accepted as
“firm”, since there is no sign of convergence
in the data for multiparae or within age groups
in each parity. The parallelism also remains
when more extreme social groups are compared. Our original hypothesis was that poor
nutrition during growth produces stunting, and
that stunting is much less common in the upper
than in the lower social classes. The variance of
stature in the upper social classes is therefore
regarded mainly as a matter of genetic differences. On this basis, it seemed reasonable to
conclude that height should “matter” less in
Classes I and II than in Classes IV and V, so
far as the phenomena of reproduction are
concerned. But differences of height seem to
have as much influence in the upper as in the
lower social classes. One is forced to the conclusion that the original hypothesis is inadequate. It can scarcely be wholly wrong, in view
of the evidence of frequent pelvic distortion in
short women and its comparative rarity in tall
women. The uncomfortable inference is that
women who are genetically short, whose growth
has not been stunted, are on the whole less
efficient at reproduction than women who are
genetically tall. I am not competent to discuss
whether the genes which determine growth are
somehow concerned with physiological functioning as a whole, but it looks as if they may
be. At all events, I have not succeeded in
isolating, by the use of an independent criterion,

160

any group of short women whose physiological
efficiency, as tested by maternity, is as good as
that of tall women. Groups of short women
seem always to be at a disadvantage.

Experience has shown that many epidemiological truths have the property of arousing
emotion. Medical journals have recently been
enlivened by the resistance of a Fellow of the
Royal Society to the idea that cigarette smoking
causes lung cancer. The addition of fluorides to
drinking water not only helps to prevent dental
caries but also arouses violent controversy, and
has caused the fall of at least one local government in England. Similarly, I have found that
data of the kind I am now presenting are apt
to arouse strong feelings in many people, especially people of small stature. Let me say plainly,
therefore, that I know that most short women
are capable of uncomplicated childbearing, and
that many tall women experience difficulty. But
I have failed to explain away, as artefacts, the
statistical trends under discussion. In my view,
they express real biological and social trends
which require assessment and explanation.

The third finding arising out of Figure 2, that
the gradients with height become reversed
among exceptionally tall women in the lower
social classes, is not entirely clear-cut as a fact.
In primiparae, it is most unlikely to be a chance
phenomenon. But it does not appear nearly so
clearly in multiparae. If it is indeed a fact, a
possible explanation may be that women with
an exceptionally high growth potential brought
up in poor surroundings and on a relatively
poor diet are at a disadvantage relative to
women who grew more slowly under similar
conditions.

In conclusion, I want to say something about
the social distribution of adult stature. I think
it is universally accepted that men and women
in the upper social classes have a greater mean
stature than those in the lower classes. |

The data I have at my disposal relate to married women with children, who form about twothirds of all women of childbearing age. A circumstance which will have to be taken into
account in any general theory of the distribution
of adult statures is that single and childless
women are on an average taller than women
with children. For example, the Joint Clothing
MATERNAL STATURE AND REPRODUCTIVE EFFICIENCY

Council, Ltd.!° found in its recent survey that
the mean height of both single and childless
married women was 63:0 inches, whereas that
of married women with children was 62°4
inches. The findings of O’Brien and Shelton"!
in an American survey for clothing manufacturers were similar. It may be that the average
man prefers to marry a “bonny wee thing” and
to have children by her, or that tall women are
more “choosy”? about the men they marry. I
believe it is generally true that men prefer not
to marry women taller than themselves; so that
tall women presumably have a more restricted
choice of partner. This is the only disadvantage
of tallness in women that I have been able to
discover.

Coming back to women who have borne one
child; Figure 3, prepared for me by my colleague Dr. R. Llsley, shows the percentages of

FIGURE 3
PERCENTAGES OF SHORT WOMEN ACCORDING TO CLASS OF
ORIGIN, PREMARITAL OCCUPATION AND HUSBAND’S SOCIAL

CLASS.
7,442 First single births. Aberdeen 1950-1957.

Husbond's
Wife's Soceat
eetcupation Closs

     

PERCENTAGE UNDER S$ 0° IN HEIGHT

Semi- and unskilled
manual (U) including
SC If fish workers

Skilled manual
father (S)
Percentages of short women (height under 5 ft. 1 in.)
according to occupation of father, pre-marital occupation, and husband’s occupation. Aberdeen first single
irths.

Occupation
of wife's Noone

short women (under 61 inches in height) in
groups according to the occupations of their
fathers, their own pre-marital occupations, and
the occupations of their husbands.* The num
* The Registrar-General’s social classification is not

well suited to female occupations, and in Figure 3 has
been modified as follows. “White-collar® jobs in
Class III are included with Classes I and II, giving a
“non-manual” (N) top category; the semi-skilled and

unskilled (U) group comprises Classes IV and V plus
fish workers from Class III; the skilled (S), group is
class III less non-manual occupations and fish
workers.

4—ER

bers in some sub-groups are small, and in those
with less than 100 subjects the directions of the
lines have been indicated only. But it is evident
that, even with this extremely comprehensive
social classification the proportions of short
women array themselves perfectly logically on
the basis that the lower the class, the higher the
proportion. Whatever the class of the father, the
shorter women tend to take the less skilled jobs
when they leave school; and whatever the premarital occupation, the shorter women tend to
marry men with the less skilled jobs.

Social Rewards and Biological Merit

The association between social class and the
proportion of short women appears to arise
because taller women tend to “drift”? towards
“superior” jobs and “superior” husbands,
whereas smaller women tend to drift towards
the lower end of the social scale. On our
original hypothesis, that shortness often implies
stunting whereas tallness tends to imply attainment of the growth potential, this picture is not
unexpected, though it is perhaps surprising that
occupations should reflect dietary and other
environmental influences upon growth with
such sensitivity.

But, as I have indicated earlier, stunting of
growth does not seem to be the whole story,
and we have to face the even more surprising
and more important probability that the distribution shown in Figure 3 illustrates also a process of genetic selection. Whatever interpretation is placed on the facts, we have the interesting problem of finding out why and how society
comes to reward tallness and all that tallness
implies. Dr. Leitch has already hinted that, in
its characterization of the human form for commercial and artistic purposes, society shows
awareness of those forms which are physiologically “meritorious.” The data I have shown give
statistical support to this idea, and also indicate
that the awareness extends into the fields of employment and family life. Furthermore, the
evolution of social rewards for biological merit
seems to be guided more sensitively than some
of us might have believed possible. It is clearly
assisted when there is a high degree of interclass mobility, and hindered when there is a
rigid “caste” system. :

161
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Social selection in this sense is also helped by
geographical mobility. The great majority of the
Aberdeen mothers in the lower social classes
were born and brought up in or near the city,
whereas a high proportion of those in the upper
classes migrated into the city, sometimes from a
considerable distance. In Aberdeen, as elsewhere, migrants tend to be taller than those
who do not migrate. Hence, if immigration is
not balanced by equivalent emigration, this
tends to increase the disparity between the
classes in terms of stature.

On grounds of improving diet and social conditions in general, it would be expected that the
mean stature of the adult population of Aberdeen should rise with the passage of time;
though this tendency would no doubt be counteracted by the relatively higher birth rate in the
shorter women of the lower social classes. Our
data do not show any increase of mean stature
during the past ten years. This may be because
even our youngest primiparae were born before
the beginning of the post-war Welfare State.
Those that appear first are usually drawn from
the lower social classes. We will have to wait
longer before the babies born in the 1940s
achieve adult stature and appear in large numbers in our maternity records. The secular trend
in the heights of school children appears to be
determined mainly during the pre-school and
early school years; later growth has little further
influence.’ There has, I know, been considerable controversy as to whether or not there has
been a secular change in the heights of British
adults during the last 100 years. I myself accept
the conclusion of Boyne and Leitch® that the
available British data are not adequate to settle
the question one way or another, but that there
is “clear evidence of improving stature in a
population similar to our own”, namely, that
of Scandinavia where much better records are
available.

Conclusions

Many questions remain, and in this paper I
have described only the preliminary findings in
an investigation that is proving to be more complex and interesting than we expected. Whatever the ultimate findings may be, the data
already available show clearly that there is a

162

continuous process of social selection, whereby
taller women move towards the top of the social
scale and smaller women move in the opposite
direction. It is equally clear that tallness connotes “merit”, at least in terms of the physiological efficiency of childbearing; and merit of
this kind is almost certainly accompanied by
merit in other respects. According to our
original hypothesis, all this was to be explained
in terms of nutritional and environmental experience; but it now looks as though there is
also a process of genetic selection by social
class. So the investigation of stature has farreaching implications for any inquiry into the
nature of socio-biological variations and the
direction of social change.

Acknowledgments

I would like to thank Professor Baird for
encouragement and advice, and Mr. W. Z.
Billewicz and Dr. R. Tlsley for assistance with
the investigations.

REFERENCES
Baird, D. 1945. J. Obstet. Gynaec. Brit. Emp.

2, 339.

Baird, D. 1949. Lancet, 1, 1079.

Baird, D. 1952. New England J. Med. 246, 561.

Baird, D. 1952. Amer. J. Obstet. Gynec. 63,

a and Scott, E. M. 1953. Eugen. Rev.

» 139.

Bernard, R. M. 1952. Edinb. Med. J. 59, Proc.

Edinb. Obstet. Soc. p. 1.

Boyne, A. W., Aitken, F. C., and Leitch, I.

1957. Nutr. Abstr. Rev. 27, 1. .

Boyne, A. W. and Leitch, I. 1954. Nutr. Abstr.

Rev, 24, 255.

Infant Mortality in Scotland. 1946. The report

of a sub-committee of the Scientific Advisory

Committee, Department of Health for Scot
land. Edinburgh. H.M.S.O.

10. Joint Clothing Council, Ltd. 1957. Women’s
Measurements and Sizes. London. H.M.S.O.

11. O’Brien, R. and Shelton, W. C. 1941. U.S.
Dept. of Agric. Misc. Publ. No. 454.

12. Orr,J. B. 1937. Food, Health and Income. 2nd
Ed. London. Macmillan.

13. Scott, E. M., Isley, R. and Thomson, A. M.
1957. J. Obstet. Gynaec. Brit. Emp. 63, 338.

14. Thomson, A. M. and Thomson, W. 1949.
Brit. J. Nutr. 2, 290.

—_
e

9 9 ND WwW PN
