J. B.S. HALDANE ON EUGENICS
By C. P. BLACKER, M.A., M.D.

ROFESSOR HALDANE has thought

and written much on _ evolution.

His latest book* is recorded as the

eighteenth to be published in the course

of some thirty years. Heredtty and Politics,

The Inequality of Man and Possible Worlds

have been among earlier titles. In most of

these eighteen books the author has discussed
eugenics.

Everything has a History, like several of its
forerunners, consists of essays previously
published in other journals, chiefly the
Datly Worker. But the last essay, called
Human Evolution: Past and Future, which
will most interest readers of the EUGENICS
-REvieEw, differs in origin from the others,
for it was delivered as a discourse at a
conference on Genetics, Paleontology and
Evolution held at Princeton University as

of a commemoration of its bicentenary.
Unfortunately we are not told when. The
essays are not dated.

But all are written with the lucidity,
persuasiveness and charm which are familiar
features of earlier writings; they exhibit,
furthermore, the customary encyclopedic
range and impressive learning; and they
reflect that quality of imaginativeness which
is the author’s chief asset as a popular
writer. With a unique didactic skill he can
bring seemingly remote subjects near to his
reader. He can unveil that which is recondite
and abstruse, and can demonstrate how it
makes contact with the ordinary man. A
young adolescent recently remarked to me
that Haldane was an “eye-opener.” The
term was used in a wholly underogatory
sense to mean that the author had opened
his eyes to things around him and had made
him ask “Why have I not realized that
before ? ”’

The reader of the last essay of Everything
has a History who has been duly impressed
by what has gone before may feel that the

* Everything has a History. 1951. Allen & Unwin.
6: .

IOS.

claims of eugenics to be regarded as a serious
subject are irremediably shattered. Such an
impression, if received, is mainly produced
by a weapon which, upon the minds of those
who have been adequately prepared, no one
can wield more effectively than Haldane—
an, aggressively modest nescience. The fact
might perhaps be overlooked that the
conference to which the author delivered this
discourse was concerned with palzontology.
Projected into the future, the time-scale of
palzontology takes us forwards millions of
years. In such a perspective, meek nescience
is fitting. In earlier essays, particularly those
assembled in the volume Fact and Faith,
published in 1934 by the Thinker’s Library,
this weapon of derisive nescience was
devastatingly employed as a form of counterattack against religious dogma. None is
better equipped by scientific attainments and
literary skill to use against eugenics the same
weapon, the derisory tones muted but none
the less perceptible, than Haldane. In his
authoritative voice, science proclaims
nescience.

What then does Haldane say in this essay ?
In the first of eight headed sections we are
reminded of some important dates which the
study of radio-active minerals enables us to
establish with about 10 per cent of error.
They delimit the palzontological conspectus
of the discourse. About 350 million years
ago, our ancestors were fish; 270 million
years ago, amphibians; 200 million, reptiles ;
and 70 million, mammals somewhat like
shrews, we are told. The last 20 million
years are more difficult to date, but the
Pekin man (Sznanthropus) lived about half
a million years ago. In a section of this essay
headed ‘‘ Controlled Evolution as an Ideal,”’
Haldane contends that if this ideal were
ignored our descendants half a million years
hence might differ from us, for better or
worse, about as much as we differ from the
Pekin man. At present, we do not know how
to control our evolution ; but the power to

146
HALDANE ON EUGENICS

do so may be acquired, in which event
changes might be speeded up a hundredfold,
so that conditions otherwise expectable
in 500,000 years might be attained in 5,000.
This period is rather less than a thousand
years longer than that which has elapsed
since the first fixed and certain date in
human history, namely that of a total
eclipse of the sun which occurred in 2283 B.c.
Five thousand years ago most men were
savages, though there existed enclaves of
civilization in Egypt and elsewhere. But for
three reasons we should not be deterred by
these wide perspectives from thinking ahead.
Power, in the first place, is less likely to be
abused if, before it is in our hands, we think
about how to use it. ‘‘ About 2,500 years
ago, the prophet Isaiah got the idea that all
the nations would be at peace. Isaiah’s idea
of universal peace was something like a
Jewish world empire. Ours ts an association
of friendly democracies’ (my _ italics).
““ Secondly,’’ says Haldane, “‘ we shall not
get the required knowledge in a hurry.
Even now we can only do a litile to alter the
anborn capacities of the next generation [my
italics]. Let us begin to think about what
sort of changes we want and criticize one
another’s ideas... .”’ Thirdly, something
even more important may be discovered on
the way. Columbus set out to find China,
but discovered America instead.

Under the heading “‘ Slow Development
as a Major Evolutionary Trend ’’ Haldane
makes the same point that Dr. G. C. L.
Bertram made in his Galton Lecture (1951),
namely that a man takes longer to reach
maturity than other mammals. His development is slower; he is ‘“‘ neotenic ’’—1i.e.
his youth stretches over a long period,
and when adult he exhibits characteristics
shown by related or ancestral forms when
young. This neotenic tendency makes him
the most plastic and educable of mammals,
his behaviour patterns being less fixed by
heredity. Man is also polymorphic (several
human types breeding together in the same
area) and polytypic (different types inhabiting different areas, for example white men in
Europe, black in Africa).

A heading ‘“‘ Human Diversity Desirable ”’

147

develops the argument that polymorphism
(diversity) is valuable and should be
encouraged. Galton expressed the same idea.
In his words—‘“‘ There are a vast number of
conflicting ideals, of alternative characters,
of incompatible civilizations; but all are
wanted to give fullness and interest to life.”

“The Political Implications of Human
Diversity ’’ (a heading) provokes a definition.
‘Liberty is the practical recognition of
human polymorphism ’”’; otherwise stated,
it is tolerance of human diversity. We are
polymorphic (diverse) “not only in our
zsthetic but in our intellectual abilities.’’
And “without postulating any overall
superiority of one race to another, we may
be fairly sure that some desirable genotypes
are commoner in one people than in others and
that this difference 1s to some extent reflected
an tts cultural achievement”’ (my _ italics).
Polytypicism should, for the present, be
preserved ; but if tolerance widened and
selective methods improved the need for it
might disappear.

In a section entitled ‘‘ The Evolution of the
Meek,’’ Haldane suggests that, in the last
million years, man has become more cerebral,
more neotenic and more polymorphic. These,
he thinks, are desirable evolutionary trends.
But no sooner is this said than the author
beats a retreat into nescience. ‘‘ How are we
to achieve these ends? I do not know. We
do not know in detail for what human
characteristics we want to breed.” A
Martian zoologist knowing no more about
evolution than we do, if asked at any time
in the past to pick the most progressive
vertebrate, would rarely have hit upon the
right one. During the Permian period, our.
ancestors were probably large and progressive reptiles; but during the Jurassic and
Cretaceous our forefathers, by this time
mammals, were small, inconspicuous and
unspecialized, thus substantiating words
delivered in another context: “ Blessed are
the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.”

A section entitled ‘‘ Negative Eugenics ”’
discourages the hope that abnormalities due
to dominant genes, such as juvenile cataract,
could be totally eliminated by preventing
the reproduction of affected persons ; for
148

similar harmful genes constantly reappear
by mutation. Here negative eugenics would
not extirpate an infirmity, though if continually applied it could reduce its incidence.
Sex-linked abnormalities could also be somewhat reduced. Indeed, ‘“‘ we could cut down
the incidence of a great many maladies to a
large extent.’’ But recessive genes would be
more refractory. The author opposes
sterilization, whether compulsory or
voluntary, for carriers. Laws permitting
voluntary sterilization are, he says, subject
to gross abuse. After a further declaration
of nescience, Haldane says: ‘‘ We shall only
do what is right if people realize that we
have a duty to beget and bear the best-endowed
children. ... A prerequisite ... is the
moralization of our sexual behaviour—that is
to say, making it subordinate to ideal ends,
not to impulse on the one hand or
superstition on the other ”’ (my italics).

The author’s final section, “‘ Difficulties of
Positive Eugenics,” deals with values. ‘‘ In
many human societies those types which are
most admired are bred out. The Middle
Ages. admired holiness and courage. The
holy men and women were celibate, the
courageous men killed one another. Our
age admires money-making. The men who
make most money have least children.”
Haldane does not know of a single’ rare and
desirable gene whose frequency we could
increase, though there is little doubt that
such exist. Knowledge being as yet rudimentary, our best course is to encourage the
mapping of the human chromosomes and the
analysis of the psychological constitution of
exceptionally gifted people. Haldane does
not know what we are now selecting for;
to mention but three possibilities, we may be
favouring genes which make for high sexual
activity, low intelligence or lack of
susceptibility to propaganda. But despite
his ignorance of current trends and his
affirmed nescience as to values, Haldane
gives us a picture of the “‘ man of the future.”’
“He would probably be regarded as a
physical, mental and moral defective. As
an adult, he would probably have great
muscular skill but little muscular strength,
a large head, fewer teeth than we have, and

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

so on. He would develop very slowly,
perhaps not learning to speak till five years
of age, but continuing to learn up to maturity
at the age of forty, and then living for several
centuries. He would be more rational and
less instinctive than we are, less subject to
sexual and parental emotions, to rage on the
one hand and so-called herd instincts on
the other. His motivation would depend far
more than ours on education. In his own
society he would be a good citizen, in ours
perhaps a criminal or a lunatic. He would
be of high general intelligence by our
standards, and most individuals would have
some special aptitude developed to the
degree which we call genius.”’ Finally, our
immediate task is the remodelling of human
society rather than the refashioning of the
human race, ‘‘ though the two duties must
and will go together.”’ | |
An impression is received that the author’s
declarations of nescience, irreproachable in
the dim vistas of paleontology, have been
belied by the exercise of his imaginative
powers. The unengaging picture of the

weakly, large-headed, neotenic, cerebralized,

apathic and largely edentulous man-of-the
future is doubtless a salutary corrective of
Nietzsche’s vision of the superman as a
pitiless, blond and warlike viking. Haldane’s
man-of-the-future is the product of his
system of values (“I think that these are
desirable evolutionary trends”’) and presumably of his analysis of what human
characteristics are in fact being selected for.
The chilling mists of nescience are dissolved
by the warmth of human likes, dislikes and
hopes.

More important, there emerges from
Haldane’s text, though punctuated throughout by declarations of nescience, a fairly
clear picture of the type of human being
that he would like to see inhabiting the
planet not half a million years hence but
today. The quotations italicized above are
finger-pointers to his preferences. The
desirable, the eugenically valuable, human
would be tolerant of his fellow beings in their
unhindered diversities; he would be
co-operative rather than combative; he
would be educable, plastic and moralizable
HALDANE ON EUGENICS

in his sexual behaviour, and conscious of
“‘a duty to beget and bear the best-endowed
children possible ’ ; he would be moralizable
also in his social and international behaviour,
showing himself capable of living happily in
a world where universal peace reigned. This
would be a world consisting of an association
of friendly democracies (rather than a
Jewish, Hitlerian or other world empire)
which recognized, encouraged and educated
to the full each man’s special gifts ; and he
would be free from genetically caused
disabilities. Haldane, moreover, recognizes
that ‘ we are polymorphic not only in our
esthetic but in our intellectual abilities ”’ ;
and he is “ fairly sure that some desirable
genotypes are commoner in one people than
in others, and that this difference is to some
extent reflected in its achievement.” But
these differences are not such as to produce
an overall superiority of one race over
another. What, we may ask, are the genotypes responsible for cultural achievement ?
Haldane does not, in the context of the
passage above quoted, specify. But other
‘passages in the essay leave the reader in no
doubt. Haldane refers to zsthetic and
intellectual endowments. He is himself the
possessor of an abnormally high congenital
ability for mathematics. But he is also tonedeaf. He regards it as possible that his
tone-deafness may be an advantage to
society as well as to himself, for his time
might otherwise have been devoted to music
at the expense of science. It is thus clear that
Haldane regards proficiency in the arts and
in science as culturally valuable activities
which are, in part at least, the outcome of
inborn endowments, and that he would
encourage the spread of their determining
genes if he knew how to recognize them.
There is quite enough in this disjointedly
avowed programme to justify the author in
forthwith joining the Eugenics Society. Why
then this facade of nescience, this parade of
hostility ? There are perhaps two reasons,
which I suggest with diffidence—disgust at
Nazi practices and the past history of the
Eugentcs Society. Little need be said about
the first, except perhaps that Haldane
discerned earlier than some of us the inner

149

implications and guiding principles of the
Nazi philosophy, and, before 1939, himself
fought in the Spanish civil war. Haldane’s
attitude to the past history of the Eugenics
Society is expressed in the following passage
taken from his Possible Worlds (1927) :
‘““The Eugenics Education Society ’’ [as the

Eugenics Society was then called] ‘“ have doubtless done good work in persuading a certain
number of intelligent people to have more
children. They have also rightly urged lessened
taxation of parents and children. But many of
their members have coupled with this a clamour
against measures designed to ameliorate the lot
of the children of the poor at the expense of the
rich. It is a curious policy to combat evils due to
economic inequality by perpetuating that
inequality.’

Haldane can be readily forgiven for not
having closely followed developments within
the Society in recent years. But had he done
so, he would have known that the clamour
to which he objects ceased long ago. It has
not, indeed, been heard since I became the
Society’s General Secretary in 1931; nor
has it been sounded in the editorial columns
of the EuGENnics REVIEW since 1934, when
Maurice Newfield became Editor.

At the risk of appearing presumptuous, I
now offer a suggestion which bears upon an
evolutionary event which puzzles Haldane
and which affects our interpretation of
present-day eugenic values.

Haldane has drawn our attention to how,
in the Permian, our ancestors seem to have
been large and progressive reptiles, whereas
70 million years ago they were mammals
something like shrews. How can we account
for this transformation? I suggest that it
may be connected with periods of cold.
Mammals and birds are descended from
reptiles which as a class flourished in the
Mesozoic. During this epoch there were high
mountains which were doubtless populated
by a fauna differing from that inhabiting the
hot, luxuriant and marshy lowland. In the
cold uplands, where food was _ scarce,
survival value would come to attach to
anatomical structures, physiological
processes and psychological characteristics
different from those which benefited the
reptilian inhabitants, many of them large
and formidable, of the lowlands. Changes in
150

anatomical structures would mainly affect
the skin, protecting it against cold. The fur
of mammals and the feathers of birds do
this in a manner which has no equivalent
among known reptiles, living or extinct.
Physiological processes which protect against
cold are those concerned in the maintenance
of a constant body temperature. Mammals
are more warm-blooded than reptiles, and
birds than mammals. Psychological
characteristics having a similar purpose are
those which conduce to the protection of the
young against cold and which favour their
maintenance in harsh and _ inclement
surroundings where food is _ scarce.
Viviparousness and the development of
facilities for feeding the young, after birth,
from the body of the parent serve this
purpose. So do the accompanying parental
instincts, strongest in the female but capable
of extending to the male. In birds oviparous
habits are retained, but are effectively
supplemented by nest-building and brooding
habits powered by compelling instincts.
These upland and highland progenitors of
mammals and birds were probably small in
size, food being scarce ; they were probably
vegetarian, insectivorous or omnivorous in
diet. Descent to the lowlands spelt death
in the jaws of formidable enemies. An
inborn terror, surviving till today in many
humans and some monkeys, of sinuous, scaly,
coiling, elongated or serpentine shapes may
then have acquired survival value. Such a
fear would resemble a Jungian archetype.
The causes of the geologically sudden
extinction of the many sub-classes of
reptiles which flourished in fullest diversity
during the Jurassic, Triassic and Chalk
periods are unknown. Geological upheavals,
germs of new disease, atmospheric and
climatic changes have been suggested. The
disappearance of marine animals, among
them ammonites and aquatic reptiles, some
of the last probably viviparous, is difficult to
‘explain. The slow replacement of equable,
torrid and humid conditions by a colder
age, beginning with an alternation of longer
and severer winters with still hot but
shortening summers, and proceeding gradually to ice ages, may have played a part in

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

exterminating the oviparous reptile, uninterested in eggs and young. The five subclasses of reptiles surviving today are best
represented in hot regions. In cold and
temperate zones these fall into a winter sleep,
and in hot climates there is often a summer
sleep which comes to an end with the
beginning of the rainy season.

Gradually our small and inoffensive
protomammalian ancestors may have been
forced down from the uplands to find the
territories below cleared of the redoubtable
enemies which, in earlier epochs, had made
them untenable.

If there is any truth in these suppositions,
we would, if adopting a palzontological
conspectus, confer upon the instincts centring round the family—filial and parental
instincts, each evoking, supplementing and
satisfying the other—a greater importance
than Haldane has allowed. They would,
indeed, become central features of the theme
of his chapter which deals with human
evolution, past and future. If, by parental
instincts and structures and by filial impulses
and reflexes, our supposedly shrew-like
ancestors were differentiated from reptiles
70 and more million years ago, we are
entitled to assign to these characteristics an
important réle in the equipment of our
descendants half a million years hence.
Haldane sees his “‘ man of the future’’ as
(in his words) “less subject to sexual and
parental emotions” than we. Many would

_ agree about the sexual emotions but not

about the parental. Our sexual instincts and
overt sexual activities (I am not here
referring to their sublimated forms) are
excessive to the requirements of civilized
man today. Hence the need for contraception. The parental instincts are rarely
excessive. Periods of decadence have, in the
past, been characterized by neglect of
reproductive activities in response to what
have been called ‘‘ waves of hedonism.”’ In
the mammalian world excluding man, neglect
of the parental activities causes prompt
extinction. But with civilized man other
sequences are possible. Lactation can be
shortened or avoided altogether by artifices ;
and an elaborate system of foster-parentage
HALDANE ON EUGENICS

can be organized. Women differ as do
animals in the strength of their maternal
instincts and in the willingness with which
they will forgo pleasures and make sacrifices
on their children’s behalf. The local
authority can now provide means by which
a sequence of misconceived children, whom
the mother persistently neglects or abandons,
can be reared to maturity. If a delight in
children, conveniently called genophilia,
is nm inborn, we are now providing
(albeit in a small way) the means by which
lack of this quality can be disseminated.
Social measures encouraging  fosterparentage, if widely extended and continued
over a long period, would permit of the
survival of children in the absence of
parental emotions in their parents, and might
therefore weaken the race’s equipment of
these instincts. On the other hand,
contraception is rapidly disconnecting sexual
from parental emotions, thus conferring upon
the desire for children a new importance in
evolution. The future may see a simultaneous development of these two opposed
processes, the first: weakening, the second
strengthening the values of the family.
But there is one obvious way in which
Haldane’s men and women of the future,
who seem to bear a resemblance to the
Selenites of Well’s First Men 1 the
Moon, could quickly come to possess a
lesser endowment of genophilia than ourselves. Indeed, Haldane may have had such
a possibility in mind when he was delivering
his discourse to the Americans. I refer to
ectogenesis, a vivid description of which was
contained in the fantasia * which established
Haldane as a literary figure thirty years ago.
Haldane has suggested that our immediate
task is to remodel human society rather than
try to refashion the human race, ‘‘ though
the two duties must and will go together.”
Such a fusion of tasks is best accomplished
by our taking as our standard of eugenic
merit a performance test which is partly
of a social and partly of a biological character.
The following is a quotation from the
Eugenics Society's Statement of Objects :
“‘The eugenically meritorious couple is the

_ © Daedalus. 1924. Kegan Paul.

151

one which produces by design (t.e., by planned

parenthood) a healthy and happy family. To

plan the births of a well-spaced family demands
intelligence, foresight and restraint ; to produce
families large enough for replacement implies

a love of children and a sense of duty to a

community which needs children; to provide

them with a good home requires the power to
make a success of marriage and of life outside
the home. All these are valuable qualities and
their perpetuation should be encouraged.
Eugenists aim at replacing the present
generation by children who are deliberately
conceived in the full light of all known medical,
social and genetic factors. They favour the
planned against the unplanned family; and
they wish to see the community so organized
that its best citizens will feel eager to give full
expression to the instincts of parenthood... ...
The effects of heredity and environment, of
nature and nurture, are not easy to separate ;
nearly always they are closely interwoven.

The healthy and happy family perpetuates

valuable inborn qualities; it also reproduces

the conditions in which these qualities can
develop to the best advantage.”

If these values are preserved and reinforced in man’s evolutionary future, our
distant descendants would be less macabre
than Haldane depicts. They would be less
likely than he suggests to strike us as
criminals. The metamorphosis eventually
realized in a new geological epoch would
bear a closer resemblance than he has
conveyed to the transformation we would
like to see brought about tomorrow.

I have said nothing about the other sixtytwo essays in this book. They range over a
wide assortment of topics which have been
classified under twelve general headings.
These include geological, meteorological and
astronomical subjects, a popular outline of
zoology (most readable), examples of animal
behaviour, evolution, and accounts of six
great men. My enjoyment of these essays
has been enhanced by an impression (which
may be misleading) that they exhibit less
political bias than their forerunners. They
encourage the hope that later collections
may altogether avoid this bias. Political
innuendo and propaganda, which mix badly
with science, have for many readers spoiled
much of Haldane’s popular writings, and
they have undoubtedly impeded the general
recognition of his true status as a thinker
and teacher.

Eugenies Review, Vol. XLIV, No. 3
