122
page 126 which is at least as important as
any other pronouncement of the Commission :

The general considerations which the Com
mittee on Empire Migration had in mind seem to
us to be at least as cogent now as they were in

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

1932, and Weighing the advantages and disadvantages of emigration, we have no doubt that
it is in the long-run interests of Great Britain
and the Commonwealth as a whole to maintain
the flow of emigrants from Great Britain to the
other parts of the Commonwealth at as high a
level as‘ possible.

ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION AND
THE SOCIETY’S AIMS
By C. P. BLACKER

N April 13th, 1945, oral evidence was
(_) sien on behalf of the Soczety to the

Royal Commission by Dr. J. A.
Fraser Roberts, Professor A. J. Lewis and
myself. Previously, a memorandum prepared at the request of the Royal Commission had been submitted, and it was mainly
about the contents of this document that we
were questioned. The memorandum was
published in the October 1945 issue of the
EUGENICS REVIEW.

Now that the Royal Commission’s report
has been published we may profitably turn
back to our memorandum, to-day more than
four years old, and ask ourselves how far our
points have been met.

We have many grounds for satisfaction.
Indeed, the report of the Royal Commission
compares well with the Brock Committee’s
report as a document almost completely
vindicating the Society’s policy as presented
to these two bodies. Let us compare our
written evidence with the relevant recommendations of the Commission.

Our memorandum consisted -of eleven
sections. It begins by quoting Galton, whose
conception of what eugenics is, and what it
aims at, has been partially lost sight of in the
controversies of later years. Galton contended

that the inborn qualities of future generations

should resemble the better rather than the worse
moiety of the nation to-day ; and that our im
w

perial and world responsibilities impose on us a
special obligation to foster the valuable inborn
qualities of our people.

Much attention has been paid by eugenists
in the past to the question of differential fertility ; and a chart, specially prepared from
the report of the 1911 census, of the standardized fertility of each of the eight social classes
into which the population of the country was
then divided, was included in our memorandum. Less attention, we said, was paid
to-day than formerly to differences between
classes, and more to those between intelligence. Perversions of eugenicS such as the
doctrines of race superiority had somewhat
spoiled the word eugenics, which stands in
need of rehabilitation. We compared the
liberal and authoritarian conception of
eugenics, the essential difference lying in the
use made of the expert. In the authoritarian
system the expert is vested with powers
whereas, in the liberal, his function is never
more than advisory.

The word eugenics contayns a challenge—
to define the particle ‘ ’ Each person is
entitled to his own views ‘which will reflect
his private system of values. We advanced
five standards :

(a) Sound physical and mental health and

geod physique ;

(b) Intelligence ;

(c) Social usefulness ;

(d) Freedom from genetic taints ;
ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION AND THE SOCIETY’S AIMS

(e) Philoprogenitiveness.

Of these five traits only the second, intelligence, is quantitatively measurable. The
memorandum went on to examine how far
these five qualities could-be combined in a
biological index of eugenic merit. It concluded

Eugenic merit is thus a difficult matter to
evaluate accurately. Different qualities, some

valuable, others neutral, others harmful, have 
to be balanced against each other: There is no
simple biological index.

But there is a social index.

The five qualities above considered have, as
their confluent and resultant expression the
couple who, in a community which provides
good prospects for the future welfare of children,
which encourages family life and inculcates a
sense of its responsibilities, produce by intention
and design a large family and provide for it a
happy and a healthy home.

The memorandum points out how essential
a part the environment plays in a voluntary
system of eugenics.

Sir William Beveridge’s five ‘“ giants ’’—
disease, ignorance, squalor, idleness and want—
sterilize parenthood in large masses of the
population. Where these evils prevail the
improvident and feckless contribute freely to
the next generation ; those who cannot use the
prevailing birth-control methods beget large
families ; and sexual, dissociated from parental,
instincts determine the course of reproduction.
A voluntary system of eugenics cannot work
successfully under conditions of extreme poverty,
malnutrition, ill health and isolation.

We went on to specify four characteristics
of an environment which was “ favourable ”’
from the standpoint of a voluntary system
of eugenics. They are:

(a) The removal of social and economic deterrenis
from parenthood. ‘‘ We advocate equalizing
as far as possible the social and economic
status of parents and non-parents.”’

(b) The inculcation of a eugenic conscience.
““Every adolescent should be taught and
every parent should realize that he has a
social and a national obligation to have
enough children to replace the generation to
which he belongs, provided (the eugenist’s
proviso to the demographer’s purely quantitative formula) that the children are likely
to be normal, healthy and useful members of
the community.”

(c) The establishment of facilities by which every
engaged or married couple can obtain the most

123

up-to-date scientific guidance
problems.

(d) Universal accessibility of knowledge as to how

pregnancies can be regulated.. Here we said :
“‘ Information about birth control should be
in accordance with the family’s religious
beliefs, and these should be taken into
account by those who advise.” __

These four points will be examined below
in the light of the Royal Commission’s
recommendations.

Our memorandum next posed the question:
How far could parental instincts, dissociated
from their sexual precursors, effect replacement. It cannot, we said, at present be
proved that they could. If it turns out that
they could not, it might be-necessary to
reinforce them with incentives which appeal
to self-interest. It might prove necessary to
resort to measures which would go so far as
to make it economically advantageous to
parents to have children. (An example of
how this might be done is given by the Royal
Commission (para. 446), which quotes recent
French practice. “‘ Under the law of August
1946,’ says the Royal Commission, ‘a
French worker, who is the sole breadwinner
in his family, receives allowances under one
heading or another, amounting for the first
child in the family to 20 per cent of the
average Departmental wage, to 60 per cent
of this average wage for two dependent
children, to 100 per cent for three children,
plus a further 30 per cent for each additional
child. Thus, on the average, a worker in a
single-income family with three children
receives in allowances as much as the wage
he earns.’’)

We went on to specify the social and
economic changes needed to equalize the
position of parents and childless persons ;
and we mentioned family allowances, encouragement of early marriage, childbearing
(the cost of which should be as low as
possible), education and housing. I need not
recapitulate what we said under these
headings.

There followed some miscellaneous observations dealing with the social problem group,
the provision of guidance for persons who
seek genetic advice, health examinations
before marriage, and the _ establishment

on genetic
124

of an Imperial Institute of Demographic
Studies.

Let us now consider how far the suggestions we put before the Royal Commission
have been met in their report.

The Commission’s report (apart from its
appendices) only once refers to the Society
by name. The reference appears in paragraph
413, and mentions us as having subsidized,
together with the Population Investigation
Committee and the Nuffield Foundation, the
committee set up by the Scottish Council for
Research in Education, of which Sir Godfrey
Thomson is chairman, ; as most readers of the
REVIEW will know, this committee promoted
a large-scale inquiry into the intelligence of
Scottish children. But against this single
reference we can record the fact that the
Commission’s report is among the few official
documents of major importance which has
publicly recognized the place of qualitative
considerations in social or demographic
policy. This standpoint, which is reflected
throughout the Commission’s recommendations, finds explicit expression in the report’s
Chapter 15, entitled “‘ Differential Fertility ”’;
indeed this chapter might appropriately be
reproduced exactly as it stands as one of our
“Occasional Pamphlets.’”’ Discussing the
role of education in shaping the results of
intelligence tests, the report says :

Bad nurture and inadequate education may
mask innate intelligence or prevent its full
development, but heredity puts a definite limit
to what can be achieved in intelligence even with
the best of nurture, education and good fortune.
The Commission

sees no reason to doubt that in general intelligent

persons in all social groups limit the size of their

families more than the unintelligent
and their recommendations are mainly designed to induce all elements of the population to replace themselves with the same
intention and deliberation as, in the past,
was applied to restricting fertility. Indeed,
the Commission’s recommendations about
birth control are perhaps the most noteworthy feature of the report ; at least they
have been treated as such by the Press.

The duty to give contraceptive advice should
be discharged in such a way as to make clear

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

that it is part of a national policy for the
promotion of family welfare. Its aim is
positive, not negative ; it is designed primarily
to secure that the children come when the
parents want them. It should therefore be
. linked as closely as possible in administration
with other services for family welfare. (Para.

537-)

Thus the Commission have unreservedly
met the fourth of the points raised in our
memorandum as characterizing an environment which was favourable to a voluntary
system of eugenics—the universal accessibility of knowledge as to how pregnancies
can be regulated. They have done little less
for the other three points, which may be
briefly considered.

Our memorandum’s first point was concerned with the removal of social and
economic deterrents from parenthood. The
Commission’s recommendations, as is more
than once stressed, are designed in part to
promote fertility but also and no less, to.
provide social justice to the family which
“until recently ... has been overlooked or
given only a minor place in social policy ”’
(para. 406). These recommendations can be
grouped under four main headings, corresponding to the titles of chapters in the
report’s Part III, namely financial issues and
proposals, family services, health services
and housing. Under each of these four
headings constructive recommendations are
advanced which would ease the position of
parents of more than two children.

(i) The financial proposals include larger
family allowances and a scheme of incometax rebates which should prove helpful to
parents in the middle as well as the lowerincome brackets. These proposals are discussed at some length in paragraphs 479-90.
The Commission suggests that a sum amounting to one-tenth of earned income up to
£1,000, with smaller exemptions for incomes
over this figure, which sum should in no
circumstances exceed £150, should be exempted from income tax in respect of each
dependent child.

(ii) The family services include domiciliary
help of various kinds to be provided in the
home, and also help through various kinds of
nurseries (residential nurseries, nursery
ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION AND THE SOCIETY’S AIMS

schools and day nurseries) ; and the Commission further recommends that these services
be made available not only in emergencies,
as has been the rule hitherto, but also as a
normal routine. ‘‘ Our view,”’ say the Commission, “is that these services should be
developed so as to cater as much for the needs
of mothers of young children for occasional
help and relief in normal circumstances as
for help in emergencies ’’ (para. 507). This
change in orientation, if effectively translated into practice, might lead to a big
development of miscellaneous family services.

(111) In respect of health services, the main
recommendation is the one already noted,
that guidance on contraception be made part
of the national health services. But contraception should be linked with facilities for
advice and treatment of infecundity.

We have received, says the Commission
(para. 539), evidence of a small but growing
demand for advice on suitability, from the

. eugenic point of view, for parenthood. The
evidence does not justify us in recommending
any comprehensive provision at this stage, but
we would like to see experiments made where
circumstances are suitable. A clinic which
embraced facilities for advice on infecundity and
on birth control could develop naturally as the
needs emerged to include premarital examinations and other services of direct relevance to
family welfare. This branch of the National

Health Service might well play an important

part in family welfare in the future.

The Commission, in effect, recommends
that a two-purposes clinic (to deal with contraception and infecundity) be built into the
National Health Service ; and it suggests
that experiments be made with a five-purposes clinic (to deal, in addition, with eugenic
prognosis, pre-marital examinations, and
marriage guidance). The Royal Commission
deals rather more cautiously with this issue
than did P.E.P., which forthrightly advocated the five-purposes clinic. The Commission recommends improvements in the
maternity and child welfare services designed
to assist the family.

(iv) In respect of housing, the Commission
draws attention, among other things, to the
superfluity of five-roomed houses containing
three bedrooms, and to the lack of both
smaller and larger houses.

125

Taken together, the recommendations
made by the Commission under the four
headings of financial proposals, family services, health services and housing make up
an impressive contribution to the problem
of removing social and economic deterrents
from parenthood.

The second and third points contained in
the Soczety’s memorandum related to the
inculcation of a eugenic conscience and to
the establishment of facilities by which
every engaged or married couple could obtain
the most up-to-date scientific guidance on
genetic problems. Such guidance would be
obtainable through the establishment, as
part of the health services of the five-purposes clinic with which the Commission would
like to see an experiment made. It is much

_to be hoped that the experiment will soon be

instituted, perhaps through the agency of
some grant-giving body. Such five-purposes
clinics, if they become widely adopted,
would doubtless be organized, together with
the rest of the health services, on a regional
basis. Each region is centred on a university
and each university should contain departments of social medicine and of biology.
Human genetics is a subject common both to
biology and to social medicine, and we may
allow ourselves to visualize the development
of departments of genetics to which the
proposed five-purposes clinic could turn for
help with its genetic problems. Such departments could usefully establish connections
with the Galton Laboratory, whose influence
could thus be enlarged.

With the Soczety’s point about the inculcation of a eugenic conscience, the Commission has dealt in its Chapter 21 which is
entitled ‘‘ Public Opinion and the Family.”’
The contents of this chapter are epitomized
(para. 594) by the Commission as follows :

Preparation for family life should be given a
more prominent place in the educational system.
This should be achieved by : (1) a wide development of sex education in schools; (2) adjustments of the curricula to raise the status of the
practical crafts of home-making and subjects
relating to married life ; and (3) by the development of special courses at county colleges and
centres of adult education for the psychological
aspects of marriage as well as the ordinary
126

domestic subjects. Outside the school the
co-operation of the churches and voluntary
organizations would be essential.

Thus it will be seen that though the
Eugenics Society is little mentioned in the
Royal Commission’s report, and though
eugenic issues (apart from those arising from
the discussion of intelligence and fertility)
are not specifically designated as such, the
report as a whole is, from the Soctety’s
standpoint, a most satisfactory document.
In making this statement I am-not advancing
any special claims for the memorandum
which we placed before the Commission or for
the part which our representatives played in
their oral evidence. The Commission’s report
is based on the findings of the investiga
THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tions they specially promoted—such as the
fertility census of 1946 and the inquiry into
fertility carried out by Dr. Lewis Faning

for the Royal College of Obstetricians and

Gynecologists ; it also takes account of the
written evidence submitted by thirty-six
organizations and numerous individuals and
of the oral evidence which they heard. The
pleasing nature of the report testifies
rather to the fact, stressed by General
Frederick Osborn in his informal talk to our
Fellows and Members on November 23rd,
1948, and also commented on in the editorial
notes of the January 1948 issue, that, after
blowing contrarily throughout most of the
inter-war period, the winds of public
opinion are now veering in our favour.

POPULATION STUDIES

A Quarterly Journal of Demography
Editor: D. V. GLASS

Vol. III, No. 1

June 1949

CONTENTS

H. GILLE. The Demographic History of the Northern European Countries in the Eighteenth

Century

KARE OFSTAD. Population Statistics and Population Registration in Norway. Part 3:
Population Censuses

E. LESSOF. Mortality in New Zealand and England and Wales

CHIA-LIN PAN. The Population of Libya

NOTICE. The International Union for the Scientific Study of Population

Subscription : 30s. net per volume.

Single Parts 10s. net

Published for the POPULATION INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE .
by the CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PREss, 200 EUSTON RoapD, LonpDon, N.W.1

 

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLI, No. 3
