RECENT EUGENIC AND SOCIAL
LEGISLATION IN AMERICA.

~By R. NEWTON CRANE.

DESPITE the unusual tax upon their time and their energies
caused by the war, the legislators of many States in the United
States, have found opportunity to enact laws dealing with
subjects of great interest to eugenists and sociologists. Some of
the laws which have been placed on the Statute Books are novel
and experimental, while others are of great and immediate
practical importance. |

In addition to the National or Federal Congress, there are
forty-eight State legislatures, each of which has its Senate and
House of Representatives. An Act must be passed through
both of these houses and afterwards receive the assent of the
governor of the state before it can become a law. This ensures
a certain amount of deliberation and consideration. One of
the advantages of this large number of independent legislative
bodies lies in the fact that an experiment in social reform adopted
in one state, if found satisfactory in its operation, is adopted by
other states, and not infrequently with improvements or modifications suggested by experience in its practical operation. This
is particularly true of measures designed to improve racial conditions and ensure a better heritable stock.

For the first time, probably, in the history of legislation
anywhere in the world, the State of Oregon has established an
official Board of Eugenics, and clothed it with’ very considerable
powers. It is constituted of certain designated officials, who
are the members of the State Board of Health together with the
Superintendents of the State Hospital, the State Institution for
Feeble-minded, and the State Penitentiary. Its chief function
at present is to prevent the procreation of the feeble-minded
and insane, the epileptics and the habitual criminals, and the
moral degenerates and sexual perverts who may for the time
being be inmates of the institutions under the charge of the
respective members of the Board of Eugenics.
RECENT EUGENIC AND SOCIAL LEGISLATION IN AMERICA. 25

It is the duty of these officials to make a quarterly report
of those under their care who are “‘ potential to producing offspring, who because of inheritance of inferior or anti-social
traits would probably become a social menace or a ward of the
state.’’ The Board is required to examine the innate traits of
all such persons, their mental and moral condition, their personal
records and their family traits and histories. If, in the
judgment of a majority of the Board, procreation by any such
persons would produce children with an inherited tendency to
parental defects, and there is no probability that the condition
of the persons so examined will improve to the extent of rendering procreation advisable, then it is the duty of the Board to
cause to be performed such a type -of sterilisation as may be
deemed best. Before the operation is performed, however,
notice is served upon the subject and his relatives and he and
they are given an opportunity, at the expense of the Board,
to appeal to the Court for a reconsideration of the decision.

It is now some years since the first law of this kind was
passed in Indiana. Despite the opposition its novelty and its
radical nature evoked, it was followed by legislation of a like
character in two or three other states. That these laws have
proved beneficial is proved by the enactment during the past
year of similar statutes, not only in Oregon but in California,
Kansas, Minnesota, New Hampshire and South Dakota.

The South Dakota Act makes as the test of the desirability
of sterilisation, whether procreation by the class mentioned
would be likely to produce children with a tendency to disease,
feeble-mindedness, idiocy or imbecility. On the other hand,
the physicians are directed to enquire whether the mental condition of the individual will probably be materially improved
by sterilisation.

The first attempt, by a Western state, to prevent the
marriage of a person affected with a venereal disease, by requiring all applicants for a marriage licence to produce a physician’s
certificate of freedom from the disease, evoked ridicule and
protest, and led to litigation to determine the constitutionality
of the regulation. ‘The measure, however, survived the ridicule
and overcame the protest against it, and now other states have
26 EUGENICS REVIEW.

acknowledged its wisdom. During the past year a law has been
enacted in New York which requires each party to an application
for a marriage licence to make an affidavit, in a prescribed form,
to the effect that he or she has never knowingly been infected
with any venereal disease, or, if so infected within a period of
five years from the iime of the application, has since had a
laboratory test of the blood which has demonstrated freedom
from such infection. In Wisconsin, a marriage licence may
not be granted to any person who has ever been afflicted with
certain blood diseases until such person produces.a medical
certificate of absolute freedom from disease. The physician who
is applied to for the certificate, or who has attended the
applicant, is not permitted to make any charge for furnishing
it, and is required to give evidence before the licensing authority.
New Jersey has gone further, and has made either marriage or
sexual intercourse by any person knowing himself or herself
infected with a venereal disease, a misdemeanour punishable bv
a heavy fine or imprisonment or both. Maine has added feebleminded persons, and Wisconsin epileptics, to those disqualified
for marriage, and in some states proof of freedom from
tuberculosis is necessary before a marriage license may be
granted. |

Unfortunately, the refusal of a marriage licence does not
prevent marriage in the states where what is called commonlaw or Scotch marriages are legal. For this reason, marriages
contracted without conforming to statutory regulations are valid
in the great majority of states. The only consequence of disregarding the laws is the imposition of a heavy penalty in the way
of fine and imprisonment. This is incurred by the parties
themselves, and also by the clergyman, minister or official who
celebrates the marriage. This has a deterrent influence of considerable gravity. In other states a marriage without complying
with the prescribed statutes is either void or voidable.

Every state gives positive and substantial encouragement
to marriage by providing that subsequent marriage between
the parents of illegitimate children shall legitimate such children,
or by the suspension of prosecution or a penalty, in cases of
seduction, upon the marriage of the parties. This legitimisation
RECENT EUGENIC AND SOCIAL LEGISLATION IN AMERICA. 27

of illegitimates carries with it the rights in all respects of
children born in wedlock, so far as succession and inheritance
are concerned, and imposes absolute responsibility upon the
parent for the care, education and maintenance of the child.
What may perhaps be called a freak in legislation has been
made a law in North Dakota, where a statute passed at the last
session of the legislature solemnly declares that all children
shall be deemed to be the legitimate children of their parents.
No subsequent marriage of the parents is therefore necessary
in that state to secure the legitimacy of children born out of
wedlock. °
Laws in grant of what are popularly known as “‘ mothers
pensions’’ are being adopted in many states. These do not,
in fact, provide pensions but give an allowance for maintenance
out of the public funds to mothers who have the care of
dependant children. The grant is made in such a manner as
to take away from it all suggestion of poor relief, and to give
it the appearance of being a reward conferred for service to the
state in rearing and maintaining potential citizens. This is not
expressed in any of the statutes which have been passed, but
it is said to be the argument which is used by those who advocate
the enactment of these laws.
During the past year, Acts to provide these grants or
‘* pensions ’’ have been passed in Missouri, Texas, Arizona,
Maine and West Virginia. In Arizona and in Texas the law
is restricted to widows. In Texas the county authorities are
required to pay to any widow with dependent children, up
to the age of sixteen, not more than $12 a month for one child,
$18 for two children, and $4 for each additional child, whatever
the number. If the children are not sufficiently clothed and
fed and otherwise properly carred for, the grant is revoked.
The Missouri law is wider in its scope and its details are
worthy of consideration by those who are engaged in this
country in the attempt to secure legislation, or other provision,
for the welfare of children and of mothers who are unable under
present conditions to properly provide for their off-spring. It
requires every county to appropriate out of the public funds
such sums as may be necessary to provide for the support of
28 an EUGENICS REVIEW.

any needy mother having the custody of a dependent child or
children under the age of sixteen, and any needy woman about
to become a mother, provided that the father of such child or
children or expected child is either dead, or in any hospital for
the insane or feeble-minded, or in prison, or is permanently
incapacitated to earn a living, or has deserted the mother, or is
divorced from her. The amount allowed is ‘‘ such a sum as
shall be sufficient and adequate to enable the mother to rear
the child or children properly.’’ The maximum grant is $16
a month if there is only one child and not less than $8 a month
for each child, but in no case shall the mother receive more
than $40 a month, or eight pounds. The conditions upon which
the grant is made are that the child or children are living with
the mother, that if the allowance was not provided the mother
would be required to work regularly away from her home, and
that there are no relatives of the mother or children able and
willing to support her and them.

The wording of the Act plainly indicates that this provision
is intended for an unmarried mother and her illegitimate
children, and it would probably be so construed by the Courts.
The allowance for the support and the care of the mother during
confinement extends to three weeks before and three weeks after
child birth.

The provision which now exists in all of the states for the
maintenance by the father of his illegitimate children and their
mother is, generally speaking, of a liberal character, and a
growing tendency to enforce this obligation is apparent. In
Minnesota, during the past year, the existing law has been
amended by requiring the father to provide proper support for
his illegitimate child, and by compulsorily enforcing the presence
of the physician who attended at birth, and requiring him to
give evidence. The enforcement of the law is aided by making
it a felony for the father to leave the jurisdiction of the Court
to evade paternity proceedings. It is also a felony for either
parent to desert a child during infancy, and for a father to
desert his wife if she is expecting a child.

The recent law of Indiana for the prevention and control of
tuberculosis is an illustration of the preventive and curative
RECENT EUGENIC AND SOCIAL LEGISLATION IN AMERICA. 29

measures which are being generally adopted to stop the progress
of this disease, which is declared by the statute to be infectious
and communicable and dangerous to the public health. Every
practising physician is required within five days after the fact
comes to his knowledge, to report the name and address of
every person known by him to be infected with tuberculosis.
The chief officer having charge of any hospital, dispensary or
private or public institution and every school physician is
obliged to report the name, age, sex, occupation, place where
last employed and the home address of every person under his
care having tuberculosis. These reports are transmitted to the
State Board of Health, whose officials are required to investigate
the prevalence, causes, and distribution of the disease and devise
ways and means for restricting and controlling it. The results
of these investigations must be published and distributed
throughout the state for the enlightenment of the people as to
the prevalence and dangers of tuberculosis and the best methods
of its cure and prevention. It is made the duty of the health
officer of every town or county, as soon as he shall be notified
of a case of tuberculosis, to see that the premises, which have
been occupied by a person infected with the disease, shall be
disinfected, at the expense of the county. It is unlawful for
any owner or agent to let or allow to be occupied any such
house or premises until after such disinfection.

In the State of Washington an addition has been made to
the grounds for divorce by the provision that where the parties
have become estranged, and have lived separate and apart for
eight years and more, and the Court is satisfied that they can
no longer live together, a decree of divorce may be entered.
A similar statute already in existence in North Carolina contained the provision that such separation should constitute a
ground for divorce only where no children should have been
born during the marriage. At the last.session of the legislature
this proviso was eliminated.
