114
great in the Air Force and Navy, and we had
therefore lost many picked men. She appealed to the Press to counteract the feeling
among all ranks of those chivalrous men who
refused to marry because they did not wish
to leave a widow. If they had to leave a
widow, they should also leave a mother.
The young men in the Forces should be
urged to marry as quickly as they could.

Mrs. MITCHELL told of the campaign of
the Incorporated Midwives’ Institute to
obtain State aid to enable mothers to stop
away from work for four weeks before the
birth of a child and eight weeks afterwards.

Lapy CHAMBERS asked if a special film
could be made to be shown throughout the
country, and if the Ministry of Information
would allow this.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

~

Mrs. GRANT DuFF replied that the Ministry of Information had turned down the
Socrety’s film as unsuitable, but said that
they would make one if the Ministry of
Health asked for such a film.

Lorp HorpeER said that the suggestion
was good in principle, and he would try and
see if the new broom at the Ministry of
Health would sweep in this direction. The
luncheon had evoked proof that the
Eugenics Society was alive. The discussion
had brought to light a number of suggestions
about the ways in which the eugenic principle could express itself. He was grateful
to Mrs. Grant Duff for having brought this
scheme into operation, and for the support of
all present.

THE STUDY OF RACIAL MIXTURE IN
THE BRITISH COMMONWEALTH
Some Anthropological Preliminaries

By K. L. LITTLE
(The Duckworth Laboratory, University Museum of Archeology and Ethnology, Cambridge)

N a recently published and noteworthy

symposium entitled ‘‘ Race Relations

and the Race Problem,” eleven prominent American writers reviewed the sociological implications of racial contacts on the
American continent, with special reference
to problems arising out of the very large
racial minority in the U.S.A. of some 13
million American Negroes. One of these
authors, Professor S. J. Holmes, has pointed
out elsewhere that there are three racial
possibilities in view for the United States.
The entire population may become
“white ’’; it may become “black”; or
‘“‘ whites ” and ‘‘ blacks ’’ may fuse together
into a hybrid stock. This last possibility
seems to be fairly well substantiated by the

anthropometric material collected by Professor Melville J. Herskovits, who in his turn
attributes the rise and growth of this new
hybrid ‘‘race” to the effect of social
selection.

Although the interest shown in North
America to problems of racial relations in
particular, and to human genetics in general,
as proved by the articles in such journals as
the American Journal of Physical Anthropology, is readily understandable, it stands
out in very sharp relief to the lukewarm
attention afforded to such matters in the
countries which compose the _ British
Commonwealth. The latter empire comprises practically speaking members of every
major and minor race group in the world, and
THE STUDY OF RACIAL MIXTURE

so contains the elements of most possible
forms of human miscegenation, yet official
information regarding the actual racial compositions of these populations is often very
incomplete, and particularly so in the colonial
areas where it would be most interesting.*
Nor, anthropologically speaking, can much
of the semi-official data, as displayed, for
example, in such books of reference as the Encyclopedia Britannica by the use of phrases
as “‘ the higher-type races,” “‘ black low type,”
etc., be considered more satisfactory. The
fact, however, that nothing like a complete
anthropometric survey has yet been instituted even in this country, may help to
explain, though not to condone, the lack
of more exact information elsewhere.

Populations and the Sociological Position

The consideration of sociological factors
in dealing with the problems which arise
out of race and racial hybridization is a
sine qua non. The following facts and
figures, though for obvious reasons incomplete, may therefore be accepted as a
necessary preliminary to the review of the
racial situation in those areas under the
British flag where symbiosis is a phenomenon
of importance. Partly for reasons stated
above, very little information regarding
purely “native’’ populations is included,
although in this connection it need hardly
be pointed out that what significance is
attached to racial mixture as such, is as
important from the biological and eugenical
point of view where races of non-Caucasoid
origin (i.e. in general terms—non-European)
are implicated, as it is in the case of
European-non-Caucasoid miscegenation.t

Australasia
‘Whites’ (mainly
British) 6,600,000
Chinese (and others of .
Asiatic origin) 122,000

* Some of the difficulties of distinguishing populations by race from cofonial reports have already been
quoted by Dr. R. R. Kuczynski (1937) in Colonial
Populations.

¢ The word “ British’’ indicates populations originating in the British Isles.

II5
Papuans 275,000*
Fijians ... . 84,000
Australian aborigines... 62,000
Maoris ... 63,000

From the above it will be clear that
elements in varying degree are present from
all four major racial stocks, i.e. Caucasoid,
Mongoloid, Negroid and Australoid. In the
case of the Papuans and Fijians, previous
hybridization involving more than one of
these elements seems clearly responsible for
their present racial ‘‘ make-up.” Speaking
of to-day, the “ whites ” are racially excluded
from any appreciable degree of mixture
with the non-Europeans, either by legislative
or social strictures. This applies most
strongly in the case of the small and
diminishing aboriginal population. In New
Zealand, though the Maoris are not particularly racially divergent from the English

settlers, both groups maintain a social
segregation.
Canada
““ Whites ”’ (mainly

ae and French
origin) .». Some 10,000,000
Aboriginal Redskin In
dians and Eskimos .. 128,000
Asiatic origin (chiefly

Chinese)... ss 70,000
Negroes... 20,000

The aboriginal Indians and Eskimos
(Mongoloid) are already fairly strongly
mixed with ‘‘ white ’’ blood. This hybridizing
process is still going on in some degree, but
stronger social determinants segregate the
“whites ’ from any conspicuous mixture
with the other races.

South Africa
‘* Whites ”’ (mainly
British and Dutch
origin)
Bantu ...
Indians..
Mixed “ Cape Coloured ”

2,000,000
6,600,000
220,000

770,000T

* Approximate estimation.
¢t E. A. Walker, 1940.
1x6

The ‘Cape Coloured,’”’ who comprise
elements from three racial stocks, have
originated from a mixture of Hottentots
with Bushmen, Bantu and Malay (ex Java,
Siam, etc.) together with a considerable
addition of European blood, and some
definite Mongoloid infusion in the shape of
Chinese must also be counted. Here the
sociological situation is probably more complicated and more rigid than in any other
area of the British Empire. The hybrid
“ Coloured ’’ population acts as a social and
racial “ buffer’’ between the ‘‘ Whites”
and the Negroid Bantu; that is to say,
whereas the two latter are completely
segregated, there is continuous mixture
between the Coloured population and the
poorer ‘ Whites.”

West Indies
“Whites ’’ (practically
all British) ...
“Coloured ’”’ ... ..- 1,600,000
About four-fifths of the ‘“‘ Coloured ”’
population here is Negroid in origin, although
some aboriginal Indian blood must not be
disregarded. In the past this population was
fairly well “‘ hybridized ’”’ by miscegenation
between the “ white ” settlers and the slaves
they imported. To-day, a segregation,
possibly stronger than is the case in the
Southern States of the U.S., obtains.

Great Britain

The 1931 Census of England and Wales
differentiates the non-British population on
the lines of “foreign-born population by
country of birth and nationality.”” On this
basis the figures obtainable are as follows :—

130,000

European countries 226,000

Asiatic ” II,300

African ” 6,200
(chiefly Egypt)

American countries II,000

(the U.S. excepted)

Although the “alien” population of
Britain is proportionately very small, it is
nevertheless the case that racial problems in
the local sense are of not inconsiderable
moment. Reference is made, of course, to
large sea-port cities like London, Liverpool,
Cardiff, etc., where there is a distinct and

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

easily recognizable ‘hybrid’ population
resulting from the residence of “ British ”
(and, therefore, presumably not separately
classified), West African and East Indian
seamen and others. Here, it must be stressed,
as much as in any other part of the Commonwealth, biological phenomena tend to be
greatly obscured by sociological factors.

How Will Racial Relations be Affected in the
Future?

In sociological science it is no more than
a truism to state that the structure of no
society is static. This would be clear even
if the disruptions achieved by such forces
as war did not make the presence of the
dynamic factors which are continuously
changing and modifying institutions and
traditions even more obvious. It may,
therefore, be thought unquestionable that
present forms of racial or social segregations
will undergo corresponding alteration, becoming either more elastic or more rigid in
the process. In the former event then not
only will the racial composition of populations change considerably, but many new
“racial ’’ populations will emerge. In this
light, then, eugenic considerations involve
not only the forms of racial hybridization
at present in force, but the far wider possibilities of the future ; since it is but reasonable to suppose that in human genetics
no less than elsewhere, the biological results
become more diverse as new and additional
factors are added. Moreover, specific as well
as general consideration seems all the more
necessary, when it is remembered that
answers still to be provided for certain
ambiguously interpretable phenomena are
in a sense but the preface to wider fields.

Some Anthropological Considerations

The eugenic attitude to questions concerning racial or human hybridization in
general considers quite logically two factors.
The first appertains to the qualities of the
parental stocks ; the second to the qualities
of the offspring. It is also not unusual to
assume @ priort, on general biological and
genetical grounds, that when one progenitor
is “inferior ’’ to the other the likelihood of
THE STUDY OF RACIAL MIXTURE

the offspring exhibiting the desirable characteristics of the ‘‘ superior ’” parent is
diminished.

Over questions relating to the “ quality ”’
of racial characteristics, as well as to the
genetical result of their mixture, many
notable spears have been broken in the past
by such scientists as Davenport, Mjoen,
Fischer, Castle, etc. The not inconsiderable
amount of controversy which arose over such
theories and explanations as “ blended
inheritance,” “harmonic and unharmonic
features,’ ‘instability,’ etc., relating to
hybrid populations, has but lately subsided
and little would be gained in seeking to
revive it. One observation, however, not
necessarily indicative of belligerent neutrality, may, perhaps, be permitted: that
strictly from the anthropological point of
view discussion as to the dysgenic effects of
hybridization on the basis of adjudged
qualities and features of racial stocks must
be regarded as premature. It is but fair to
offer substantiation for this statement. In
the first place, however, although the main
racial groups of mankind are fairly strongly
differentiated on the basis of physical characteristics, the divergence is one of degree and
not of kind. Secondly, although there are
significant group differences in physiological
activity, there is yet no definite proof that
they are determined by racial heredity.
Thirdly, although it is perfectly legitimate
to suppose that racial differences in mentality
may exist, they are not as yet scientifically
demonstrable. As a rider it might be added
that Race itself, being essentially a group
concept, there can in no sense be any idea
of racial “ purity’ attaching itself to the
individual, for where certain features attributed to one race may actually overlap in
the case of certain members of an entirely
separate race, any attempt to isolate individuals (as in genetical practice is inevitable) in terms of specific racial qualities is
rendered doubly precarious.

The anthropologist, therefore, is obliged to
be very wary of genotypical considerations
unless of a somatic kind interpretable in
racial terms, i.e. as a group study, and to
concentrate his main attention on what in a

117

genetical sense is the second consideration,
the nature of the hybrid population itself.
Yet here again, the present range of legitimate operations is limited. Eugenical considerations of the first order demand and
reasonably expect to derive information from
the ‘‘ hybrid’ as to the actual mechanism
of inheritance as well as to the process of
hybridization itself. The answer, it has to
be admitted, even to certain Mendelian
questions, is still inconclusive. For want of
adequate data, the genetic basis of specific
racial traits is unknown, and although certain
physical characteristics owe their origin to
simple gene differences, other features have
a much more complicated heredity, being
dependent upon the interaction of multiple
genes, which in consequence makes the process of segregation which follows all the more
difficult to interpret.

Of even more fundamental importance,
as at first sight it appears to conflict with the
Mendelian laws of inheritance themselves, is
the problem of accounting for the low degree
of variability evinced by hybrid populations.
As Mr. J. C. Trevor has already illustrated,
with a few debatable exceptions, hybrid
populations which have resulted from the
mixture of parental stocks of more or less
widely divergent racial origin show variabilities tending to be neither particularly
high nor particularly low, and, in fact, not
greater than the variabilities of either
parent race. To use the words of the geneticist,
H. S. Jennings, on this subject—* It is unthinkable that human beings should not
follow the same laws of inheritance as other
animals,” and several explanations have
been advanced to account for the
phenomenon. The suggestion of Professor
Muller, on neo-Mendelian lines, is that the
high degree of variability, often found intraracially, i.e. between members of the same
race, is probably due to rather rare genes,
so that unless some of these are part of the
genic equipment of the relevant parent
races, there will be no adequate basis for
high variability amongst the hybrid population. Herskovits, to whose work in revealing
the emergence of a new “ fixed” hybrid
race amongst the American Negro reference
118

has already been made, explains the situation
on the basis of Mendelian laws being obscured
by social factors. Finally, it has been contended, not without some justification, that
the real blame should be ascribed to certain
inconsistencies of method in the accumulation and assembly of the material, as well as
to ununiform statistical treatment.
Although, therefore, it may be true that
there is nothing truly irreconcilable between
low hybrid variability and modern genetical
principles, it seems clear that here, just as
much as in what may be considered as the
more primary consideration, polymeric
traits, the situation is sufficiently confused
to merit extensive attention and closer data.

The Procedure

The anthropological procedure envisaged
will require in many ways a more rigorous
systematization than has hitherto been
practised, though it is desirable that room
should be left for the inclusion of new factors,
which reasonably may be expected to evolve
in the course of the study. In the initial
process of random sampling, for example, it
will be desirable, if not essential, after the
conventional selection according to age, sex,
etc., to differentiate according not only to
genealogical stages, but in regard to economic
class or social status, age-group,* and even
habitat and climate.t In the choosing of
physical criteria, measurable and descriptive,
attention will be paid not only to those
of known Mendelian significance like length
of face, head breadth, hair form, eye colour,
etc., but to the more modifiable ones like
stature and body weight. The actual selection of characters is itself a process demanding
great care. The genetic basis of several
criteria in formal use is yet unknown, and
it is suggested that interesting results might
be obtained by the choosing and use of a
large number of characters on a three-fold

*H. L. Shapiro (1931). The Chinese Population in
Hawaii, American Council. Institute of Pacific
Relations.

t+ Franz Boas (1928). Anthropology and Modern
Life. It must be noted, however, that Boas’s findings
regarding the change in the head shape of American
immigrants has received severe criticism on statistical
grounds.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

basis according to whether they may be
regarded as (1) non-adaptive, (2) to have
originated in functional modifications, e.g.
malar breadth of the face, (3) to be easily
modifiable through the action of environmental factors, like nutrition, etc.* In
particular, care will be taken to include
features which have special racial significance, like limb proportions, the degree of
prognathism, etc., and also those features
in which the parental stocks are observably
most distinct. For purposes of the subsequent analysis it will be highly valuable,
if not essential, to know not only the
immediate characteristics of the parents of
the Fr cross, but the degree of homogeneity
or heterogeneity of the stock to which they
belong. Needless to say, in the preparation
of the material for statistical treatment and
analysis consistency of method will be as
necessary as it is in the accumulation of the
data themselves, and in this connection it
will be as important for comparative'purposes
to know the degree of reliability of the Means
contrasted as it will be to obtain the usual
statistical constants. In comparing the
characteristic variability of one population
with another, Professor Wagner has pointed
out that in general all the somatic characters
must be taken into account so far as they
are of a nature that their variability can be
determined, and suggests for the purposes of
group comparisons the use of the formula

xv .
>= where n is the number of characters

in question and =v is the sum of their
coefficients of variation, in order to provide
a “‘ mean ”’ coefficient of variation. Another
method for use in a similar connection has
been devised by Dr. Morant. This, by taking
into account the variances (ss) of a number
of characters, provides another conventional
estimate of the variability of one series as
compared with another.

In such an analysis as this the question
as to how far physiological and psychological characters may usefully be employed
naturally arises. Anthropological opinion
differs greatly on this point. Tests can be

*E. A. Hooton (1926). Science, 68.
THE STUDY OF RACIAL MIXTURE

made on skin, auditory sensitivity, etc., and
have been used for some time past. They are
clearly of most use when they can be interpreted in absolute terms. Physiological
functions like metabolism, respiration, speed
of nerve conduction, etc., are also amenable
to testing, but owing to environmental
factors like cultural and climatic conditions
have a limited range of application. The
same unfortunate handicap so far obtains in
the case of the interpretation of most of the
results gained by psychological methods.

The Requirements of the Future

None better than the anthropologist is
aware of the present meagreness of his
Offering to the eugenic consideration of the
racial problem. It would be idle, nevertheless, to imagine that less ambiguous evidence,
or even a more exact technique, is to be
gained except on the basis of much more
widely obtained data than are at present
available. It would be equally wrong to
infer that the employment of more controlled
experimentation following the lines of the
orthodox laboratory methods of biology, even
if obtainable, would provide a satisfactory
means of making good the deficiency.
Though it is not unreasonable to hope that
Man will one day consider himself as worthy
of at least the same amount of study as he is
prepared to devote to the lowliest member of
his own zoological class, comparatively
little would be gained by installing human
beings behind the bars of the experimental
cage.

Complicated as is the environmental
machinery which impinges upon the ordinary
rat, the factors which affect Man are a
hundred times more inextricable and diverse
in character, and as is equally plain, many
times more so than in the case of (say)
Drosophila. Such work on genetical lines that
has been done on animals closest to humans,
as, for instance, the ape, more than supports
the argument of complexity. Surely, then,
it is to be looked upon rather as a logical
consequence of the nature of man’s biological
equipment than as a cause for wonderment
and even disappointment that the mechanism
of human heredity has not yielded all its

119

secrets to lines of inquiry compatible with
the wielding of the microscope. Indeed,
what conclusions have so far been reached
point quite the other way: that far from
following out any simple process, human
heredity unfolds itself in many directiy
unanalysable ways. Certain traits and
characters follow automatically from certain
miscegenations: others appear to require
definite though often unspecifiable environmental conditions to evoke them. Some
features rise clearly above all external
inhibitions ; others, if latent, are obscured
by social, climatic and nutritional influences.

Professor Ruggles Gates declared some
time ago that in his opinion it was doubtful
even if marriages between north and south
Europeans (members in general anthropological terms of the same major race group)
are wholly desirable in their results. It has
already been mentioned that the variability
to be expected in quantitative characters
between the members of the same race is
greater than it is between race groups
themselves. It is possible that considerations
which differentiate ecologically one part of
a large area inhabited by members of the
same major race group from another part
may in the qualitative sense be responsible
for still further increase in intra-racial
variation ; for example, parts of Mediterranean Europe, ecologically alike and to
some extent racially akin with parts of
Mediterranean Africa, are in_ ecological
terms very distinct from the northern areas
of Europe. From the eugenist’s point of
view as much as from the anthropological
standpoint, it therefore seems feasible to
suggest that material collected on intraracial mixture may be as relevant to the
problem as are the materials appertaining
to wider contacts, and that work on racial
hybridization should include studies not
only of the mixture of very divergent stocks,
like Caucasoid and Negroid, but of those
springing from the union of parents of the
same broad racial ancestry.

Discussion as to the best means of
attaining eugenic desiderata is bound to
some extent to be controversial; but it is
heartening at least to note that geneticists
720

and biologists, no less then eugenists, are
alive to the requirements and potentialities
of the future. It is interesting in this
connection to note the words of Professor
J. B. S. Haldane:

“IT would urge the extraordinary importance of a scientific study of the effects
of racial crossing for the future of the
British Commonwealth. Until such a
study has been accomplished, and it is
a study which will take generations to
complete, we are not, I think, justified
in any dogmatism as to the effects of
racial crossing. It may not be desirable
to forbid it, but there can be little reason,
I think, to encourage it as between the
widely different races of mankind.”

At the present time this country and the
British Commonwealth are engaged in a
bitter and costly struggle. Nevertheless,
it is recognized that planning and construction must go on. New cities will
have to be built over the ashes of the
present ones to house the populations of
the future. Is it not true, also, that the
foundations upon which the human and
racial relationships of those populations
will rest are in no less urgent need of
examination and reconstruction ? These are
grave days for science and scientific workers.
Yet the hour at present is no graver than
it was for the scientists of Barcelona, who,
conscious even that their work might be

    
     
 

Phone: EUSton 4282 (5 lines)

SCIENTIFIC BOOKS

in MEDICAL, CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL and PHYSICAL SCIENCE
supplied from stock, or obtained promptly to order. '
FOREIGN BOOKS not in stock obtained under Licence.

A visit to this Department is respectfully suggested.
Please write for CATALOGUES, mentioning interests

H. K. LEWIS & Co. Ltd.,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

lost, went calmly on amidst the chaos of
the siege to amass much-needed serological
material out of the very shambles.

References

Thompson, Edgar T. (Editor) and eleven other
Contributors (1939). Race Relations and the Race
Problem.

Herskovits, Melville J. (1930). The Anthropometry of the American Negro. Columb. Univ.
Contr. Anthrop. LXI.

Encyclopedia Britannica (1939).
Empire. Area and Population.

Kuczynski, R. R. (1937). Colonial Populations.

Walker, E. A. (1940). South Africa. Oxford
Pamphlets on World Affairs.

H.M. Stationery Office (1931). Census of England
and Wales. |

Trevor, J. C. (1938). Characteristics of Hybrid
Populations. Eug. Rev., XXX.

Muller, H. J. (1936). On the Variability of Mixed
Races. Amer. Nat. LXX.

Hooton, E. A. (1926).
Analysis. Science, LXIII.

Shapiro, H. L. (1931). The Chinese Population
in Hawatit. The American Council. Institute of
Pacific Relations.

Boas, Franz (1928). Materials for Study of
Inheritance in Man. Columb. Univ. Contr. Anthvop.
VI. :
~ Wagner, K. (1932). The Variability of Hybrid
Populations. Amer J. Phys. Anthrop. XVI.

Morant, G. M. (1935). An Attempt to Estimate
the Variabilities of Various Populations. Z.
Rassenk. 11.

The British

Methods of Racial

Gates, R. Ruggles (1923). Heredity and
Eugenics.
Haldane, J. B. S. (1939). Heredity and Politics.

  

 
   
     

136 GOWER STREET
LONDON W.C.1

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXII, No. 4.
