CAN THE SCHOOL PREPARE FOR
PARENTHOOD ?

By JoHN RUSSELL, M.A.

(Headmaster of the Hampstead School of the King Alfred
School Society)

AT the suggestion of the Eugenics Education Society I have
attempted to answer this question, but I write as a schoolmaster,
not as a biologist. And I speak in my private capacity only.

The science of Eugenics may be shortly defined as ‘‘ the study
of the conditions under control which affect the quality of
children at birth,’”’ and the art of Eugenics may be defined as ‘‘the
steps by which the knowledge gained from that study may be
turned to practical account in the interest of children yet unborn,
and ideals yet unrealised.”

The school does not specialise, and can, I think, do little
more for the science than lead to some understanding of the
place and power of science in human affairs. Can it do anything
for the art ? Can it inany sense prepare for parenthood ? There
is perhaps a preliminary question—is it desirable that it should
so prepare ?

With the school lie the -destinies of the future, and if
we really desire the betterment of the race, and really believe
in the physical basis of life, and therefore of betterment,
there can be only one answer—it ts desirable. Those only can
say ‘‘ No” who either are content with the prevailing wholesale
happy-go-lucky propagation of fit and unfit, or else are afraid
that the school, with its pervasive corporate life, will be unable
to treat so intimate a matter with becoming delicacy, so think
it safer to let sleeping dogs lie. As for the nothing-can-be-done
philosophers, we can, I think, afford to ignore them.
78 J. Russell :

Leaving, for the moment, these questions of delicacy and
safety, in what does preparation for parenthood of good quality
consist ? The foundations of such preparation (in boy or girl)
are the foundations of all life of good quality, and therefore the
foundations of all education—which is not (as some seem to
think) a mere preparation for life, but is also an actual living of
life. Those foundations are (in the consecrated words)—a sound
body, a sound mind, and a sound soul. Every least element of
sound physical growth, of sound mental growth, and of sound
spiritual growth, must ultimately contribute, if parenthood ever
come, to the quality of that parenthood. And this will be true,
even though the thought of subsequent parenthood never enter
either the child’s mind or the teacher’s. And so the school,
by merely doing its everyday trinity of duties by the child, is,
however unconsciously, preparing indirectly for parenthood.

But it can, and should also, I hold, prepare directly : negatively, by not deliberately suppressing in the child’s education
(boy’s or girl’s) all reference to the sacred truths of sex ; positively,
by deliberately using those truths to establish a sense of fuller
personal responsibility to the men and women to come—all of
them the heirs, and for all time, of the best and worst of our own
day. I say by not ignoring the truths of fatherhood and motherhood, I do not say by presenting them, because I hold that such
presentation (to both boy and girl) can best be made by father
and mother in the quite early years of life—as soon, that is, as
the child begins to wonder about new lives.

The duty of the parent in the home is not my immediate
theme, but I may be allowed one or two reflections.

Sex-troubles (so rife in every class of society) are largely the
result of the dishonour in which sex-truths are generally held, of
the ignorance which prevails of the whole truth, and of the irreverence with which the half truth is generally communicated. The
quality of the nation (in body and soul) will never be what it
might be till thisirreverent dishonour gives way to reverent honour.
That consummation can only be effected by the vigilant safeguarding of our children from all irreverence, and by a fearless
honesty of statement in answer to their natural enquiries. Both
safeguarding and truth-telling must begin in early childhood.
CAN THE SCHOOL PREPARE FOR PARENTHOOD ? 79

Before he is 10, a boy’s imagination may be smirched for
his whole life. He may afterwards become a good man, but
there will always be a shadow on his happiness. Evil sex-communications of some sort are almost inevitable (with girls perhaps less than with boys) and it is the part of wisdom to anticipate them. With foundations well and truly laid in the home,
the task of the school in respect of sex-knowledge will be much
lightened. Indeed, in the absence of such foundations, the
school (in the present state of public opinion) is almost
powerless.

How children in the nursery are to be safeguarded from sexirreverence parents will know as well as I. Exactly when and
how they are to be led to the truth, the wisest of us cannot say.
A good many helpful books have been written to guide us, but
we must each of us go our own way. The love that has dared to
look fearlessly upon life will have no difficulty in finding the
moment and the words. Of all knowledge, of all truth, this is
the most holy (although the most often treated unholily) and the
lips of love and wisdom will utter it in a thousand different ways.

Returning now to the school—my proper theme—I am met
by thisdoubt. Am I tosay what I should think it best todo asa
schoolmaster if I were quite free, or am I to say what, in the
present state of parental (that is, public) opinion, I think it
possible to do?

I have as yet actually done nothing—unless it be something
to have long felt the significance of sex in education, and to have
helped for several years in the purposeful school-mixing of boys
and girls. But although I have no right to speak in any sense
as a pioneer, I venture first to set forth an ideal—what I would
do if I could have my heart’s desire.

I should wish boys and girls to come to school (as I have said)
with elementary sex-knowledge and unashamed—the knowledge
that life and all it means is a joint gift from the bodies of fathers
and mothers, and that just as children have received that gift
from their parents, so some day it may be their privilege to confer it upon their children. And I should wish them to be as
unashamed of this knowledge and of any respectful reference to
it as of the knowledge that food feeds them and that sleep
80 J. Russell :

restores. I should wish them further to be as ready—or as
unready—to talk with their trusted teachers about such things
as they are to talk—or be silent—about the deepest things of the
soul.

Upon some such foundations I could, I think, usefully build.
I should show my children incidentally in their nature-lessons how
the law of fatherhood and motherhood is the law of everything
we call life, and I should introduce them in the case of plants
and animals to the principle, and some of the results, of
selective parenthood. And so I should hope to lead them
gradually to discover, almost for themselves, that the physical
quality of the bodies with which men and women are born is
not an accidental thing—an arbitrary so-called ‘‘ act of God ”’—
but is dependent upon the physical quality of their parents and
of their parents’ parents.

And I should hope in the sociological (or applied science)
lessons to lead them to the further conception that the mental
and spiritual qualities which, on the one hand, have held the
world so long in evil bondage, and, on the other, have broken so
many chains, are also inherited qualities, and therefore under
control—a control which, however slight and uncertain to-day,
will steadily grow as knowledge grows.

They would then (I should hope) go out of school-life into
world-life’ with a foundation-sense of the significance in human
affairs of human quality, and of our paramount duty to our
own bodies, and further with a burning unquenchable faith in
human progress, and a determination to take no part in the
wanton propagation of evil in the spirit or in the flesh.

‘¢ Keep thy heart with all diligence,” runs my own school
motto, ‘‘ for out of it are the issues of life.” ‘‘ Keep thy body
also with all diligence,”” Iam sometimes tempted to add, “ for
out of it are issues of no less moment.”

That in general terms is what I think it would be wise to
do, and what I think every proved schoolmaster and schoolmistress should be not only free to do, but expected to do.

And yet in this grave matter, as in other grave matters, so
timid and so divided is public opinion, that I haveto be practically
silent, ‘“‘letting I dare not wait upon I would.”
CAN THE SCHOOL PREPARE FOR PARENTHOOD ? 8I

Is that silence a cowardice and unwarrantable ? I think not.
At its best it is formal respect for two unwritten laws—that the
school must do no violence to the conscience of the home, and
that sex is in the keeping of that conscience. At its worst it is
mistaken deference. ‘Those two unwritten laws will not, I am
sure, always hold sway. And yet, if I were now to enter into
discussion with the parents of my children, I should use all my
powers to persuade them that the duty of laying foundations was
theirs, rather than the school’s, and not, at their peril, to be
neglected. But even if they agreed to undertake it, public
opinion would, I believe, make it almost impossible for me to go
further.

What is this public opinion? Who are the people who are
afraid, and of what are they afraid? Those who are afraid fall,
as always, into two categories—the thinking and the unthinking.
The unthinking, who live by a sort of instinctive imitation of
their own milieu and an instinctive acquiescence in the prevailing
modes of thought, are always afraid of anything really new and
at all unconventional, and condemn, sometimes even with real
moral fervour, without pausing to examine. Such people are a
dead weight, and are not to be stirred in the mass. But here
and there an individual will respond to stimulus, and that is all
we can hope.

The thinking people who are afraid think chiefly, I imagine,
three things: either that sex is an unfortunate attribute of
humanity to which no reference may ever be made before
marriage, and no overt reference after—in short, as Mr. Philip
Wicksteed once wrote in fierce irony, ‘‘ an indiscretion, if not a
positive impropriety, on the part of the Creator ’’; or that sex,
however precious and dominating a factor in the life of the race,
is so dangerous and masterful in the individual, that it is safer to
keep it under lock and key till the latest possible moment; or
that self-consciousness of any sort in children is a bad, not a
good, thing, and that just as there is a danger that much talk
about health will turn them into premature valetudinarians, and
much talk about conscience into hypocrites or prigs, so there is
a danger that much talk about sex, even though inspired by the
Eugenic ideal, will do harm rather than good.
82 J. Russell :

To the thinkers (if really I ought to call them so) of the first
category there is only one answer, which I borrow from Mr.
Wicksteed: ‘‘ The differentiation of the sexes,’’ he says, ‘is
often resented as an insult, and often treated as an indecent
irrelevancy. But in this, as in other matters, it is the conduct
and arguments of mankind that are indecent, insolent, and
irrelevant, not the foundation laid by nature.”

The lock and key argument would have more force (I cannot
allow that it could ever have much) if any effective lock and key
had ever been devised. But the truth—or rather a foul parody
of the truth—will out, be your locks and keys what they may.
And one of the strongest arguments for education in sex, as for
education in all other elements of noble life, is just this—that
the devil (to use the old phrase) is always busy and ready, and
will fill the soul with his lies unless we can get our truth in
before him. You tell me that by opening the eyes of my child
to the holy mystery of sex, I am yielding the devil place! I
answer in solemn seriousness that it is the only hope I have of
keeping the devil at bay.

That the knowledge of good will always be an effective
armour against evil I do not assert. I have even been told, and
I have no difficulty in believing, that in one of our public schools
an honourable attempt to teach the good did at the time seriously
inflame certain tainted imaginations to evil; but that relative
failure is only a further indication of the appalling failure of our
hitherto accepted methods of culpable silence, and a further
proof of the need for reform.

Think for a moment of the vile words that have been spoken
in England by old and young since the present year began, of the
vile thoughts thought, of the vile acts committed; think also of
what is far worse, the tragic begetting of children, in ignorance,
in recklessness, in disease, in riot, in brutality, in despair, and
then dare to say: ‘‘ We have done our best. Nothing more is
possible. Meddling will only make bad worse.”

Even if we could make a secret of this knowledge and lock
it safely up, would it be wise? It is knowledge and the power to
apply knowledge that distinguishes man from the beast. I admit
of course that knowledge is of many sorts, and that there are
CAN THE SCHOOL PREPARE FOR PARENTHOOD ? 83

some sorts that boys and girls, perhaps even men and women,
are better without. But I should draw my own dividing line
between nature’s ways and some men’s ways. What nature has
ordained cannot in itself be evil, however much man may turn it
to evil uses. Life is unliveable on any other terms. And so, in
the faith that elemental knowledge of any sort is power, and upon
a basis of perfect frankness,—the only possible basis in education
—I would unfold little by little to the growing child all I knew
of the marvellous ways of nature, and of man’s increasing control
of those ways. If I secretly kept anything back, I should be
afraid that when the fraud was discovered, confidence would be
shaken in everything. And if I openly made reservations, I could
hardly hope to lead my child to the reverent and whole-hearted
trust in nature that is the foundation of all intelligent effort.

Moreover, on a still higher plane, whatever our view may be
of the ultimate purpose of human life, we cannot ignore the fact
that one great part of the purpose is the production of new life.
Now that fact, and all its tremendous issues, cannot be driven
home, can scarcely even be stated intelligibly, till the knowledge
for which I am contending has been given.

And yet that fact and those issues affect more profoundly

than perhaps any other fact or any other issues, not only the
lives of the living generation, but the lives of all the generations
yet to come.
My third category of doubters were those who, while not
wishing to keep sex under lock and key, are afraid that Eugenists,
like other enthusiasts, may run their enthusiasm a little too hard.
Of course it will be possible to go too far, as it has been possible
to go not far enough. And of course proportion must be kept.
But if we can agree that something should be done, may we not
also agree that the ‘“‘ how much ”’ can only be left, as so often, to
the wisdom of the individual teacher. First find your wise
teachers. Then trust them.

The school is holy ground. It aims at nothing short of the
good life—personal good life, national good life. But it is not
always saying so—is not always beating the big morality drum.
I never myself hesitate to beat the drum, when the occasion
‘seems to demand it, but for the most part I keep it out of sight.
84 J. Russell:

And so with this question of sex, and the relation of the sexes—
for that is what it really comes to. Boys and girls must begin
to understand while they are yet boys and girls—or they will
never really understand as men and women—that the thing that
matters most in the world is how we behave to one another,
whether as human being to human being, man to woman, or
woman to man. In the relation of human to human there is (or
should be) no question of sex. Inthe relation of man to woman
it is the determining factor—for it is the foundation of the
noblest (as of the basest) human intimacies, and the source, not
only of fatherhood and motherhood, but of the weal and woe of
the world.

This great truth need not forever be in the mouth, but it
must come to be felt by our boys and girls of all classes, and not
as a truth only but as an inspiration. It must be taught everywhere with the earnestness of a religion—in the immediate
interest of cleaner minds and personal chastity, but above all in
the ultimate interest of happier marriages and healthier children.
I admit the apparent greater difficulty of dealing with children
from some of the dens we call homes. But the more sick these
children are, the more they need a physician. We do not hesitate,
in spite of their homes, to prescribe for their other weaknesses
other ideals. Why should we hesitate to prescribe this ideal for
this weakness ? Peradventure one or two may be saved, and,
for the rest, can they really be harmed? ‘Let well alone,’’ may
sometimes be sound policy, but I have no patience with “ let ill
alone.”” The least those who disagree with me can do is to
suggest some positive alternative.

I have only to add that, ardently as I desire a good heredity
and good conditions of birth, the schoolmaster in me attaches at
least as much importance to a good environment and good
conditions of growth.
