MYRDAL’S “NATION AND FAMILY”
By SALLY CHILVER 
LVA MYRDAL’S Nation and Family*

was finished in Stockholm in 1940.

In her introduction she says: ‘‘ We
fear the end of an historic epoch during which
humanitarian ideals, despite slips and setbacks, have been steadily making this world a
more decent place in which to live.” The war
is ended and the totalitarian régimes of
Germany and Italy have been destroyed,
but the fear voiced in 1940, in a neutral
Sweden miraculously exempt from invasion,
is still alive.
some of us do, merely in terms of prejudice
against this or that régime savours a little
of self-justification. Qut accuse, s’excuse.
The grounds for criticism may be valid
enough but they are incomplete unless the
trends and disharmonies of our own democratic society are rigorously analyzed.

The Swedish Population . Commission,
appointed in May 1935 by the Social Democratic Government of the day, did in fact undertake such an analysts; and Alva Myrdal’s
book is an account of this experiment, of the
social trends which preceded it and the social
legislation which resulted from it.

The salient facts of Swedish demography
are already fairly familiar. They are illus
* Kegan Paul, 1945. Price 21s. net.

To externalize this fear, as

TABLE II

NORMAL FAMILIES IN SWEDEN AND MEDIAN
FamMiIty INCOME, BY NUMBERS OF CHILDREN AND
RESIDENCE—1935—-36

   
 

 
     

Median Family
Income (Crs)

   
     
     

 
       
     
       
        
      
       
   
 

| ~—s Nos. of ——_——
children. In Urban In Urban
under Districts | Total | Districts
16 years
‘Total 100-0 3,996 | 3,046
o 45°0 | 2,148 3,160
I 30°8 2,072 | 2,970
2 15°3 1,955 | 3,031
3 5°6 - 1,751 2,900
4 2-1 1,612 2,786
5 o-8 | 1,474 | 2,655
6 03 | 1,426) 2,553
7 or more orl 1,296 n.a.

  

 

trated in Tables I and II. The pattern of
age distribution shows a bulge in the adult
group, reflected in the high expectation of
life and due to the large number of births at
the beginning of the century. The probability of advances in hygiene and‘longevity
is offset by the fact that the proportion of
old people in the population will increase.
The net reproduction rate declined from
about +300 in IgII-15 to 0-958 in 1925, and
fluctuated between 0-725 and 0-750 during
the ’thirties. The average age at marriage
is high. In 1931-5 it was 30°55 for men

TABLE I
SELECTED VITAL STATISTICS FOR SWEDEN
IQOI—-1937

 
 

       
  
 

  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
   
 

    
    
   
   
   
  
  
  
 

Married, Births,
per 5,000 per 1,000
population population
IgoOI—-IQIO 6-00 25°77
IQII—1920 6:26 2231
I92I—I930 6°49 I7'5E
1931 6:97 14:80
1932 6°75 14°54
1933 win hae 7°00 13°71
1934 on wa 9°73 13°68
1935 ene wa 8-22 13°76
1936 eT 8-51 ¥4:24
) 1937 wee we 8-67 14°33

 
  
 
  
  
 
 

Percentage

    
  
   
  
    
   
   
   
  
  
  
  
 

of unmarried
Deaths in first Child-bearing women
year per roo women per bearing children

children born 1,000 married to all women

alive women (15-44) | bearing children
8°45 258-6 12°84

6-93 2115 15°34
5°88 155°4 15°50

53°66 124‘! 15°96

5°07 I2I°o 15°61

4°95 113°8 14°48

4°72 T13°5 14°32

4°59 EE2‘! 53°46

4°34 TI4'5 13°03

4°52 1140

 

142
MYRDAL’S ‘‘ NATION AND FAMILY”

and 26:92 for women. Increased mobility
during Sweden’s industrialization period
gave rise to an unfavourable sex-ratio in
different localities. It seems probable that
men are more stationary and women more
mobile as far as internal migration is concerned. In the most marriageable agegroup (25-29 years) there were only 52 unmarried women in rural districts of Sweden
to 100 unmarried men.

Swedish social patterns reflect the relative
weakness of feudal influences in Swedish
history and the strength of the free farmers.
Industrialization, starting with the lumber
industry in the ‘fifties of last century, was
rapid. By 1935 35:2 per cent of the population was urban. But a considerable pro
portion of Swedish industry is located in the,

countryside and acted as a centre for the
spread of urban ideas in the farming community.

The challenge of a falling population did
not come upon a community quite untried
in social and sexual discussion. Most of us
are aware of the very high standard of
Swedish journalism, of the quite detailed
knowledge most Swedes possess of sociological problems, and of the wide variety of
clubs and societies which cater for adults
anxious to increase their civic sense. Buta
more fundamental discussion had been proceeding for years before the Population
Commission had been set up on the ethics of
birth control and on the nature of sexual
conventions. It was this discussion which
had created a basis of public opinion for the
family reforms of the ’thirties.

The Swedish people seem to have been the
first to attempt a really frank public assess‘ment of sexual moves in their relation to
public policy, and to uncover the personal
choices which lay behind the statistical
evidence for falling population trends. Much
of the argument has now become part of the
adées rvecues of civilized Europe. But a
great deal of it was really original—that is
to say original as public, opinion-forming discussion, rather than as private discussion in
go-ahead circles. Discussion on topics like
the frequency of abortion, methods of family
limitation, the pattern of extra-marital re
143

lations and the prolonged existence of a
double standard of sexual morality for men
and women penetrated the people as a whole.
“The discussion,”’ says Alva Myrdal, ‘‘ was
far from harmonious and peaceful. .
The lancing of the boil of public dishonesty
was painful, but it was lanced. In general,
the discussion penetrated to the roots of the
problems and was pursued in most social
groups with courage and rationality, with
dignity and understanding of its social
implications.”

The section of Alva Myrdal’s book devoted
to this part of Sweden’s sociological experiment is short. It is treated more fully in
her husband Gunnar Myrdal’s book, Population: A Problem for Democracy.* But I
have insisted on it because of the enormous
importance of the Swedish lesson to our own
society, which, though strongly democratic
in tradition, is disposed to absorb, consciously or unconsciously, certain totalitarian ideas of both “right” and “left”
parentage because they attract by a promise
of efficiency. The methods adopted for the
education of public opinion in Sweden were,
by totalitarian standards, vastly inefficient.
Time will show how much more effective
they were than the mixture of regimentation
and blackmail adopted by the Nazi population experts.

Our own Royal Commission on Population has started with certain disadvantages.
Public discussion of the issues has been
extremely superficial on the whole. The
boil of public dishonesty has not been lanced.
Newspapers, films and politicians have
avoided controversial issues, have done little
or nothing to explode the myths that pass
for rational judgments on any question connected with marriage, childbearing and
sexual relations. Many newspapers,t for
instance, maintain on their staffs psychologists or “‘ problem-solvers ” to whom readers
may write for advice on all sorts of personal
difficulties, and who are given a certain
amount of “‘ feature’’ space once a week.
Many of them are very sensible people and

* Harvard University Press, 1940.

t E.g., the Daily Mail with Ann Temple’ s solumen,
and the News Chronicle with John Aubrey’s column.
144

their advice, given the limitations of their
“ practice,” is usually pretty sound. But
these writers are generally subject to certain
rather vague policy directives which effectively prevent them from broaching any topic
likely to disturb a minority of their readers.
While marital infidelities and male promiscuity can be discussed, providing certain linguistic conventions are observed, homosexuality
and the emotional problems of women which
arise out of an unfavourable sex ratio are
carefully shelved.

Much of the evidence put before the
Population Commission is likely to be unsound, not so much because of prejudice,
but because the problems treated will not
have been properly thrashed out. There is
a real danger that a minority demand for
half-baked measures—such as the outlawing
of birth control, for instance—may be
allowed to distract the public from the central
issues.

It is one of the many great merits of Alva
Myrdal’s book that she never loses sight of
the central issues.
expert, maternity welfare worker, public
health officer, educationist—is amply catered
for in chapters which describe Swedish
measures and the principles behind them
with great clarity. But he or she is brought
up against the central issues in the final
chapter.

Can there be such a thing as a truly
democratic population policy ? Alva Myrdal
thinks there can be and that the acid test
is the attitude taken towards women’s
problems'and women’s strivings for emancipation.

Whether we like it or not our attitude to
women’s status is coloured by traditional
patterns of thought. We assume that these
traditional patterns have some fundamental
relation to “‘ nature,” forgetting that many
of them are quite recent and that other
patterns exist even to-day in differently
organized societies.

In urban Europe in modern times, the
tich developed a system whereby men
engrossed all outside activities, while women
attended to domestic duties. Later, the
more ornamental and useless the domestic

‘of people that it is

The specialist—housing .

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

duties occupying women, the greater was the
prestige attached to them.

With the advances of industrial civilization, the notions of the rich were copied by
the poor, and it is now accepted by millions
“natural ’”’ for men to
work and for women to do domestic work
only, or no work at all.

In peasant societies in the past (and even
to some extent to-day) there was a rather
different division of labour, the men doing
the work farther away and the women the
work nearer the homestead. Then—and
this was true of town households too—the
women were engaged in manufacture, in
trading, in teaching, in curing illnesses and
so on. With industrialization, the manu
.facturing and trading activities of women

passed to entirely new social groups. In
time, too, the professions became organized,
took over still more of women’s responsibilities and for a long time successfully prevented
the re-entry of women into what had been
a customary field of activity in the past.
Domestic duties now merely involved maintenance and the preparation of finished or
semi-finished products instead of their manufacture.

Other social influences, all tending to
break up older kinds of co-operative organization in the family and village group, made
child-rearing more tirne-wasting than it had
been and isolated the child-rearing woman
from the community which now began to
regroup itself in new ways.

What had happened was that the new basic
economic unit was the individual, not the
family, and that many of the family’s
previous functions had been taken over by
industries, professions and the State. Married women now have two economic rdles
open to them. The first is a variety, dependent on the husband’s status, of semiparasitic existences with which child-rearing
can be accommodated ; the second a productive existence which can only be combined with child-rearing under exceptional
circumstances.

The semi-parasitic existence, though it has
its attractions for the well-to-do, does not,
although it is supposed to, fit in with modern
MYRDAL’S “NATION AND FAMILY”

socialrhythms. The housewife has little odds
and ends of leisure at times she cannot share
them with workers. If she has a child, she
is almost invariably tied at the times at
which workers have leisure. The productive
married woman is financially and socially
better off than she is. Consequently, the
semi-parasitic woman is just as much at
sixes and sevens as her gainfully employed
sister. She is vaguely, irritably aware that
her status is anomalous, that “‘ they ”’ (masc.
plur.) do not consider her. She realizes that
recreation is not organized for her but for
workers, that in most socially organized
activities she has been simply overlooked.

The working woman, on the other hand, is
strongly aware that society is well disposed
towards her as a producer, but indifferent
or hostile when she wishes also to become a
mother.

In Sweden the central “‘ woman problem ”
was allowed to come right out into the open.
The laws, which were passed in 1939, protecting the working woman’s right to marry
or have children as she pleased, were expected

145

by some to have a boomerang effect by inducing some employers not to employ women
at all. Some such effects were apparent for
a few months and a few employers withdrew
small ex gratia payments to girls leaving to
get married. The reaction among working
women was to join trade unions to improve
their bargaining power, as one would have
expected. (In fact, it would not be out of
the question for the women’s side of the
T.U.C. to become, in this country, the chief
proponent of a rational family policy.)

The Swedish Parliament has gone a long
way towards abolishing some of women’s
economic dilemmas. Other dilemmas re
main, but the Swedes, at least, are aware

of them, thanks largely to the work of
a group of sociologists which includes Alva
Myrdal. |

Her book is something more than an important sociological epitome. It is also a
work of art in the sense that its author has
the sort of insight into human motives which
is usually reserved to first-class poets and
dramatists.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXVIII, No. 3
